 Mandela 's administration inherited a country with a huge disparity in wealth and services between white and black communities . Of a population of 40 million , around 23 million lacked electricity or adequate sanitation , and 12 million lacked clean water supplies , with 2 million children not in school and a third of the population illiterate . There was 33 % unemployment , and just under half of the population lived below the poverty line . Government financial reserves were nearly depleted , with a fifth of the national budget being spent on debt repayment , meaning that the extent of the promised Reconstruction and Development Programme ( RDP ) was scaled back , with none of the proposed nationalisation or job creation . In 1996 , the RDP was replaced with a new policy , Growth , Employment and Redistribution ( GEAR ) , which maintained South Africa 's mixed economy but placed an emphasis on economic growth through a framework of market economics and the encouragement of foreign investment ; many in the ANC derided it as a neo @-@ liberal policy that did not undermine social inequality , no matter how Mandela defended it . In adopting this approach , Mandela 's government adhered to the " Washington consensus " advocated by the World Bank and International Monetary Fund . 
 Under Mandela 's presidency , welfare spending increased by 13 % in 1996 / 97 , 13 % in 1997 / 98 , and 7 % in 1998 / 99 . The government introduced parity in grants for communities , including disability grants , child maintenance grants , and old @-@ age pensions , which had previously been set at different levels for South Africa 's different racial groups . In 1994 , free healthcare was introduced for children under six and pregnant women , a provision extended to all those using primary level public sector health care services in 1996 . By the 1999 election , the ANC could boast that due to their policies , 3 million people were connected to telephone lines , 1 @.@ 5 million children were brought into the education system , 500 clinics were upgraded or constructed , 2 million people were connected to the electricity grid , water access was extended to 3 million people , and 750 @,@ 000 houses were constructed , housing nearly 3 million people . 
 The Land <unk> Act of 1994 enabled people who had lost their property as a result of the Natives Land Act , 1913 to claim back their land , leading to the settlement of tens of thousands of land claims . The Land Reform Act 3 of 1996 safeguarded the rights of labour tenants who live and grow crops or graze livestock on farms . This legislation ensured that such tenants could not be evicted without a court order or if they were over the age of 65 . Recognising that arms manufacturing was a key industry in South Africa , Mandela endorsed the trade in weapons but brought in tighter regulations surrounding <unk> to ensure that South African weaponry was not sold to authoritarian regimes . Under Mandela 's administration , tourism was increasingly promoted , becoming a major sector of the South African economy . 
 Critics like Edwin Cameron accused Mandela 's government of doing little to stem the HIV / AIDS pandemic in the country ; by 1999 , 10 % of South Africa 's population were HIV positive . Mandela later admitted that he had personally neglected the issue , in part due to public reticence in discussing issues surrounding sex in South Africa , and that he had instead left the issue for Mbeki to deal with . Mandela also received criticism for failing to sufficiently combat crime , with South Africa having one of the world 's highest crime rates , and the activities of international crime syndicates in the country growing significantly throughout the decade . Mandela 's administration was also perceived as having failed to deal with the problem of corruption . 
 Further problems were caused by the exodus of thousands of skilled white South Africans from the country , who were escaping the increasing crime rates , higher taxes , and the impact of positive discrimination toward blacks in employment . This exodus resulted in a brain drain , with Mandela criticising those who left . At the same time , South Africa experienced an influx of millions of illegal migrants from poorer parts of Africa ; although public opinion toward these illegal immigrants was generally unfavourable , characterising them as disease @-@ spreading criminals who were a drain on resources , Mandela called on South Africans to embrace them as " brothers and sisters " . 
 = = = Foreign affairs = = = 
 Mandela expressed the view that " South Africa 's future foreign relations [ should ] be based on our belief that human rights should be the core of international relations " . Following the South African example , Mandela encouraged other nations to resolve conflicts through diplomacy and reconciliation . In September 1998 , Mandela was appointed Secretary @-@ General of the Non @-@ Aligned Movement , who held their annual conference in Durban . He used the event to criticise the " narrow , chauvinistic interests " of the Israeli government in stalling negotiations to end the Israeli @-@ Palestinian conflict and urged India and Pakistan to negotiate to end the Kashmir conflict , for which he was criticised by both Israel and India . Inspired by the region 's economic boom , Mandela sought greater economic relations with East Asia , in particular with Malaysia , although this was scuppered by the 1997 Asian financial crisis . He attempted to overcome the ' Two China Problem ' by extending diplomatic recognition to both the People 's Republic of China ( PRC ) , who were growing as an economic force , and Taiwan , who were already longstanding investors in the South African economy . However , under pressure from the PRC , in November 1996 he cut recognition of Taiwan , and in May 1999 paid an official visit to Beijing . 
 Mandela attracted controversy for his close relationship with Indonesian President Suharto , whose regime was responsible for mass human rights abuses , although on a July 1997 visit to Indonesia he privately urged him to withdraw from the occupation of East Timor . He also faced similar criticism from the West for his government 's trade links to Syria , Cuba , and Libya , and for his personal friendships with Fidel Castro and Muammar Gaddafi . Castro visited in 1998 to widespread popular acclaim , and Mandela met Gaddafi in Libya to award him the Order of Good Hope . When Western governments and media criticised these visits , Mandela lambasted such criticism as having racist undertones , and stated that " the enemies of countries in the West are not our enemies . " Mandela hoped to resolve the long @-@ running dispute between Libya , and the US and Britain , over bringing to trial the two Libyans , Abdelbaset al @-@ Megrahi and Lamin Khalifah <unk> , who were indicted in November 1991 and accused of sabotaging Pan Am Flight 103 . Mandela proposed that they be tried in a third country , which was agreed to by all parties ; governed by Scots law , the trial was held at Camp Zeist in the Netherlands in April 1999 , and found one of the two men guilty . 
 Mandela echoed Mbeki 's calls for an " African Renaissance " , and was greatly concerned with issues on the continent . He took a soft diplomatic approach to removing Sani Abacha 's military junta in Nigeria but later became a leading figure in calling for sanctions when Abacha 's regime increased human rights violations . In 1996 , he was appointed Chairman of the Southern African Development Community ( SADC ) and initiated unsuccessful negotiations to end the First Congo War in Zaire . He also played a key role as a mediator in the ethnic conflict between Tutsi and Hutu political groups in the Burundian Civil War , helping to initiate a settlement which brought increased stability to the country but did not end the ethnic violence . In South Africa 's first post @-@ apartheid military operation , in September 1998 it ordered troops into Lesotho in order to protect the government of Prime Minister <unk> <unk> after a disputed election prompted opposition uprisings . The action was not authorised by Mandela himself , who was out of the country at the time , but by Buthelezi , who was serving as acting president during Mandela 's absence . 
 = = = Withdrawing from politics = = = 
 The new Constitution of South Africa was agreed upon by parliament in May 1996 , enshrining a series of institutions to check political and administrative authority within a constitutional democracy . De Klerk opposed the implementation of this constitution , and that month he and the National Party withdrew from the coalition government in protest , claiming that the ANC were not treating them as equals . The ANC took over the cabinet positions formerly held by the Nationalists , with Mbeki becoming sole Deputy President . Inkatha remained part of the coalition , and when both Mandela and Mbeki were out of the country in September 1998 , Buthelezi was appointed " Acting President " , marking an improvement in his relationship with Mandela . Although Mandela had often governed decisively in his first two years as President , he had subsequently increasingly delegated duties to Mbeki , retaining only a close personal supervision of intelligence and security measures . During a 1997 visit to London , he said that " the ruler of South Africa , the de facto ruler , is Thabo Mbeki " and that he was " shifting everything to him " . 
 Mandela stepped down as ANC President at the party 's December 1997 conference . He hoped that Ramaphosa would succeed him , believing Mbeki to be too inflexible and intolerant of criticism , but the ANC elected Mbeki regardless . Replacing Mbeki as Deputy President , Mandela and the Executive supported the candidacy of Jacob Zuma , a Zulu who had been imprisoned on Robben Island , but he was challenged by Winnie , whose populist rhetoric had gained her a strong following within the party ; Zuma defeated her in a landslide victory vote at the election . 
 Mandela 's relationship with Machel had intensified ; in February 1998 , he publicly stated that he was " in love with a remarkable lady " , and under pressure from his friend Desmond Tutu , who urged him to set an example for young people , he organised a wedding for his 80th birthday , in July that year . The following day , he held a grand party with many foreign dignitaries . Although the 1996 constitution allowed the president to serve two consecutive five @-@ year terms , Mandela had never planned to stand for a second term in office . He gave his farewell speech to Parliament on 29 March 1999 when it adjourned prior the 1999 general elections , after which he retired . Although opinion polls in South Africa showed wavering support for both the ANC and the government , Mandela himself remained highly popular , with 80 % of South Africans polled in 1999 expressing satisfaction with his performance as president . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 = = = Continued activism and philanthropy : 1999 – 2004 = = = 
 Retiring in June 1999 , Mandela sought a quiet family life , to be divided between Johannesburg and Qunu . He set about authoring a sequel to his first autobiography , to be titled The Presidential Years , but it was abandoned before publication . Finding such seclusion difficult , he reverted to a busy public life with a daily programme of tasks , met with world leaders and celebrities , and , when in Johannesburg , worked with the Nelson Mandela Foundation , founded in 1999 to focus on rural development , school construction , and combating HIV / AIDS . Although he had been heavily criticised for failing to do enough to fight the HIV / AIDS pandemic during his presidency , he devoted much of his time to the issue following his retirement , describing it as " a war " that had killed more than " all previous wars " ; affiliating himself with the Treatment Action Campaign , he urged Mbeki 's government to ensure that HIV @-@ positive South Africans had access to anti @-@ <unk> . Mandela was successfully treated for prostate cancer in July 2001 . 
 In 2002 , Mandela inaugurated the Nelson Mandela Annual Lecture , and in 2003 the Mandela Rhodes Foundation was created at Rhodes House , University of Oxford , to provide postgraduate scholarships to African students . These projects were followed by the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory and the 46664 campaign against HIV / AIDS . He gave the closing address at the XIII International AIDS Conference in Durban in 2000 , and in 2004 , spoke at the XV International AIDS Conference in Bangkok , Thailand , there urging for greater measures to tackle tuberculosis as well as HIV / AIDS . 
 Publicly , Mandela became more vocal in criticising Western powers . He strongly opposed the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo and called it an attempt by the world 's powerful nations to police the entire world . In 2003 , he spoke out against the plans for the US and UK to launch a war in Iraq , describing it as " a tragedy " and lambasting US President George W. Bush and UK Prime Minister Tony Blair for undermining the UN , saying , " All that ( Mr. Bush ) wants is Iraqi oil " . He attacked the US more generally , asserting that it had committed more " unspeakable atrocities " across the world than any other nation , citing the atomic bombing of Japan ; this attracted international controversy , although he later reconciled his relationship with Blair . Retaining an interest in Libyan @-@ UK relations , he visited Megrahi in <unk> prison and spoke out against the conditions of his treatment , referring to them as " psychological persecution " . 
 = = = " Retiring from retirement " : 2004 – 13 = = = 
 In June 2004 , aged 85 and amid failing health , Mandela announced that he was " retiring from retirement " and retreating from public life , remarking , " Don 't call me , I will call you . " Although continuing to meet with close friends and family , the Foundation discouraged invitations for him to appear at public events and denied most interview requests . 
 He retained some involvement in international affairs . In 2005 , he founded the Nelson Mandela Legacy Trust , travelling to the U.S. to speak before the Brookings Institution and the NAACP on the need for economic assistance to Africa . He spoke with U.S. Senator Hillary Clinton and President George W. Bush and first met then @-@ U.S. Senator Barack Obama . Mandela also encouraged Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe to resign over growing human rights abuses in the country . When this proved ineffective , he spoke out publicly against Mugabe in 2007 , asking him to step down " with residual respect and a modicum of dignity . " That year , Mandela , Machel , and Desmond Tutu convened a group of world leaders in Johannesburg to contribute their wisdom and independent leadership to some of the world 's toughest problems . Mandela announced the formation of this new group , The Elders , in a speech delivered on his 89th birthday . 
 Mandela 's 90th birthday was marked across the country on 18 July 2008 , with the main celebrations held at Qunu , and a concert in his honour in Hyde Park , London . In a speech marking the event , Mandela called for the rich to help the poor across the world . Throughout Mbeki 's presidency , Mandela continued to support the ANC , usually overshadowing Mbeki at any public events that the two attended . Mandela was more at ease with Mbeki 's successor Jacob Zuma , although the Nelson Mandela Foundation were upset when his grandson , <unk> Mandela , flew him out to the Eastern Cape to attend a pro @-@ Zuma rally in the midst of a storm in 2009 . 
 In 2004 , Mandela successfully campaigned for South Africa to host the 2010 FIFA World Cup , declaring that there would be " few better gifts for us " in the year marking a decade since the fall of apartheid . Mandela emotionally raised the FIFA World Cup Trophy after South Africa was awarded host status . Despite maintaining a low profile during the event due to ill @-@ health , Mandela made his final public appearance during the World Cup closing ceremony , where he received a " rapturous reception " . Between 2005 and 2013 , Mandela , and later his family , were embroiled in a series of legal disputes regarding money held in family trusts for the benefit of his descendants . In mid @-@ 2013 , as Mandela was hospitalised for a lung infection in Pretoria , his descendants were involved in an intra @-@ family legal dispute relating to the burial place of Mandela 's children , and ultimately Mandela himself . 
 = = = Illness and death : 2011 – 2013 = = = 
 In February 2011 , Mandela was briefly hospitalised with a respiratory infection , attracting international attention , before being re @-@ hospitalised for a lung infection and gallstone removal in December 2012 . After a successful medical procedure in early March 2013 , his lung infection recurred and he was briefly hospitalised in Pretoria . In June 2013 , his lung infection worsened and he was <unk> in Pretoria in a serious condition . Cape Town Archbishop Thabo <unk> visited Mandela at the hospital and prayed with Machel , while Zuma cancelled a trip to Mozambique to visit him the following day . In September 2013 , Mandela was discharged from hospital , although his condition remained unstable . 
 After suffering from a prolonged respiratory infection , Mandela died on 5 December 2013 at the age of 95 , at around 20 : 50 local time ( UTC + 2 ) at his home in Houghton , surrounded by his family . Zuma publicly announced his death on television , proclaiming ten days of national mourning , a memorial service held at Johannesburg 's FNB Stadium on 10 December 2013 , and 8 December as a national day of prayer and reflection . Mandela 's body lay in state from 11 to 13 December at the Union Buildings in Pretoria and a state funeral was held on 15 December in Qunu . Approximately 90 representatives of foreign states travelled to South Africa to attend memorial events . Images of and tributes to Mandela proliferated across social media . His $ 4 @.@ 1 million estate was left to his widow , other family members , staff , and educational institutions . 
 = = Political ideology = = 
 Mandela was a practical politician , rather than an intellectual scholar or political theorist . According to biographer Tom Lodge , " for Mandela , politics has always been primarily about enacting stories , about making narratives , primarily about morally exemplary conduct , and only secondarily about ideological vision , more about means rather than ends . " Mandela identified as both an African nationalist , an ideological position he held since joining the ANC , and a democratic socialist . He advocated the ultimate establishment of a classless society , with Sampson describing him as " openly opposed to capitalism , private land @-@ ownership and the power of big money " . 
 Mandela was influenced by Marxism , and during the revolution he advocated scientific socialism . During the Treason Trial , he denied being a communist , maintaining this stance when later talking to journalists . Conversely , biographer David Jones Smith stated that Mandela " embraced communism and communists " in the late 1950s and early 1960s , while historian Stephen Ellis found evidence that Mandela had been an active member of the South African Communist Party ( SACP ) . This was confirmed after his death by the SACP and the ANC . According to the SACP , he was not only a member of the party , but also served on the party 's Central Committee . 
 The 1955 Freedom Charter , which Mandela had helped create , called for the nationalisation of banks , gold mines and land , believing this necessary to ensure equal distribution of wealth . Despite these beliefs , Mandela initiated a programme of privatisation during his presidency in line with trends in other countries of the time . It has been repeatedly suggested that Mandela would have preferred to develop a social democratic economy in South Africa but that this was not feasible as a result of the international political and economic situation during the early 1990s . This decision was in part influenced by the fall of the socialist states in the Soviet Union and Eastern Bloc during the early 1990s . In contrast , China was developing rapidly within a " socialist market economy " and Mandela began to quote Deng Xiaoping 's aphorism , " It doesn 't matter whether a cat is black or white , so long as it catches mice . " 
 Over the course of his life , he began by advocating a path of non @-@ violence , later embracing violence , and then adopting a non @-@ violent approach to negotiation and reconciliation . When endorsing violence , he did so because he saw no alternative , and was always pragmatic about it , perceiving it as a means to get his opponent to the negotiating table . 
 Mandela took political ideas from other thinkers , among them Indian independence leaders like Gandhi and Nehru , African @-@ American activists , and African nationalists like Nkrumah , and fitted them into the South African situation . At the same time he rejected other aspects of their thought , such as the anti @-@ white sentiment of many African nationalists . He also synthesized both counter @-@ cultural and hegemonic views , for instance by drawing upon ideas from Afrikaner nationalism . Although he presented himself in an autocratic manner in several speeches , he was a devout believer in democracy and abided by majority decisions even when deeply disagreeing with them . His political thought nevertheless exhibited tensions between his support for liberal democracy and pre @-@ colonial African forms of consensus decision making . He held a conviction that " inclusivity , accountability and freedom of speech " were the fundamentals of democracy , and was driven by a belief in natural and human rights , pursuing not only racial equality but also promoting gay rights as part of the post @-@ apartheid reforms . His political development was strongly influenced by his legal training and practice , in particular his hope to achieve change not through violence but through " legal revolution " . 
 = = Personality and personal life = = 
 Mandela was widely considered a charismatic leader , with biographer Mary Benson describing him as having been " a born mass leader who could not help magnetizing people " . He was highly image conscious and throughout his life always sought out fine quality clothes , with many commentators believing that he carried himself in a regal manner . His aristocratic heritage was repeatedly emphasised by supporters , thus contributing to his " charismatic power " . While living in Johannesburg in the 1950s , he cultivated the image of the " African gentleman " , having " the pressed clothes , correct manners , and modulated public speech " associated with such a position . In doing so , Lodge argued that Mandela became " one of the first media politicians [ ... ] embodying a glamour and a style that projected visually a brave new African world of modernity and freedom " . In the 1990s , he came to be associated closely with the highly coloured " Madiba shirts " that he began wearing . 
 His official biographer , Anthony Sampson , commented that he was a " master of imagery and performance " , excelling at presenting himself well in press photographs and producing sound bites . His public speeches were presented in a formal , stiff manner , and often consisted of clichéd set phrases . Although not considered a great orator , his speeches conveyed " his personal commitment , charm and humour " . In describing his life , Mandela stated , " I was not a messiah , but an ordinary man who had become a leader because of extraordinary circumstances . " 
 Mandela was a private person who often concealed his emotions and confided in very few people . Privately , he lived an austere life , refusing to drink alcohol or smoke , and even as President made his own bed . Renowned for his mischievous sense of humour , he was known for being both stubborn and loyal , and at times exhibited a quick temper . He was typically friendly and welcoming , and appeared relaxed in conversation with everyone , including his opponents . Constantly polite and courteous , he was attentive to all , irrespective of their age or status , and often talked to children or servants . He was known for his ability to find common ground with very different communities . In later life , he always looked for the best in people , even defending political opponents to his allies , who sometimes thought him too trusting of others . He was raised in the Methodist denomination of Christianity , with the Methodist Church of Southern Africa claiming that he retained his allegiance to them throughout his life . An analysis of his writings have led to him being described by theologian Dion Forster as a Christian humanist , who relied more upon Ubuntu than Christian theology . According to Sampson , Mandela however never had " a strong religious faith " , while Boehmer stated that Mandela 's religious belief was " never robust " . He was fond of Indian cuisine , and had a lifelong interest in archaeology and boxing . 
 Mandela was heterosexual , with biographer Fatima Meer stating that he was " easily tempted " by women . Another biographer , Martin Meredith , characterised him as being " by nature a romantic " , highlighting that he had relationships with various women . Mandela was married three times , fathered six children , and had seventeen grandchildren and at least seventeen great @-@ grandchildren . He could be stern and demanding of his children , although he was more affectionate with his grandchildren . His first marriage was to Evelyn <unk> Mase in October 1944 ; they divorced after 13 years in 1957 under the multiple strains of his adultery and constant absences , devotion to revolutionary agitation , and the fact that she was a Jehovah 's Witness , a religion requiring political neutrality . The couple had two sons whom Mandela survived , Madiba " Thembi " <unk> ( 1945 – 1969 ) and <unk> Mandela ( 1950 – 2005 ) ; his first son died in a car crash and his second son died of AIDS . The couple had two daughters , both named Makaziwe Mandela ( born 1947 and 1954 ) ; the first died at the age of nine months , the second , known as " Maki " , survived Mandela . <unk> 's son , <unk> Mandela , became chief of the <unk> tribal council in 2007 . Mandela 's second wife , Winnie Madikizela @-@ Mandela , also came from the Transkei area , although they too met in Johannesburg , where she was the city 's first black social worker . They had two daughters , Zenani and <unk> . In 1995 , he divorced Winnie , and married Graça Machel on his 80th birthday in 1998 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 By the time of his death , within South Africa Mandela was widely considered both " the father of the nation " and " the founding father of democracy " . Outside of South Africa , he was a " global icon " , with the scholar of South African studies Rita Barnard describing him as " one of the most revered figures of our time " . One biographer considered him " a modern democratic hero " , while his popularity had resulted in a cult of personality building up around him . He is often cited alongside Gandhi and Martin Luther King , Jr. as one of the 20th century 's exemplary anti @-@ racist and anti @-@ colonial leaders . Boehmer described him as " a totem of the totemic values of our age : toleration and liberal democracy " and " a universal symbol of social justice " . 
 Mandela 's international fame had emerged during his incarceration in the 1980s , when he became the world 's most famous prisoner , a symbol of the anti @-@ apartheid cause , and an icon for millions who embraced the ideal of human equality . In 1986 , Mandela biographer Mary Benson characterised him as " the embodiment of the struggle for liberation " in South Africa . Meredith stated that in becoming " a potent symbol of resistance " to apartheid during the 1980s , he had gained " mythical status " internationally . Sampson commented that even during his life , this myth had become " so powerful that it blurs the realities " , converting Mandela into " a secular saint " . Within a decade of the end of his Presidency , Mandela 's era was being widely thought of as " a golden age of hope and harmony " , with much nostalgia being expressed for it . Across the world , Mandela earned international acclaim for his activism in overcoming apartheid and fostering racial reconciliation , coming to be viewed as " a moral authority " with a great " concern for truth " . 
 Mandela generated controversy throughout his career as an activist and politician , having detractors on both the radical left and right . Some voices in the ANC accused him of selling out for agreeing to enter negotiations with the apartheid government . Concerns were raised that the personal respect and authority he accrued were in contrast to the ideals of democracy that he promoted . His government would be criticised for its failure to deal with the HIV / AIDS pandemic , and to promote an economic model that benefited South Africa 's poor . During the 1980s , Mandela was widely labelled a terrorist by prominent political figures in the Western world for his embrace of political violence . Thatcher attracted international attention for describing the ANC as " a typical terrorist organisation " in 1987 , although she later called on Botha to release Mandela . Mandela has also been criticised for his friendship with political leaders such as Castro , Gaddafi , and Suharto – deemed dictators by critics – as well as his refusal to condemn their human rights violations . 
 = = = Orders , decorations , and monuments = = = 
 On 16 December 2013 , the Day of Reconciliation , a nine @-@ metre @-@ high , bronze statue of Mandela was unveiled at the Union Buildings by President Jacob Zuma . In 2004 , Johannesburg granted Mandela the Freedom of the City , and the Sandton Square shopping centre was renamed Nelson Mandela Square , after a Mandela statue was installed there . In 2008 , another Mandela statue was unveiled at Drakenstein Correctional Centre , formerly Victor Verster Prison , near Cape Town , standing on the spot where Mandela was released from the prison . 
 In 1993 , he received the joint Nobel Peace Prize with de Klerk . In November 2009 , the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed Mandela 's birthday , 18 July , as " Mandela Day " , marking his contribution to the anti @-@ apartheid struggle . It called on individuals to donate 67 minutes to doing something for others , commemorating the 67 years that Mandela had been a part of the movement . 
 Awarded the US Presidential Medal of Freedom and appointment to the Order of Canada , he was also the first living person to be made an honorary Canadian citizen . Mandela was the last recipient of the Soviet Union 's Lenin Peace Prize and the first recipient of the Al @-@ Gaddafi International Prize for Human Rights . In 1990 , he received the Bharat Ratna Award from the Government of India , and in 1992 received Pakistan 's Nishan @-@ e @-@ Pakistan . The same year , he was awarded the Atatürk Peace Award by Turkey ; he at first refused the award , citing human rights violations committed by Turkey at the time , but later accepted the award in 1999 . Queen Elizabeth II appointed him as a Bailiff Grand Cross of the Order of St. John ( upon the recommendation of the order 's Honours and Awards Committee ) and granted him membership in the Order of Merit ( a personal gift of the monarch ) . 
 = = = Biographies and popular media = = = 
 The first biography of Mandela was authored by Mary Benson , based on brief interviews with him that she had conducted in the 1960s . Two authorised biographies were later produced by friends of Mandela . The first was Fatima Meer 's Higher Than Hope , which was heavily influenced by Winnie and thus placed great emphasis on Mandela 's family . The second was Anthony Sampson 's Mandela , published in 1999 . Other biographies included Martin Meredith 's Mandela , first published in 1997 , and Tom Lodge 's Mandela , brought out in 2006 . 
 Since the late 1980s , Mandela 's image began to appear on a proliferation of items , among them " photographs , paintings , drawings , statues , public murals , buttons , t @-@ shirts , refrigerator magnets , and more " , items that have been characterised as " Mandela kitsch " . Following his death , there appeared many internet memes featuring images of Mandela with his inspirational quotes superimposed onto them . 
 Many artists have dedicated songs to Mandela . One of the most popular was from The Special AKA who recorded the song " Free Nelson Mandela " in 1983 , which Elvis Costello also recorded and had a hit with . Stevie Wonder dedicated his 1985 Oscar for the song " I Just Called to Say I Love You " to Mandela , resulting in his music being banned by the South African Broadcasting Corporation . 
 Mandela has been depicted in cinema and television on multiple occasions . He was portrayed by Danny Glover in the 1987 HBO television film Mandela . The 1997 film Mandela and de Klerk starred Sidney Poitier as Mandela , and Dennis Haysbert played him in Goodbye <unk> ( 2007 ) . In the 2009 BBC telefilm Mrs Mandela , Mandela was portrayed by David Harewood , and Morgan Freeman portrayed him in Invictus ( 2009 ) . Terrence Howard portrayed him in the 2011 film Winnie Mandela . He was portrayed by Idris Elba in the 2013 film Mandela : Long Walk to Freedom . 
 = Hull House = 
 Hull House was a settlement house in the United States that was co @-@ founded in 1889 by Jane Addams and Ellen Gates Starr . Located in the Near West Side of Chicago , Illinois , Hull House ( named for the home 's first owner ) opened its doors to recently arrived European immigrants . By 1911 , Hull House had grown to 13 buildings . In 1912 the Hull House complex was completed with the addition of a summer camp , the Bowen Country Club . With its innovative social , educational , and artistic programs , Hull House became the standard bearer for the movement that had grown , by 1920 , to almost 500 settlement houses nationally . 
 Most of the Hull House buildings were demolished for the construction of the University of Illinois @-@ Circle Campus in the mid 1960s . The Hull mansion and several subsequent acquisitions were continuously renovated to accommodate the changing demands of the association . The original building and one additional building ( which has been moved 200 yards ( 182 @.@ 9 m ) ) survive today . On June 12 , 1974 , the Hull House building was designated a Chicago Landmark . On June 23 , 1965 , it was designated as a U.S. National Historic Landmark . On October 15 , 1966 , which is the day that the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 was enacted , it was listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Hull House was one of the four original members to be listed on both the Chicago Registered Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places list ( along with Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , Robie House & Lorado Taft Midway Studios ) . The Hull House Association ceased operations in January 2012 , but the Hull mansion remains open as a museum . 
 = = Mission = = 
 Addams followed the example of Toynbee Hall , which was founded in 1884 in the East End of London as a center for social reform . She described Toynbee Hall as " a community of university men " who , while living there , held their recreational clubs and social gatherings at the settlement house among the poor people and in the same style they would in their own circle . Addams and Starr established Hull House as a settlement house on September 18 , 1889 . 
 In the 19th century a women 's movement began to promote education , autonomy , and break into traditionally male dominated occupations for women . Organizations led by women , bonded by sisterhood , were formed for social reform , including settlement houses in working class and poor neighborhoods , like Hull House . To develop " new roles for women , the first generation of New Women wove the traditional ways of their mothers into the heart of their brave new world . The social activists , often single , were led by educated , often single New Women . 
 Hull House became , at its inception in 1889 , " a community of university women " whose main purpose was to provide social and educational opportunities for working class people ( many of them recent European immigrants ) in the surrounding neighborhood . The " residents " ( volunteers at Hull were given this title ) held classes in literature , history , art , domestic activities ( such as sewing ) , and many other subjects . Hull House also held concerts that were free to everyone , offered free lectures on current issues , and operated clubs for both children and adults . 
 In 1892 , Addams published her thoughts on what has been described as " the three R 's " of the settlement house movement : residence , research , and reform . These involved " [ c ] lose cooperation with the neighborhood people , scientific study of the causes of poverty and dependence , communication of [ these ] facts to the public , and persistent pressure for [ legislative and social ] reform ... " Hull House conducted careful studies of the Near West Side , Chicago community , which became known as " The Hull House Neighborhood " . These studies enabled the Hull House residents to confront the establishment , eventually partnering with them in the design and implementation of programs intended to enhance and improve the opportunities for success by the largely immigrant population . 
 According to Christie and <unk> ( 2001 ) , while the Christian settlement houses sought to Christianize , Jane Addams , “ had come to epitomize the force of secular humanism . ” Her image was , however , “ reinvented ” by the Christian churches . According to the Jane Addams Hull @-@ House Museum , " Some social settlements were linked to religious institutions . Others , like Hull @-@ House [ co @-@ founded by Addams ] , were secular . " 
 = = The Hull House neighborhood = = 
 One of the first newspaper articles ever written about Hull House quotes the following invitation sent to the residents of the Hull House neighborhood . It begins with : " Mio <unk> Amico " … and is signed , Le <unk> , Jane Addams and Ellen Starr . That invitation to the community , written during the first year of Hull House 's existence , suggests that the inner core of what Addams labeled " The Hull House Neighborhood " was overwhelmingly Italian at that time . " 10 @,@ 000 Italians lived between the river and Halsted Street . " 
 By all accounts , the greater Hull House neighborhood ( Chicago 's Near West Side ) was a mix of various ethnic groups that had immigrated to Chicago . There was no discrimination of race , language , creed , or tradition for those who entered the doors of the Hull House . Every person was treated with respect . The Bethlehem @-@ Howard Neighborhood Center records substantiate that , " Germans and Jews resided south of that inner core ( south of twelfth street ) … The Greek delta formed by Harrison , Halsted and Blue Island Streets served as a buffer to the Irish residing to the south and the Canadian – French to the northwest . From the river on the east end , on out to the western ends of what came to be known as " Little Italy " — ( from Roosevelt Road on the south to the Harrison Street delta on the north ) — became the port @-@ of @-@ call for Italians who continued to immigrate to Chicago from the shores of southern Italy until a quota system was implemented in 1924 for most southern Europeans . 
 The Greektown and Maxwell Street residents , along with the remnants of other immigrant groups living on the outer fringes of the Hull House Neighborhood , disappeared long before the physical demise of Hull House . The exodus of most ethnic groups began shortly after the turn of the twentieth century . Their businesses , e.g. Greektown and Maxwell Street , however , remained . Italian Americans were the only immigrant group that endured as a vibrant on @-@ going community . That community came to be known as " Little Italy " . Taylor Street 's Little Italy , the inner core of Addams ' " Hull House Neighborhood " , remained as the laboratory upon which the social and philanthropic groups of Hull House elitists had tested their theories and formulated their challenges to the establishment . 
 The synergy between Taylor Street ’ s Little Italy and the Hull House complex ; i.e. , the settlement house and its summer camp , the Bowen Country Club , is well documented . Alice Hamilton , medical professional and early member of that elite Hull House hierarchy , wrote in her autobiography , " Those Italian women knew what a baby needed , far better than my Ann Arbor professors did . " The ancillary literature between , among and about members of Hull House 's inner sanctum of sociologists and philanthropists is littered with such comments , reinforcing the relationship that existed between Taylor Street 's Little Italy and Hull House . A review of the ethnic composition of those who registered for and utilized the services provided by the Hull House complex , during its 74 years as a tenant of the near @-@ west side , suggests an ethnic bias . Of the 257 known WWII veterans who were alumni of the Bowen Country Club , " virtually all had a vowel at the end of their names ... denoting their Italian heritage . " 
 A historic picture , " Meet the Hull House Kids , " was taken on a summer day in 1924 by Wallace K. Kirkland Sr. , Hull House Director . He later became a top photographer with Life . The twenty Hull House Kids were erroneously described as young boys , of Irish ancestry , posing in the Dante School yard on <unk> Street ( now Arthington Street ) . It circulated the world as a " poster child " of sorts for the Hull House social experiment . On April 5 , 1987 , over a half century later , the Chicago Sun @-@ Times refuted the contention that the Hull House Boys were of Irish ancestry . In doing so , the Sun @-@ Times article listed the names of each of the young boys . All twenty boys were first @-@ generation Italian @-@ Americans , all with vowels at the end of their names . " They grew up to be lawyers and mechanics , sewer workers and dump truck drivers , a candy shop owner , a boxer and a mob boss . " 
 Because of the immigrants ’ loneliness for their homeland , Addams started hosting ethnic evenings at Hull House . This would include ethnic food , dancing , music , and maybe a short lecture on a topic of interest . Some of the themed evenings were Italian , Greek , German , Polish , etc . Ellen Gates Starr described one Italian evening as having the room packed full with people . One of the ladies who attended “ recited a patriotic poem with great spirit ” and everyone was moved by it . 
 = = = Accomplishments = = = 
 Throughout the first two decades , along with thousands of immigrants from the surrounding area , Hull House attracted many female residents who later became prominent and influential reformers at various levels . At the beginning , Addams and Starr volunteered as on @-@ call doctors when the real doctors either didn 't show up or weren 't available . They acted as midwives , saved babies from neglect , prepared the dead for burial , nursed the sick , and sheltered domestic violence victims . For example , one Italian bride had lost her wedding ring and in turn was beaten by her husband for a week . She sought shelter at the settlement and it was granted to her . Also , a baby born with a cleft palate was unwanted by his mother so he was kept at the Hull House for six weeks after an operation . In another case , a woman was about to give birth to an illegitimate baby , so none of the Irish matrons would touch it . Addams and Starr stepped in and delivered this helpless little one . Finally , a female Italian immigrant was so thrilled about fresh roses at one of the Hull House receptions that she insisted they had come from Italy . She had never seen anything as beautiful in America despite the fact that she lived within ten blocks of a florist shop . Her limited view of America came from the untidy street she lived on and the long struggle to adapt to American ways . The settlement was also gradually drawn into advocating for legislative reforms at the municipal , state and federal levels , addressing issues such as child labor , women 's suffrage , healthcare reform and immigration policy . Some claim that the work of the Hull House marked the beginning of what we know today as " Social Welfare " . 
 At the neighborhood level , Hull House established the city ’ s first public playground , bathhouse , and public gymnasium ( in 1893 ) , pursued educational and political reform , and investigated housing , working , and sanitation issues . The playground opened on May Day in 1893 , located on Polk Street . Families dressed in party attire and came to join the celebration that day . Addams became the founder of the National Playground Association and advocated for playgrounds nationwide . She had studied child behavior and painfully concluded that “ children robbed of childhood were likely to become dull , sullen men and women working mindless jobs , or criminals for whom the adventure of crime became the only way to break out of the bleakness of their lives ” Also , one volunteer , Jenny Dow , started a kindergarten class for children left at the settlement while their mothers worked in the sweatshops . Within three weeks , Dow had 24 registered kindergartners and 70 on a waiting list . At the municipal level , their pursuit of legal reforms led to the first juvenile court in the United States , and their work influenced urban planning and the transition to a branch library system . At the state level Hull House influenced legislation on child labor laws , occupational safety and health provisions , compulsory education , immigrant rights , and pension laws . These experiences translated to success at the federal level , working with the settlement house network to champion national child labor laws , women ’ s suffrage , a children ’ s bureau , unemployment compensation , workers ' compensation , and other elements of the Progressive agenda during the first two decades of the twentieth century . 
 = = = Teachings = = = 
 Later , the settlement branched out and offered services to ameliorate some of the effects of poverty . A public dispensary provided nutritious food for the sick as well as a daycare center and public baths . Among the courses Hull House offered was a bookbinding course , which was timely — given the employment opportunities in the growing printing trade . Hull House was well known for its success in aiding American assimilation , especially with immigrant youth . Hull House became the center of the movement to promote hand workmanship as a moral regenerative force . Under the direction of Laura Dainty Pelham their theater group performed the Chicago premiers of several plays by John Galsworthy , Henrik Ibsen , and George Bernard Shaw , and was given credit for founding the American Little Theatre Movement . The success of Hull House led Paul Kellogg to refer to the group as the " Great Ladies of Halsted Street " . 
 The objective of Hull House , as stated in its charter , was : " To provide a center for a higher civic and social life ; to institute and maintain educational and philanthropic enterprises , and to investigate and improve the conditions in the industrial districts of Chicago . " 
 = = The building and museum = = 
 Hull House was located in Chicago Illinois , and took its name from the Italianate mansion built by real estate magnate Charles Jerald Hull ( 1820 @-@ 1889 ) at 800 South Halsted Street in 1856 . The building was located in what had once been a fashionable part of town , but by 1889 , when Addams was searching for a location for her experiment , it had descended into squalor . This was partly due to the rapid and overwhelming influx of immigrants into the Near West Side neighborhood . Charles Hull granted his former home to his niece Helen Culver , who in turn granted it to Addams on a 25 @-@ year rent @-@ free lease . By 1907 , Addams had acquired 13 buildings surrounding Hull 's mansion . Between 1889 and 1935 , Addams and Ellen Gates Starr continuously redeveloped the building . In 1912 , the Bowen Country Club summer camp was added to complete the Hull House complex . The facility remained at the original location until it was purchased in 1963 by what was then called the University of Illinois @-@ Circle Campus . The development of University of Illinois @-@ Circle Campus required the demolition of most of the Hull House buildings and the 1967 restoration to the original building by Frazier , Raftery , Orr and Fairbank removed Addams 's third floor addition . Of the dozen additional buildings only the craftsman style dining hall ( built in 1905 and designed by Pond & Pond ) survives and it was moved 200 yards ( 182 @.@ 9 m ) from its original site . 
 = = = The haunting of Hull House = = = 
 Addams noted upon moving in that the building had a " half skeptical reputation for a haunted attic . " Over the years , numerous stories of ghosts and hauntings have surrounded Hull House , making it a stop on many of the " ghosts in Chicago " tours . Charles Hull 's wife had died in the house in 1860 , and is sometimes thought to haunt it . Other candidates for resident ghosts include the many people who died there of natural causes in the 1870s when it was used as a home for the aged by the Little Sisters of the Poor . 
 In 1913 , another Hull House ghost story began circulating . According to this legend , after a man claimed that he would rather have the Devil in his house than a picture of The Virgin Mary , his child was born with pointed ears , horns , scale @-@ covered skin , and a tail . The mother was said to have taken the baby to Hull House , where Addams was said to have attempted to have it baptized and wound up locking it in the attic . While initially annoyed about the story , which had no basis in fact , Addams became fascinated by the effect the episode had on old women in the neighborhood and used the episode as a basis for her book , The Long Road of Woman 's Memory . 
 While a great many erroneous stories have circulated about the building , Addams is known to have spoken to several friends about one of the front bedrooms on the second floor being haunted - she and a friend once thought they saw a " woman in white " ghost there , and the same ghost was later seen by a group of girls when the room was used as a dressing room for the adjacent theater . Though Addams called it " haunted , " she seems to have been more amused than frightened by it . 
 = = Theater = = 
 Addams felt that the community benefits from theater plays and thus established an amateur theater in the Hull House in 1899 . “ The neighborhood Greeks performed the classic plays of antiquity in their own language and the children of European immigrants produced Shakespeare ” as well as others . Early one December , the Greeks performed Odysseus in Chicago . The auditorium was filled with a multi @-@ ethnic crowd and packed too close for comfort . The audience was very eager and gave the performers “ rapt attention . " They watched neighbors and co @-@ workers execute this primitive play , but it was very powerful , plausible , and personal . The actors seemed to pay “ tribute to a noble ancestry ” and plea for the respect of the audience . Indeed , they did gain this respect because it was said that not even trained college students could give the same play with as much zeal and patriotism . In 1963 , when road tours of Broadway productions became common , the Hull House Theater in the Jane Addams Center at <unk> North Broadway fostered the development of Chicago Theater companies for the rest of the century . Founder Bob <unk> created an environment to nourish young talent with professionalism . Chicago 's noted improvisational theatre scene has roots in Hull House , as Viola Spolin , noted improvisational techniques instructor , taught classes at Hull House . 
 = = 1930s to 2012 = = 
 Addams ran Hull House as head resident until her death in 1935 . Hull House continued to serve the community surrounding the Halsted location until it was displaced by the urban branch campus of the University of Illinois in the 1960s . Until 2012 , the social service center role was performed throughout the city at various locations under an umbrella organization , the Jane Addams Hull House Association . The original Hull House building itself is a museum , part of the College of Architecture and the Arts at the University of Illinois at Chicago , and is open to the public . 
 The Jane Addams Hull House Association was one of Chicago ’ s largest nonprofit social welfare organizations . Its mission was to improve social conditions for underserved people and communities by providing creative , innovative programs and by advocating for related public policy reforms . The Association had more than 50 programs at over 40 sites throughout Chicago and served approximately 60 @,@ 000 individuals , families , and community members every year . 
 The Jane Addams Hull @-@ House Museum is part of the College of Architecture and the Arts at the University of Illinois at Chicago and serves as a memorial to Addams and other resident social reformers , whose work influenced the lives of their immigrant neighbors , as well as national and international public policy . The museum and its programs connect the work of Hull House residents to important contemporary social issues . The Museum 's collection includes over 1 @,@ 100 artifacts related to Hull House history and over 100 oral interviews conducted with people who have shared their stories about Hull House and the surrounding neighborhood . 
 = = = Hull House Association closure = = = 
 On January 19 , 2012 , it was announced that Jane Addams Hull House Association would close in the spring of 2012 and file for bankruptcy due to financial difficulties , after 122 years . On Friday , January 27 , 2012 , Hull House closed unexpectedly and all employees received their final paychecks . Employees learned at time of closing that they would not receive severance pay or earned vacation pay or healthcare coverage . Union officials said that the agency closed while owing employees more than $ 27 @,@ 000 in unpaid expense reimbursement claims . The University of Illinois at Chicago 's Jane Addams Hull @-@ House Museum ( unaffiliated with the agency ) , however , will remain open . 
 = = Selected notable residents = = 
 Edith Abbott 
 Grace Abbott 
 Jane Addams 
 Ethel Percy Andrus 
 Viola Spolin 
 Neva Boyd 
 Charlotte Perkins Gilman 
 Sophonisba Breckinridge 
 Edward L Burchard , the first male resident 
 Dorothy <unk> 
 Pauline <unk> Schindler 
 Henry Standing Bear 
 Alice Hamilton 
 Florence Kelley 
 Mary Kenney O 'Sullivan 
 Julia Lathrop 
 Mary McDowell 
 Ernest Carroll Moore , founder and first provost of UCLA . 
 Frances Perkins 
 Gerard Swope , General Electric Company ( 1922 @-@ 1939 ) 
 <unk> Stevens 
 Cornelia De Bey 
 Eleanor Clarke Slagle , founder of Occupational Therapy 
 Victor Yarros and Rachelle Yarros 
 <unk> Benedict 
 Emily Edwards ( de <unk> ) 
 Willard Motley , author : Knock on Any Door . Resident writer at Hull House , Willard Motley used the Hull House Neighborhood , Taylor Street 's Little Italy , and its people for the setting of his 1949 best seller . Taylor Street Archives 
 = = Selected notable alumni = = 
 Benny Goodman 
 = Víðarr = 
 In Norse mythology , Víðarr ( Old Norse , possibly " wide ruler " , sometimes anglicized as Vidar , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) is a god among the Æsir associated with vengeance . Víðarr is described as the son of Odin and the jötunn Gríðr , and is foretold to avenge his father 's death by killing the wolf Fenrir at Ragnarök , a conflict which he is described as surviving . Víðarr is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson , and is interpreted as depicted with Fenrir on the Gosforth Cross . A number of theories surround the figure , including theories around potential ritual silence and a Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European basis . 
 = = Attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the Poetic Edda , Víðarr is mentioned in the poems Völuspá , <unk> , Grímnismál , and Lokasenna . In stanzas 54 and 55 of the poem Völuspá , a völva tells Odin that his son Víðarr will avenge Odin 's death at Ragnarök by stabbing Fenrir in the heart . In stanzas 51 and 53 of <unk> , Vafþrúðnir states that Víðarr and his brother Váli will both live in the " temples of the gods " after Surtr 's fire has receded and that Víðarr will avenge the death of his father Odin by sundering the cold jaws of Fenrir in battle . 
 In stanza 17 of Grímnismál , during Odin 's visions of various dwelling places of the gods , he describes Víðarr 's ( here anglicized as " Vidar " ) residence : 
 <unk> grows and high grass 
 widely in Vidar 's land 
 and there the son proclaims on his horse 's back 
 that he 's keen to avenge his father . 
 According to Lokasenna , Loki rebukes the gods at the start of the poem for not properly welcoming him to the feast at Ægir 's hall . In stanza 10 , Odin finally relents to the rules of hospitality , urging Víðarr to stand and pour a drink for the quarrelsome guest . Víðarr does so , and then Loki toasts the Æsir before beginning his flyting . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 Víðarr is referenced in the Prose Edda books Gylfaginning and Skáldskaparmál : 
 = = = = Gylfaginning = = = = 
 Víðarr is referenced in the book Gylfaginning in chapters 29 , 51 , and 53 . In chapter 29 , Víðarr is introduced by the enthroned figure of High as " the silent god " with a thick shoe , that he is nearly as strong as the god Thor , and that the gods rely on him in times of immense difficulties . 
 In chapter 51 , High foretells that , during Ragnarök , the wolf Fenrir will devour Odin , Víðarr will avenge him by stepping down with one foot on the lower jaw of the monster , grabbing his upper jaw in one hand and tearing his mouth apart , killing him . Víðarr 's " thick shoe " is described as consisting of all the extra leather pieces that people have cut from their own shoes at the toe and heel , collected by the god throughout all time . Therefore , anyone who is concerned enough to give assistance to the gods should throw these pieces away . 
 In chapter 54 , following Ragnarök and the rebirth of the world , Víðarr along with his brother Váli will have survived both the swelling of the sea and the fiery conflagration unleashed by Surtr , completely unharmed , and shall thereafter dwell on the field Iðavöllr , " where the city of Asgard had previously been " . 
 = = = = Skáldskaparmál = = = = 
 According to Skáldskaparmál , Víðarr was one of the twelve presiding male gods seated in their thrones at a banquet for the visiting Ægir . At a point in dialogue between the skaldic god Bragi and Ægir , Snorri himself begins speaking of the myths in <unk> terms and states that the historical equivalent of Víðarr was the Trojan hero Aeneas who survived the Trojan War and went on to achieve " great deeds " . 
 Later in the book , various kennings are given for Víðarr , including again the " silent As " , " possessor of the iron shoe " , " enemy and slayer of <unk> " , " the gods ' avenging As " , " father 's homestead @-@ inhabiting As " , " son of Odin " , and " brother of the Æsir " . In the tale of the god Thor 's visit to the hall of the jötunn Geirröd , Gríðr is stated as the mother of " Víðarr the Silent " who assists Thor in his journey . In chapter 33 , after returning from Asgard and feasting with the gods , Ægir invites the gods to come to his hall in three months . Fourteen gods make the trip to attend the feast , including Víðarr . In chapter 75 , Víðarr 's name appears twice in a list of Æsir . 
 = = Archaeological record = = 
 The mid @-@ 11th century Gosforth Cross , located in Cumbria , England , has been described as depicting a combination of scenes from the Christian Judgement Day and the pagan Ragnarök . The cross features various figures depicted in Borre style , including a man with a spear facing a monstrous head , one of whose feet is thrust into the beast 's forked tongue and on its lower jaw , while a hand is placed against its upper jaw , a scene interpreted as Víðarr fighting Fenrir . The depiction has also been theorized as a metaphor for Jesus 's defeat of Satan . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Theories have been proposed that Víðarr 's silence may derive from a ritual silence or other abstentions which often accompany acts of vengeance , as for example in Völuspá and Baldrs draumar when Váli , conceived for the sole purpose of avenging Baldr 's death , abstains from washing his hands and combing his hair " until he brought Baldr 's adversary to the funeral pyre " . Parallels have been drawn between chapter 31 of Tacitus ' 1st century CE work Germania where Tacitus describes that members of the Chatti , a Germanic tribe , may not shave or groom before having first slain an enemy . 
 Georges Dumézil theorized that Víðarr represents a cosmic figure from an archetype derived from the Proto @-@ Indo @-@ Europeans . Dumézil stated that he was aligned with both vertical space , due to his placement of his foot on the wolf 's lower jaw and his hand on the wolf 's upper jaw , and horizontal space , due to his wide step and strong shoe , and that , by killing the wolf , Víðarr keeps the wolf from destroying the cosmos , and the cosmos can thereafter be restored after the destruction resulting from Ragnarök . Thus Dumézil conceives of Víðarr as a spatial god ( per the hypothesized <unk> / wide root - <unk> <unk> , from <unk> * <unk> ( cf . O.S. , <unk> wid , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> wit , <unk> <unk> ) . Dumézil substantiates this claim with the text of the Lokasenna , in which Víðarr , trying to mediate the dispute with Loki , urges the other Aesir to " grant Loki his space " at the feasting table . Dumézil argues that this play on Víðarr 's spatiality would have been understood by an audience familiar with the God , an interpretation further warranted by his reading of the Lokasenna as being in significant part a book of puns and word plays about the different Aesir . Dumézil also suggests that Víðarr 's spatiality is seen in the Vishnu of the Vedic traditions , both etymologically ( the <unk> root ) and mythologically , citing the story of Bali and Vishnu . In this legend , Vishnu ( in the form of Vamana ) tricks the malevolent king Bali , who has secured dominion over the whole Earth , by making Bali promise to grant Vamana all the land he can cover in three paces . Vamana turns himself into a giant and strides across all of heaven and Earth , taking Bali 's head and granting him immortality in lieu of taking the last pace . Dumézil theorizes that these myths of Fenrir / Víðarr and Bali / Vishnu may have a common origin in an Indo @-@ European God of spatiality , similar but distinct from the hypothetical framing or entry / exit God that spawned Janus and Heimdall . 
 = Victoria Cross for Australia = 
 The Victoria Cross for Australia is the highest award in the Australian Honours System , superseding the Victoria Cross for issue to Australians . The Victoria Cross for Australia is the " decoration for according recognition to persons who in the presence of the enemy , perform acts of the most conspicuous gallantry , or daring or pre @-@ eminent acts of valour or self @-@ sacrifice or display extreme devotion to duty . " 
 The Victoria Cross for Australia was created by letters patent signed by Elizabeth II , Queen of Australia , on 15 January 1991 . It is listed equal first with the British Victoria Cross on the Australian Order of Wear with precedence in Australia over all orders , decorations and medals . The decoration may be awarded to members of the Australian Defence Force and to other persons determined by the Australian Minister for Defence . A person to whom the Victoria Cross for Australia has been awarded is entitled to the post nominals VC placed after the person ’ s name . 
 The Governor @-@ General of Australia awards the Victoria Cross for Australia , with the approval of the Sovereign , on the recommendation of the Minister for Defence . The first medal was awarded on 16 January 2009 to Trooper Mark Donaldson , for the rescue of a coalition forces interpreter from heavy fire in Oruzgan Province in Afghanistan . Donaldson 's award came almost 40 years after Warrant Officer Keith Payne became the last Australian to be awarded the ( original ) Victoria Cross for gallantry on 24 May 1969 during the Vietnam War . Unlike the original Victoria Cross where the announcement of the award is followed some time later by the presentation of the award , the announcement and presentation of all awards of the VC for Australia have occurred on the same occasion with the presentation being made by the Governor @-@ General in the presence of the Prime Minister . Both VC for Australia and original Victoria Cross recipients are entitled to the Victoria Cross allowance under the Veterans ’ Entitlements Act 1986 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Original medal = = = 
 On 29 January 1856 , Queen Victoria signed the Royal Warrant that officially instituted the Victoria Cross . The Warrant was backdated to 1854 to recognise acts of valour committed during the Crimean War . It was originally intended that the Victoria Crosses would be cast from the bronze cascabels of two cannon that were captured from the Russians at the Siege of Sevastopol . However , historian John Glanfield has proven , through the use of X @-@ rays of older Victoria Crosses , that the metal used for the Victoria Crosses is in fact from antique Chinese guns , and not of Russian origin . 
 The barrels of the cannon used to cast the medals are stationed outside the Officers ' Mess , at the Royal Artillery Barracks at Woolwich . The remaining portion of the only remaining cascabel , weighing 10 kilograms ( 358 oz ) , is stored in a vault maintained by 15 Regiment , Royal Logistic Corps at MoD Donnington , and can be removed only under armed guard . It is estimated that 80 to 85 more Victoria Crosses could be cast from this source . A single company of jewellers , Hancocks of London , established in 1849 , has been responsible for the production of every medal since its inception . Both the Australian and New Zealand Victoria Crosses are made from the same gunmetal as the originals . 
 The original medal was awarded to 96 Australians ; 91 of these were received while serving as members of Australian forces ; five were received by former members of the Australian forces who were serving with South African or British forces . Sixty @-@ four awards were for action in the First World War , nine of them for action during the Gallipoli Campaign . Twenty medals were awarded for action in the Second World War , and the other medals were for action in the Second Boer War , Russian Civil War and in the Vietnam War . The last recipient was Warrant Officer Keith Payne , for gallantry on 24 May 1969 during the Vietnam War . Payne was awarded the medal for instigating a rescue of more than 40 men . 
 = = = Separate Commonwealth awards = = = 
 In the past 70 years several Commonwealth countries have introduced their own honours systems , completely separate from the British Honours System . Australia , Canada and New Zealand have each introduced their own decorations for gallantry and bravery , replacing British decorations such as the Military Cross with their own awards . Most Commonwealth realms still recognise some form of the Victoria Cross as their highest decoration for valour . 
 With the issuing of letters patent by the Queen of Australia on 15 January 1991 , Australia became the first Commonwealth realm to institute a separate Victoria Cross award in its own honours system . Although it is a separate award , the Victoria Cross for Australia 's appearance is identical to its British counterpart . Canada followed suit when in 1993 , Queen Elizabeth II as Queen of Canada signed Letters Patent creating the Canadian Victoria Cross . The Canadian version has a different inscription , as well as being created from a different unspecified metal . The legend has been changed from FOR VALOUR to the Latin PRO VALORE . Although one Canadian VC has been cast , none has been awarded . In 1999 , New Zealand created the Victoria Cross for New Zealand , identical to the Australian and British Victoria Crosses , and this has been awarded once , on 2 July 2007 to Corporal Willie Apiata . 
 = = Appearance = = 
 The Victoria Cross for Australia is identical to the original design . It is a " cross pattée 41 millimetres high , 36 millimetres wide . The arms of the Cross have raised edges . The obverse bears a Crowned Lion standing on the Royal Crown with the words ' FOR VALOUR ' inscribed on a semi @-@ circular scroll below the Crown . The reverse bears raised edges on the arms of the cross and the date of the act for which the Cross is awarded is engraved within the circle in the centre . The inscription was originally to have been FOR <unk> , until it was changed on the recommendation of Queen Victoria , who thought some might erroneously consider that only the recipients of the Victoria Cross were brave in battle . The decoration , suspension bar , and link weigh about 27 grams ( 0 @.@ 87 troy ounces ) . 
 The cross is suspended by a ring from a seriffed " V " to a bar ornamented with laurel leaves , through which the ribbon passes . The reverse of the suspension bar is engraved with the recipient 's name , rank , number and unit . On the reverse of the medal is a circular panel , on which the date of the act for which it was awarded is engraved in the centre . The ribbon is crimson , and is 38 millimetres ( 1 @.@ 5 inches ) wide . Although the warrants state the colour as red , it is defined by most commentators as " crimson " or " wine @-@ red " . 
 = = Conferment = = 
 The Victoria Cross for Australia is awarded for 
 ... most conspicuous gallantry , or some daring or pre @-@ eminent act of valour or self @-@ sacrifice , or extreme devotion to duty in the presence of the enemy or belligerents . 
 Awards are granted by the Governor @-@ General with the approval of the Sovereign . The warrant for the Victoria Cross for Australia differs markedly from the Imperial warrant . The new warrant does not specify any particular process for recommendations , though it is expected that any recommendation will pass through the military hierarchy to the Minister for Defence . The new warrant also allows for " other persons determined by the Minister [ for Defence ] for the purposes of this regulation . " Author Robert Macklin has speculated that this has opened up the field of eligibility to policemen and women or civilians during a terrorist act . He goes on to say that by " separating the VC from its traditional roots the Hawke government can be accused , with some justice , of devaluing the honour ... " Subsequent awards of the Victoria Cross for Australia to the same individual shall be made in the form of a bar to the Cross . Where a person has been awarded a second or three or more awards , the post nominals " VC and Bar " or " VC and Bars " may be used . 
 The Victoria Cross for Australia is the highest award in the Australian Honours Order of Precedence . As such , it takes precedence over all other Australian orders and decorations , except the Imperial Victoria Cross , with which it shares equal precedence . This postnominal is valid only for the recipient and is not transferred to the recipient 's heirs . " Tradition holds that even the most senior officer will salute a Victoria Cross recipient as a mark of the utmost respect for their act of valour . " Whilst it has been a tradition for many years to salute a Victoria Cross recipient the Australian Army Ceremonial Manual , Volume 1 , Annex B to Chapter 13 states " Victoria Cross winners , unless they are serving commissioned officers in the armed forces , are not saluted " . Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston saluted Trooper Mark Donaldson after he received his VC . Under Section 103 , <unk> ( 4 ) , of the Veterans ' Entitlements Act 1986 , the Australian Government pays a Victoria Cross Allowance to any service person awarded the medal . The act set this amount at A $ 3 @,@ 230 per year . Since 20 September 2005 , this amount has been indexed annually in line with Australian Consumer Price Index increases . This amount is in addition to any amount that the veteran may be awarded under the general decoration allowance of $ 2 @.@ 10 per fortnight . 
 The various forms of the Victoria Cross are inherently valuable , as was highlighted on 24 July 2006 , when at the <unk> Bonhams in Sydney , the VC which had been awarded to First World War soldier Captain Alfred Shout , fetched a world @-@ record hammer price of $ 1 million . Shout had been awarded the Victoria Cross posthumously in 1915 for hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat at the Lone Pine trenches in Gallipoli , Turkey . The buyer , Kerry Stokes , has lent it to the Australian War Memorial for display with the eight other Victoria Crosses awarded to Australians at Gallipoli . The Australian War Memorial in Canberra currently holds 66 Victoria Crosses , 63 awarded to Australians — including Mark Donaldson 's Victoria Cross for Australia on loan — and three to British soldiers ; this formed the largest publicly displayed collection in the world , until the opening of the Lord Ashcroft Gallery at the Imperial War Museum ( IWM ) in London during November 2010 , which displays the 168 VCs owned by Lord Ashcroft and 48 more held by the IWM . 
 = = Recipients = = 
 = = = Mark Donaldson = = = 
 The first Victoria Cross for Australia was awarded to Trooper Mark Donaldson of the Special Air Service Regiment by Governor @-@ General Quentin Bryce at Government House , Canberra on 16 January 2009 . On 2 September 2008 , Donaldson rescued an interpreter under heavy enemy fire in Oruzgan province during Operation Slipper , the Australian contribution to the War in Afghanistan . 
 On 2 September 2008 Trooper Donaldson was outstanding in the manner in which he fought during a prolonged and effective enemy ambush . On numerous occasions , he deliberately drew the enemy 's fire in order to allow wounded soldiers to be moved to safety . As the battle raged around him he saw that a coalition interpreter was lying motionless on exposed ground . With complete disregard for his own safety , on his own initiative and alone , Trooper Donaldson ran back eighty metres across exposed ground to rescue the interpreter and carry him back to a vehicle . Trooper Donaldson then rejoined his patrol and continued to engage the enemy while remaining exposed to heavy enemy fire . 
 = = = Ben Roberts @-@ Smith = = = 
 Corporal Ben Roberts @-@ Smith MG of the Special Air Service Regiment was awarded the second Victoria Cross for Australia on 23 January 2011 . Corporal Roberts @-@ Smith was awarded the medal for single @-@ handedly charging and destroying two Taliban machine gun positions during the Shah Wali Kot Offensive in Afghanistan on 11 June 2010 . This act has been described as similar to that of Edward Kenna VC . Corporal Roberts @-@ Smith had previously been awarded a Medal for Gallantry in 2006 , and upon receiving the VC became the most highly decorated serving member of the Australian Defence Force . 
 = = = Daniel Keighran = = = 
 Corporal Daniel Keighran of the 6th Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment was awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia on 1 November 2012 for actions in the Battle of Derapet ( Oruzgan province , Afghanistan ) in August 2010 . Corporal Keighran deliberately exposed himself to enemy fire , drawing the fire away from an injured colleague and those who were attending to him . He is the third recipient , and the first non @-@ Special Forces recipient , of the award . 
 = = = Cameron Baird = = = 
 On 13 February 2014 , Prime Minister Tony Abbott announced that Corporal Cameron Baird of the 2nd Commando Regiment would be awarded a posthumous Victoria Cross . Corporal Baird had been awarded the Medal for Gallantry in 2007 and was killed in Afghanistan in 2013 . 
 = = Proposed retrospective awards = = 
 On 3 April 2001 , Senator Chris Schacht , then a member of the Australian Senate , gave notice that on the next day of sitting he would introduce the Award of Victoria Cross for Australia Bill 2001 to award the Victoria Cross for Australia to certain persons . The next sitting day , 4 April 2001 , Senator Schacht introduced the bill for three members of the Australian forces to be awarded the Victoria Cross for Australia . The bill was read a first time and Senator Schacht gave his Second Reading Speech in which he said it could be argued that an Act conferring a Victoria Cross for Australia may be beyond the legislative power of the Parliament but he believed that the " naval and military defence of the Commonwealth " power under section 51 ( vi ) of the Constitution gave the Parliament authority to legislate with respect to honours and awards . In accordance with normal procedure the debate was then adjourned . On 1 June 2001 , Sid Sidebottom , the Member for Braddon introduced the Defence Act Amendment ( Victoria Cross ) Bill 2001 . The Bill was similar to the Senate bill and Sidebottom also believed that the Parliament had power under section 51 ( vi ) of the Constitution . Neither bill was again debated before the 2001 Australian federal election . Both Senator Schacht and Mr Sidebottom were members of the Australian Labor Party , then in opposition and the issue was included by the then opposition leader Kim Beazley in his campaign in the following General Election . The awards were intended " to raise the profile and recognition of three ordinary Australians , who displayed outstanding bravery . " 
 The awards were to be made posthumously to John Simpson Kirkpatrick ( " Simpson " ) , Albert Cleary and Teddy Sheean for their actions in the First and Second World Wars . Simpson 's story has become an Australian legend . He was a stretcher bearer with the 3rd Australian Field Ambulance , Australian Army Medical Corps at Gallipoli during the First World War . He landed at Anzac Cove on 25 April 1915 and , on that first night , took a donkey and began carrying wounded from the battle line to the beach for evacuation . He continued this work for three and a half weeks , often under fire , until he was killed . However , in 1919 , King George V decreed that no more operational awards would be made for the recently concluded war . 
 In 1965 , a campaign to award the Victoria Cross to Simpson resulted in his image with a donkey appearing on the obverse of the Anzac Commemorative Medallion that was announced in 1966 and first issued in 1967 . Following the 2007 Australian federal election the Labor party came to power and there was speculation that the 2001 bills may be reintroduced . Historians such as Anthony Staunton , writing in the Australian Journal of Military History , have opined that the Victoria Cross for Australia should not be awarded retrospectively . It was announced on 13 April 2011 that 13 cases of valour would be examined posthumously by the Australian government 's Defence Honours and Awards Appeals Tribunal . The Tribunal first debated " the eligibility of the 13 to receive the Victoria Cross , the Victoria Cross for Australia or other forms of recognition , " before moving on to discuss the individual cases . The recommendations of the inquiry were ultimately submitted to government on 6 February 2013 , advocating no awards be made . 
 = Second Battle of Passchendaele = 
 The Second Battle of Passchendaele was the culminating attack during the Third Battle of Ypres of the First World War . The battle took place in the Ypres Salient area of the Western Front , in and around the Belgian town of Passchendaele , between 26 October and 10 November 1917 . The Canadian Corps relieved the exhausted II Anzac Corps , continuing the advance started with the First Battle of Passchendaele and ultimately capturing Passchendaele village . Beyond gaining favourable observation positions , the battle was intended to gain drier winter positions on higher ground . 
 The assault position was directly south of the inter @-@ army boundary between the British Fifth and Second Armies . As a result , the Canadian Corps was to attack with support of formations from the British Fifth Army to the north and the I Anzac Corps and X Corps to the south . The offensive was executed in a series of attacks each with limited objectives , delivered at intervals of three or more days . The execution dates of the phases were tentatively given as 26 October , 30 October and 6 November with a final smaller action on 10 November . To permit time to facilitate inter @-@ divisional relief , there was a planned seven @-@ day pause between the second and third stages during which time the Second Army was ordered to take over the section of the Fifth Army front adjoining the Canadian Corps , so that the central portion of the assault could proceed under a single command . 
 The attack was successful in capturing the German @-@ held high ground along the Passchendaele – Westrozebeke ridge but the campaign was forced to end just short of Westrozebeke . No further attempt was made to build on the momentum of the attack . The significant victory of the Austro @-@ German forces against the Italian Army at the Battle of Caporetto and the forthcoming Battle of Cambrai forced the British into a parallel diversion of resources away from the sector and make an end to offensive actions in the Ypres Salient . 
 = = Background = = 
 In July 1917 , British Field Marshal Douglas Haig launched a series of offensives , the Third Battle of Ypres . This was an attempt to break down the resistance of the German Fourth Army and advance out of the Ypres Salient . Initial successes had been achieved at the Battle of Messines and subsequent Battle of Pilckem Ridge . Torrential rain in August interrupted the tempo of the British advance and led to little progress at the Battle of Langemarck . In view of the failure of the British Fifth Army to make much headway in August , Haig decided to transfer more offensive weight towards the south @-@ east , along the southern half of Passchendaele Ridge . The main command was therefore switched from General Hubert Gough 's Fifth Army to the British Second Army under command of General Herbert Plumer . Plumer planned a series of more limited attacks , taking advantage of recent experience , rather than Gough 's attempts at a more optimistic semi @-@ open warfare version . Less ambitious infantry advances at the Battle of Menin Road , Battle of Polygon Wood , Battle of Broodseinde and Battle of Gravenstafel Ridge produced a 4 @,@ 000 @-@ yard ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) advance in two weeks . The German attempts at resisting the advances led to heavy losses on their part , especially at Broodseinde , after which the German command began preparations for a general withdrawal . 
 In the low ground west of the Passchendaele Ridge , three months of constant shelling had blocked the watercourses that normally provided drainage . When rain began falling on the night of 4 October — which continued intermittently for the next three days — the battlefield was once again transformed into a quagmire of mud , making movement extremely difficult . Gough and Plumer apparently told Haig that they favoured ending the campaign on account of the change in the weather and general state of the battlefield , however the decision was made to continue the offensive to gain more favourable winter positions on higher ground . The Battle of Poelcappelle and First Battle of Passchendaele both resulted in many casualties for both sides and failed to achieve any appreciable advance opposite Passchendaele , although they did provide a slightly better starting line for another attack . The four divisions of the Canadian Corps were transferred from the Lens sector to the Ypres Salient to capture Passchendaele . The Canadian Corps relieved the II Anzac Corps on 18 October , from its position along the valley between Gravenstafel Ridge and the heights at Passchendaele and immediately began planning for the offensive . Interestingly , it was virtually the same front as had been occupied by the 1st Canadian Division back in April 1915 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Planning and preparations = = = 
 The Canadian Corps operation was to be executed in a series of three attacks , each with limited objectives , delivered at intervals of three or more days . As the Canadian Corps position was directly south of the inter @-@ army boundary between British Fifth and Second Army , the British Fifth Army would mount subsidiary operations on the left flank of the Canadian Corps , while the I Anzac Corps would advance to protect the right flank and X Corps attacked Gheluvelt to improve the local tactical position and act as a diversion for the main attack in the north . Canadian Corps commander Lieutenant @-@ General Arthur Currie submitted his provisional operational plan on 16 October and recommended the attack not be executed until 29 October , to move sufficient artillery forward . However , Haig was anxious to avoid any unnecessary delays , particularly given that he wished to assist the French attack on <unk> , which was due to start on 23 October . Currie and the British Second Army commander , Herbert Plumer , re @-@ examined the situation and finally set the attack for 26 October . The dates for the subsequent phases were tentatively given as 30 October and 6 November . 
 Extensive preparations were needed before any advance could be made . A number of problems were found with the artillery and positions transferred from the Australians . Of the 250 heavy howitzers that existed on paper , only 227 could be found and of these 89 were out of action . Of the 306 18 pounder field guns , less than half were in action . The problem of mobility caused by the mud also resulted in the Australian artillery being badly bunched in two main clusters , thereby furnishing the Germans with easy targets . Furthermore , the Australians had been unable to send damaged artillery pieces for repair , because the Provost Marshal had ordered that no guns use the roads , for fear of blocking traffic . The situation was considerably improved by the arrival of the Canadian divisional artillery which placed an additional 210 18 @-@ pounder field guns , 190 howitzers and 26 heavy guns at the disposal of the Canadian Corps . 
 As early as 17 October , assaulting units were given details about the German defences in their respective sectors , to facilitate early assault planning . Intelligence officers and artillery observers worked jointly in observation posts , recording newly built German fortifications as well as those that had escaped notice , permitting the artillery to bombard them before the offensive . To improve the transport of artillery and supplies , an extensive program of road building was started . Ten field companies , seven Royal Engineer tunnelling companies , four army troop companies and nine battalions were put to work repairing or extending plank roads . From the middle of October until the end of the offensive , a total of 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) of double plank road and more than 4 @,@ 000 yards ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) of heavy tram line were laid in the Canadian Corps area . Brigadier General Edward Morrison , commander of the artillery , also secured permission to use the roads to the rear for getting disabled guns back for repair . 
 Moving troops to the front ahead of the attack was nonetheless extremely difficult , as the only means of approaching the front line were narrow boardwalks made of wood planking , which wound between the shell @-@ holes . Slipping off the duckboards could often be deadly with unfortunate soldiers frequently drowning in mud under the weight of their own equipment . On account of the exhausting nature of the trip , the leading assault units entered the support line four days before the battle , to ensure soldiers would be as fresh as possible for the attack . 
 = = = Preliminary operations = = = 
 On 14 October , a German attack captured a post on the IX Corps front of the British 37th Division . The next day , patrols from the British 9th Division found that the Germans had occupied <unk> Farm . On 20 October , A local assault was conducted by elements of three British divisions and one French division . The British 18th and 34th Divisions attacked Poelcappelle while the British 35th and French First Division assaulted the <unk> Forest . The attack began at 5 : 25 a.m. , after a 48 @-@ hour bombardment . Two battalions of the British 18th Division reached a German headquarters , west of Poelcappelle church . Two brigades of the 34th Division attacked at 5 : 35 a.m. , the right brigade taking their objectives and <unk> Farm in the 18th Division area . The left brigade of the 34th Division advanced until close to a row of pillboxes , thought to have been captured ; this proved incorrect and the attacking troops consequently suffered casualties . British reinforcements were stopped at the <unk> creek due to flooding and a heavy German barrage . The 35th Division attacked with two brigades . The right brigade reached the first objective easily . The left flank of the brigade reached its final objective at 6 : 45 a.m. whereas any further advance on the right flank was stopped by German machine @-@ gun fire . The left brigade captured Marechal Farm on its right flank but the attack in the centre was stopped by German machine @-@ gun fire . The left flank of the brigade reached the final objective by 7 : 45 a.m. A German counterattack forced one battalion to retreat to the start line ; the counterattack was then caught by British artillery fire and contained . During the operation , the British suffered 479 casualties and took 125 prisoners . 
 On 21 October , wire @-@ cutting began on the Fifth and Second Army fronts ; under cover of the bombardment , 18th Division platoons moved forward on the night of 21 October and dug shallow trenches , which saved many casualties from a German counter @-@ bombardment , after a ruined farm behind the jumping @-@ off places caught fire and silhouetted the troops . On 22 October , in the British 9th Division sector to the south , the XVIII Corps Cyclist Battalion conducted a feint , using dummy figures to assist an attack by the 9th Division . The attack was resumed at 7 : 30 a.m. through the village , taking Noble 's Farm , Meunier House and then <unk> Farm , a total advance of 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) . At 5 : 00 p.m. A German counterattack was stopped before Noble 's Farm with heavy casualties . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Opposing forces = = = 
 Currie 's Canadian Corps was the principal attacking formation . Immediately to the north , the Canadians were supported by XVIII Corps and after an inter @-@ army boundary shift , II Corps of the Second Army . To the extreme north , the advance was supported by diversionary attacks launched by the British XIV Corps and the 1st and 133rd Divisions of the French First Army . To the south , the advance was supported by I Anzac Corps . Further south , X Corps supported the operation by attacking Gheluvelt to secure Tower Hamlets ridge , east of the <unk> as a diversion . 
 Passchendaele Ridge and the area surrounding the village was defended by Gruppe Ypern organized under Guard Corps commander General der Kavallerie Alfred Graf zu <unk> @-@ <unk> . Defending German units changed throughout the battle and at various times , consisted of the 4th , 7th , 11th , 11th Bavarian , 27th , 39th , 44th Reserve , 185th , 199th , 238th and 239th Divisions . 
 = = = First stage = = = 
 Constant shelling had blocked the Ravebeek stream , creating an impassible swamp directly between the boundary of the 3rd Canadian and the 4th Canadian Divisions , necessitating a two @-@ prong attack . The 3rd Canadian Division was assigned the wider advance on the left , which included the sharply rising ground of the Bellevue spur . In the more restricted ground south of the Ravebeek stream , the 4th Canadian Division would occupy advanced positions in no man 's land before the start of the offensive and take Decline Copse , which straddled the Ypres – Roulers railway . Currie planned the attack with extensive depth in resources . The remaining units of the 8th , 9th and 10th Canadian Infantry Brigades were placed in support , while the 7th , 11th and 12th Canadian Infantry Brigades were held in divisional and corps reserve . The 1st and 2nd Canadian Divisions were in army reserve . 
 The assault began at 5 : 40 a.m. on the morning of 26 October . The troops were preceded by a rolling barrage , edging forward in lifts of 50 yards ( 46 m ) every four minutes , permitting the infantry to keep up while negotiating the mud . On the left flank , the 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade captured Wolf Copse and secured its objective line but was ultimately forced to drop a defensive flank 300 yards ( 270 m ) back to link up with the 63rd ( Royal Naval ) Division , the flanking division of the British Fifth Army . In the middle , the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade found the German barbed wire to be well cut by the preliminary artillery bombardment and within an hour of the attack commencing , cleared and captured the Bellevue pillboxes . However , the Germans brought down heavy artillery fire on their abandoned positions , and by 9 : 00 a.m. the brigade 's right flank had retreated towards its start line . On the far right , the 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade initially captured all its objectives as did the 1st Australian Division on its southern flank . As the day wore on , the positions in Decline Copse , a Canadian – Australian objective on the Canadian Corps ' southern boundary were gradually abandoned due to German counterattacks and misunderstandings between the Canadian and Australian units . 
 The 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade 's right flank had consolidated its position and by the morning on 27 October , had gained or established outposts only 300 yards ( 270 m ) short of its first objective . The 10th Canadian Infantry Brigade captured Decline Copse on the night of 27 October . The German 238th Division attacked and briefly recaptured the copse the following night , only to be quickly expelled by a Canadian counterattack . When the first stage ended on 28 October , the Canadian Corps had suffered 2 @,@ 481 casualties . Although the first stage was not completely successful , the operation had placed the Canadians on higher ground and in a good tactical position for the second stage . 
 Immediately to the north of the Canadian Corps , the supporting attack by XVIII Corps involved one brigade each from the British 63rd and 58th divisions . The British 188th Brigade , 63rd Division quickly captured <unk> Farm and Banff House . The centre of the attack was held up on the road between Bray Farm and the village of <unk> and dug @-@ in near Source Trench . As dark fell , Banff House was abandoned and the line reformed at Berks House , leaving Banff House and Source Trench the only part of the first objective not captured . Further north , the 58th Division took three pillboxes at Cameron House , before being stopped at Spider crossroads by German machine @-@ gun fire and exhaustion due to the muddy conditions . From 7 : 00 a.m. to 10 : 00 a.m. German counterattacks from the north cut off the foremost troops and then advanced from a sunken road between Papa Farm and Whitechapel , which pushed the rest of the brigade back to the start line , where the Germans were also caught in the mud and pushed back by British reinforcements . 
 To the extreme north , XIV Corps conducted diversionary activities employing one brigade each from the 57th and 50th divisions . The 57th Division attack advanced into a marsh , which stopped the attack close to the start line . The division established advanced posts at Rubens and <unk> Farms 200 – 350 yards ( 180 – 320 m ) forward . On the 50th Division front , the right battalion got to within 80 yards ( 73 m ) of the objective , before fire from German machine @-@ guns and snipers forced a withdrawal to the start line . Further north up to the Ypres – Staden railway line , a battalion reached Hill 23 , Aden House and <unk> Crossing but was back at the start line by 4 : 15 p.m .. The left battalion advanced 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) before machine @-@ gun fire forced it back to the start line . All of the Fifth Army attacks encountered deep mud , which slowed progress to a crawl , caused the barrage to be lost and clogged weapons , in the face of German counterattacks , which forced most attacks back to their start lines . 
 To the south of the Canadian Corps , diversionary activities by X Corps involved formations from the British 5th and 7th Division . The British 7th Division commander only refrained from protesting against the attack , because it was intended to pin German reserves and stop them moving north against the main attack . The 7th Division attacked Gheluvelt with the 20th and 91st Brigades , while the 5th Division attacked Polderhoek and the <unk> valley immediately to the north with the 13th Brigade . On the 91st Brigade 's front , the battalion on the right advanced rapidly , protected by a rise which hid them from most of the German machine @-@ gunners nearer to the Menin road . They attacked their objective , a fortified mound near Hamp Farm , and overwhelmed the garrison stationed there after hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting . The other two battalions of the brigade suffered far worse , having to advance along the forward slope of the spur running south @-@ east from Tower Hamlets ridge . The area was dominated by a group of pillboxes at Lewis House which held several machine @-@ guns . The centre battalion could not keep pace with the barrage and its advance was stopped well short of Lewis House . Troops began to converge on the area near Lewis House , which caused crowding and gaps in the line . An attempt to outflank the pillboxes failed and the brigade fell back to its assembly positions . 
 The 20th Brigade attacked astride the Menin Road . The right battalion crossed marshy ground that progressed into waist @-@ high mud towards the <unk> creek . Some troops veered right and were caught by German machine @-@ gun fire from Lewis House and cross @-@ fire from the pillboxes on the Menin road and Swagger Farm . Others found the condition of the ground so poor that they moved left towards the Menin Road and were pinned down by fire from the pillboxes there . Despite the machine @-@ gun fire , the advance captured one pillbox and advanced to within 100 yards ( 91 m ) of Gheluvelt Church at the western end of the village . The two battalions that advanced north of the Menin road managed to keep up with the barrage and reached its junction with the railway tracks immediately outside Gheluvelt . Both battalions became intermingled and entered Gheluvelt at the same time , some of the troops cleared several pillboxes along Johnson Trench and one party got close enough to Gheluvelt Château to try to rush it . At 10 : 00 a.m. , the Germans counterattacked and the British retreated , due to many of their weapons being jammed with mud . The remaining troops formed a defensive flank south of the road towards Tower Hamlets and reoccupied the original front line . Once the retreat was complete , British artillery fired a protective barrage and no further German counterattack developed . 
 The 5th Division attack through the <unk> valley was raked by fire from Gheluvelt and ultimately found the valley to be impassable . Three battalions tried to push forward but were stopped by German fire from the village of Gheluvelt . One battalion took Polderhoek Château but was forced to relinquish it due to many weapons being clogged with mud and to straighten the front line . The Germans promptly reoccupied the château , swept the area to the west with massed machine @-@ gun fire and counterattacked , which pushed the brigade back to the start line . 
 The simultaneous advances on the flanks of the Canadian Corps had not gone well . The diversion by X Corps resulted in 3 @,@ 321 casualties , 2 @,@ 201 in the 7th Division . XVIII Corps suffered 2 @,@ 310 casualties , the 63rd Division losing approximately 2 @,@ 000 casualties in the 188th Brigade and XIV Corps 3 @,@ 092 casualties . On 27 October the 63rd Division retook Banff House and repulsed a German counterattack . Two reserve battalions reinforced the 4th Canadian Division and reached the previous day 's objective by 10 : 00 a.m. Next day patrols from the 3rd Canadian Division scouted <unk> and Furst Farms . On 29 October the 1st Australian Division established a post in Decoy Wood . 
 = = = = Franco @-@ Belgian operations = = = = 
 The French First Army , with the 1st and 133rd divisions and a division of the Belgian army , planned to occupy the Merckem peninsula in stages , by an attack on the south @-@ east of the peninsula , then to extend the attack to the north . On 26 October , after an intensive bombardment , French troops crossed the lower Steenbeek , advanced into <unk> Wood , <unk> Farm and the pillboxes in between . The French then forced the Germans from the remaining pillboxes to the west of the woods and forded the <unk> , which in places was shoulder @-@ high . The French soon captured the pillboxes opposite and occupied the <unk> – Dixmude road round Langewaede . In the evening , the Germans rushed the 8th Bavarian Reserve Division into the Merckem peninsula as a reinforcement . 
 During the night the French engineers , in water up to their armpits , built pontoon bridges over the lower Steenbeek , west of Langewaede . At about 5 : 00 a.m. on 27 October , French troops on the right bank were joined by those on the left bank of the Steenbeek and a column advanced from the bridgehead at Drei Grachten , to attack the German defences on the causeway to Luyghem . The French on the extreme right in front of <unk> , formed a flank guard facing east , near the troops in <unk> Wood , which also protected the troops moving up from <unk> through Langewaede to Dixmude . The fortified villages of Verbrandesmis and Kippe blocked the road further on and north @-@ east of Verbrandesmis near <unk> Forest , <unk> Farm near the hamlet of <unk> and the village of Aschhoop to the north , also obstructed a further advance . 
 From Verbrandesmis a road runs north @-@ west , parallel with the lower Steenbeek through Merckem to Luyghem , slightly above the level of the surrounding marshes . Machine @-@ guns nests in the villages , commanded the causeway from Drei Grachten ; the ground everywhere in the peninsula was soaked and dotted with large numbers of blockhouses and pillboxes . The French artillery destroyed Verbrandesmis and it was quickly captured but the German garrisons at <unk> Farm and <unk> held out for some time , before being driven out and forced back to Kippe and Aschhoop . German artillery bombarded the banks of the Steenbeek in front of Merckem and French troops rushed across on pontoon bridges , struggled through the mud to the objectives and then attacked towards Kippe and Luyghem . Kippe and Aschhoop were captured quickly but the German garrisons at Luyghem and the causeway from Drei Grachten , resisted until afternoon before being overwhelmed . 
 The French and Belgian advance on Luyghem began as soon as the causeway was captured , Belgian troops employing flat @-@ bottomed boats to move to the north of the village . The Belgians secured the southern edge of <unk> Lake and then attacked Luyghem from the north , taking the German pillboxes and blockhouses systematically . By the morning of 28 October , the French and Belgians had completed the capture of the Merckem peninsula , had taken approximately 300 prisoners and inflicted many casualties on the German defenders , who had resisted the attacks with great determination . The skill of the French artillery had obtained success with few infantry casualties and the Belgians had managed to conceal their flotilla of flat @-@ bottomed boats , despite German vigilance and then advance to their objectives despite the floods , against much German artillery and small @-@ arms fire . 
 = = = Second stage = = = 
 The second stage on 30 October was intended to complete the capture of the positions the Canadian Corps had attacked on 26 October and gain a base for the final assault on Passchendaele . The objective line ( Blue Line ) was approximately 600 yards ( 550 m ) east of the objective line of the previous stage . The advance was meant to capture the strongly held Crest Farm at the southern end of the advance and in the northern sector , the hamlet of Meetcheele and the Goudberg area near the Corps 's northern boundary . The northern flank of the Canadian Corps advance was to link up outside Goudberg at Vapour Farm with the British Fifth Army , which would be advancing with the 58th Division and 190th Brigade , 63rd ( Royal Naval ) Division along both sides of the swamped <unk> creek . The southern advance was to link up with the I Anzac Corps along the Ypres – Roulers railway line south of Vienna Cottage . The southern flank of the main assault would once again be the responsibility of the 4th Canadian Division , which planned to attack with the 12th Canadian Infantry Brigade . The northern flank remained the responsibility of the 3rd Canadian Division , which would advance with the 7th and 8th Canadian Infantry Brigades . 
 The night before the attack , a battalion assault by the Canadians captured a particularly troublesome German pillbox on the northern bank of Ravebeek creek , which had held up the 9th Canadian Infantry Brigade during the first stage . The action advanced the southern edge of the 3rd Canadian Division 500 yards ( 460 m ) in parity with the line of the 4th Canadian Division to the south . The main attack began at 5 : 50 am on 30 October and was preceded by a rolling barrage with a preliminary artillery bombardment directed largely at pillboxes . The southern flank quickly captured Crest Farm and had begun sending patrols beyond its objective line and into Passchendaele , which they found the Germans evacuating . By 8 : 30 am , the 4th Canadian Division commander , Major @-@ General David Watson , reported that all objectives between the Ypres — Roulers railway and the Ravebeek creek had been taken . Northwest of Crest Farm , the ground was so badly flooded that consolidation had to be carried out short of the objective line . 
 On the northern flank , the 3rd Canadian Division was again met with exceptional German resistance . The 8th Canadian Infantry Brigade managed to capture Source Farm and later Vapour Farm at the corps boundary , just short of the objective line . However , the brigade had difficulty getting through the swampy ground in the Woodland Plantation , resulting in a division in the line . The 58th Division and 63rd ( Royal Naval ) Division infantry were caught by German artillery fire at their jumping @-@ off line and made only slight progress in deep mud against German machine @-@ gun fire and were unable to reach their rendezvous objectives , leaving the Canadian troops at Source Farm and Vapour Farm in precarious and largely unsupported positions . Two companies later advanced through the Canadian sector to capture Source Trench but were only able to reinforce the Canadian outpost at Source Farm and form a defensive flank to Vapour Farm . In the centre of the assault was the 7th Canadian Infantry Brigade . Advancing between Ravebeek creek and the roadway to Meetcheele , one section of the brigade captured its intermediate objective , a pillbox known as Duck Lodge , by 7 : 00 a.m. To the west of the roadway and Meetcheele , the advance captured Furst Farm , albeit with heavy casualties . Later in the afternoon , the brigade succeeded in overcoming a number of pillboxes and captured the crossroads at Meetcheele . However , the Germans continued to hold a strong position at Graf House along the bank of the Ravebeek creek , producing a salient in the Canadian line directly between the two Canadian divisions . 
 The advance appeared to have reached its limit by late afternoon and reports of a large number of Germans concentrating north of Mosselmarkt indicated a possible counterattack . As a result , the 3rd Canadian Division ( although not having achieved all its objectives ) was ordered to consolidate its positions and patrol , rather than occupy , the Woodland Plantation swamp between the 7th and 8th Canadian Infantry Brigades . There was some question as to whether the positions at Source Farm and Vapour Farm could be maintained without the support of the 63rd ( Royal Naval ) Division . Currie and Plumer ultimately decided that every effort should be made to hold the line in the hope of not having to retake the positions before the assault on Passchendaele . The night ultimately passed without any major counterattacks taking place , permitting the Canadians to consolidate their positions . When the second stage ended on 30 October , the Canadian Corps had suffered 2 @,@ 321 casualties , consisting of 884 killed , 1 @,@ 429 wounded and eight taken prisoner . Further north the 63rd Division had 3 @,@ 126 casualties from 26 – 31 October . 
 = = = Tactical pause = = = 
 To give time for inter @-@ divisional reliefs , there was a seven @-@ day pause between the second and third stages . The British Second Army was ordered to take over a section of the British Fifth Army front adjoining the Canadian Corps , so that the central portion of the assault might proceed under a single command . On 2 November , General Plumer relieved the XVIII Corps of the British Fifth Army with II Corps . The role of II Corps in the next stage would be limited to providing the Canadian Corps with artillery support . Immediately north of the Canadian Corps , the 63rd Division was able to close up to the <unk> by attacking at night between 1 November and the night of 4 / 5 November , a method which took more ground than its attacks in October for a loss of 14 killed and 148 wounded . 3 – 5 November were rainless which aided logistical preparations and reorganization of the troops for the next stage . Hundreds of pack animals were used to move supplies , including gun ammunition . The 1st and 2nd Canadian Divisions moved forward by rail from their reserve area east of Cassel to take over from the 3rd and 4th Canadian Divisions respectively . The reliefs were completed by the morning of 5 November . To the south of the Canadian Corps , the I Anzac , IX and VIII Corps were to simulate attacks along a 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) front extending south to Zandvoorde . During the night of 5 November , the assault units moved to their jumping off positions and were ready by 4 : 00 a.m. on 6 November . The Germans also took advantage of the break in fighting to relieve exhausted units . The 11th Division had arrived from the Champagne sector on 3 November to relieve the 39th Division between the Ypres – Roulers railway and the Mosselmarkt road . 
 = = = Third stage = = = 
 The Corps objectives for 6 November lay along the Green Line , a rough semicircle that ran 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) from Graf House – the centre of the salient in the Canadian line . Besides Passchendaele , it encompassed the hamlets of Mosselmarkt and Goudberg to the north @-@ west . The 2nd Canadian Division would send the 6th Canadian Infantry Brigade to attack Passchendaele from the north side and one battalion from the 5th Canadian Infantry Brigade to attack it from the south . In the 1st Canadian Division sector , the 1st Canadian Infantry Brigade would advance on either side of the Meetcheele – Mosselmarkt road and along the northern corps boundary , one battalion was to execute a subsidiary operation against Vine Cottages , a strong @-@ point which the Germans were holding 350 yards ( 320 m ) south @-@ east of Vapour Farm . 
 The third stage began at 6 : 00 a.m. on 6 November , with a preliminary bombardment under largely clear skies . The German counter @-@ bombardment fell mainly behind the advancing troops . Almost everywhere the attack went well for the Canadians . The 2nd Canadian Division encountered its chief opposition from pillboxes at the north end of Passchendaele but less than three hours after the start of the battle the village had been secured . The 1st Canadian Division encountered stiff resistance from the defenders of Vine Cottages , however by 8 : 00 a.m. the 1st Canadian Infantry Brigade had reached and consolidated the Green Line . 
 = = = Final attack = = = 
 A small final action to gain a nearby crossroad and the remaining high ground north of the village , in the vicinity of Hill 52 , was set to be launched 10 November . The road junction was 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) north of Passchendaele along the highway to Westrozebeke . Hill 52 , the highest point on the northern end of the Passchendaele Ridge , was 500 yards ( 460 m ) beyond the crossroad . Possession of both features would permit observation over German positions to the north @-@ east . The attack was made the responsibility of the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade , with support from one battalion of the 4th Canadian Infantry Brigade . The Germans had taken advantage of the break in the fighting to relieve exhausted units . Regiments from the 4th Division and 44th Reserve Division replaced those of the 11th Division on 9 November . Nevertheless , the assault was launched from the Green Line , north and north @-@ east of Mosselmarkt , on the morning of 10 November . The assault made good initial progress , capturing the crossroad , over @-@ running Venture Farm and capturing four 77 mm field guns . However , north of the Canadian Corps boundary , the supporting advance by the British 1st Division ran into difficulties when a German counterattack got between two diverging battalions . This permitted the Germans to fire against the British inner flanks , resulting in significant casualties and forcing both formations to withdraw . As a result , the 2nd Canadian Infantry Brigade was forced to fill the gap and throw back a defensive flank along the corps boundary ending any further progress . The action of 10 November brought to an end the long drawn @-@ out Third Battle of Ypres . Though Haig had hoped to have the entire Passchendaele – Westrozebeke ridge as a winter position , the line was still short of Westrozebeke village . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 On 24 October , The Austro @-@ German 14th Army under General der Infanterie Otto von Below inflicted a great defeat on the Italian Army at the Battle of Caporetto . In fear that Italy might be put out of the war , the French and British Governments each promised to send six divisions to the Italian Front . All troops were rapidly and efficiently transferred between 10 November and 12 December , due to good administrative preparations made by the French Chief of Staff Ferdinand Foch , who had been sent to Italy in April 1917 to plan for just such an emergency . The Third Battle of Ypres came to an unsatisfactory close as a result of the diversion of British forces , with Haig being forced to end his advance just short of <unk> . On 14 November , a gradual relief of the Canadian divisions by the VIII Corps began and on 20 November , Currie resumed command along the Lens – Vimy front . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 In the German Official History ( Der Weltkrieg volume XIII ) the <unk> historians recorded 20 @,@ 500 casualties from 21 – 31 October and 9 @,@ 500 casualties from 1 – 10 November . From 11 November – 31 December another 15 @,@ 000 casualties were recorded . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Local operations continued after 10 November . German air activity and artillery @-@ fire remained intense and the British continued to attract German attention , to assist the attack due at Cambrai in late November . German defences consisted of a line of advanced outposts , with garrisons of as few as six men , about 500 yards ( 460 m ) in front of a covering line , to which the forward troops could retire and a main line of resistance set further back , which made it relatively easy for the British to regularly capture prisoners . On the night of 24 / 25 November , two battalions of the 8th Division attacked without artillery support and advanced the line to the ridge crest , which increased the depth of observation into the German lines by 400 yards ( 370 m ) . A German counter @-@ attack at 6 : 00 a.m. on 30 November , was anticipated and stopped with many German casualties inflicted by British small @-@ arms fire and a prompt artillery barrage . 
 VIII Corps and II Corps planned a larger operation for the night of 1 / 2 December . In the salient at Passchendaele , the 33rd Division faced east along the ridge , the 8th Division held the apex of the salient facing north @-@ east and the 32nd Division faced north . The main attack by the 32nd Division was intended to expand the west side of the salient , while an advance north along the ridge was to gain observation over the valleys to the north and east . To exploit the German practice during a British attack of first bombarding the British front line , then swiftly moving the artillery @-@ fire back to the German outpost line , the plan called for the infantry to cross the danger zone without artillery support , before the German artillery could react . Consequently , the British artillery did not begin firing until eight minutes after the attack began at 1 : 55 a.m. Owing to the moonlight , the British infantry had to form up well behind their outpost line and many of the troops got stuck in the mud , while others were caught by German artillery @-@ fire . 
 German machine @-@ guns commenced firing as soon as the British infantry attacked , which slowed the advance and left some troops in the German barrage zone , despite German artillery not firing until a minute after the start of the British barrage . Both sides suffered many casualties in the confusion . The German outpost zone was overrun and the main line of defence breached at one point . At dawn a local truce allowed wounded to be recovered and at noon a German counter @-@ attack forced the 32nd Division troops back to their start line , with the 8th Division dug @-@ in about 100 yards ( 91 m ) forward on the left and 200 yards ( 180 m ) on the right . Further attempts by the British to advance were easily stopped by the Germans and at 4 : 10 p.m. a German counter @-@ attack from the east was dispersed by British artillery . The British attack failed to gain much ground but the German 25th Division suffered so many casualties that it had to be relieved by the 16th Division on 3 December . 
 The New Zealand Division concurrently prepared an attack on Polderhoek Spur , to the south @-@ west of Passchendaele , that had last been assaulted on 26 October . It was intended to occupy the low , east @-@ running ridge and deny German observation over the area between Cameron Covert to the north and the Menin road to the south @-@ west . An advance of 600 yards ( 550 m ) on a 400 @-@ yard ( 370 m ) front , would deprive the German defenders of observation and shield the new line from German observers on the Gheluvelt spur further south . Heavy artillery bombarded the Polderhoek Château and pillboxes on 28 November and again on 30 November , while howitzers cut the German wire . The attack was set for 3 December but was conducted separate from the attack at Passchendaele by II Corps and VIII Corps . Two battalions planned a daylight attack , in the belief that the unusual time would surprise the German defenders , who would be under cover sheltering from the regular bombardments being fired at that time of day . The British planned smoke and gas bombardments for the Gheluvelt and <unk> spurs on either side and the local bombardment was timed to begin at the same time as the infantry attack . 
 Some of the British artillery dropped short as the attack began and the German defenders proved alert , engaging the New Zealanders from the château , pillboxes in the grounds and Gheluvelt ridge . A strong west wind ruined the smoke screens and the British artillery failed to suppress the German machine @-@ guns , which gradually stopped the attack ; New Zealand machine @-@ gunners did the same to German parties on the <unk> road when they attempted to counter @-@ attack . The New Zealand advance was held up 150 yards ( 140 m ) from the first objective and a resumption of the attack after dark was cancelled , after German reinforcements were seen reaching Polderhoek Château and because the moon was full . Next morning , German troops assembling for another counter @-@ attack were dispersed and German artillery bombarded the area all day ; after dark the New Zealanders consolidated the new trench line . A German counter @-@ attack at dawn on 5 December was repulsed and German artillery @-@ fire then resumed in clear weather , assisted by an observation balloon . A German attack later in the day was also stopped by British artillery ; the captured ground was lost to a German attack on 14 December . 
 = = = Victoria Cross = = = 
 Nine Victoria Crosses , the highest military decoration for valour awarded to British and Commonwealth forces , were awarded for actions during the battle . 
 Acting Captain Christopher O 'Kelly of the 52nd ( New Ontario ) Battalion . 
 Sergeant Robert Shankland of the 43rd ( Cameron Highlanders of Canada ) Battalion . 
 Private Thomas William Holmes of the 4th Canadian Mounted Rifles Battalion . 
 Private Cecil John Kinross of the 49th ( Edmonton ) Battalion . 
 Sergeant George Mullin of Princess Patricia 's Canadian Light Infantry . 
 Acting Major George Pearkes of the 5th Canadian Mounted Rifles Battalion . 
 Lieutenant Hugh McKenzie of the 7th Canadian Machine Gun Company . 
 Corporal Colin Fraser Barron of the 3rd ( Toronto ) Battalion . 
 Private James Peter Robertson of the 27th ( City of Winnipeg ) Battalion . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 For the Canadian Corps , participation in the Second Battle of Passchendaele is commemorated with the Passchendaele Memorial located at the former site of the Crest Farm on the southwest fringe of Passchendaele village . 
 = Isaac Parsons ( Virginia politician ) = 
 Isaac Parsons ( January 27 , 1752 – August 25 , 1796 ) was an American planter , politician , and militia officer in the U.S. state of Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . Parsons served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates representing Hampshire County from 1789 until his death in 1796 . Following an act of the Virginia General Assembly in 1789 , Parsons was appointed to serve as a trustee for the town of Romney . In 1790 , Parsons began serving as a justice for Hampshire County . He served as a captain in command of a company in the Virginia militia during the American Revolutionary War and continued to serve as a captain in the Hampshire County militia following the war . Parsons operated a public ferry across the South Branch Potomac River , and later died from drowning in the river in 1796 . Parsons was the grandfather of Isaac Parsons ( 1814 – 1862 ) , who also represented Hampshire County in the Virginia House of Delegates and served as an officer in the Confederate States Army . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Isaac Parsons was born on January 27 , 1752 , in Hampshire County , Virginia ( now West Virginia ) . Parsons was the third son of Thomas Parsons and his wife <unk> Baldwin ( also spelled <unk> ) Parsons . The Parsons family was a prominent family whose ancestors arrived to the Thirteen Colonies from England in 1635 and relocated to Hampshire County around 1740 . Parsons ' father settled on the Eastern Shore of Maryland in 1725 prior to relocating to Hampshire County , Virginia . 
 = = Landholdings = = 
 Following the death of his father Thomas Parsons between the date of his will and testament on May 27 , 1771 , and his will 's recording on March 10 , 1772 , Parsons inherited a plantation on Lot Number 16 of the " South Branch Survey " of Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron 's Northern Neck Proprietary and other valuable lands in Hampshire County and in the present @-@ day counties of Hardy and Grant . Parsons and his brother Baldwin also received land their father had acquired from Luke Collins , which was divided between Parsons and his brother by Nathaniel Kuykendall , John Foreman , and William Foreman . By 1778 , Parsons owned 161 acres ( 65 ha ; 0 @.@ 252 sq mi ) of Lot Number 16 and all of Lot Number 17 of Lord Fairfax 's " South Branch Survey " . 
 By 1790 , Parsons also owned the corner of Lot Number 1 within the town of Romney . In 1795 , Parsons acquired an additional 100 acres ( 40 ha ; 0 @.@ 16 sq mi ) along the South Branch Potomac River . Parsons ' Lot 16 property along the South Branch Potomac River was later purchased by David Gibson in 1836 , after which Gibson established his Sycamore Dale plantation there . 
 = = = Ferry service = = = 
 Parsons petitioned the Virginia General Assembly to establish a public ferry across the South Branch Potomac River , thus connecting his property on both sides of the river . In October 1786 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an act establishing the public ferry at Parsons ' property near the present site of the U.S. Route 50 bridge west of Romney . The assembly 's act set the ferry 's toll at three pence and three farthings per man , and the same price per horse . By 1790 , Parsons was continuing the operation of the ferry , which had become known as " Parson 's Ferry " . On December 26 , 1792 , the Virginia General Assembly passed an additional act for the settlement and regulation of public ferries . The assembly 's act mandated that Parsons ' ferry be " constantly kept " at its location , and established its toll amounting to six cents per man , and six cents per horse . 
 = = Political and military careers = = 
 During the American Revolutionary War , Parsons served as a captain in command of a company under the charge of Major Vincent Williams in the Virginia militia . By December 11 , 1788 , Parsons was again serving as a captain in command of a company in the Hampshire County militia . 
 Parsons served as a member of the Virginia House of Delegates representing Hampshire County from 1789 until his death on August 25 , 1796 . Parsons represented Hampshire County , which was a multi @-@ member electoral district , in the Virginia House of Delegates . During the October 19 – December 19 , 1789 , session , Parsons served alongside Elias Poston and Isaac Miller . In the sessions between 1790 and 1793 , Parsons served alongside Elias Poston . Parsons served alongside Francis White during the 1794 session . During the 1795 session , he again served alongside Elias Poston . Parsons died on August 25 , 1796 , before the November 8 – December 27 , 1796 , session of the Virginia House of Delegates , where he was to have served alongside Alexander King . Parsons ' seat was filled by Fielding <unk> , who served out Parsons ' term during this session . During his final two sessions in the Virginia House of Delegates in 1794 and 1795 , Parsons was a member of the Federalist Party . 
 By February 14 , 1788 , Parsons had been appointed as an appraiser of property in Hampshire County by an act of the Virginia General Assembly . On December 4 , 1789 , Parsons was again appointed by an act of the Virginia General Assembly to serve as a trustee of the town of Romney . Parsons served as a trustee alongside Isaac Miller , Andrew Wodrow , Stephen Colvin , Jonathan Purcell , Nicholas Casey , William McGuire , Perez Drew and James Murphy . Parsons and his fellow trustees were given authority by the Virginia General Assembly to settle disputes regarding the town 's land lots and to " open and clear " the town 's " streets and lanes " in accordance with the original survey and plan for Romney . In 1790 , Parsons was either elected or appointed as a justice for Hampshire County alongside Jonathan Purcell , James Martin , Cornelius Ferrel , Edward McCarty , Solomon Jones , and Elias Poston . Parsons died on August 25 , 1796 ; according to tradition , he died from drowning in the South Branch Potomac River . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Parsons was married on April 23 , 1772 , to Mary E. Ellender Gregg . Mary E. Ellender Gregg was born on February 27 , 1756 . Parsons and his wife had two sons : James Gregg Parsons ( 1773 – 1847 ) , married to Mary Catherine Casey in 1795 , and David Parsons ( born 1775 ) , married to Catherine Miller . 
 = Educational goals of Sesame Street = 
 The children 's television show Sesame Street , which premiered on public broadcasting television stations in 1969 , was the first show of its kind that utilized a detailed and comprehensive educational curriculum , with specific educational goals , in its content . Its goals were garnered from in @-@ house formative research and independent summative evaluations , and its first curriculum was created in a series of five seminars in 1968 . 
 Sesame Street has both cognitive and affective goals . Initially , its producers and researchers focused on their young viewers ' cognitive skills , while addressing their affective skills indirectly , because they believed that focusing on cognitive skills would increase children 's self @-@ esteem and feelings of competency . They sought to prepare young children for school , especially children from low @-@ income families . The show 's producers used modeling , repetition , and humor to fulfill their goals . They made changes in the show 's content to increase their viewers ' attention and to increase its appeal . They encouraged " co @-@ viewing " to entice older children and parents to watch the show by including humor , cultural references , and celebrities . 
 After Sesame Street 's first season , its producers and researchers began to address affective goals more overtly . They addressed social competence , tolerance of diversity , and nonaggressive ways of resolving conflict , which was depicted through interpersonal disputes among its residents . In the 1980s , the show used the real @-@ life experiences of the show 's cast and crew , such as the death of Will Lee ( Mr. Hooper ) and the pregnancy of Sonia Manzano ( Maria ) to address affective concerns . In later seasons , Sesame Street addressed real @-@ life disasters such as the September 11 terrorist attacks and Hurricane Katrina . 
 The show 's goals for outreach were addressed during its first season by an extensive and innovative promotional campaign targeted at children and their families in low @-@ income , inner city homes because these groups tended to not watch educational programs on television and because traditional methods of promotion and advertising were not effective with them . In subsequent seasons , the producers developed a series of educational materials used in preschool settings . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 According to author Malcolm Gladwell , " Sesame Street was built around a single , breakthrough insight : that if you can hold the attention of children , you can educate them " . Gerald S. Lesser , the first chair of the advisory board of the Children 's Television Workshop ( the CTW , or " the Workshop " ) , the organization that oversaw the show 's production , stated that to be effective as an educational tool , television needed to capture , focus , and sustain children 's attention . Sesame Street was the first children 's show that paid attention to the structure of each episode and made " small but critical adjustments " to each segment to capture children 's attention . 
 Sesame Street was one of the few children 's television programs that utilized a detailed and comprehensive educational curriculum , with specific educational goals , in its content . The show 's goals were garnered from in @-@ house formative research which informed and improved production , and independent summative evaluations conducted by the Educational Testing Service ( ETS ) during the show 's first two seasons that measured the program 's educational effectiveness . The first curriculum was created in a series of five seminars , led by Lesser and attended by Sesame Street 's new creative staff and by educational and child development specialists , in 1968 . The participants generated long lists of goals , which the Workshop organized into five categories . Eventually , these categories were whittled down to four : symbolic representation , cognitive processes , the physical environment , and the social environment . The show 's curriculum was eventually restated to identify the writers ' goals instead of the child 's . 
 = = Cognitive goals = = 
 Lesser reported in his 1974 book , Children and Television : Lessons Learned From Sesame Street , written to document the development of the show and the CTW , that one of the goals of the show 's creators was " the fundamental purpose of preparing children for school " . They were aware of the " individual suffering and frustration " of the child who was ill @-@ prepared for the demands of school , so they sought to instill in their young viewers an appetite for learning . Two related goals were providing their viewers with basic educational skills , which Lesser insisted was valuable to inner @-@ city parents , and teaching children both what and how to think . The show 's creators decided to only include in their curriculum the range of skills of the three to five @-@ year @-@ old child , and not focus on skills they already had , or on skills beyond their reach . 
 Sesame Street 's creators recognized that television lent itself well to the use of modelling as a teaching tool . They understood that children tended to imitate what they saw on the screen , so many writing and production methods were used to directly model effective verbal communication . Indirect modeling , without explicit labeling , was used to demonstrate positive behaviors as well . One of the positive behaviors they modeled was inquisitiveness and the enjoyment of learning . If humor , for example , interfered with the intended instructional message or exhibited inappropriate behavior , it was removed . As Muppet performer Fran Brill explained , the show 's puppeteers demonstrated emotions by banging their puppets ' heads against the wall or by having them fall backwards , but when research found that these behaviors did not demonstrate good models of appropriate behavior , these behaviors were changed . The Muppet Roosevelt Franklin , for example , was removed from the show because many leaders in the African American community felt that he displayed negative cultural stereotypes . 
 The creators of Sesame Street believed that young children were easily distracted by peripheral details and were unable to selectively attend to the most useful aspects of what they observed , so they gave special care to , as Lesser put it , " make salient what the child is expected to learn " . They eliminated irrelevant and distracting content without making the content uninteresting , especially in repeated viewings . The content they presented had to compete with the distractions that occurred as a result of viewing at home , so they realized that the show had to have high appeal . They found , however , that the relationship between appeal and comprehension was more complicated than they initially thought , and discovered that young children probably did not attend to material that was presented at a higher level than they were ready to understand . The Workshop 's researchers found that by crafting the show 's segments , children 's verbal participation and interaction could be increased , which addressed their critics ' concerns about children 's passivity while watching television . 
 Repetition was a convention used often on Sesame Street . The creators understood that repetition gave young children opportunities to practice new skills and assisted them in making a connection between new and unfamiliar concepts . They observed that children seemed to enjoy some material more after viewing them several times , and allowed them to predict and anticipate the outcome of a sequence . Repetition made it easier to teach complex concepts or situations a child would not be able to comprehend from a single viewing , and allowed children to explore different facets of a subject . In the early years of Sesame Street , the producers took advantage of repetition as an effective teaching tool by often repeating the same segment many times during the course of an episode ; in the first ten seasons , one in six segments was a repeat of an earlier one . The Workshop also learned that varying the details while repeating the same format was also an effective use of repetition . 
 Television historian Robert W. Morrow saw what he called " the often repeated alphabet recitation segment " as an example of the show 's use of repetition . For example , in a short film in which actor James Earl Jones recited the alphabet , Jones made long pauses before each letter , which were superimposed in a corner of the screen moments before he said it . According to Cooney , some educational advisors recommended against using Jones , thinking that he would frighten young viewers , but children ended up loving his segments . The producers found that children who had seen the segment a few times said the letter before Jones did , and Jones often served as confirmation or correction . The producers viewed this as a way to make television more interactive , and dubbed it " the James Earl Jones effect " . 
 Humor was used on Sesame Street to both attract the attention of its young viewers and to , as Lesser put it , " entice parents and older siblings to share the young child 's viewing " , called " <unk> " by Truglio and Fisch . Jim Henson 's characters and humor were instrumental in creating the show 's " two @-@ tiered audience " of younger and older viewers . Lesser went so far as to state that educational television was " completely dependent upon the effective use of humor " . Lesser also stated that in order for comedy to be an effective teaching tool , it had to coincide with the lesson being taught . Although critics complained that slapstick was too violent for children 's television , the Workshop found that it was the most effective comedy form they used , and as Lesser said , " a favorite with preschoolers " . Morrow reported that the only violence depicted on Sesame Street was " slapstick punctuation " , and that it was used only in animations and short films . 
 Another way the Workshop encouraged co @-@ viewing was through the use of cultural references that only adults would understand . Celebrities familiar to adults and older children also appeared on the show Cooney 's previous documentary production experience and producer Dave Connell 's " wide ranging contacts in the media " resulted in successful bookings of celebrities on the show , even before the show became successful . As of 2009 , over 500 celebrities had appeared on Sesame Street . 
 = = Affective goals = = 
 At first , the creators of Sesame Street addressed " affective goals " indirectly , believing that focusing on cognitive and educational goals would naturally increase children 's self @-@ esteem and feelings of competency . Their viewers ' racial identities were addressed by integrating the show with , at first , black and white actors and performers . Eventually their critics during the show 's first season forced the Workshop to address affective goals more overtly , which occurred after " extensive research and planning " . The affective goals they addressed were social competence , tolerance of diversity , and nonaggressive ways of resolving conflict , which was depicted through interpersonal disputes among its residents , making Sesame Street an " idealized place of child empowerment " . 
 According to Davis , Sesame Street 's curriculum began addressing affective goals more overtly during the 1980s , when the show focused on " turning inward , expanding its young viewers ' world " . Davis reported that their affective goals were inspired by the experiences of its writing staff , cast , and crew . For example , in one of the show 's landmarks , the producers addressed grief after the 1982 death of Will Lee , who had played Mr. Hooper since the show 's premiere . 
 For the 1988 and 1989 seasons , the topics of love , marriage , and childbirth were addressed when they created a storyline in which the characters Luis and Maria fall in love , marry , and have a child , Gabi . Sonia Manzano , the actress who played Maria , had married and became pregnant ; according to the book Sesame Street Unpaved , published after the show 's thirtieth anniversary in 1999 , Manzano 's real @-@ life experiences gave the show 's writers and producers the idea . Research was done before any scripts were written to gain an understanding of the previous studies about preschoolers ' understanding of love , marriage , and family . The show 's research staff found that at the time , there was very little relevant research done about children 's understanding of these topics , and no books for children had been written about them . Studies done after the episodes about Maria 's pregnancy aired showed that as a result of watching these episodes , children 's understanding of pregnancy increased . 
 Another way Sesame Street addressed affective goals was by addressing real @-@ life disasters . For example , the producers addressed the September 11 terrorist attacks with an episode that aired in early 2002 . They also produced a series of four episodes that aired after Hurricane Katrina in 2005 . These episodes were used in Sesame Workshop 's Community Outreach program . 
 Gikow called writer Emily Perl Kingsley an " expert " at interpreting the show 's curriculum goals surrounding tolerance , diversity , and inclusion , especially as it related to the disability community . Kingsley has been a leader in the Workshop for ensuring that people with disabilities were included in the show . For example , she hired the Little Theater of the Deaf to appear on Sesame Street , and was instrumental in the addition of Deaf actress Linda Bove to its cast . Kingsley 's son Jason , who had Down syndrome , also appeared several times on the show . As Kingsley reported , " ... Sesame Street has a better record than any other show in the history of television of doing this on a regular basis in a comfortable kind of way " . 
 = = = Healthy Habits for Life = = = 
 Healthy Habits for Life is a series of segments and storylines in Sesame Street . Launched in season 36 , the segments are a " multi @-@ year , content @-@ driven initiative to help young children and their caregivers establish an early foundation of healthy habits that can last a lifetime . " Developed in the early part of the 2000s as childhood obesity became a critical issue in the public mind , Sesame Workshop took interest in promoting healthy lifestyles to its viewers . At the start of every show , before the sponsorship list and opening sequence ran , a " Healthy Moment " segment aired . Generally , these segments included celebrity guests . 
 As part of the Healthy Habits programming , Sesame Workshop began " broadening Cookie Monster 's eating habits " . A 1999 Sesame Street Beat Newsletter for parents discussed his balanced lifestyle : 
 Lately , Cookie has also taught children the importance of eating a balanced diet . This doesn 't mean that Cookie rounds out his diet with plates , trucks , ukuleles , and other objects the munching monster has been known to devour . This means that Cookie now eats a fair share of salads , meats , and vegetables to set a good example for viewers at home . And Cookie doesn 't mind a bit . Sure he loves cookies , but he likes the act of eating in general . As long as his mouth is full , his heart is happy . 
 The international media picked up on the story , but instead a high percentage twisted it into sensationalism , with headlines like " ' Sesame Street ' tosses its cookies " or claiming the character was " sent on a diet " . An Internet petition / boycott received hundreds of signatures of support , from misinformed web users . 
 There have been many product tie @-@ ins , including the Sony Wonder home video release Happy Healthy Monsters , a series of books from Random House , and product placement efforts including Del Monte canned vegetables featuring the characters , as well as Sunkist strawberries and blueberries . Hannaford Supermarkets ran an " Apple of the Month " promotion , featuring the characters on various varieties ' stickers , with activity sheets describing the unique traits of each fruit . 
 = = Outreach = = 
 Sesame Street focused on children from disadvantaged backgrounds , but the show 's creators recognized that in order to achieve the kind of success they wanted , they needed to encourage all children , no matter what their background , to watch it . At the same time , however , their primary goal was to make the show appealing to inner @-@ city families , a group that did not traditionally watch educational programs on public television . As Lesser stated , " If the series did not work for poor children , the entire project would fail " . Morrow called the new show 's audience " concentric " , with its targeted audience , " the urban poor " , within the larger circle of all preschoolers . 
 The Workshop devoted 8 % of their initial budget to advertise the new show . In what Morrow called " an extensive campaign " that Lesser stated " would demand at least as much ingenuity as production and research " , they promoted the show with educators and the broadcast industry . The Workshop understood that a special effort had to be made to reach their target community because traditional methods of promotion and advertising were not effective with these groups . To get the word out to their target audience in the inner cities , they hired Evelyn Davis from the Urban League , whom Michael Davis called " remarkable , unsinkable , and indispensable " , as the Workshop 's first Vice President of Community Relations and head of the Workshop 's Community Educational Services ( CES ) division . 
 After Sesame Street 's popularity became established after its first season , the CES ' outreach efforts turned from promotion to the development of educational materials used in preschool settings . The child @-@ care community eventually became the CES ' " core constituency " . Early outreach efforts included mobile viewing units that broadcast the show in the inner cities , in Appalachia , in Native American communities , and in migrant worker camps . In the early 1980s , the CES developed into the Sesame Street Preschool Education Program ( PEP ) , whose goal was to assist preschools , by combining television viewing , books , hands @-@ on activities , and other media , in using the show as an educational resource . 
 The Workshop 's outreach programs included providing materials to non @-@ English speaking children and adults . Instead of following the traditional practice of translating their English materials into Spanish , for example , they employed what they called " versioning " , or creating parallel sets of materials that conveyed the same content and messages in culturally and linguistically relevant ways . Starting in 2006 , the Workshop expanded its outreach by creating a series of PBS specials and DVDs focusing on how military deployment affects the families of soldiers . The Workshop 's outreach efforts also focused on families of prisoners , health and wellness , and safety . 
 = Battle of Pusan Perimeter = 
 The Battle of Pusan Perimeter was a large @-@ scale battle between United Nations and North Korean forces lasting from August 4 to September 18 , 1950 . It was one of the first major engagements of the Korean War . An army of 140 @,@ 000 UN troops , having been pushed to the brink of defeat , were rallied to make a final stand against the invading North Korean army , 98 @,@ 000 men strong . 
 UN forces , having been repeatedly defeated by the advancing North Koreans , were forced back to the " Pusan Perimeter " , a 140 @-@ mile ( 230 km ) defensive line around an area on the southeastern tip of the Korean Peninsula that included the port of Pusan . The UN troops , consisting mostly of forces from the Republic of Korea ( ROK ) , United States and United Kingdom , mounted a last stand around the perimeter , fighting off repeated North Korean attacks for six weeks as they were engaged around the cities of Taegu , Masan , and P 'ohang , and the Naktong River . The massive North Korean assaults were unsuccessful in forcing the United Nations troops back further from the perimeter , despite two major pushes in August and September . 
 North Korean troops , hampered by supply shortages and massive losses , continually staged attacks on UN forces in an attempt to penetrate the perimeter and collapse the line . However , the UN used the port to amass an overwhelming advantage in troops , equipment , and logistics , and its navy and air forces remained unchallenged by the North Koreans during the fight . After six weeks , the North Korean force collapsed and retreated in defeat after the UN force launched a counterattack at Inchon on September 15 . The battle would be the furthest the North Korean troops would advance in the war , as subsequent fighting ground the war into a stalemate . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Outbreak of war = = = 
 Following the outbreak of the Korean War , the United Nations decided to commit troops in support of the Republic of Korea ( South Korea ) , which had been invaded by the neighboring Democratic People 's Republic of Korea ( North Korea ) . The United States subsequently sent ground forces to the Korean peninsula with the goal of fighting back the North Korean invasion and to prevent South Korea from collapsing . However , US forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier , and at the time the closest forces were the 24th Infantry Division of the Eighth United States Army , which was headquartered in Japan . The division was understrength , and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . Regardless , the 24th Infantry Division was ordered into South Korea . 
 The 24th Infantry Division was the first US unit sent into Korea with the mission to take the initial " shock " of North Korean advances , delaying much larger North Korean units to buy time to allow following forces to arrive . The division was consequently alone for several weeks as it attempted to delay the North Koreans , making time for the 7th Infantry Division , 25th Infantry Division , 1st Cavalry Division , and other Eighth Army supporting units to move into position . Advance elements of the 24th Infantry Division were badly defeated in the Battle of Osan on July 5 , during the first battle between American and North Korean forces . For the first month after the defeat of Task Force Smith , 24th Infantry Division soldiers were repeatedly defeated and forced south by the North Korean force 's superior numbers and equipment . The regiments of the 24th Infantry Division were systematically pushed south in battles around Chochiwon , Chonan , and Pyongtaek . The 24th Infantry Division made a final stand in the Battle of Taejon , being almost completely destroyed but delaying North Korean forces from advancing until July 20 . By that time , the Eighth Army 's force of combat troops was roughly equal to North Korean forces attacking the region , with new UN units arriving every day . 
 = = = North Korean advance = = = 
 Having captured Taejon , North Korean forces began surrounding the Pusan Perimeter from all sides in an attempt to envelop it . The North Korean 4th Infantry Division and the North Korean 6th Infantry Division advanced south in a wide maneuver . The two divisions were coordinating to envelop the UN 's left flank and were extremely spread out . They advanced on UN positions , repeatedly pushing back US and South Korean forces . 
 In the east , the North Korean army , 89 @,@ 000 men strong , had advanced into South Korea in six columns , catching the Republic of Korea Army by surprise and completely routing it . The smaller South Korean army suffered from widespread lack of organization and equipment , and was unprepared for war . Numerically superior , North Korean forces destroyed isolated resistance from the 38 @,@ 000 South Korean soldiers on the front before moving steadily south . Most of South Korea 's forces retreated in the face of the advance . By June 28 , the North Koreans had captured South Korea 's capital of Seoul , forcing the government and its shattered forces to retreat further south . Though it was steadily pushed back , South Korean forces increased their resistance further south , hoping to delay North Korean units as much as possible . North and South Korean units sparred for control of several cities , inflicting heavy casualties on one another . The ROK Army defended Yongdok fiercely before being forced back , and managed to repel North Korean forces in the Battle of Andong . 
 In the west , US forces were pushed back repeatedly before finally halting the North Korean advance . Elements of the 3rd Battalion , 29th Infantry Regiment , newly arrived in the country , were wiped out at Hadong in a coordinated ambush by North Korean forces on July 27 , leaving open a pass to the Pusan area . Soon after , Chinju to the west was taken , pushing back the 19th Infantry Regiment and leaving open routes to Pusan . US units were subsequently able to defeat and push back the North Koreans on the flank in the Battle of the Notch on August 2 . Suffering mounting losses , the North Korean force on the west flank withdrew for several days to re @-@ equip and receive reinforcements . This granted both sides several days of reprieve to prepare for the attack on the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Terrain = = = 
 The UN forces established a perimeter around the port city of Pusan throughout July and August 1950 . Roughly 140 miles ( 230 km ) long , the perimeter stretched from the Korea Strait to the Sea of Japan west and north of Pusan . To the west the perimeter was roughly outlined by the Naktong River where it curved at the city of Taegu , except for the southernmost 15 miles ( 24 km ) where the Naktong turned eastward after its confluence with the Nam River . The northern boundary was an irregular line that ran through the mountains from above Waegwan and Andong to Yongdok . 
 With the exception of the Naktong delta to the south , and the valley between Taegu and P 'ohang @-@ dong , the terrain is extremely rough and mountainous . Northeast of P 'ohang @-@ dong along the South Korean line the terrain was especially treacherous , and movement in the region was extremely difficult . Thus , the UN established the Pusan Perimeter in a location outlined by the Sea of Japan to the south and east , the Naktong River to the west , and extremely mountainous terrain to the north , using the terrain as a natural defense . However the rough terrain also made communication difficult , particularly for the South Korean forces in the P 'ohang @-@ dong area . 
 UN forces in this region also suffered from casualties related to the heat of the summer , as the Naktong region has little vegetation and clean water . Korea suffered from a severe drought in the summer of 1950 , receiving only 5 in ( 130 mm ) of rain as opposed to the normal 20 in ( 510 mm ) during the months of July and August . Combined with temperatures of 105 ° F ( 41 ° C ) , the hot and dry weather contributed to a large number of heat and exertion casualties , particularly for the unconditioned American forces . 
 = = = Forces involved = = = 
 The North Korean People 's Army forces were organized into a mechanized combined arms force of ten divisions , originally numbering some 90 @,@ 000 well @-@ trained and well @-@ equipped troops in July , with hundreds of T @-@ 34 Tanks . However , defensive actions by US and South Korean forces had delayed the North Koreans significantly in their invasion of South Korea , costing them 58 @,@ 000 of their troops and a large number of tanks . In order to recoup these losses , the North Koreans had to rely on less experienced replacements and conscripts , many of whom had been taken from the conquered regions of South Korea . During the course of the battle , the North Koreans raised a total of 13 infantry divisions and one armored division to the fight at Pusan Perimeter . 
 The United Nations forces were organized under the command of the United States Army . The Eighth United States Army served as the headquarters component for the UN forces , and was headquartered at Taegu . Under it were three weak US divisions ; the 24th Infantry Division was brought to the country early in July , while the 1st Cavalry Division and 25th Infantry Division arrived between July 14 and 18 . These forces occupied the western segment of the perimeter , along the Naktong River . The Republic of Korea Army , a force of 58 @,@ 000 , was organized into two corps and five divisions ; from east to west , ROK I Corps controlled the 8th Infantry Division and Capital Divisions , while the ROK II Corps controlled the 1st Division and 6th Infantry Division . A reconstituted ROK 3rd Division was placed under direct ROK Army control . Morale among the UN units was low due to the large number of defeats incurred to that point in the war . US forces had suffered over 6 @,@ 000 casualties over the past month , while the South Korean Army had lost an estimated 70 @,@ 000 . 
 Troop numbers for each side have been difficult to estimate in subsequent research . The North Korean army had around 70 @,@ 000 combat troops committed to the Pusan Perimeter on August 5 , with most of its divisions far understrength . It likely had less than 3 @,@ 000 personnel in mechanized units , and around 40 T @-@ 34 tanks at the front , due to extensive losses so far in the war . MacArthur reported 141 @,@ 808 UN troops in Korea on August 4 , of which 47 @,@ 000 were in US ground combat units and 45 @,@ 000 in South Korean combat units . Thus the UN ground combat force outnumbered the North Koreans 92 @,@ 000 to 70 @,@ 000 . UN Forces had complete control of the air and sea throughout the fight as well , and US Air Force and US Navy elements provided support for the ground units throughout the battle virtually unopposed . Overall command of the naval force was taken by the US Seventh Fleet , and the bulk of the naval power provided was also from the US . The United Kingdom also provided a small naval task force including an aircraft carrier and several cruisers . Eventually , Australia , Canada , the Netherlands , and New Zealand provided ships as well . Several hundred fighter @-@ bombers of the Fifth Air Force were positioned within the perimeter and in Japan , and just off the coast were US Navy aircraft aboard the USS Valley Forge and the USS Philippine Sea . By the end of the battle the Eighth Army had more air support than General Omar Bradley 's Twelfth United States Army Group in Europe during World War II . 
 From south to northeast , the North Korean units positioned opposite the UN units were the 83rd Motorized Regiment of the 105th Armored Division and then the 6th , 4th , 3rd , 2nd , 15th , 1st , 13th , 8th , 12th , and 5th Divisions and the 766th Independent Infantry Regiment . 
 Throughout September 1950 , as the battle raged , more UN forces arrived from the US and other locations . The 2nd Infantry Division , 5th Regimental Combat Team , 1st Provisional Marine Brigade and British 27th Commonwealth Brigade arrived in Pusan later in the fighting , along with large numbers of fresh troops and equipment , including over 500 tanks . By the end of the battle , Eighth Army 's force had gone from three under @-@ strength , under @-@ prepared divisions to four formations that were well equipped and ready for war . 
 = = = Logistics = = = 
 = = = = UN logistics = = = = 
 On July 1 , the US Far East Command directed the Eighth United States Army to assume responsibility for all logistical support of the United States and UN forces in <unk> including the ROK Army . Support for the American and South Korean armies came through the United States and Japan . The re @-@ equipping of the ROK Army presented the UN forces with major logistical problems in July . The biggest challenge was a shortage of ammunition . Though logistics situations improved over time , ammunition was short for much of the war . Consumption of supplies differed among the various units and a lack of a previously drafted plan forced UN logisticians to create a system on the fly . Subsistence for the UN troops in Korea was among the other logistical challenges confronting the UN in the early days of the war . There were no C rations in Korea and only a small reserve in Japan at the outbreak of the war . The Quartermaster General of the US Army immediately began moving all available C rations and 5 @-@ in @-@ 1 B rations from the United States to the Far East . Field rations at first were largely World War II K rations . Subsistence of the ROK troops was an equally important and difficult problem . 
 The majority of resupply by sea was conducted by cargo ships of the US Army and US Navy . The massive demand for ships forced the UN to charter private ships and bring ships out of the reserve fleet to increase the number of the military vessels in service . The UN had a major advantage in its sealift operations in that the most developed port in Korea was Pusan which was at the southeastern tip of the peninsula . Pusan was the only port in South Korea that had dock facilities large enough to handle a sizable amount of cargo . An emergency airlift of critically needed items began almost immediately from the United States to Japan . Although it did not fly into Korea , the Military Air Transport Service ( MATS ) , Pacific Division , expanded rapidly after the outbreak of the war . Supplies and troops were flown into airfields on the Pusan Perimeter from Japan by Far East Air Forces transports . The consumption of aviation gasoline thanks to both combat and transport aircraft was so great in the early phase of the war , taxing the very limited supply available in the Far East , that it became one of the serious logistical problems . From Pusan a good railroad system built by the Japanese and well ballasted with crushed rock and river gravel extended northward . The railroads were the backbone of the UN transportation system in Korea . The 20 @,@ 000 mi ( 32 @,@ 000 km ) of Korean vehicular roads were all of a secondary nature , as measured by American or European standards . 
 = = = = North Korean logistics = = = = 
 The responsibility of the North Korean logistics was divided between the Ministry of National Defense ( MND ) , led by Marshal Choe Yong Gun , and the NKPA Rear Service Department , commanded by General Choe Hong Kup . The MND was mainly responsible for railroad transportation and supply procurement , while the Rear Service Department was responsible for road transportation . The North Koreans relied on a logistical system which was very lean and substantially smaller than the United Nations ' system . This logistics network was therefore capable of moving far fewer supplies , and this caused considerable difficulty for front @-@ line troops . Based on the efficient Soviet model , this ground @-@ based network relied primarily on railroads to transport supplies to the front while troops transported those items to the individual units on foot , trucks , or carts . This second effort , though more versatile , was also a substantial disadvantage because it was less efficient and often too slow to follow the moving front @-@ line units . 
 In mid @-@ July , the UN Far East Air Force Bomber Command began a steady and increasing campaign against strategic North Korean logistics targets . The first of these targets was Wonsan on the east coast . Wonsan was important as a communications center that linked Vladivostok , Siberia , with North Korea by rail and sea . From it , rail lines ran to all the North Korean build @-@ up centers . The great bulk of Russian supplies for North Korea in the early part of the war came in at Wonsan , and from the beginning it was considered a major military target . By July 27 , the FEAF Bomber Command had a comprehensive rail interdiction plan ready . This plan sought to cut the flow of North Korean troops and materiel from North Korea to the combat area . Two cut points , the P 'yong @-@ yang railroad bridge and marshaling yards and the Hamhung bridge and Hamhung and Wonsan marshaling yards , would almost completely sever North Korea 's rail logistics network . Destruction of the rail bridges over the Han near Seoul would cut rail communication to the Pusan Perimeter area . On July 28 the FEAF gave Bomber Command a list of targets in the rail interdiction program , and two days later a similar plan was ready for interdiction of highways . On August 4 , FEAF began B @-@ 29 interdiction attacks against all key bridges north of the 37th Parallel in Korea and , on August 15 , light bombers and fighter @-@ bombers joined in the interdiction campaign . North Korea 's lack of large airstrips and aircraft meant it conducted only minimal air resupply , mostly critical items being imported from China . Other than this , however , aircraft played almost no role in North Korean logistics . The North Koreans were also not able to effectively use sea transport . Ports in Wonsan and Hungnam could be used for the transport of some troops and supplies , but they remained far too underdeveloped to support any large @-@ scale logistical movements , and the port of Inchon in the south was difficult to navigate with large numbers of ships . 
 The supremacy of the Fifth Air Force in the skies over Korea forced the North Koreans in the first month of the war to resort to night movement of supplies to the battle area . They relied primarily on railroads to move supplies to the front , however a shortage of trucks posed the most serious problem of getting supplies from the trains to individual units , forcing them to rely on carts and pack animals . The North Korea Army was able to maintain transport to its front lines over long lines of communications despite heavy and constant air attacks . The United Nations air effort failed to halt military rail transport . Ammunition and motor fuel , which took precedence over all other types of supply , continued to arrive at the front , though in smaller amounts than before . At best there were rations for only one or two meals a day . Most units had to live at least partially off the South Korean populace , scavenging for food and supplies at night . By September 1 the food situation was so bad in the North Korean army at the front that most of the soldiers showed a loss of stamina with resulting impaired combat effectiveness . 
 The inefficiency of its logistics remained a fatal weakness of the North Korean Army , costing it crucial defeats after an initial success with combat forces . The North Koreans ' communications and supply were not capable of exploiting a breakthrough and of supporting a continuing attack in the face of massive air , armor , and artillery fire that could be concentrated against its troops at critical points . 
 = = August push = = 
 = = = Defensive position = = = 
 On August 1 , the US Eighth Army issued an operational directive to all UN ground forces in Korea for their planned withdrawal east of the Naktong River . UN units would then establish main defensive positions behind what was to be called the Pusan Perimeter . The intent was to draw the line on retreating and hold off the Korean People 's Army while the U.S. Army built up its forces and launch a counteroffensive . The Perimeter was the last stand for the UN forces that had seen successive defeats during the first month of the war ; any further retreat would cost the Eighth Army heavy casualties . The US 25th Infantry Division held the southernmost flank at Masan , while the 24th Infantry Division withdrew to Koch 'ang . The 1st Cavalry Division withdrew to Waegwan . US forces demolished all bridges over the Naktong River in the retreat . At one bridge in the 1st Cavalry Division sector , the division commander attempted several times to clear refugees from the bridge but they continued to cross it despite warnings and several attempts to clear the bridge . Eventually the commander was forced to demolish the bridge , taking several hundred refugees with it . 
 Central to the UN defensive plan was to hold the port of Pusan , where vital ground supplies and reinforcements were arriving from Japan and the US . Pusan possessed airfields where US combat and cargo aircraft were streaming into Korea with more supplies . The installation of heavy duty cranes at Pusan 's docks allowed for easier handling of heavy weapons and cargo , with a subsequent reduction in UN airlifts . A system similar to the Red Ball Express in World War II was employed to get supplies from Pusan to the front lines . Hundreds of ships arrived in Pusan each month , starting with 230 in July and increasing steadily thereafter . On July 24 , the UN established its highest command under General of the Army Douglas MacArthur in Tokyo , Japan . North Korean forces in the meantime were suffering from overextended supply lines which severely reduced their fighting capacity . 
 North Korean forces had four possible routes in the perimeter : to the south , the pass through the city of Masan around the confluence of the Nam and Naktong rivers ; another southerly route through the Naktong Bulge and into the railroad lines at Miryang ; through the route into Taegu in the north ; and through Kyongju in the eastern corridor . North Korea mounted a large offensive in August , simultaneously attacking all four entries into the perimeter . As a result , the Battle of Pusan Perimeter was not one single engagement but a series of large battles fought between the UN and North Korean divisions all along the perimeter . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The Eighth Army , commanded by Lieutenant General Walton Walker , began preparing a counteroffensive , the first conducted by the UN in the war , for August . It would kick off with an attack by the US reserve units on the Masan area to secure Chinju from the North Korean 6th Division , followed by a larger general push to the Kum River in the middle of the month . One of Walker 's goals was to break up a suspected massing of enemy troops near the Taegu area by forcing the diversion of some North Korean units southward . On August 6 , the Eighth Army issued the operational directive for the attack by Task Force Kean , named for the US 25th Infantry Division commander , William B. Kean . Task Force Kean consisted of the 25th Division , less the 27th Infantry and a field artillery battalion , plus the 5th Regimental Combat Team and the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade attached — a force of about 20 @,@ 000 men . The plan of attack required the force to move west from positions held near Masan , seize the Chinju Pass , and secure the line as far as the Nam River . However , the offensive relied on the arrival of the entire 2nd Infantry Division , as well as three more battalions of American tanks . 
 Task Force Kean launched its attack on August 7 , moving out from Masan . At the Notch , a northern pass into the city and site of a previous battle , the 35th Infantry Regiment encountered 500 North Korean Infantry , and defeated them . The Task Force surged forward to Pansong , inflicting another 350 casualties and overrunning the North Korean 6th Division 's headquarters . However the rest of the US advance was slowed by enemy resistance . Task Force Kean pressed on the Chindong @-@ ni area , resulting in a confused battle where the fragmented force had to rely on airstrikes and airdrops to keep it effective . Kean 's offensive had collided in a meeting engagement with one being simultaneously delivered by the North Korean 6th Division . 
 Heavy fighting continued in the area for three days . By August 9 , Task Force Kean was poised to retake Chinju . Aided by air power , the Americans initially advanced quickly though North Korean resistance was heavy . On August 10 , the Marines picked up the advance , inadvertently discovering the North Korean 83rd Motorized Regiment of the 105th Armored Division . F4U Corsairs from the 1st Marine Air Wing repeatedly strafed the retreating North Koreans , inflicting 200 casualties and destroying about 100 of the regiment 's equipment vehicles . However , the 1st Provisional Marine Brigade was withdrawn from the force on August 12 to be redeployed elsewhere on the perimeter . Task Force Kean continued forward supported by naval firepower and field artillery , capturing the area around Chondong @-@ ni . However , Eighth Army requested several of its units to redeploy to Taegu to be used elsewhere on the front , particularly at the Naktong Bulge 
 An attempt to move the 25th Infantry Division 's division trains through the valley became mired in the mud through the night of August 10 – 11 @.@ and was attacked in the morning by North Koreans who had driven American forces from the high ground . In the confusion , North Korean armor was able to penetrate roadblocks and assault the supporting US artillery positions . The surprise attack was successful in wiping out most of the 555th and 90th Field Artillery battalions , with much of their equipment . Both North Korean and American armor swarmed to the scene and US Marines aircraft continued to provide cover , but neither side was able to make appreciable gains despite inflicting massive numbers of casualties on one another . American forces were unsuccessful in retaking the positions where the artillery was overrun , suffering numerous casualties in several failed attempts to do so . Upon later inspection , the bodies of 75 men , 55 from the 555th Field Artillery and 20 from the 90th Field Artillery , were found executed when the area again came under American control . Task Force Kean was forced to withdraw back to Masan , unable to hold its gains , and by August 14 it was in approximately the same position it had been in when it started the offensive . 
 Task Force Kean had failed in its objective of diverting North Korean troops from the north , and also failed in its objective of reaching the Chinju pass . However , the offensive was considered to have significantly increased morale among the troops of the 25th Infantry Division , which performed extremely well in subsequent engagements . The 6th Division had been reduced to 3 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 and had to replenish its ranks with South Korean conscripts from Andong . Fighting in the region continued for the rest of the month . 
 = = = Naktong Bulge = = = 
 About 7 miles ( 11 km ) north of the confluence of the Naktong and Nam Rivers , the Naktong curves westward opposite Yongsan in a wide semicircular loop . For most of this span , the Naktong river is around 400 meters ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) wide and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep , allowing infantry to wade across with some difficulty but preventing vehicles from crossing without assistance . This perimeter was manned by a network of observation posts on the high ground where American forces of the 24th Infantry Division , under Major General John H. Church , monitored the river area . Forces in reserve would counterattack any attempted crossings by North Korean forces . Artillery and mortar fire were also dispersed so large amounts of fire could be poured on any one spot . The division was spread extremely thinly ; already understrength , it presented a very weak line . 
 = = = = North Korean crossing = = = = 
 At midnight on the night of August 5 – 6 , 800 North Korean soldiers of the 3rd Battalion , 16th Regiment , waded across the river at the Ohang ferry site , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) south of Pugong @-@ ni and west of Yongsan , carrying light weapons and supplies over their heads or on rafts . A second force attempted to cross the river further north but was hit with machine guns and artillery , falling back in confusion . At 02 : 00 the morning of August 6 , the North Koreans began engaging the forces of 3rd Battalion , 34th Infantry , but moved forward after a small fight , attempting to penetrate the lines to Yongsan . The North Korean infantry forced 3rd Battalion back , and the American battalion abandoned its command post to consolidate its positions . The North Korean attack caught the Americans , who were expecting an attack from further north , by surprise . Subsequently the North Koreans were able to capture a large amount of American equipment . The attack threatened to split the American lines and disrupt supply lines to the north . 
 The regimental headquarters ordered the 1st Battalion to counterattack the North Koreans . Once 1st Battalion arrived at the 3rd Battalion 's former command post it was ambushed by North Korean soldiers on higher ground . Heavy casualties were incurred by C Company , the first unit of the battalion to reach the post . Over half of C Company became casualties in the fight . A and B Companies counterattacked the North Korean positions with tanks and armored vehicles , eventually rescuing the beleaguered C Company . At around 20 : 00 , A Company made contact with L Company of 3rd Battalion , still in its positions on the river , radioing that the North Koreans had penetrated eastward north of the Yongsan @-@ Naktong River road to an elevated position known as Cloverleaf Hill , but had not yet crossed south of the road to Obong @-@ ni Ridge . The North Koreans had penetrated 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) east of the Naktong and halfway to Yongsan . 
 American counterattacks continued into the morning of August 7 , but gains were slow , hampered by the hot weather and a lack of food and water . North Koreans were able to press forward and regain Cloverleaf Hill and Oblong @-@ ni Ridge , critical terrain astride the main road in the bulge area . By 16 : 00 that day , the US 9th Infantry Regiment , 2nd Infantry Division , a newly arrived unit , was sent to the region . Church immediately ordered it to attack the bulge salient . The 9th Infantry 's troops were fresh , well @-@ equipped and well @-@ rested . However , they were also inexperienced , many of their number being reservists . Despite a tenacious attack , the 9th Infantry was only able to regain part of Cloverleaf Hill before intense fighting stalled its movement . 
 In order to effect the destruction of the North Korean bridgehead , Church assembled a large force under the 9th Infantry Regiment . Dubbed Task Force Hill , this force comprised the 9th 19th and 34th Infantry Regiments as well as 1st Battalion , 21st Infantry , as well as supporting artillery and other attached units . It was assigned to drive the North Koreans from the east bank of the river on August 11 . Commanding Task Force Hill was Colonel John G. Hill , the 9th Infantry Commander . 
 The NK 4th Division , in the meantime , had constructed underwater bridges of sandbags , logs and rocks , finishing the first one the day before . It moved trucks and heavy artillery across the river through this bridge , as well as additional infantry and a few tanks . By the morning of August 10 an estimated two North Korean regiments were now across the river and occupying fortified positions . Supplies continued to stream in through rafts . Task Force Hill mounted its attack , but was unable to make progress due to the newly established artillery . Its directive to attack quickly became one to dig in and hold its ground , and by nightfall the entire NK 4th Division was across the river . On August 10 some of these units began to move south , around the American lines and outflanked Task Force Hill . The next day , scattered elements of the North Korean forces attacked Yongsan . The North Korean forces repeatedly attacked US lines at night , when American soldiers were resting and had greater difficulty resisting . 
 = = = = North Korean defeat = = = = 
 The 1st Marine Provisional Brigade , in conjunction with Task Force Hill , mounted a massive offensive on Cloverleaf Hill and Obong @-@ ni on August 17 . Supported by aircraft and artillery , the offensive kicked off at 0800 on August 17 . US forces unleashed all they had at their disposal against the North Korean positions ; artillery , mortars , airstrikes , and M26 Pershing tanks supported the infantry and Marines . 
 At first tenacious North Korean defense halted the Marines ' push . The US artillery had to rake Cloverleaf Hill and force the North Koreans out of their positions before the Marines and Task Force Hill could proceed to Obong @-@ ni , eventually overwhelming the North Koreans one hill at a time . They first destroyed resistance on the slope of Obong @-@ ni with an airstrike and a barrage from US tanks , but heavy resistance caused large numbers of casualties for the Marine force , which had to withdraw after its first attack . The NK 18th Regiment , in charge of the hill , mounted a disastrous counterattack following this in hopes of pushing the Marines back . The division 's tactics of cutting off supplies and relying on surprise , which had provided them so much success up to this point in the war , were lost in the face of massive US numerical superiority . 
 By nightfall on August 18 , the North Korean 4th Division had been annihilated by the US forces ; huge numbers of deserters had weakened its numbers during the fight , but by that time , Obong @-@ ni and Cloverleaf Hill had been retaken by the US forces . Scattered groups of North Korean soldiers fled back across the Naktong , pursued by American planes and artillery fire . The next day , the remains of the 4th Division had withdrawn completely across the river . In their hasty retreat , they left a large number of artillery pieces and equipment behind which the Americans used . 
 = = = Eastern corridor = = = 
 The terrain along the South Korean front on the Eastern corridor made movement extremely difficult . A major road ran from Taegu 50 miles ( 80 km ) east , to P ’ ohang @-@ dong on Korea 's east coast . The only major north @-@ south road intersecting this line moved south from Andong through Yongch 'on , midway between Taegu and P 'ohang @-@ dong . The only other natural entry through the line was at the town of An 'gang @-@ ni , 12 miles ( 19 km ) west of P 'ohang @-@ dong , situated near a valley through the natural rugged terrain to the major rail hub of Kyongju , which was a staging post for moving supplies to Taegu . Walker chose not to heavily reinforce the area as he felt the terrain made meaningful attack impossible , preferring to respond to attack with reinforcements from the transportation routes and air cover from Yongil Airfield , which was south of P 'ohang @-@ dong . 
 = = = = Triple offensive = = = = 
 In early August , three North Korean divisions mounted offensives against the three passes through the area , with the NK 8th Division attacking Yongch 'on , NK 12th Division attacking P ’ ohang @-@ dong and NK 5th Division , in conjunction with the 766th Independent Infantry Regiment , attacking An 'gang @-@ ni . The NK 8th Division 's attack stalled almost immediately . The division drove for Yongch 'on from <unk> . However , the attack failed to reach the Taegu @-@ P 'ohang corridor after being surprised and outflanked by the ROK 8th Division . This fighting was so heavy that the NK 8th Division was forced to hold its ground for a week before trying to advance . <unk> again by South Korean resistance , it halted to wait for reinforcements . However the other two attacks were more successful , catching the UN forces by surprise . 
 East of the NK and ROK 8th Divisions , the NK 12th Division crossed the Naktong River at Andong , moving through the mountains in small groups to reach P 'ohang @-@ dong . The division was understrength and at least one of its artillery batteries had to send its guns back north because it had no ammunition for them . UN planners had not anticipated that the 12th Division would be able to cross the river effectively , and thus was unprepared when its forces infiltrated the region so heavily . In the meantime , the ROK 3rd Division was heavily engaged with the NK 5th Division along the coastal road to P 'ohang @-@ dong . The divisions ' clashes centered on the town of Yongdok , with each side capturing and recapturing the town several times . On August 5 , the North Koreans launched their attack , again taking the town from the South Korean forces and pushing them south . At 19 : 30 on August 6 , the South Koreans launched a counteroffensive to retake the town . US aircraft and ships pounded the town with rockets , napalm and artillery shells before South Korean troops from the ROK 22nd and 23rd Regiments swarmed into the town . However , NK 5th Division forces were able to infiltrate the coastal road south of Yongdok at Hunghae . This effectively surrounded the ROK 3rd Division , trapping it several miles above P 'ohang @-@ dong . The NK 766th Independent Regiment advanced around the ROK 3rd Division and took the area around P 'ohang @-@ dong . 
 On August 10 , the Eighth Army organized Task Force P 'ohang , consisting of the ROK 17th , 25th , and 26th Regiments as well as the ROK 1st Anti @-@ Guerrilla Battalion , Marine Battalion and a battery from the US 18th Field Artillery Battalion . The task force was given the mission to clear out North Korean forces in the mountainous region . At the same time , Eighth Army formed Task Force Bradley , consisting of elements of the US 8th Infantry Regiment , 2nd Infantry Division under the command of Brigadier General Joseph S. Bradley , the 2nd Division 's assistant commander . Task Force Bradley was tasked with defending P 'ohang @-@ dong from the North Korean 766th Independent Regiment which was infiltrating the town . What followed was a complicated series of fights through the large region around P 'ohang @-@ dong and An 'gang @-@ ni as South Korean ground forces , aided by US air forces engaged groups of North Korean forces operation all around the vicinity . The NK 12th Division was operating in the valley west of P 'ohang @-@ dong and was able to push back Task Force P 'ohang and the ROK Capital Division , which was along the line to the east . At the same time , the NK 766th Infantry Regiment and elements of the NK 5th Division fought Task Force Bradley at and south of P 'ohang @-@ dong . US naval fire was able to drive the NK troops from the town , but it became a bitterly contested no man 's land as fighting moved to the surrounding hills . 
 = = = = Fight for P 'ohang @-@ dong = = = = 
 By August 13 , North Korean troops were operating in the mountains west and southwest of Yongil Airfield . US Air Force commanders , wary of enemy attack , evacuated the 45 F @-@ 51s of the US 39th Fighter Squadron and US 40th Fighter Squadron from the airstrip , against the wishes of General MacArthur . In the event , the airstrip remained under the protection of UN ground forces and never came under direct enemy fire . The squadrons were moved to <unk> on the island of Kyushu , Japan . In the meantime , the ROK 3rd Division had to evacuate its position after being surrounded by the NK 5th Division . The ROK division was forced further south to the village of <unk> @-@ dong , where US Navy planners began preparations to withdraw the division by LSTs and DUKWs . The division would sail 20 miles ( 32 km ) south to Yongil bay to join the other UN forces in a coordinated attack to push the North Koreans out of the region . This evacuation was carried out on the night of August 16 under covering fire from the US Navy . 
 By August 14 , large forces from the NK 5th and 12th Divisions , as well was the 766th Independent Regiment , were focused entirely on taking P 'ohang @-@ dong . However they were unable to hold it because of US air superiority and naval bombardment on the town . The North Korean supply chain had completely broken down and more food , ammunition and supplies were not available . UN forces began their final counteroffensive against the stalled North Korean forces on August 15 . Intense fighting around P 'ohang @-@ dong ensued for several days as each side suffered large numbers of casualties in back @-@ and @-@ forth battles . By August 17 , UN forces were able to push North Korean troops out of the Kyongju and An 'gang @-@ ni areas , putting the supply road to Taegu out of immediate danger . The NK 766th Independent Regiment , down to 1 @,@ 500 men , was forced to withdraw north to prevent being surrounded . The NK 12th Division , also down to just 1 @,@ 500 , evacuated P 'ohang @-@ dong after this , having been exhausted from heavy casualties . The two units merged and received replacements , re @-@ emerging as a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ man 12th Division . By August 19 the North Korean forces had completely withdrawn from the offensive . 
 = = = Taegu = = = 
 Shortly before the Pusan Perimeter battles began , Walker established Taegu as the Eighth Army 's headquarters . Right at the center of the Pusan Perimeter , Taegu stood at the entrance to the Naktong River valley , an area where North Korean forces could advance in large numbers in close support . The natural barriers provided by the Naktong River to the south and the mountainous terrain to the north converged around Taegu , which was also the major transportation hub and last major South Korean city aside from Pusan itself to remain in UN hands . From south to north , the city was defended by the US 1st Cavalry Division , and the ROK 1st Division and ROK 6th Division of ROK II Corps . 1st Cavalry Division was spread out along a long line along the Naktong River to the south , with its 5th Cavalry and 8th Cavalry regiments holding a 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 79 @,@ 000 ft ) line along the river and the 7th Cavalry in reserve along with artillery forces , ready to reinforce anywhere a crossing could be attempted . 
 = = = = Taegu advance = = = = 
 Five North Korean divisions amassed to oppose the UN at Taegu . ; from south to north , the 10th , 3rd , 15th , 13th , and 1st Divisions occupied a line from Tuksong @-@ dong and around Waegwan to Kunwi . The North Koreans planned to use the natural corridor of the Naktong valley from Sangju to Taegu as their main axis of attack for the next push south . Elements of the NK 105th Armored Division were also supporting the attack . 
 On the night of August 4 – 5 , the NK 13th Division began crossing the Naktong River at Naktong @-@ ni , 40 miles ( 64 km ) northwest of Taegu . The crossing was not discovered until August 5 when ROK artillery and mortar fire was called on to the crossing . North Korean soldiers waded across the river carrying weapons and equipment over their heads . The division 's three regiments crossed on foot and by raft over the course of three nights , with the entire division across by August 7 . It was several miles from the ROK 1st Division 's prepared defenses . ROK troops attacked the 13th Division immediately after it completed its crossing , forcing the North Korean troops to scatter into the mountains . The division reassembled to the east and launched a concerted night attack , broke the ROK defenses , and began an advance that carried it twenty miles ( 32 km ) southeast of Naktong @-@ ni on the main road to Taegu . Within a week , the NK 1st and 13th divisions were converging on the Tabu @-@ dong area , about 15 miles ( 24 km ) north of Taegu . 
 The NK 15th Division , next of the North Korean divisions in line to the south , received 1 @,@ 500 replacements at Kumch 'on on August 5 , which brought its strength to about 6 @,@ 500 men . The next day its 45th Regiment marched northeast toward the Naktong River . The regiment passed through <unk> on August 7 and crossed the river southeast of that town , while under attack by UN aircraft . Once across the river , the regiment headed into the mountains , initially encountering no UN opposition . The other two regiments , the 48th and 50th , departed Kumch 'on later and began crossing the Naktong between <unk> and Waegwan before dawn of August 8 , constructing underwater bridges for their vehicles . The North Koreans supported this crossing by direct tank fire from the west side of the river . These tanks evidently succeeded in crossing the river during the day . The NK 15th Division seized Hills 201 and 346 on the east side of the river at the crossing site , before advancing eastward into the mountains toward Tabu @-@ dong , 7 miles ( 11 km ) away . The next day , ROK 1st Division regained the high ground at the crossing sites , forcing the North Korean forces further eastward into the mountains . During August 12 – 16 , the three regiments of the NK 15th Division reassembled on the east side of the Naktong River in the vicinity of Yuhak @-@ san , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) east of the crossing site and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) northwest of Tabu @-@ dong . The NK 15th Division was quickly locked in combat on Yuhak @-@ san with the ROK 1st Division . 
 = = = = Triangulation Hill = = = = 
 South of Waegwan , two more North Korean divisions stood ready to cross the Naktong in a coordinated attack with the divisions to the north . The experienced NK 3rd Division was concentrated in the vicinity of Songju , while the untested NK 10th Division was concentrated in the Koryong area . These two divisions crossed in the US 1st Cavalry Division 's line . The NK 3rd Division 's 7th Regiment started crossing the Naktong at about 0300 on August 9 near Noch 'on , two miles ( 3 km ) south of the Waegwan bridge . Discovering the crossing , elements of the US 5th Cavalry Regiment directed automatic weapons fire against the North Koreans and called in pre @-@ registered artillery fire on the crossing site . Although the enemy regiment suffered some casualties , the bulk of it reached the east bank safely and moved inland into the hills . Thirty minutes later , the 8th and 9th Regiments began crossing the river to the south . The 5th Cavalry Regiment and all its supporting mortars and artillery , now fully alerted , spotted and decimated the two regiments troops and turned them back to the west bank . Only a small number of North Koreans reached the east side where either they were captured , or hid until recrossing the river the following night . 
 At dawn on August 9 , 1st Cavalry Division commander Major General Hobart R. Gay in Taegu learned of the enemy crossing in his division 's sector south of Waegwan . As first reports were vague , he decided to withhold action until he found out more about the situation . He quickly discovered that around 750 North Korean infantry had gathered on Hill 268 , also known as Triangulation Hill , which was 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) southeast of Waegwan and 10 miles ( 16 km ) northwest of Taegu . Gay ordered his division to counterattack the enemy gathering to force them across the river . He and Walker believed the North Korean attack could be a feint and that a larger attack could come from the north . Moreover , the hill was important for its proximity to lines of communication . The main Korean north @-@ south highway and the main double @-@ track Seoul @-@ Pusan railroad skirted its base . 
 At 12 : 00 the US artillery fired a preparatory barrage on Hill 268 , which the 1st Battalion then attacked , with orders to continue on southwest to Hill 154 . Hill 268 was covered with thick brush 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) and trees eight to 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high . The North Koreans repulsed the attack . The next morning , August 10 , air strikes and artillery barrages rocked Hill 268 , devastating the North Korean battalion . Trapped between the air bombs and artillery shells , they started to vacate their positions . An American infantry attack then reached the top of the hill without trouble and the battle was over by 16 : 00 . American artillery and mortar fire now shifted westward and cut off the North Korean retreat . White phosphorus shells fired from the 61st Field Artillery Battalion caught North Koreans in a village as they attempted to retreat , and they were routed by American infantry , suffering over 200 killed . That evening the 1st Battalion , 7th Cavalry , reverted to division reserve , and elements of the 5th Cavalry finished securing Hill 268 . An estimated 300 survivors retreated across the river the night of August 10 / 11 . The NK 3rd Division 's attempted crossing of the Naktong south of Waegwan had ended in catastrophe . When the survivors of the 7th Regiment rejoined the division on or about August 12 , the once @-@ powerful 3rd Division was reduced to a disorganized unit of some 2 @,@ 500 men . The North Korean Army placed the division in reserve to be rebuilt by replacements . 
 = = = = Yongp 'o = = = = 
 The North Korean plan for the attack against Taegu from the west and southwest demanded the NK 10th Division make a coordinated attack with the NK 3rd Division . The 10th Division was ordered to cross the Naktong River in the vicinity of Tuksong @-@ dong , penetrate east , and cut the UN forces ' main supply route from Pusan to Taegu . The division assembled in the Koryong area on August 11 . Further north , the NK 25th Regiment , a component of the 10th Division , started crossing the Naktong at about 03 : 00 on August 12 , in the vicinity of Tuksong @-@ dong , on the Koryong @-@ Taegu road . The 2nd Battalion , 7th Cavalry Regiment , covered this crossing site , which was 14 miles ( 23 km ) southwest of Taegu . By daylight , a North Korean force of 300 to 400 had penetrated to Wich 'on @-@ dong and 2nd Battalion 's H Company engaged it in close combat . In a grenade and automatic weapons attack , the North Koreans overran the advance positions of the company , the mortar observation post , and the heavy machine gun positions . The North Koreans were apparently attempting to control high ground east of Yongp 'o in order to provide protection for the main crossing that was to follow . By 09 : 00 , however , the 2nd Battalion , supported by the 77th Field Artillery Battalion and air strikes , drove the North Koreans troops through Yongp 'o and dispersed them . 
 In the three days from August 10 to 12 the Naktong River had dropped three feet and was only shoulder @-@ deep at many places due to lack of rain . This made any attempt at crossing the river considerably easier . A more determined North Korean crossing of the Naktong in the vicinity of the blown bridge between Tuksong @-@ dong and Yongp 'o began early in the morning on August 14 . North Korean artillery and tank fire from the west side of the river supported the infantry crossing . A large number of North Korean reinforcements were crossing in barges near the bridge , while under fire from American air strikes and artillery . This attack also stalled , with the deepest North Korean penetration reaching <unk> @-@ dong , 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) beyond the blown bridge . There the combined fire of US light weapons , mortars , and artillery drove them back to the river . By 1200 , large groups of North Koreans were trying to recross the river to the west side as American artillery continued hammering them , causing heavy casualties . By nightfall , the 7th Cavalry Regiment had eliminated the North Korean bridgehead at Yongp 'o . The 7th Cavalry Regiment estimated that of 1 @,@ 700 North Korean troops who had succeeded in crossing the river , 1 @,@ 500 were killed . In its first combat mission , the crossing of the Naktong , the 10th Division suffered 2 @,@ 500 casualties . 
 = = = = Carpet bombing = = = = 
 In the mountains northeast of Waegwan and Hill 303 , the ROK 1st Division continued to suffer North Korean attacks throughout mid @-@ August . North Korean pressure against the ROK division never ceased for long . Under the command of Brigadier General Paik Sun Yup , this division fought an extremely bloody defense of the mountain approaches to Taegu . US planners believed the main North Korean attack would come from the west , and so it massed its forces to the west of Taegu . It mistakenly believed up to 40 @,@ 000 North Korean troops were near Taegu . This number was above the actual troop numbers for North Korea , which had only 70 @,@ 000 men along the entire perimeter . 
 On August 14 , General MacArthur ordered Lieutenant General George E. Stratemeyer to conduct carpet bombing of a 27 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 70 km2 ) rectangular area on the west side of the Naktong River opposite the ROK 1st Division . Intelligence estimates placed the greatest concentration of enemy troops in this area , with some estimates being as high as four enemy divisions and several armored regiments . All up , 40 @,@ 000 men were reportedly using the area to stage their attack on Taegu . Stratemeyer did not think his aircraft could successfully carpet bomb an area larger than 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) square but he complied with MacArthur 's order anyway . At 11 : 58 , August 16 , bombers from 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) dropped approximately 960 tons of 500- and 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound bombs on the area . The attack had required the entire the FEAF bombing component , and they had dropped 3 @,@ 084 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) bombs and 150 1 @,@ 000 pounds ( 450 kg ) bombs . This comprised the largest Air Force operation since the Battle of Normandy in World War II . 
 Walker reported to MacArthur the next day that the damage done to the North Koreans by the bombing could not be evaluated because of smoke and dust , and ground forces were unable to reach the area because of North Korean fire . Information obtained later from North Korean prisoners revealed the enemy divisions the Far East Command thought to be still west of the Naktong had already crossed to the east side and were not in the bombed area . No evidence was found that the bombing killed a single North Korean soldier . However , the bombing appeared to have destroyed a significant number of North Korean artillery batteries , as artillery fire on UN positions waned substantially following the mission . The UN ground and air commanders opposed future massive carpet bombing attacks against enemy tactical troops unless there was precise information on an enemy concentration and the situation was critical . Instead , they recommended fighter @-@ bombers and dive bombers would better support ground forces . They subsequently canceled a second bombing of an area east of the Naktong , scheduled for August 19 . 
 = = September push = = 
 The North Korean Army had been pushed beyond its limits and many of the original units were at much reduced strength and effectiveness by the end of August . Logistical problems racked the North Koreans , who were devastated by shortages of food , weapons , equipment and replacement soldiers . By late August , the UN command had more combat soldiers in Korea than the North Koreans , and UN superiority over the air and sea meant the North Koreans were at a disadvantage which was growing daily . North Korean tank losses had been in the hundreds , and it had fewer than 100 tanks by September 1 , compared to the Americans ' 600 tanks . By the end of August the North Koreans ' only remaining advantage was their initiative , as the North Korean troops retained a high morale and enough supplies to allow for a large @-@ scale offensive . 
 In planning its new offensive , the North Korean commanders decided that any attempt to flank the UN force was impossible thanks to the support of the UN navy . Instead , they opted to use frontal attacks to breach the perimeter and collapse it , as the only hope of achieving success . Fed by intelligence from the Soviet Union , the North Koreans were aware the UN forces were building up along the Pusan Perimeter and that they had to conduct an offensive soon or else forfeit the battle . A secondary objective was to surround Taegu and destroy the UN and ROK units in that city . As part of this mission , the North Korean units would first cut the supply lines to Taegu . 
 North Korean planners enlarged their force in anticipation of a new offensive . The army , originally numbering 10 divisions in two corps , was enlarged to 14 divisions with several independent brigades . The new troops were brought in from reserve forces based in North Korea . Marshal Choe Yong Gun served as deputy commander of the North Korean Army , with General Kim Chaek in charge of the Front Headquarters . Beneath them were the NK II Corps in the east , commanded by Lieutenant General Kim Mu Chong , and NK I Corps in the west , under Lieutenant General Kim Ung . II Corps controlled the NK 10th , 2nd , 4th , 9th , 7th , and 6th Divisions as well as the 105th Armored Division , with the NK 16th Armored Brigade and NK 104th Security Brigade in support . I Corps commanded the 3rd , 13th , 1st , 8th , 15th , 12th , and 5th Divisions with the NK 17th Armored Brigade in support . This force numbered approximately 97 @,@ 850 men , although a third of it comprised raw recruits , forced conscripts from South Korea , and lacked weapons and equipment . By August 31 they were facing a UN force of 120 @,@ 000 combat troops plus 60 @,@ 000 support troops . 
 On August 20 , the North Korean commands distributed operations orders to their subordinate units . These orders called for a simultaneous five @-@ prong attack against the UN lines . This would overwhelm the UN defenders and allow the North Koreans to break through the lines in at least one place to push the UN forces back . Five battle groupings were ordered as follows : 
 NK 6th and 7th Divisions to break through the US 25th Infantry Division at Masan . 
 NK 9th , 4th , 2nd , and 10th Divisions to break through the US 2nd Infantry Division at the Naktong Bulge to Miryang and Yongsan . 
 NK 3rd , 13th , and 1st Divisions to break through the US 1st Cavalry Division and ROK 1st Division to Taegu . 
 NK 8th and 15th Divisions to break through the ROK 8th Division and ROK 6th Division to Hayang and Yongch 'on . 
 NK 12th and 5th Divisions to break through the ROK Capital Division and ROK 3rd Division to P 'ohang @-@ dong and Kyongju . 
 On August 22 , North Korean Premier Kim Il Sung ordered the war to be over by September 1 , but the scale of the offensive did not allow for this . Groups 1 and 2 were to begin their attack at 23 : 30 on August 31 , and Groups 3 , 4 and 5 would begin their attacks at 18 : 00 on September 2 . The attacks were to closely connect in order to overwhelm UN troops at each point simultaneously , forcing breakthroughs in multiple places that the UN would be unable to reinforce . The North Koreans also relied primarily on night attacks to counter the UN 's major advantages in air superiority and naval firepower . North Korean generals thought such night attacks would prevent UN forces from firing effectively and result in large numbers of UN friendly fire casualties . 
 The attacks caught UN planners and troops by surprise . By August 26 , the UN troops believed they had destroyed the last serious threats to the perimeter , and anticipated the war ending by late November . ROK units , in the meantime , suffered from low morale thanks to their failures to defend effectively thus far in the conflict . A cautious Lieutenant General Walker ordered Major General John B. Coulter to the P 'ohang @-@ dong area to shore up the ROK I Corps , which was falling apart thanks to their low morale . UN troops were preparing for Operation Chromite , an amphibious assault on the port of Inchon on September 15 and did not anticipate the North Koreans would mount a serious offensive before then . 
 The Great Naktong Offensive was one of the most brutal fights of the Korean War . The North Koreans were initially successful in breaking through UN lines in multiple places and made substantial gains in surrounding and pushing back UN units . On September 4 – 5 the situation was so dire for the UN troops that the US Eighth Army and ROK Army moved their headquarters elements from Taegu to Pusan to prevent them from being overrun and losing their heavy communications equipment , though Walker remained in Taegu with a small forward detachment . They also prepared their logistics systems for a retreat to a smaller defensive perimeter called the " Davidson Line . " By September 6 , however , Walker decided another retreat would not be necessary . 
 The five @-@ prong offensive led to heavy fighting around Haman , Kyongju , Naktong Bulge , Nam River , Yongsan , Tabu @-@ Dong and Ka @-@ san . The North Korean attacks made appreciable gains and forced the UN troops along the Pusan Perimeter to form a thin line of defense , relying on mobile reserves for the strength to push back North Korean attackers . From September 1 – 8 this fighting was intense and the battle was a very costly deadlock for the two overextended armies . By September 15 , though , North Korean troops were caught unaware by Operation Chromite , and those forces that remained intact after 15 days of fighting were forced to retreat in a total rout . Isolated North Korean resistance continued until September 18 , but on that date UN troops were mounting a full @-@ scale breakout offensive and pursuing retreating North Korean units to the north , ending the fighting around the Pusan Perimeter . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Medals of Honor were awarded to 17 US servicemen in the fight . US Air Force Major Louis J. Sebille was the only person from his branch to receive the medal . US Army recipients include Master Sergeant Melvin O. Handrich , Private First Class Melvin L. Brown , Corporal Gordon M. Craig , Private First Class Joseph R. Ouellette , Sergeant First Class Ernest R. Kouma , Master Sergeant Travis E. Watkins , First Lieutenant Frederick F. Henry , Private First Class Luther H. Story , Sergeant First Class Charles W. Turner , Private First Class David M. Smith , Sergeant First Class Loren R. Kaufman , and Private First Class William Thompson . Sergeant William R. <unk> and Corporal John W. Collier were also awarded the medal during the breakout offensive . One Commonwealth servicemen was awarded the Victoria Cross during the breakout offensive , Major Kenneth Muir . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 During the course of the battle , both the UN and North Korean forces suffered massive numbers of casualties . The US 5th Regimental Combat Team had 269 killed , 574 wounded and four captured during the battle . The US 1st Cavalry Division suffered 770 killed , 2 @,@ 613 wounded and 62 captured . The 2nd Infantry Division suffered 1 @,@ 120 killed , 2 @,@ 563 wounded , 67 captured and 69 missing . The 24th Infantry Division suffered 402 killed , 1 @,@ 086 wounded , five captured and 29 missing . The 29th Infantry Regimental Combat Team suffered 86 killed , 341 wounded , 1 captured and 7 missing . The 25th Infantry Division suffered 650 killed , 1 @,@ 866 wounded , four captured and 10 missing . With other non @-@ divisional units , the US Army 's total casualty count for the battle was 3 @,@ 390 killed , 9 @,@ 326 wounded , 97 captured ( 9 of whom died in captivity ) and 174 missing , adding up to 12 @,@ 987 casualties . The US Marine Corps suffered 185 killed , the US Navy suffered 14 killed and the US Air Force suffered 53 killed . Another 736 were killed , 2 @,@ 919 wounded and 12 missing during the breakout offensive from the perimeter . The official count for US casualties was 4 @,@ 599 killed , 12 @,@ 058 wounded , 2 @,@ 701 missing , 401 captured . South Korean casualty numbers are nearly impossible to estimate , but are known to be at least twice the total UN casualty count , or at least 40 @,@ 000 . The US also lost 60 tanks in the fight , bringing the total number lost in the war to that date to 136 . 
 There were also a small number of British casualties in the campaign , including five soldiers killed . Naval rating J.W. Addison was the first casualty in Pusan , killed August 23 aboard the HMS Comus when the ship was attacked by a North Korean aircraft . On August 29 , Lieutenant Commander I. M. MacLachlan , commander of 800 Naval Air Squadron , was killed in an aircraft accident aboard the HMS Triumph . Additionally , three British troops of the 27th Brigade were killed near Taegu ; Private Reginald Streeter was killed September 4 , and Captain C. N. A. Buchanan and Private T. Taylor died September 6 . Another 17 British soldiers were wounded in the area . 
 Two war correspondents were killed in the campaign , Ian Morrison , a reporter for The Times , and Christopher Buckley , a reporter for The Daily Telegraph , were killed August 13 near Waegwan when their vehicle struck a landmine . One Indian Armed Forces officer was also killed in the incident , Colonel <unk> Kesavan Unni Nayar , a representative from the United Nations Commission on Korea . 
 North Korean casualties for the battle are almost impossible to estimate precisely due to a lack of records . It is difficult to determine how many South Korean citizens were forcibly conscripted during the battle and how many deserted as opposed to being killed . Larger engagements destroyed entire regiments and even divisions of North Korean troops , and their strength had to be estimated based on accounts of North Koreans captured by the UN . On September 1 , the North Korean army numbered approximately 97 @,@ 850 in South Korea , and up to one third of this number is suspected to have been conscripts from South Korea . In the aftermath of the Pusan Perimeter battle , only 25 @,@ 000 or 30 @,@ 000 of these soldiers returned to North Korea by the end of the month . Upwards of one third of the attacking force became casualties in the fighting . This would mean North Korean casualties from September 1 to 15 could range from roughly 41 @,@ 000 to 36 @,@ 000 killed and captured , with an unknown number of wounded . With the addition of the 5 @,@ 690 killed in the Bowling Alley , 3 @,@ 500 at the Naktong Bulge , at least 3 @,@ 700 at Taegu and an unknown number at P 'ohang @-@ dong before September 1 , North Korean casualties likely topped 50 @,@ 000 to 60 @,@ 000 by the end of the battle . They also lost 239 T @-@ 34 tanks and 74 SU @-@ 76 self @-@ propelled guns ; virtually all of the armor they possessed . 
 = = = War crimes = = = 
 Instances of war crimes were alleged to have occurred on both sides of the conflict , and troops from both the UN and North Korea were involved in several high @-@ profile incidents . The North Korean troops , in occupying South Korea , were accused of many instances of abuse of prisoners of war captured during the fighting . Most serious among these were accusations that some captured UN prisoners were tortured and executed . Isolated incidents of prisoners being beaten , castrated , burned to death , and used for bayonet practice arose . In the Taegu region , groups of captured soldiers were found executed with their hands bound . This was also known to have occurred at Masan , where isolated instances of prisoners being used as human shields against other UN troops were known to have taken place . Critically wounded UN troops were known to have been killed , and in at least one instance , unarmed chaplains and medics were attacked despite wearing proper identification . The North Koreans were also known to have forcibly conscripted South Korean civilians into their armies on a large scale , killing any who attempted to desert . 
 The most infamous war crime was the Hill 303 massacre on August 17 , when 41 US prisoners of war were killed by North Koreans driving on Taegu . The crime led UN Commander Douglas MacArthur to warn the North Koreans via leaflets and broadcasts that they would be held responsible for such crimes . Historians agree there is no evidence that the North Korean High Command sanctioned the shooting of prisoners during the early phase of the war . The Hill 303 massacre and similar atrocities are believed to have been conducted by " uncontrolled small units , by vindictive individuals , or because of unfavorable and increasingly desperate situations confronting the captors . " T. R. Fehrenbach , a military historian , wrote in his analysis of the event that North Korean troops committing these acts were likely accustomed to torture and execution of prisoners due to decades of rule by oppressive armies of the Empire of Japan up until World War II . North Korean commanders are known to have issued more stern orders regarding treatment of prisoners of war after these incidents , though such atrocities continued . 
 UN troops , particularly South Korean , were also accused of killing or attempting to kill captured North Korean soldiers . South Korean civilians , some of whom were leftist or communist sympathizers , were known to have been systematically imprisoned or killed in the Bodo League massacres , some of which have taken place during the battle . In the years since the fight , evidence has also surfaced indicating that the US military killed South Korean civilians shortly before the fight along the Pusan Perimeter began , fearing them North Korean infiltrators , in the No Gun Ri massacre . The evidence is debated but several books have been published on the matter . 
 = = = Implications = = = 
 Some historians contend the goals of the North Koreans at the Pusan Perimeter were unattainable from the beginning . According to historian T. R. Fehrenbach , the Americans , who had been better equipped than the North Koreans , were easily able to defeat their opponents once they had the chance to form a continuous line . At the same time , the North Koreans did break through the perimeter at several points and were able to exploit their gains for a short time . Within a week , though , the momentum of the offensive had been slowed and the North Koreans could not keep up the strength of their attacks . Most of the front saw only probing actions for the remainder of the battle . 
 The Inchon landings were a crushing blow for the North Korean Army , catching it completely unprepared and breaking the already weak forces along the perimeter . With virtually no equipment , exhausted manpower and low morale , the North Koreans were at a severe disadvantage and were not able to continue to pressure on the Pusan Perimeter while attempting to repel the landings at Inchon . By September 23 , the North Koreans were in full retreat from the Pusan Perimeter , with UN forces rapidly pursuing them north and recapturing lost ground along the way . 
 The destruction of the North Korean Army at Pusan made communist continuation of the war impossible with North Korean troops alone . The massive equipment and manpower losses rivaled those of the ROK Army in the first stages of the war . The North Koreans totally collapsed as a fighting force , and the remainder of their routed military retreated into North Korea offering very weak resistance against the UN force , which was now on the offensive with overwhelming superiority by land , air and sea . Many of the outmaneuvered North Korean units simply surrendered , having been reduced from units of thousands to just a few hundred men . 
 With the successful Pusan Perimeter holding action , the victory set in motion the moves which would shape the remainder of the war . MacArthur and the Joint Chiefs of Staff , pushed by US leaders in Washington , decided to aggressively pursue the shattered North Korean People 's Army into North Korea . The Eighth Army was ordered to advance as far north as possible to Manchuria and North Korea 's border with China , with the primary objective of destroying what remained of the North Korean Army and the secondary objective of uniting all of Korea under Syngman Rhee . This agitated China , which threatened that it would " not stand aside should the imperialists wantonly invade the territory of their neighbor . " Warnings from other nations not to cross the 38th Parallel went unheeded and MacArthur began the offensive into the country when North Korea refused to surrender . This would eventually result in Chinese intervention once the UN troops reached the Yalu River , and what was originally known as the " Home By Christmas Offensive " turned into a war that would continue for another two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years . 
 = LSWR S15 class = 
 The LSWR S15 class was a British 2 @-@ cylinder 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 freight steam locomotive designed by Robert W. Urie , based on his H15 class and N15 class locomotives . The class had a complex build history , spanning several years of construction from 1920 to 1936 . The first examples were constructed for the London and South Western Railway ( LSWR ) , where they hauled freight trains to the south coast ports and further west to Exeter , as well as occasional passenger work in conjunction with their larger @-@ wheeled N15 class counterparts . 
 Following the Grouping of railway companies in 1923 , the LSWR became part of the Southern Railway , and the Chief Mechanical Engineer ( CME ) of the newly formed company , Richard Maunsell , increased the S15 class strength to 45 locomotives . Maunsell incorporated several improvements , notably to the steam circuit and the locomotive 's loading gauge , allowing it to operate on routes with height and width restrictions . 
 The new locomotives were built in three batches at Eastleigh , and were in service with the Southern Railway for 14 years . The locomotives continued in operation with the Southern Region of British Railways until 1966 . Seven examples have been preserved for use on heritage railways , and are currently in varying states of repair . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the First World War , the LSWR management wished to address the requirement for a modern , standard heavy freight locomotive to work from London 's freight yards to the southwest of England . As the LSWR lacked existing freight designs capable of undertaking this task , a new design was needed to serve the south coast ports of Portsmouth , Weymouth and Southampton . The design was also to power traffic including milk trains , which required fast transit to the dairies in London . Robert Urie used this opportunity to develop his recent H15 class design further , applying the 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 locomotive concept to a purpose @-@ built freight design built to order number S15 . It was this order number that gave the class the name " S15 " . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 The S15 class were all built by Eastleigh Works in three discrete batches between February 1920 and December 1936 . 
 = = = First batch – Urie 1920 @-@ 21 = = = 
 This was the third design by Robert Urie for the LSWR . The outline was made during the First World War , and incorporated lessons learned from the operation of his H15 class , a design that was to provide the basis for future standardisation on the LSWR . To economise on maintenance , the S15 class had interchangeable components that could be used on a similar design , the N15 class passenger locomotive , which had the same overall appearance . Details such as the boiler , the two @-@ cylinders and valve gear were standardised between the classes , although a taper boiler was used on the S15 and N15 classes , as opposed to the parallel boiler of the H15 class . The only other major difference was the smaller diameter of the driving wheels . Smaller diameter wheels gave better traction , essential for a fast freight locomotive . 
 By May 1921 sixteen were in service , and were mostly allocated to the London area , including the new marshalling yard at Feltham . Despite being mechanically sound , changes were made to Urie 's original design after the Grouping of railway companies in 1923 . 
 Urie retired as Locomotive Superintendent when the LSWR was amalgamated into the Southern Railway in 1923 . Richard Maunsell was given the newly created post of CME to the Southern Railway , and decided to revise the cylinder arrangement of the locomotive . In doing so , he delayed the construction of further locomotives until the modifications had been made . When the modifications were trialled in service , it became evident amongst locomotive crews that Maunsell had taken a sound design and made it better , achieving a consistent locomotive capable of undertaking all the tasks for which it was intended . With the successful implementation of the modifications , permission was given by the management of the Southern Railway for a second batch of locomotives to be constructed . 
 = = = Second batch – Maunsell 1927 – 28 = = = 
 Maunsell 's modifications included increasing the boiler pressure from 180 psi ( 1 @.@ 24 MPa ) to 200 psi ( 1 @.@ 38 MPa ) , and the reduction of the cylinder bore by half an inch . The footplate was also modified for operation on the Southern 's new composite loading gauge , and differed from previous batches in having the Ashford @-@ style cab , which was usually fitted to LBSCR locomotives . Unlike the original Drummond cab that was also favoured by Urie , the Ashford @-@ style cab was of an all @-@ steel construction and had a roof that was flush with the cab sides . It was inspired by the standard cab developed in 1904 by R. M. Deeley for the Midland Railway , and was one of a number of Midland features introduced by Maunsell 's chief draughtsman James Clayton , who transferred to Ashford Works in 1914 from the Midland Railway . Variants of this cab became standard for all new Southern Railway locomotives and converted tank engines . 
 Other modifications included the lengthening of valve travel , and fitting larger outside steam pipes to streamline the flow of steam into the cylinders . Fifteen locomotives of this revised design were built in 1927 , and some were given 4 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 18 @,@ 000 l ; 4 @,@ 800 US gal ) six @-@ wheeled tenders for use on the Southern Railway 's Central section . This allowed the locomotive to be turned on the shorter turntables found on this part of the network . From new , the rest of the class was equipped with the Urie 5 @,@ 000 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 23 @,@ 000 l ; 6 @,@ 000 US gal ) eight @-@ wheel bogie tender , which allowed the class to operate on the extended freight routes of the Southern Railway 's Western section . The standardisation measures undertaken by both Urie and Maunsell were soon vindicated by the fact that tenders and other parts were swapped with those of other classes on the Southern Railway when locomotives were under overhaul . 
 = = = Third batch – Maunsell 1936 = = = 
 The benefits gained by Maunsell 's modifications showed in the improved performance of the first batch of Maunsell S15s over their Urie @-@ built predecessors . A third batch was ordered in 1931 , coinciding with a downturn in the volume of freight due to the economic depression . This meant that the last of the S15 class was not completed until 1936 , although weight @-@ saving modifications were undertaken to this batch . A final modification was also applied to the class at this time , when all locomotives were equipped with smoke deflectors to improve visibility from the footplate when travelling at speed . This modification was a feature that became common to most Maunsell @-@ influenced designs . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 After modification by Maunsell , the S15 class was regarded by locomotive crews as an excellent goods engine best known for working heavy night express goods trains between Exeter , Southampton and Nine Elms . The S15s were also very capable passenger engines , being able to deputise in situations where there was a shortage of passenger locomotives during peak holiday periods . Both Urie and Maunsell S15s spent most of their working lives on the Southern Railway 's Western section , although they were sometimes used on inter @-@ regional freights . In order to increase maintenance efficiency , all Urie S15 locomotives ( which had the lower boiler pressure ) were concentrated at the Southern Railway 's London freight depot at Feltham . This yard also featured the Maunsell S15s , which were allocated to Exmouth Junction , Hither Green and Salisbury , demonstrating the " go anywhere " nature of the class . Despite the design being only a year newer , the S15s outlasted their N15 King Arthur class counterparts because of their dual freight / passenger abilities , though they were retired between 1962 and 1966 as part of the British Railways Modernisation Plan . Maunsell S15 number <unk> became the final member of the class in operation , returning to Feltham in January 1966 to work a farewell rail tour . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 In the summer of 1946 , locomotive No. 502 was hauling a freight train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at Wallers Ash , Hampshire . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 Seven S15s have been preserved , two Urie examples and five by Maunsell , and can be seen at several heritage railways around the country . All surviving members of the class were purchased from Woodham Brothers scrapyard in Barry , Vale of Glamorgan , South Wales . Currently only 499 and 830 have yet to steam in preservation . <unk> & <unk> Have both operated on the mainline at certain points in their career with 825 only running between Grosmont & Whitby . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = LSWR and Southern Railway = = = 
 Under LSWR ownership the S15s were painted in the late LSWR dark Holly Green livery , with the same black and light green lining applied to most of the LSWR 's freight designs . Gilt lettering and numbering was located on the tender and cabside respectively . The initials " LSWR " were located on the tender . 
 The first Southern Railway livery continued that of the LSWR , but with the number displayed on the tender . However , from 1925 , a darker Olive @-@ type green was substituted , and the entire class was so painted . Wheels were green with black tyres , and the cabside numbers were replaced by a cast oval plate with " Southern Railway " around the edge and the number in the centre . Primrose Yellow " Southern " and locomotive number transfers were placed on the tender tank . From 1927 the Maunsell locomotives were given black livery with green lining , and remained in that guise with little modification until nationalisation . 
 The only slight livery modification occurred before the Second World War , when Oliver Bulleid introduced the " Sunshine Yellow " lettering and numbering . A further modification was the application of a green shaded " Sunshine " lettering during the war . This was finally reverted to " Sunshine Yellow " lettering and numbering after the war . <unk> – 515 were built between 1919 and 1921 , <unk> – 837 were delivered from Eastleigh during 1927 and 1928 and a further ten , <unk> – 847 , were authorised in 1931 . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 After a period in British Railways transitional livery the entire class was painted in British Railways Goods Black livery with no lining , the numbering located on the <unk> and the British Railways crest on the tender sides . Numbering was initially as per Southern Railway with an " s " prefix , but the locomotives were eventually re @-@ numbered under the British Railways standard numbering system according to batch . They were numbered in the series of <unk> – <unk> for the Urie batch , <unk> – <unk> for the second batch , and <unk> – <unk> for the third . 
 = Stanley Donen = 
 Stanley Donen ( / <unk> / DAWN @-@ ən ; born April 13 , 1924 ) is an American film director and choreographer whose most celebrated works are Singin ' in the Rain and On the Town , both of which he co @-@ directed with actor and dancer Gene Kelly . His other noteworthy films include Royal Wedding , Seven Brides for Seven Brothers , Funny Face , Indiscreet , Damn Yankees ! , Charade , and Two for the Road . He received an Honorary Academy Award in 1998 for his body of work and a Career Golden Lion from the Venice Film Festival in 2004 . He was hailed by film critic David Quinlan as " the King of the Hollywood musicals " . Donen married five times and had three children . His current long term partner is film director and comedian Elaine May . 
 He began his career in the chorus line on Broadway for director George Abbott , where he befriended Kelly . In 1943 he went to Hollywood and worked as a choreographer before he and Kelly made On the Town in 1949 . He then worked as a contract director for MGM under producer Arthur Freed producing hit films amid critical acclaim , both as a solo director and with Kelly . In 1952 Donen and Kelly co @-@ directed the musical Singin ' in the Rain , regarded as one of the greatest films ever made . Donen 's relationship with Kelly deteriorated in 1955 during their final collaboration on It 's Always Fair Weather . He then broke his contract with MGM to become an independent producer in 1957 . As musicals began to lose public appeal , Donen switched to comedies . He continued to make hit films until the late 1960s , after which his career slowed down . He briefly returned to the stage as a director in the 1990s and again in 2002 . 
 Donen is credited with transitioning Hollywood musical films from realistic backstage dramas to a more integrated art form in which the songs were a natural continuation of the story . Before Donen and Kelly made their films , musicals ( such as the extravagant and stylized work of Busby Berkeley ) were often set in a Broadway stage environment where the musical numbers were part of a stage show . Donen and Kelly 's films created a more cinematic form and included dances that could only be achieved in the film medium . Donen stated that what he was doing was a " direct continuation from the Astaire – Rogers musicals ... which in turn came from René Clair and from Lubitsch ... What we did was not geared towards realism but towards the unreal . " Film critic Jean @-@ Pierre <unk> has said that Donen 's contribution to the evolution of the Hollywood musical " outshines anybody else 's , including Vincent Minnelli 's . " He is the last surviving notable director of Hollywood 's Golden Age . 
 = = Early life and stage career = = 
 Stanley Donen was born in Columbia , South Carolina to Mordecai Moses Donen , a dress @-@ shop manager , and Helen ( Cohen ) , the daughter of a jewelry salesman . His younger sister Carla Donen Davis was born in August 1937 . Although born to Jewish parents , he became an atheist in his youth . Donen described his childhood as lonely and unhappy as one of the few Jews in Columbia , and he was occasionally bullied by anti @-@ semitic classmates at school . To help cope with his isolation , he spent much of his youth in local movie theaters and was especially fond of Westerns , comedies and thrillers . The film that had the strongest impact on him was the 1933 Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers musical Flying Down to Rio . Donen said that he " must have seen the picture thirty or forty times . I was transported into some sort of fantasy world where everything seemed to be happy , comfortable , easy and supported . A sense of well @-@ being filled me . " He shot and screened home movies with an 8 mm camera and projector that his father bought for him . 
 Inspired by Astaire , Donen took dance lessons in Columbia and performed at the local Town Theater . His family often traveled to New York City during summer vacations where he saw Broadway musicals and took further dance lessons . One of his early instructors in New York was Ned <unk> , who had taught eleven @-@ year @-@ old Astaire in 1910 . After graduating from high school at sixteen , Donen attended the University of South Carolina for one summer semester , studying psychology . Encouraged by his mother , he moved to New York City to pursue dancing on stage in the fall of 1940 . After two auditions he was cast as a chorus dancer in the original Broadway production of Rodgers and Hart 's Pal Joey , directed by the legendary George Abbott . The title role of Pal Joey was played by the young up @-@ and @-@ comer Gene Kelly , who became a Broadway star in the role . 
 Abbott asked Donen to appear in the chorus of his next Broadway show Best Foot Forward . He quickly became the show 's assistant stage manager , and Kelly asked him to be his assistant choreographer . Eventually Donen was fired from Best Foot Forward , but in 1942 was the stage manager and assistant choreographer for Abbott 's next show Beat the Band . In 1946 , Donen briefly returned to Broadway to help choreograph dance numbers for Call Me Mister . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = 1943 – 1949 : Hollywood choreographer = = = 
 In 1943 Arthur Freed , the successful producer of musical films at Metro Goldwyn Mayer , bought the film rights to Best Foot Forward and made a film version starring Lucille Ball and William <unk> . Donen moved to Hollywood to audition for the film and signed a one @-@ year contract with MGM . In Best Foot Forward , Donen appeared as a chorus dancer and was made assistant choreographer by Charles Walters . At MGM Donen renewed his friendship with Kelly , who was quickly becoming a popular supporting actor in musicals . When Kelly was loaned to Columbia Pictures for a film with Rita Hayworth , he was offered the chance to choreograph his own dance numbers and asked Donen to assist . Kelly stated , " Stanley needed a job . I needed someone to count for the cameraman , someone who knew the steps and could explain what I was going to do so the shot was set up correctly . " Donen accepted and choreographed three dance sequences with Kelly in 1944 's Cover Girl . Donen came up with the idea for the " Alter Ego " dance sequence where Kelly 's reflection jumps out of a shop window and dances with him . Director Charles Vidor insisted that the idea would never work , so Donen and Kelly directed the scene themselves and Donen spent over a year editing it . The film made Kelly a movie star and is considered by many film critics to be an important and innovative musical . Donen signed a one @-@ year contract with Columbia and choreographed several films there , but returned to MGM the following year when Kelly wanted assistance on his next film . 
 In 1944 Donen and Kelly choreographed the musical Anchors Aweigh , released by MGM in 1945 and starring Kelly and Frank Sinatra . The most famous scene in this film is when Kelly dances with the cartoon mouse Jerry . The animation was supervised by William Hanna and Joseph Barbera and is credited to cartoonist Fred Quimby , but the idea for the scene was Donen 's . Originally Donen and Kelly wanted to use either Mickey Mouse or Donald Duck for the sequence and met with Walt Disney to discuss the project . At the time Disney was working on a similar idea in The Three Caballeros and was unwilling to allow one of his characters to appear in an MGM film . They spent two months shooting Kelly 's dancing and Donen spent a year perfecting the scene frame by frame . According to Barbera " the net result at the preview of Anchors Away that I went to , blew the audience away . " 
 While Kelly completed his service in the U.S. Naval Air Service as a photographer from 1944 to 1946 , Donen worked uncredited as a choreographer on musical films . Of this period Donen said , " I practiced my craft , working with music , track and photography . I often directed the sequences . I always tried to have an original idea about how to do musical sequences . " Donen has stated that he was excused from military service as 4 @-@ F because of high blood pressure . When Kelly returned to civilian life , he and Donen directed and choreographed Kelly 's dance scenes in Living in a Big Way . They then began work on an original story about two baseball players in the early 20th century who spend their off @-@ season as vaudevillian song and dance men . This film would eventually become Take Me Out to the Ball Game in 1949 . Kelly and Donen had hoped to co @-@ direct the film , but Freed hired Busby Berkeley instead and they only directed Kelly 's dance numbers . The film starred Kelly , Frank Sinatra and Jules Munshin . 
 = = = 1949 : On the Town = = = 
 After the success of Take Me Out to the Ball Game , Freed gave Donen and Kelly the chance to direct On the Town , released in 1949 . The film was an adaptation of the Betty Comden and Adolph Green Broadway musical about sailors on leave in New York City and was the first musical to be filmed on location . Donen and Kelly had wanted to shoot the entire film in New York , but Freed would only allow them to spend one week away from the studio . 
 That week produced the film 's famous opening number New York , New York . Away from both studio interference and sound stage constrictions , Donen and cinematographer Harold Rosson shot a scene on the streets of New York City that pioneered many cinematic techniques that would not be used again until they were popularized by the French New Wave ten years later . These techniques included spatial jump cuts , 360 @-@ degree pans , hidden cameras , abrupt changes of screen direction and non @-@ professional actors . Donen 's biographer Joseph A. Casper stated that the scene avoids being gratuitous or amateurish , while still " developing plot , describing the setting while conveying its galvanizing atmosphere and manic mood , introducing and delineating character . " Casper also said that " Today the film is regarded as a turning point : the first bona fide musical that moved dance , as well as the musical genre , out of the theater and captured it with and for film rather than on film ; the first to make the city an important character ; and the first to abandon the chorus . " 
 On the Town starred Kelly , Sinatra , Munshin , Ann Miller , Betty Garrett and Vera @-@ Ellen . Kelly , Sinatra and Munshin play three sailors on a 24 @-@ hour shore leave in New York whose romantic ambitions get them more than they bargained for . The film was a success both financially and critically . It won the Academy Award for Best Music , Scoring of a Musical Picture and screenwriters Comden and Green won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written American Musical . Like Orson Welles , Donen made his directorial debut at 25 . Donen stated that Kelly was " responsible for most of the dance movements . I was behind the camera in the dramatic and musical sequences . " Kelly believed that he and Donen " were a good team . I thought we complemented each other very well . " 
 = = = 1949 – 1952 : MGM contract director = = = 
 After the success of On the Town Donen signed a seven @-@ year contract with MGM as a director . His next two films were for producer Freed , but without Kelly . After being replaced as director on Pagan Love Song over personal differences with star Esther Williams , Donen was given the chance to direct his boyhood idol Fred Astaire . 
 Royal Wedding starred Astaire and Jane Powell as a brother @-@ sister American dancing team performing in England during the occasion of the royal wedding of Elizabeth and Philip in 1947 . Judy Garland was originally cast in the lead role , but was fired for absenteeism due to illness and June Allyson was to replace Garland , but then Allyson found out she was pregnant , so she was replaced by Powell . In the film , Powell 's love affair with a wealthy Englishman ( Peter Lawford ) threatens to ruin the brother @-@ sister act , while Astaire finds his own romance with ( Sarah Churchill ) . The film is loosely based on Astaire 's real @-@ life career with his sister and early dancing partner Adele Astaire , who retired after marrying an English lord in 1932 . The film contains one of Astaire 's most famous dance sequences : the " You 're All the World to Me " number in which Astaire defies gravity by dancing first on the walls and then on the ceiling . The shot was achieved by building the set inside a rotating reinforced @-@ steel cylindrical chamber with the camera attached to the cylinder . Both Astaire and the film 's lyricist Alan Jay Lerner claimed that they thought of the idea . The film included music by Lerner and Burton Lane and was released in 1951 . 
 Later in 1951 Donen made Love Is Better Than Ever . The film stars Larry Parks , whose Oscar – nominated performance in The Jolson Story had made him a star five years earlier . Parks plays a streetwise show business agent who finds himself compelled to marry an innocent young dance teacher played by Elizabeth Taylor . Donen and Kelly appear in cameo roles . The film remained unreleased for over a year after Parks admitted to the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee that he had been a member of the Communist Party and named other members . The film was unsuccessful at the box office . 
 = = = 1952 : Singin ' in the Rain = = = 
 In 1952 Kelly was at the height of his fame after the release of An American in Paris . He then re @-@ teamed with Donen to make Singin ' in the Rain , which would become one of the most highly praised films of all time . The film was produced by Freed , written by Comden and Green , photographed by Harold Rosson and starred Kelly , Debbie Reynolds , Donald O 'Connor and Jean Hagen . 
 Freed wanted to make a musical using old songs that he and composer <unk> Herb Brown had written in the late 1920s and early 1930s . He hired Comden and Green to write a script , with Donen and Kelly involved from the early development stages . Comden and Green decided to write a story inspired by the time period in which the songs were written , and satirized Hollywood 's transition from silent films to " talkies " in the late 1920s . Comden , Green and Donen interviewed everyone at MGM who was in Hollywood during that period , poking fun at both the first movie musicals and the technical difficulties with early sound films . This included characters loosely based on Freed and Berkeley and a scene that references silent film star John Gilbert . Donen and Kelly also made use of MGM 's large collection of sets , props , costumes and outdated equipment from the 1920s . 
 In the film , Don Lockwood ( Kelly ) and Lina Lamont ( Hagen ) are two silent film stars in Hollywood whose careers are threatened by the invention of " talkies " . With help from his best friend Cosmo Brown ( O 'Connor ) and love interest Kathy Selden ( Reynolds ) , Lockwood saves his career by turning his latest film into a musical . Filming was harmonious , but Donen found Kelly 's " Broadway Melody " ballet sequence overlong . The Singin ' in the Rain musical number took several months to choreograph , and Donen and Kelly found it necessary to dig holes in the cement to create puddles in the street . 
 The film was a hit when it was released in April 1952 , earning over $ 7 @.@ 6 million . Kelly 's An American in Paris had been a surprise Best Picture winner at the Oscars in March 1952 , and MGM decided to re @-@ release it . Singin ' in the Rain got pulled from many theaters to showcase the older film , preventing it from making further profits . Singin ' in the Rain was nominated for two Academy Awards : Best Supporting Actress for Hagen and Best Original Score . Donald O 'Connor won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Musical or Comedy and Comden and Green once again won the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Written American Musical . Initially the film received only moderate reviews from critics such as Bosley Crowther and did not begin to receive widespread acclaim until the late 1960s . One of its earliest supporters was critic Pauline Kael , who said that it " is perhaps the most enjoyable of all movie musicals – just about the best Hollywood musical of all time . " It was re @-@ released in 1975 to critical and popular success . 
 = = = 1952 – 1955 : Seven Brides for Seven Brothers and break with MGM = = = 
 Now established as a successful film director , Donen continued his solo career at MGM with Fearless Fagan in 1952 . Based on a true story , the film stars Carleton Carpenter as a GI who brings his tame lion with him when he joins the army . In 1953 Donen made the musical Give a Girl a Break . The film stars Debbie Reynolds , Marge Champion and Helen Wood as three aspiring dancers competing for the lead in a new Broadway musical . Bob Fosse , Gower Champion and Kurt <unk> also appear , with music by Lane and Ira Gershwin . The most famous scene is the " Give a Girl a Break " dance between Reynolds and Fosse , which was choreographed backwards and then played in reverse to create the illusion that the two are surrounded by hundreds of balloons that instantly appear at the touch of their fingers . Shooting the film became a bitter experience for Donen due to a major on @-@ set fight over the film 's choreography between Fosse and Gower Champion . The fight split the cast and crew with Reynolds and Marge taking Gower 's side and Donen taking Fosse 's side . The film was not well reviewed upon release , but its reputation has grown over the years . 
 Donen solidified his solo career and scored another hit with the musical Seven Brides for Seven Brothers . Based on a short story by Stephen Vincent Benét , the film had music by Saul Chaplin and Gene de Paul , with lyrics by Johnny Mercer and choreography by Michael Kidd . Jane Powell plays Milly , an 1850s <unk> who marries Adam ( Howard Keel ) only hours after meeting him . When she returns with Adam to his log cabin in the Oregon backwoods , Milly discovers that her husband 's six brothers are uncivilized and oafish . She makes it her mission to domesticate them and , upon Milly 's sarcastic suggestion , the brothers kidnap six women from a neighboring town to marry them . The film was shot in the new CinemaScope format and is remembered for its dance sequences , particularly the " barn raising scene " in which architecture and construction become acrobatic ballet steps . Seven Brides for Seven Brothers was one of the highest grossing films of 1954 and appeared on many critics ' 10 Best Films lists . It was nominated for five Academy Awards , including Best Picture and Best Music ( Scoring of a Musical Picture ) , which it won . Its success was a surprise to MGM , which had invested more money in two of its other 1954 musicals : Rose Marie and Brigadoon , starring Kelly . Seven Brides for Seven Brothers was more profitable than either of its rivals , as well as On the Town and Singin ' in the Rain , and its success was a major turning point for Donen 's career . The film was later criticized by novelist Francine Prose , who described it as anti @-@ woman , calling it " one of the most repulsive movies about men and women that has ever been made " and a musical about rape . 
 Later in 1954 Donen made Deep in My Heart , a biography of the Hungarian @-@ born American operetta composer Sigmund Romberg starring José Ferrer . The film included cameos by many MGM contract actors , including the only screen pairing of Gene Kelly and his brother Fred . Although it received mediocre reviews , Romberg 's cult status and popularity helped make the film a hit financially . 
 In 1955 Donen teamed up with Kelly for their third and final directorial collaboration . The musical It 's Always Fair Weather was produced by Freed , written by Comden and Green and had music by André Previn . It starred Kelly , Dan Dailey , Cyd Charisse , Michael Kidd , and Dolores Gray . Originally envisioned as a sequel to On the Town , Kelly , Dailey and Kidd play three ex @-@ GIs who reunite 10 years after World War II and discover that none of their lives have turned out quite how they had expected . Kelly had approached Donen with this project as their next collaboration and at first Donen was reluctant to accept due to his own success . Their friendship deteriorated during production and Donen noted , " the atmosphere from day one was very tense and nobody was speaking to anybody . " He has been quoted as saying it was a " one hundred percent nightmare " which was a " struggle from beginning to end " and MGM did not allow the co @-@ directors to shoot on location in New York . It 's Always Fair Weather was a moderately profitable film , but not as successful as the pairs previous two films . It was Donen 's last film with Kelly or Freed . After the film 's completion he fulfilled his MGM contract agreement by working with other studios . His last project for MGM was completing the final four days of shooting on Kismet in July 1955 for director Vincent Minnelli , who had other commitments . 
 = = = 1956 – 1959 : director and independent producer = = = 
 Donen 's next film was at Paramount Pictures for producer Roger Edens . Funny Face contains four of the original George and Ira Gershwin songs from the otherwise unrelated 1927 Broadway musical of the same name that had starred Fred Astaire . Loosely based on the life of fashion photographer Richard Avedon , who was also the visual consultant and designed the opening title sequence for the film , it was written by Leonard <unk> and included additional music by <unk> and Edens . Donen and Edens began pre @-@ production at MGM , but had difficulty juggling Astaire and Audrey Hepburn 's Paramount contracts , the Warner Brothers – owned rights to the Gershwin music that they wanted and their own MGM contracts . Eventually a deal was reached that both released Donen from his MGM contract and allowed him to make his next two films at Paramount and Warner Brothers respectively . Astaire plays an aging fashion photographer who discovers the intellectual bohemian Hepburn at a used bookstore in Greenwich Village and turns her into his new model while falling in love with her in Paris . Donen , Avedon and cinematographer Ray June collaborated to give the film an abstract , smokey look that resembled the fashion photography of the period despite protests by Paramount , which had recently spent a fortune developing the crisp VistaVision . Funny Face was screened in competition at the 1957 Cannes Film Festival and received good reviews from critics like Crowther . Sight and Sound , in contrast , accused it of being anti @-@ intellectual . 
 While in pre @-@ production on Funny Face , Donen received a letter from his old boss George Abbott inviting him to make a film version of his stage hit The Pajama Game at Warner Brothers . As part of the deal to secure the Gershwin music he wanted for Funny Face , Donen was able to accept , and he and Abbott co @-@ directed the film version in 1957 . The Pajama Game stars Doris Day and John Raitt , with music by Richard Adler and Jerry Ross and choreography by Bob Fosse . Raitt plays a plant supervisor at a <unk> factory who is in constant disputes with the plant 's union organizer ( Day ) , until they end up falling in love . Donen described his working relationship with Abbott as relaxed , stating that " [ Abbott would ] play tennis , come watch on the set for an hour , then watch the rushes , then go home . " It was only a modest financial success , but Jean @-@ Luc Godard praised it in a review and declared " Donen is surely the master of the movie musical . The Pajama Game exists to prove it . " 
 Donen 's next film was Kiss Them for Me . He was personally asked by Cary Grant to direct and began developing it while still under contract at MGM . With a plot that strongly resembles On the Town , the film features Grant , Ray Walston and Larry Blyden as three navy officers on leave in San Francisco in 1944 . Unlike On the Town , Kiss Them for Me is a dark comedy that contrasts the officers ' selfless heroism with their self @-@ absorbed hedonism while on leave . The film was released in 1957 to mostly poor reviews . 
 After three films in 1957 Donen became an independent producer and director . He had reluctantly agreed to direct Kiss Them for Me on condition that 20th Century Fox buy out his remaining contract with MGM . Now free from contractual obligations , he formed <unk> Productions with Grant and signed a distribution deal through Warner Brothers . Donen would self @-@ produce nearly all of his films for the rest of his career , sometimes under the name " Stanley Donen Productions " . Donen and Grant inaugurated their company in 1958 with Indiscreet , based on a play by Norman Krasna and starring Grant and Ingrid Bergman . Because of Bergman 's schedule , the film was shot on location in London where , much like he had in his directorial debut , Donen utilized such landmarks as the Leicester Galleries , the Royal Opera House and the Garrick Club . Bergman plays a famous and reclusive actress who falls in love with the playboy @-@ diplomat Grant , who tells her that he is already married and that his wife refuses to divorce him . When Bergman discovers that he has been lying about having a wife , she concocts a charade with another man in order to win Grant 's full affection . The film 's most famous scene involves Donen 's clever circumvention of the strict Production Code . In the scene , Grant is in Paris while Bergman is still in London and the two exchange pillow talk over the phone . Donen used a split screen of the two stars with synchronized movements to make it appear as though they were in the same bed together . The film was a financial and critical success , and Donen was compared to such directors as Ernst Lubitsch and George Cukor . 
 Donen briefly returned to the musical genre in 1958 with Damn Yankees ! , based on George Abbott 's Broadway hit . He again co @-@ directed with Abbott in the same hands @-@ off collaboration as their first film . Like The Pajama Game the film includes music by Adler and Ross and choreography by Fosse . It starred Tab Hunter , Gwen Verdon , and Ray Walston . Damn Yankees ! is an adaptation of the Faust legend about a fan of the baseball team the Washington Senators who mentions that he would sell his soul to give the losing team a good hitter . Walston plays the Brooks Brothers @-@ attired Devil who grants the fan his wish and transforms him into the muscular young hitter Joe Hardy ( Hunter ) . Donen was able to shoot three real Senator @-@ Yankee games on location with as many as seven hidden cameras . The low @-@ budget film was a moderate financial success and received good reviews . It was also Donen 's last musical film for many years . 
 = = = 1960 – 1969 : England = = = 
 After Indiscreet Donen made England his home until the early 1970s . Musicals ' waning popularity caused Donen to focus on comedy films . He observed that his " London base afforded me the advantage of being away from the Hollywood rat race . Just going your own way in spite of whatever anyone else is doing or in spite of what you 've done already was satisfying . I also had the advantage of the European influence : their way of looking at life , of making movies . " While in England in the early 1960s Donen was praised as an early influence on the then @-@ emerging British New Wave film movement . 
 In the late 1950s Donen signed a non @-@ exclusive , three film deal with Columbia Pictures . His first film under this contract was Once More , with Feeling ! in 1960 . Adapted by Harry <unk> from his own stage play , the film was shot in Paris and starred Yul Brynner and Kay Kendall . Brynner plays a tyrannical orchestra conductor whose mistress ( Kendall ) grows tired of his tantrums and plots to marry him in order to quickly divorce him for his money . Kendall was terminally ill with leukemia during the shoot and died before its release . The film was not successful financially or critically . 
 Donen quickly re @-@ teamed with Brynner and <unk> for the film Surprise Package , also released in 1960 . In this film Brynner plays an American gangster who is deported to the Greek island of Rhodes . Mitzi Gaynor plays the " surprise package " who is sent to the island to appease Brynner , and Noël Coward plays the King of Rhodes whom Brynner plots to dethrone . The film was not a financial success , and Donen stated that it was made because he " desperately needed money for personal reasons ... it was one of the few times I 've made a movie for money . " These were the only two films that Donen completed for his Columbia contract . The studio cancelled the deal after their poor box office results , and Donen was unable to produce the projects that he was pursuing at that time : playwright Robert Bolt 's A Man for All Seasons and A Patch of Blue , both of which became successful films by other directors . 
 <unk> Productions produced Donen 's next film : The Grass Is Greener , released through Universal Pictures in 1960 . Cary Grant and Deborah Kerr play the earl and countess of a large estate in England who are forced to permit guided tours of their mansion in order to help their financial problems . Robert Mitchum plays an American oil tycoon who falls in love with Kerr and Jean Simmons plays an eccentric American heiress who is Grant 's former girlfriend . The film was a financial disappointment in the US , but successful in England where the original stage version had been a West End hit . 
 In 1963 Donen made one of his most praised films : Charade , starring Cary Grant , Audrey Hepburn , Walter Matthau , James Coburn , George Kennedy and Ned Glass . Donen has said that he had " always wanted to make a movie like one of my favorites , Hitchcock 's North by Northwest " and the film has been referred to as " the best Hitchcock movie that Hitchcock never made . " Charade was produced by Stanley Donen Productions , released through Universal and adapted by Peter Stone from his own novel . Reggie Lampert ( Hepburn ) discovers that her husband has been murdered and ( at least ) three sinister men are all searching for the $ 250 @,@ 000 in gold that he had hidden somewhere . Peter Joshua ( Grant ) befriends Reggie and helps her fight off the three thugs while the two begin to fall in love , and in the end no one is quite who they seem to be . The film was released in December 1963 , only two weeks after the assassination of US President John F. Kennedy , and the word " assassinate " had to be redubbed twice . It was Donen 's most financially successful film and influenced a number of romantic comedy @-@ thrillers released in the years following it . Film critic Judith Crist called it a " stylish and amusing melodrama " , and Pauline Kael said it had " a freshness and spirit that makes [ it ] unlike the films of any other country " and was " probably the best American film of [ 1963 ] " . In 2002 it was remade as The Truth About Charlie , directed by Jonathan Demme . 
 In 1966 Donen made another Hitchcock @-@ inspired film : Arabesque , starring Gregory Peck and Sophia Loren . The film was written by Julian Mitchell and Stanley Price , with an uncredited rewrite by Peter Stone . Peck plays an American professor at Oxford University who is an expert in ancient hieroglyphics . He is approached by a Middle Eastern prime minister to investigate an organization that is attempting to assassinate him and uses hieroglyphic codes to communicate . The investigation leads Peck to one mystery after another , often involving the prime minister 's mysterious mistress ( Loren ) . The film was Donen 's second consecutive hit . 
 In 1967 Donen made Two for the Road , starring Audrey Hepburn and Albert Finney with supporting roles by Eleanor Bron , William Daniels , and Jacqueline Bisset early in her career . The film was conceived by Donen and written by novelist Frederic Raphael , who was nominated for an Academy Award . It has been called one of Donen 's most personal films , " with glints of passion never disclosed before " , and " a veritable textbook on film editing . " The film 's complicated and non @-@ linear story is about the 12 @-@ year relationship between Hepburn and Finney over the course of four separate ( but interwoven ) road trips that they take together throughout the years in the south of France . It was moderately successful at the box office while the critical reception was extremely mixed . Crowther called the film " just another version of commercial American trash . " The film attained a cult following and was cited as an early example of non @-@ linear storytelling in film . It is also the film that Donen is most frequently asked about by film students . 
 While living in England Donen became a fan of the British variety show Beyond the Fringe and wanted to work with the show 's comedy duo Peter Cook and Dudley Moore . The resulting film was Bedazzled , an updated version of the Faust legend in 1967 . It was written by Cook with music by Moore , and also starred Eleanor Bron and Raquel Welch . Moore plays a lonely young man whose unrequited love of his co @-@ worker ( Bron ) drives him to attempt suicide . Just then the devil ( Cook ) appears and offers him seven wishes in exchange for his soul . The film 's fun @-@ loving association with the Swinging London of the 1960s divided critics , but Roger Ebert called its satire " barbed and contemporary ... dry and understated " , and overall , a " magnificently photographed , intelligent , very funny film . " On the other hand , Time magazine called it the feeblest of all known variations on the Faust theme . The film was a hit and was especially popular among American college students . Donen considered it a favorite among his own films and called it " a very personal film in that I said a great deal about what I think is important in life . " It was remade as Bedazzled by director Harold Ramis in 2000 . 
 In 1969 Donen directed Staircase , an adaptation of the autobiographical stage play by Charles Dyer with music by Moore . Rex Harrison and Richard Burton star as a middle @-@ aged gay couple who run a London barber shop and live together in a " bad marriage " . The film was shot in Paris for tax purposes and was not a financial success . It received poor reviews upon release , but was reevaluated by film critic Armond White in 2007 . He called the film " a rare Hollywood movie to depict gay experience with wisdom , humor and warmth " , and " a lost treasure " . 
 = = = 1970 – 2003 : Later works = = = 
 After Donen 's marriage to Adelle Beatty ended , he moved back to Hollywood in 1970 . Producer Robert Evans asked Donen to direct an adaptation of the beloved children 's book The Little Prince . Lyricist Alan Jay Lerner and composer Frederick Loewe wrote the music and screenplay and filming was done on location in Tunisia . The Little Prince stars Steven Warner in the title role , with Richard Kiley , Bob Fosse , Gene Wilder and Donna McKechnie . It was Donen 's first musical film since Damn Yankees ! Although it contained very little dancing , Fosse choreographed his own dance scenes as the snake . Lerner stated that Donen " took it upon himself to change every tempo , delete musical phrases at will and distort the intention of every song until the entire score was unrecognizable " . It was released in 1974 and was a financial disaster . 
 Donen 's next film was Lucky Lady , starring Liza Minnelli , Gene Hackman and Burt Reynolds . Minnelli plays a Prohibition era bootlegger who smuggles alcohol from Mexico to California with the help of Hackman and Reynolds , who both compete for her affection . Donen has stated that he " really cared about [ the film ] and gave three years of my life to it ... I think its a very good movie . " It went over budget and was unsuccessful at the box office . Most critics were unenthusiastic ; however , Jay Cocks praised the film for having " the glistening surface and full @-@ throttle frivolity that characterized Hollywood films in the 1930s . " 
 Nostalgia for old Hollywood movies would be a theme of Donen 's next film : Movie Movie , produced by Lew Grade 's ITC Entertainment and scripted by Larry Gelbart . The film is actually two shorter films presented as an old fashioned double feature , complete with a fake movie trailer and an introduction by comedian George Burns . It starred George C. Scott , Trish Van Devere , Red Buttons , Michael Kidd and Eli Wallach and premiered in competition at the 29th Berlin International Film Festival in 1978 . The first of the two films is Dynamite Hands , a black and white tribute to boxing – morality films . The second film is Baxter 's Beauties of 1933 , a tribute to the extravagant musicals of Busby Berkely . Like Donen 's previous two films , it was unsuccessful both financially and critically . 
 In 1980 Donen made the science fiction film Saturn 3 , starring Kirk Douglas , Farrah Fawcett and Harvey Keitel . Donen first read the script when its writer ( and Movie Movie 's set designer ) John Barry showed it to him , prompting Donen to pass it along to Lew Grade . Donen was initially hired to produce , but Grade asked him to complete the film when first @-@ time director Barry was unable to direct . According to Donen " only a tiny bit of what Barry shot ended up in the finished film . " It was a critical and financial disaster and initially Donen did not want to be credited as director . In the early 1980s Donen was attached to direct an adaptation of Stephen King 's The Dead Zone and worked with writer Jeffrey Boam on the script . Donen eventually dropped out of the project and David Cronenberg directed the film a few years later . Boam stated that Donen was initially attracted to making the film because he wanted to " connect with contemporary youthful audiences " and that the script that they worked on together was " very close to the script that David wound up making . " 
 Donen 's last theatrical film was the May – December romance Blame It on Rio in 1984 . The film is a remake of the 1977 Claude Berri film Un moment d <unk> and was written by Gelbart and Charlie Peters . It stars Michael Caine , Joseph Bologna , Michelle Johnson , Valerie Harper and Demi Moore and was shot on location in Rio de Janeiro . Caine and Bologna play wealthy executives on vacation with their families in Rio , where Caine has an affair with Bologna 's teenage daughter ( Johnson ) . It received poor reviews , but was a modest success financially . 
 In 1986 Donen produced the televised ceremony of the 58th Academy Awards , which included a musical performance of the song " Once a Star , Always a Star " with June Allyson , Leslie Caron , Marge Champion , Cyd Charisse , Kathryn Grayson , Howard Keel , Ann Miller , Jane Powell , Debbie Reynolds , and Esther Williams . Also in 1986 Donen directed a musical sequence for an episode of the popular TV series Moonlighting and directed the music video for Lionel Richie 's song " Dancing on the Ceiling " . In 1989 Donen was awarded an Honorary Doctorate in Fine Arts from the University of South Carolina . In his commencement address Donen stated that he thought he was unique in being the first tap dancer to be a doctor and then tap danced for the graduates . At around the same time Donen taught a seminar on film musicals at the Sundance Institute at the request of Robert Redford . 
 In 1993 Donen was preparing to produce and direct a movie musical adaptation of Robert Louis Stevenson 's Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde starring Michael Jackson . After allegations that Jackson had molested young boys at his Neverland ranch became a tabloid scandal , the project was abandoned . Later that year Donen directed a stage version of The Red Shoes at the George Gershwin Theater . He replaced the original director Susan Schulman just six weeks before the show opened . It closed after four days . In 1998 Donen was awarded an Honorary Academy Award " in appreciation of a body of work marked by grace , elegance , wit and visual innovation . " In his acceptance speech he danced with his Oscar statue while singing Irving Berlin 's " Cheek to Cheek " , a song first popularized by his boyhood idol Fred Astaire . Martin Scorsese presented the award and created a montage of Donen 's films for the show . 
 Donen 's final television film was the made @-@ for @-@ TV movie Love Letters , which aired on ABC in April 1999 . The film starred Steven Weber and Laura Linney and was based on the play by A.R. Gurney . Weber plays a successful US Senator who finds out that his long lost love ( Linney ) has recently died . The two had only corresponded through mail over the years , and Weber remembers Linney through his collection of old love letters . Donen had wanted to make a theatrical film version of the play , but was unable to secure financing from any major studio and instead took the project to ABC . In 2002 Donen directed Elaine May 's musical play Adult Entertainment starring Danny Aiello and Jeannie Berlin in Stamford , Connecticut . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 During his career Donen 's biggest rival was Vincente Minnelli , who he is often compared to . Like Donen , Minnelli was a contract director at MGM known for the musicals he made in the Freed Unit . According to Donen biographer Stephen Silverman , critics tend to " express a distinct preference for Donen 's bold , no @-@ nonsense style of direction over Minnelli 's Impressionist visual palette and Expressionist character motivations " , while most film directors are said to prefer Minnelli 's work . Michael Kidd , who worked with both directors early in his career , describes Minnelli as being much less open to collaborative suggestions than Donen . The two directors ' camera work differs in that Minnelli often used forward and backwards tracking shots while Donen preferred horizontal tracking shots and crane shots , with film critics considering Donen 's approach to be better suited for dance sequences . 
 However David Thomson dismisses most of his later comedy films , but praises him for leading " the musical in a triumphant and personal direction : out of doors ... Not even Minnelli can rival the fresh @-@ air excitement of such sequences . And few can equal his integration of song , dance and story . " Andrew Sarris dismisses Donen as being without a personal style of his own and as being dependent upon his collaborators on his better films . Debbie Reynolds downplayed his contributions to Singin ' in the Rain , stating that " Stanley just operated the camera , because Stanley didn 't dance . " 
 Among Donen 's admirers are film directors Pedro Almodóvar , Lindsay Anderson , Charlie Chaplin , Damien Chazelle , Jules Dassin , William Friedkin , Jean @-@ Luc Godard , Stanley Kubrick , Karel Reisz , Martin Scorsese , François Truffaut , and Edgar Wright . Donen 's skill as a director has been praised by such actors as Cyd Charisse and Audrey Hepburn . Donen 's work influenced later directors of film musicals Bill Condon , Rob Marshall and Baz Luhrmann The 2011 film The Artist pays tribute to Singin ' in the Rain ( among other films ) , and Donen praised the film after attending its Los Angeles premiere . 
 Singin ' in the Rain is Donen 's most revered film and it was included in the first group of films to be inducted into the National Film Registry at the Library of Congress in 1989 and has been included on Sight and Sound 's prestigious list of " Top Ten Films " twice , in 1982 and in 2002 . Chaplin and Truffaut were among its earliest fans , and Billy Wilder called the film " one of the five greatest pictures ever made . " 
 = = Cine @-@ dance = = 
 Donen made a host of critically acclaimed and popular films . His most important contribution to the art of film was helping to transition movie musicals from the realistic backstage settings of filmed theater to a more cinematic form that integrates film with dance . Eventually film scholars named this concept " cine @-@ dance " ( a dance that can only be created in the medium of film ) , and its origins are in the Donen / Kelly films . Film scholar Casey Charness described " cine @-@ dance " as " a melding of the distinctive strengths of dancing and filmmaking that had never been done before " and adds that Donen and Kelly " seem to have elevated Hollywood dance from simplistic display of either dancing or photographic ability into a perception that incorporates both what the dancer can do and what the camera can see ... [ They ] developed a balance between camera and dancer that ... encouraged both photographer and choreographer to contribute significantly to the creation and final effectiveness of dance . " 
 When " talkies " began to gain momentum in the film industry , the Hollywood studios recruited the best talent from Broadway to make musical films . These films included Broadway Melody , which was promoted as the first " all singing , all talking , all dancing " film and had music by Arthur Freed and <unk> Herb Brown , and Berkley 's 42nd Street , his first major success . These films established the backstage musical , a subgenre in which the plot revolves around a stage show and the people involved in putting on the show . These first musicals set the standard for the genre , placing their musical numbers either within the context of a stage performance or tacked on and gratuitous , without furthering the story or developing the characters . Donen stated that he disliked them and that his own films were " a reaction against those backstage musicals . " Donen credits producer Freed as the driving force behind the transition , adding that Freed " had some sort of instinct to change the musical from a backstage world into something else . He didn 't quite know what to change it into , just that it had to change . " Kelly stated that Donen was the only person he knew that understood how musicals could progress and better suit the film medium . 
 = = = Techniques = = = 
 Donen and Kelly 's films set new standards for special effects , animation , editing and cinematography . Their first collaboration Cover Girl firmly established their intentions , particularly in the " Alter Ego " dance sequence . It employed a special effect that could not be achieved with a live take , while advancing the story and revealing the character 's inner conflict . Donen and Kelly tested the limits of film 's potential with the Jerry the Mouse dance in Anchors Aweigh , one of the time 's most sophisticated combinations of live action and animation . 
 By the time they made Take Me Out to the Ball Game they had perfected what Martin Rubin called an " indication of changing trends in musical films " which differed from the Berkeley spectacles towards " relatively small @-@ scale affairs that place the major emphasis on comedy , transitions to the narrative , the cleverness of the lyrics and the personalities and performance skills of the stars , rather than on spectacle and group dynamics . " Rubin credits Donen and Kelly with making musicals more realistic , compared to Berkeley 's style of a " separation of narrative space from performance space " Take Me Out to the Ball Game was Berkeley 's last film as a director and today can be viewed as a passing of the torch . Both Donen and Kelly found working with Berkeley difficult , and the director left before the film 's completion . When Donen and Kelly directed their own work , they were able to realize their ambitions . 
 When Donen and Kelly released On the Town , they boldly opened the film with an extravagant musical number shot on location in New York with fast @-@ paced editing and experimental camera work , thus breaking from the conventions of that time . Their most celebrated film Singin ' in the Rain is appropriately a musical about the birth of the movie musical . The film includes a musical montage that Donen says was " doing Busby Berkeley here , only we 're making fun of him . " Charness stated that Singin ' in the Rain 's references to Berkeley " marks the first time the Hollywood musical had ever been reflexive , and amused at its own extravagant non @-@ dancing inadequacy , at that " and that <unk> 's " overhead kaleidoscope floral pattern is predominantly featured , as is the line of tap @-@ dancing <unk> , who are seen only from the knees down . " Charness also stated that the film 's cinematography " moves the audience perspective along with the dance . " 
 Charness singled out the film 's famous title number and states , " it 's a very kinetic moment , for though there is no technically accomplished dance present , the feeling of swinging around in a circle with an open umbrella is a brilliantly apt choice of movement , one that will be readily identifiable by an audience which might know nothing <unk> of actual dance ... Accompanying this movement is a breathless pullback into a high crane shot that takes place at the same time Kelly is swinging into his widest arcs with the umbrella . The effect is dizzying . Perhaps the finest single example of the application of camera <unk> to a dance moment in Donen @-@ Kelly canon . " He also complimented Donen 's direction in the " Moses <unk> " number , including " certain camera techniques which Donen had by now <unk> ... the dolly shot into medium shot to signify the ending of one shot and the beginning of another . " Although Donen credits earlier musicals by René Clair , Lubitsch and Astaire as " integrated " , he also states that " in the early musicals of Lubitsch and Clair , they made it clear from the beginning that their characters were going to sing operatically . Gene and I didn 't go that far . In ' Moses <unk> ' , he and Donald sort of talk themselves into a song . " Donen 's Royal Wedding and Give A Girl A Break continued to use special effect shots to create elaborate dance sequences , and Kelly used even more sophisticated animation in his film Invitation to Dance . 
 = = Relationship with Gene Kelly = = 
 Donen 's relationship with Gene Kelly was complicated and he often spoke bitterly about his former friend and mentor decades after they worked together . Kelly was never explicitly negative about Donen in later years . However , Silverman has asserted that Kelly 's comments were often condescending and demonstrated " a long @-@ standing attempt to diminish Donen 's contributions to their collective work . " The reasons for their conflict were both personal ( both men married dancer Jeanne Coyne ) and professional ( Donen always felt that Kelly did not treat him as an equal ) . They disagreed over who deserved more credit for their joint projects : three film 's as co @-@ directors and four as co @-@ choreographers . 
 = = = Jeanne Coyne = = = 
 At age 7 Coyne enrolled in the Gene Kelly Studio of Dance in Johnstown , Pennsylvania and developed a schoolgirl crush on him In her twenties she was cast in Best Foot Forward , where she reconnected with Kelly and first met Donen , later moving to Hollywood with them . She and Donen eloped in 1948 , but their marriage became strained . They separated in 1950 and divorced in 1951 . During their marriage Donen confided to Coyne his frustration with Kelly while making On the Town , only to find that she immediately took Kelly 's side . Coyne worked as Kelly 's personal assistant on several films while married to Donen and continued assisting Kelly until her death . Rumors held that Kelly and Coyne were having an affair both during and after Coyne 's marriage to Donen , as well as that Donen was in love with Kelly 's first wife Betsy Blair . Blair 's autobiography makes no mention of an affair between Kelly and Coyne nor of any romantic relationship with Donen . However , she does state that Donen 's marriage to Coyne was unhappy and that Donen was very close to both her and Kelly . 
 Kelly said that Donen 's impulsive marriage to Coyne showed an emotional immaturity and lack of good judgment , and stated that " Jeannie 's marriage to Stanley was doomed from the start . Because every time Stanley looked at Jeannie , he saw Betsy , whom he loved ; and every time Jeannie looked at Stanley , I guess she saw me . One way or another it was all pretty incestuous . " Kelly 's marriage to Blair ended in 1957 , after which he moved in with Coyne . They married in 1960 and had two children together . Coyne died of leukemia in 1973 . In November 2012 the musical What A Glorious Feeling depicted both the making of Singin ' in the Rain and the love triangle between Donen , Kelly and Coyne . 
 = = = Professional conflict = = = 
 Donen and Kelly 's relationship has been described as similar to that of the characters Don Lockwood and Cosmo Brown in Singin ' in the Rain , with Kelly as the star performer and Donen as his trusted sidekick . Kelly described Donen as being like a son to him and Donen initially idolized Kelly , while still finding him to be " cold , egotistical and very rough . " Although Donen credited Kelly for " jump @-@ starting his career as a filmmaker " , he also stated that MGM producer Roger Edens was his biggest promoter . 
 Many people believe that Donen owed everything to Kelly , and Kelly biographer Clive Hirschhorn described Donen as having " no particular identity or evident talent ... and was just a kid from the south who wanted to make it in show business . " Donen stated that he moved to Hollywood of his own accord ; other sources state that he followed Kelly , who then helped him get his first job . Kelly would sometimes embarrass and patronize Donen in public , such as berating him for not being able to keep up with his dance steps during the rehearsals for Cover Girl . Donen has admitted that he did not consider himself to be a great performer . Despite Donen 's growing resentment of Kelly , he was able to contain his feelings and professional attitude during their collaborations . Tensions between the two exploded on the set of It 's Always Fair Weather . After Donen 's recent hits Deep in My Heart and Seven Brides for Seven Brothers he did not want to make another film with Kelly . They fought on the set for the first time , with the now more confident Donen asserting himself . Donen almost quit the film , and his friendship with Kelly ended . 
 Other tensions included Donen 's hit films compared to Vincente Minnelli 's Brigadoon ( which Kelly was closely involved in and had wanted to direct ) flop , and Kelly 's own ambitious film Invitation to Dance , both financially unsuccessful . During the shooting of Seven Brides for Seven Brothers , Donen often complained about his budgetary constraints , while Brigadoon had a much larger budget . Around that time Kelly 's unsuccessfully attempted dramatic acting with The Devil Makes Three and Seagulls Over Sorrento also flopped , and his marriage to Betsy Blair was ending . 
 In later years Donen would state that he had nothing nice to say about Kelly . At a 1991 tribute to Comden and Green , Kelly said in a public speech that Donen " needed [ him ] to grow up with " but added " I needed Stanley at the back of the camera . " He also described Donen as being thought of as his whipping @-@ boy at MGM . Although Donen often complained that Kelly never gave him enough credit for their work , Kelly did credit him for the Jerry the Mouse and " Alter Ego " dance sequences . In 1992 Donen said " I 'm grateful to him , but I paid back the debt , ten times over . And he got his money 's worth out of me . " Betsy Blair claimed to be " surprised and bemused " about Donen 's bitterness towards Kelly . 
 = = = Directorial careers = = = 
 The relative importance of the two men 's contributions has been debated by critics . David Thomson wrote about " the problem in assessing [ Donen 's ] career : who did what in their collaboration ? And what is Donen 's real standing as a director ? " Thomson remarked that " nothing in his career suggests that Gene Kelly could have filmed himself singing in the rain with the exhilaration of Donen 's retreating crane shot . " However set reports state that Kelly rode the camera boom between shots and during camera set @-@ ups . Donen stated that " by the time you hash it through from beginning to end ten million times , you can 't remember who did what except in a few instances where you remember getting an idea . " Composer Saul Chaplin said that " Gene was the prime mover and Stanley an eager and talented pupil . " During the shooting of On the Town , all memos and correspondence from MGM to the production were addressed exclusively to Donen and not to Kelly . 
 However , actress Kathleen Freeman stated that when people visited set of Singin ' in the Rain to relate their experiences during the silent era , they would ask to speak with Kelly . Singin ' in the Rain art director Randall <unk> stated , " Gene ran the show . Stan had some good ideas and worked with Gene , but he was still the ' office boy ' to Gene , in a sense , although Gene had great respect for him . " Kelly became more involved with the Singin ' in the Rain script during its third draft , which was when its structure began to resemble the final version . Comparing Donen and Kelly 's films as solo directors , Donen 's were usually more critically acclaimed and financially successful than Kelly 's films . Kelly 's 1969 film Hello Dolly ! is credited with effectively killing the Hollywood musical . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Donen married and divorced five times and had three children . His first wife was dancer , choreographer and actress Jeanne Coyne . They married on April 14 , 1948 and divorced in May 1951 . Donen 's second wife was actress Marion Marshall , who had been the girlfriend and protégé of Howard Hawks and later married actor Robert Wagner . Donen and Marshall had two sons together : Peter Donen , born in 1953 , and Joshua Donen , born in 1955 . They provided the name of Cary Grant 's character in Charade . Donen and Marshall were married from 1952 until 1959 . They had a lengthy custody battle over their two sons after Marshall married Wagner and Donen moved to England . Donen 's third wife was Adelle , Countess Beatty . She had previously been the second wife of the 2nd Earl Beatty . They married in 1960 , had one son ( Mark Donen , born 1962 ) , and lived together in London . They separated in 1969 before divorcing in 1971 . Donen 's fourth wife was American actress Yvette <unk> . They were married from 1972 until 1985 , but remained close friends after their divorce . Donen 's fifth wife was Pamela Braden , thirty @-@ six years his junior . Donen proposed to her four days after having met her . They were married from 1990 until 1994 . 
 In the early 1940s Donen dated actress Judy Holliday while working on Broadway . He also dated Elizabeth Taylor for a year between his first and second marriages . Donen 's current longtime companion is writer and director Elaine May , who he has dated since 1999 and claimed to have proposed marriage to " about 172 times . " 
 Donen 's eldest son Peter Donen was a visual effects artist who worked on such films as Superman III , Spaceballs , The Bourne Identity , and The Truth About Charlie . He also designed the title credits for Blame It on Rio . He died of a heart attack in 2003 at age 50 . Donen 's second son Joshua Donen is a film producer who worked on such films as The Quick and the Dead and Gone Girl , and the television series Spartacus : Blood and Sand . Mark Donen , Stanley 's third son , worked as a production assistant on Blame It on Rio . 
 In 1959 , Donen 's father , Mordecai , died at 59 in Beaufort , South Carolina . His mother , Helen , died in 1989 at 84 in South Carolina , and Donen delivered the eulogy at her funeral . 
 With the deaths in the 2000s of Billy Wilder , George Sidney , Elia Kazan , Robert Wise , and Jules Dassin , Donen became the last surviving notable film director of Hollywood 's Golden Age . He occasionally appears at film festivals and retrospectives and has continued to develop ideas for film projects . He was the subject of the 2010 documentary Stanley Donen : You Just Do It . 
 In December 2013 it was announced that Donen was in pre @-@ production for a new film co @-@ written with Elaine May , to be produced by Mike Nichols . A table reading of the script for potential investors included such actors as Christopher Walken , Charles Grodin , Ron Rifkin and Jeannie Berlin . In celebration of Donen 's 90th birthday in 2014 , a retrospective of his work titled " A Lotta Talent and a Little Luck : A Celebration of Stanley Donen " was held from July to August in Columbia , South Carolina . This retrospective included a tour of Donen 's childhood neighborhood , a lecture by Steven Silverman and film screenings at the Nickelodeon movie theater , which Donen frequented as a child . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Feature Films = = = 
 = Cantiones sacrae ( Schütz ) = 
 Cantiones sacrae ( Vocal sacred music , literally : Sacred chants ) , Op. 4 , is a collection of forty different pieces of vocal sacred music on Latin texts , composed by Heinrich Schütz and first published in 1625 . The pieces have individual numbers 53 to 93 in the Schütz @-@ Werke @-@ Verzeichnis ( SWV ) , the catalogue of his works . The general title Cantiones sacrae was common at the time and was used by many composers , including Palestrina , Byrd and Tallis ( 1589 and 1591 ) and Hans Leo Hassler ( 1591 ) . 
 Schütz composed the motets and madrigals , based on texts from a 1553 <unk> <unk> by Andreas Musculus , for four voices ( SATB ) and basso continuo . Some of the settings form groups of up to five pieces , including the expressive Passion motets , Quid <unk> , SWV 56 to 60 . Cantate Domino , SWV 81 , is a joyful setting of Psalm 149 . The Protestant composer dedicated his work to the Catholic politician Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg . He published it as his Opus <unk> . The counterpoint of the Cantiones has been regarded as unmatched in the sacred vocal works of the 17th century . 
 = = History = = 
 Schütz composed the pieces during the first years of the Thirty Years ' War , when he was in the service of the Protestant Elector of Saxony Johann Georg I , who tried to stay neutral . The texts are mostly taken from a <unk> by Andreas Musculus , <unk> ex <unk> <unk> <unk> , first published in 1553 and often reprinted . Subtitled " Ex Ecclesia <unk> Et <unk> : Ex <unk> <unk> [ ue ] <unk> <unk> " ( Church hymns and chants from the collection of David 's psalms ) , it is based on psalms , the Song of Songs , the Gospels , and passages by Bernard of Clairvaux , " significantly designed for intimate and private devotion " . Some texts , then believed to be by Augustine such as meditations on the Passion , are now known to be by later writers such as Bernard and Anselm of Canterbury . Schütz set the texts for four voices ( SATB ) and basso continuo . He conceived the pieces for voices a cappella , but the publisher requested a basso part . The basso <unk> , following the lowest voice , may have been added by a pupil . 
 Schütz published the collection as his Opus <unk> ( Fourth work ) in Freiberg in 1625 : forty pieces at age forty . In his foreword , he notes that the publisher " wrested " ( <unk> ) the accompaniment from him , while he regarded a <unk> ad <unk> as " vain and clumsy " ( <unk> <unk> [ ue ] <unk> ) . 
 Schütz dedicated the work to the Catholic Prince Hans Ulrich von Eggenberg , an influential politician , whom he first met in 1617 , when Eggenberg accompanied Emperor Ferdinand of Habsburg on a visit to Saxony . The composer has been described as " universal " ( katholikos ) , and Cantiones sacrae as his " opus <unk> primum " ( first sacred work ) , also his first publication on Latin texts . Musicologist Matteo Messori notes : 
 Schütz employed the international language that united European Christendom ( as well as often being the language of communication between Lutherans of different nationalities ) and hence potentially addressed Christians of every faith . 
 = = Collection = = 
 The collection contains forty different individual motets and madrigals with numbers 53 to 93 in the SWV . Some works form groups of a similar topic of up to five pieces , marked pars ( part ) . One movement , the Lord 's Prayer , is repeated , being part of two groups . Musicologist Volckmar @-@ <unk> identifies the 13th piece , <unk> mihi Domine , as especially sad ( tristis ) and the 29th , Cantate Domino ( Sing to the Lord ) , as happy ( laetus ) . 
 The following table shows a sequence number , a number of groups , the SWV number , for groups the Latin term of the single part from the print , the first line of the Latin text replacing a title , a translation , an abbreviation of the text source within the prayer book and notes . The translations follow Emmanuel Music for SWV 53 to 81 , otherwise the recording of the Heinrich Schütz Edition by Matteo Messori . For biblical quotation , the King James version is additionally supplied in the details about single pieces . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The major influence for the compositions was the polyphony of madrigals by Palestrina . Matteo Messori , who has been conducting recordings of the complete works by Schütz , regards the counterpoint of Cantiones as " superlative and unmatched in the sacred vocal works of that century " , comparable only to the madrigals alla <unk> italiana ( in the Italian manner ) from Fontana d <unk> , Israelis <unk> , published in 1623 by the composer 's friend and Thomaskantor Johann Hermann Schein . Musicologist Stephen Rose terms the Cantiones " the composer 's " most impassioned pieces " and notes : " They set first @-@ person devotional texts to avant @-@ garde <unk> " , evoking the crucifixion by extreme harmonies and " joy in Christ by dance rhythms " . 
 = = = SWV 53 – 54 = = = 
 The collection opens with two movements addressing Jesus , based on an invocation of his name by Bernhard of <unk> , O bone , o dulcis , o <unk> Jesu ( O good , o sweet , o benign Jesus ) , followed by Et ne <unk> <unk> te <unk> ( And do not despise the one asking in humility ) . 
 = = = SWV 56 – 60 = = = 
 SWV 56 – 60 form a group of five Passion motets , set the text of Psalm 115 augmented by Augustine and later authors . The first movement is Quid <unk> , o <unk> puer ? ( What have You done , o sweetest boy ? ) Craig Smith notes : " In richness of harmony , intensity of expression , and most importantly , the exploration of the vague , the ambiguous , and the contradictory , they are without equal , " and compares them to the drama , light and shade in paintings by Caravaggio . 
 = = = SWV 63 – 64 = = = 
 Ego <unk> , et cor meum <unk> ( I sleep , but my heart <unk> , Song of Solomon 5 : 2 ) and <unk> cor meum , filia <unk> ( Thou hast ravished my heart ... , Song of Solomon 4 : 9 ) are based on verses from the Song of Songs . The biblical text was slightly changed , replacing " soror mea sponsa " ( my sister , my spouse ) by " filia <unk> " ( most beloved daughter ) , which may reflect the composer 's loss of his daughter . 
 = = = SWV 73 – 75 = = = 
 A sequence of three more Passion motets is positioned in the <unk> of the collection , beginning with <unk> pater <unk> <unk> ( Consider , Father , your most pious son ) . 
 = = = SWV 78 – 80 = = = 
 Schütz composed the three verses of Psalm 131 , Domine , non est <unk> cor meum ( Lord , my heart is not haughty , Psalms 131 ) in a group of three movements . 
 = = = SWV 81 = = = 
 Cantate Domino <unk> novum ( Sing to the Lord a new song , ( Psalms 149 : 1 @-@ 3 ) is a madrigal setting of the three verses bidding everybody who hears them to sing and play for the Lord . Musicologist Volckmar @-@ <unk> describes the mood as happy ( laetus ) . 
 = = = SWV 85 = = = 
 The penitential Psalm 6 , Domine , ne in furore tuo <unk> me ( O Lord , rebuke me not in thine anger , Psalms 6 ) is set in one movement . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After the composer 's death , the collection was not as popular as his Geistliche <unk> ( Sacred choral music ) for which he became known in the 20th century . Musicologists began earlier than the public to be interested in the works and their advanced composition . Carl von <unk> analysed them in his monography of Giovanni Gabrieli , illustrated by musical examples . A thesis by Anna Amalie Abert was published in 1935 , another by Heide Volckmar @-@ <unk> in 2001 , dedicated to the work 's history , texts and analysis . 
 = = Publication and recordings = = 
 After the first publication , the Cantiones appeared as part of a complete edition of the composer 's works by Breitkopf & Härtel , begun by Philipp Spitta , who published a first volume in 1885 , and completed by Arnold Schering and Heinrich Spitta in 1927 . This edition was faithful to keys and clefs , a problem for modern performers . In 1960 , Gottfried Grote published the collection in the Neue Ausgabe , transposing and with modern meter signs . A critical edition was published in 2004 by Bärenreiter , edited by Heide Volckmar @-@ <unk> , who uses modern clefs , but shows the original clefs and retains the keys and note values . 
 The Cantiones sacrae are part of the complete edition of the composer 's works by Carus @-@ Verlag , begun in 1992 in continuation of the Stuttgart Schütz Edition and planned to be completed by 2017 . The edition uses the Heinrich @-@ Schütz @-@ Archiv of the Hochschule für Musik Dresden . They were recorded , as part of the complete recordings of works by Schütz , by the Dresdner Kammerchor and organist Ludger Rémy , conducted by Hans @-@ Christoph <unk> . 
 = Øvre Pasvik National Park = 
 Øvre Pasvik National Park ( Norwegian : Øvre Pasvik <unk> , Northern Sami : <unk> <unk> ) is located in the southeastern part of the Pasvikdalen valley in southern Sør @-@ Varanger Municipality in Finnmark county , Norway . Covering an area of 119 square kilometers ( 46 sq mi ) , the national park is dominated by Siberian @-@ like taiga consisting of old @-@ growth forests of Scots pine , shallow lakes and bog . Proposals for a national park in Øvre Pasvik were first launched in 1936 , but the park was not created until 6 February 1970 . It originally covered 66 square kilometers ( 25 sq mi ) , but was expanded on 29 August 2003 . Øvre Pasvik is part of Pasvik – Inari Trilateral Park along with the adjacent Øvre Pasvik Landscape Protection Area , the joint Norwegian and Russian Pasvik Nature Reserve , and Finland 's Vätsäri Wilderness Area . 
 The park has its western border running along the Finland – Norway border . The two most prominent lakes are Ellenvatn and Ødevatn , both of which flow into tributaries of the river Pasvikelva . The fauna and flora are typical of the Siberian taiga , and include some species uncommon for Norway . The park is a habitat for the brown bear and also has a large population of moose ; reindeer husbandry takes place during winter . Eight species of fish live in the lakes and the park has 190 species of flowering plants . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The national park covers an area of 119 square kilometers ( 46 sq mi ) . It is located in the southernmost part of Sør @-@ Varanger and covers the southwestern part of the valley of Pasvikdalen . The park 's western border is identical to the Finland – Norway border . The eastern border crosses through the lakes of <unk> , <unk> and Ødevatn . <unk> , the tripoint cairn located at the intersection of the Finland – Norway – Russia border , is within the park . To the east is Øvre Pasvik Landscape Protection Area and Pasvik Nature Reserve , which both lie along the Norway – Russia border . The park is part of Pasvik – Inari Trilateral Park , which in addition to the three Norwegian protected areas includes Vätsäri Wilderness Area on the Finnish side of the border and the Russian part of Pasvik Nature Reserve . 
 The area is exceptionally flat by Norwegian standards . It consists of large rolling hills with forest , shallow lakes and numerous tarns . The land is covered in an old @-@ growth forest of Scots Pine , intertwined with bog . The park rises slightly towards the west . The climate is dry , with an average 350 millimeters ( 14 in ) precipitation per year . The winters are cold , − 45 ° C ( − 49 ° F ) having been measured . There are 60 days of midnight sun per year . Because of the flat terrain , which is only broken by a few hills , it is easy to get lost in the park ; lakes and creeks are the easiest means of orientation . The tallest point is <unk> , 260 meters ( 850 ft ) above mean sea level ( AMSL ) . 
 About twenty percent of the national park is covered by lakes . The entire park is drained through two tributaries of the Pasvikelva , one draining Ellenvatn and one draining Ødevatn . Ellenvatn is the largest lake ; located centrally in the park , it is drained from the north . It has two enclosed bays to the south , <unk> and <unk> . <unk> , located in the southeast , is the second @-@ largest lake . Many of the smaller lakes are being filled with peat , a process which began following the end of the last glacial period . Many of the bogs have previously been lakes but have been transformed over the years . 
 The rock composition is mostly granite gneisses , although the northern part of the park has some schist . The entire area is covered by large amounts of soil , and bedrock can only be seen in cliffs and hillocks . These geological conditions result in poor soil quality . During the last glacial period the region was covered by a large glacier which had little movement because of the flat terrain . Thus the glacier did not create any moraines , which could have created larger lakes . Most lakes are created by variations in the bedrock ; <unk> is a notable exception as is lies in a deep fault , giving it a long and narrow profile . The fault continues northeastwards , creating the <unk> cliff . The valley has a marine border at 110 meters ( 360 ft ) AMSL , with the post @-@ glacial rebound having dried up the land about 5000 BC . Prior to this the valley was part of a fjord . The landscape is occasionally interrupted with vegetation @-@ less and flat screes . 
 = = History = = 
 Pasvikdalen has been populated since the Stone Age ; archeological findings from the <unk> culture have been dated back to 4000 BC . About 2300 BC there was immigration from Finland and later the area was largely used by <unk> for reindeer husbandry . Norwegian immigration started about 1850 , and the first land was granted land for farming in 1874 , after a road was built along the valley to <unk> . This was followed up by Russian immigration to the other side of the border . The road was extended to <unk> in 1939 and after 1945 the population on the Russian side was forcefully moved by the Soviet authorities and the area depopulated . The Soviet Union started planning to regulate Pasvikelva for hydroelectricity in the 1940s , with the first power station opening in 1951 . Seven power stations were built which take advantage of the entire height of fall in the river . 
 Proposals for a national park was first launched by author Carl Schøyen in 1936 , who sent the proposal to the Ministry of Agriculture . The ministry halted the process as they were principally opposed to all forms of conservation ; they wanted all natural resources to be exploited . Schøyen raised the proposal again in the late 1940s ; in 1951 , the year of Schøyen 's death , the Director of Forestry decided to administratively protect 70 square kilometers ( 27 sq mi ) of land within the current national park . The plans for a national park were revitalized in the late 1960s with the proposal to build a highway up Pasvikdalen to Ivalo , Finland . However , the road plans were never accepted politically . The national park was established on 6 February 1970 and originally covered an area of 66 square kilometers ( 25 sq mi ) . 
 The national park center opened in 2001 and the park was expanded on 23 August 2003 . At the same time the adjacent Øvre Pasvik Landscape Protection Area was created , which borders Pasvik Nature Reserve . Thus the five protected areas were connected . Since 2011 a local political board has been responsible for the management of the park . 
 = = Management = = 
 The park is managed by the National Park Board for Øvre Pasvik . - This is a local politically nominated body which has the management responsibility for the park , along with the landscape protection area . The board is formally appointed by the Ministry of Environment . It consists of two members nominated by Sør @-@ Varanger Municipal Council , one member from Finnmark County Council and one member from the Sami Parliament . The park is under the supervision of the Kirkenes office of the Norwegian Nature Inspectorate , a division of the Norwegian Directorate for Nature Management . 
 = = Flora = = 
 Pasvik is dominated by the old @-@ growth Scots pine , which covers half the park 's area . The forest has a very slow life cycle . The age of a typical tree is between 300 and 400 year ; the oldest recorded tree was 820 years when chopped down in 1896 . Regrowth is slow because the trees need two consecutive years to produce cones and young trees often die after their buds are eaten by moose during winter . The park has been stricken regularly by wildfires — the latest major fire occurring in 1945 . Wildfires normally spread and burn in the undergrowth ; as pine trees do not have low @-@ laying branches , older pines will not be effected while younger trees will be consumed by the fire . A forest fire can kill tens of generations of trees , but the remaining ashes give good conditions for young trees , giving an uneven age distribution of pine . None of the islands in the lake of <unk> have had fires , giving it a unique forest composition . 
 In neighboring areas of Russia there are significant numbers of Norway spruce , but they only exist sporadically within Øvre Pasvik , with no more than 40 trees in one place . The lack of spruce is caused by a combination of frost occurring as late as June , and wildfire . There is also a limited amount of birch , specifically dwarf birch and silver birch . Aspen is uncommon largely because its bark and roots are popular food for animals . Along some creeks there are bird cherry and grey alder . The area is too dry to allow the latter to grow away from creeks and lake sides . There are eight to ten species of willow within the national park . 
 About 190 species of flowering plants in the park have been registered , most of which are part of the natural composition of the Siberian taiga . Marsh Labrador tea is the most common , the park being one of only three locations in Norway where it occurs . The most common berry plant is <unk> ; common bilberry and bog bilberry are also common , but do not carry good yields of berries . In August there is normally a good yield of <unk> , and occasionally there can be found Arctic raspberry . There is a limited number of marine plants . The steep cliffs at <unk> allow mountainous plants to thrive , such as Alpine chickweed , white bluegrass and brittle bladder @-@ fern . These were common throughout the area after the last glacial period , but have vanished with forestation . Other mountainous plants common in the region are not found in Pasvik because of low oxygen levels in the lower soil levels . 
 = = Fauna = = 
 The brown bear hibernates in the park , and two to four females have cubs in the park and the landscape protection area each year . Bears can also be found in transit between Russia and Finland . Other common mammals include red fox , stoat , least weasel , American mink and European pine marten . The population of moose has been increasing ; its wear on the tree population affects the regrowth of trees . Norway lemming and wood lemming are uncommon ; Eurasian lynx sometimes cross through the park . Pasvik is one of very few areas in Norway where <unk> 's shrew is found . Reindeer husbandry is permitted within the park , although the area is mostly used during the winter as the herds are moved out to <unk> for the summers . Raccoon dog is an introduced species to Europe and was first spotted in the national park area in 1983 . 
 There are eight species of fish in the park : Northern pike and European perch are the most common , others include grayling , common minnow , burbot , three @-@ spined stickleback and the least common , brown trout . The trout came up <unk> about 8000 BC . The other species arrived after the last glacial period from Lake Inari and ultimately from the ten fresh @-@ water Baltic Sea . 
 The bird life is dominated by species from the Siberian taiga , which are otherwise not common in Norway . Species inhabiting the park include Siberian jay , pine grosbeak , Bohemian waxwing , common crane and whooper swan . Several species of sparrow and <unk> are also common . There are also three species of Falconiformes — rough @-@ legged buzzard , merlin and osprey , the latter which can be seen hunting over Ellenvatn and Ødevatn . The great grey owl and northern hawk @-@ owl are common in years with good access to rodents . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 No recreational facilities exist in the park , nor has the park been modified in any way to accommodate recreation . There is a national park center co @-@ located with <unk> <unk> <unk> , located at <unk> , 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) south of Kirkenes . In addition to information for hikers , the center has a display and shows films from the national park and its nature , culture and history . Øvre <unk> is located 90 kilometers ( 56 mi ) south of Kirkenes . The park is accessible by car at three points from three side roads of National Road 885 ; the one terminates at the national park border near <unk> , the other at <unk> close to Ødevatn , and the third runs through the landscape protection area and terminates at <unk> , ca . 5 kilometers ( 3 mi ) from the tripoint cairn . 
 All motorized vehicles are prohibited , but it is permitted to bring canoes and other non @-@ motorized boats , as well as skiing during winter . Walking and tenting is permitted everywhere . Berries and mushrooms can be harvested for personal use . Hunting and fishing is also permitted with a hunting or fishing license . Dogs may be brought along , but must be in a leash between 1 April and 20 August . Hikers must show special consideration regarding vegetation , animal life and cultural heritage . 
 = 2nd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division ( United States ) = 
 The 2nd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division is an infantry Brigade Combat Team of the United States Army based at Fort Drum , New York . It is a subordinate unit of the 10th Mountain Division . 
 Activated in 1985 , the 10th Mountain Division 's second brigade 's elements saw numerous deployments to contingencies around the world in the 1990s . With the Global War on Terrorism the brigade has deployed six times : initially deployed to Uzbekistan , Kuwait and Qatar in 2001 , elements of the brigade later deployed from Uzbekistan into Afghanistan ; the brigade deployed again in early 2003 , split across Iraq , Afghanistan and the Horn of Africa ; the entire brigade returned to Iraq in 2004 @-@ 2005 , 2006 @-@ 2007 and 2009 @-@ 2010 before return to Afghanistan in 2013 for its sixth deployment . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 2nd Brigade Combat Team is a subordinate unit of the 10th Mountain Division , however its modular nature means it is capable of operating independently of the division 's Headquarters and Headquarters Company . 
 As an infantry brigade combat team ( IBCT ) , the brigade consists of a Headquarters and Headquarters Company and seven subordinate battalions stationed at Fort Drum , New York : 
 2nd Battalion , 14th Infantry Regiment 
 2nd Battalion , 87th Infantry Regiment 
 4th Battalion , 31st Infantry Regiment 
 1st Squadron , 89th Cavalry Regiment 
 2nd Battalion , 15th Field Artillery Regiment 
 41st Engineer Battalion 
 210th Brigade Support Battalion 
 = = History = = 
 On 13 February 1985 , the 10th Mountain Division ( Light Infantry ) was activated at Fort Drum , New York , after several decades inactive . In accordance with the Reorganization Objective Army Divisions plan , the division was no longer centered on regiments , instead two brigades were activated under the division . The 1st Brigade , 10th Mountain Division was activated at Fort Drum while the 2nd Brigade , 10th Mountain Division was activated at Fort Benning , moving to Fort Drum in 1988 . The division was also assigned a round @-@ out brigade from the Army National Guard , the 27th Infantry Brigade . The division was specially designed as a light infantry division able to rapidly deploy . Equipment design was oriented toward reduced size and weight for reasons of both strategic and tactical mobility . The division also received a distinctive unit insignia . 
 = = = Contingencies = = = 
 In 1990 , the division sent 1 @,@ 200 soldiers to support Operation Desert Storm . The largest of these units was the <unk> Supply and Services Battalion with almost 1 @,@ 000 soldiers , which supported the 24th Infantry Division ( Mechanized ) in Iraq . Following a cease @-@ fire in March 1991 , the support soldiers began redeploying to Fort Drum through June of that year . 
 Hurricane Andrew struck South Florida on 24 August 1992 , killing 13 people , leaving another 250 @,@ 000 homeless and causing damages in excess of 20 billion dollars . On 27 September 1992 , the 10th Mountain Division assumed responsibility for Hurricane Andrew disaster relief as Task Force Mountain . Division soldiers set up relief camps , distributed food , clothing , medical necessities and building supplies , as well as helping to rebuild homes and clear debris . The last of the 6 @,@ 000 division soldiers to deploy to Florida returned home in October 1992 . 
 = = = = Operation Restore Hope = = = = 
 On 3 December 1992 , the division headquarters was designated as the headquarters for all Army forces ( <unk> ) of the Unified Task Force ( UNITAF ) for Operation Restore Hope . Major General Steven L. Arnold , the division commander , was named Army forces commander . The 10th Mountain Division ’ s mission was to secure major cities and roads to provide safe passage of relief supplies to the Somali population suffering from the effects of the Somali Civil War . Due to 10th Mountain Division efforts , humanitarian agencies declared an end to the food emergency and factional fighting decreased . When Task Force Ranger and the SAR team were pinned down during a raid in what later became known as the Battle of Mogadishu , 10th Mountain units provided infantry for the UN quick reaction force sent to rescue them . The 10th had 2 soldiers killed in the fighting , which was the longest sustained firefight by regular U.S. Army forces since the Vietnam War . The division began a gradual reduction of forces in Somalia in February 1993 , until the last soldiers of the 2nd Battalion , 22nd Infantry returned to the United States in March , 1994 . 
 = = = = Operation Uphold Democracy = = = = 
 The division formed the nucleus of the Multinational Force Haiti ( MNF Haiti ) and Joint Task Force 190 ( JTF 190 ) in Haiti during Operation Uphold Democracy . More than 8 @,@ 600 of the division 's troops deployed during this operation . On 19 September 1994 , the 1st Brigade conducted the Army ’ s first air assault from an aircraft carrier . This force consisted of 54 helicopters and almost 2 @,@ 000 soldiers . They occupied the Port @-@ au @-@ Prince International Airport . This was the largest Army air operation conducted from a carrier since the Doolittle Raid in World War II . 
 The division ’ s mission was to create a secure and stable environment so the government of Haitian President Jean @-@ Bertrand Aristide could be reestablished and democratic elections held . After this was accomplished , the 10th Mountain Division handed over control of the MNF @-@ Haiti to the 25th Infantry Division on 15 January 1995 . The Division redeployed the last of its soldiers who served in Haiti by 31 January 1995 . 
 = = = = Task Force Eagle = = = = 
 In the fall of 1998 , the division received notice that it would be serving as senior headquarters of Task Force Eagle , providing a peacekeeping force to support the ongoing operation within the Multi @-@ National Division @-@ North area of responsibility in Bosnia and Herzegovina . Selected division units began deploying in late summer , approximately 3 @,@ 000 division soldiers deployed . After successfully performing their mission in Bosnia , the division units conducted a Transfer of Authority , relinquishing their assignments to soldiers of the 49th Armored Division , Texas National Guard . By early summer 2000 , all 10th Mountain Division soldiers had returned safely to Fort Drum . 
 = = = Global War on Terrorism = = = 
 Following the 11 September 2001 attacks , elements of the division , including its special troops battalion and the 1 @-@ 87th Infantry and 4th Battalion , 31st Infantry Regiment ( 4 @-@ 31 Infantry ) , deployed to Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in late 2001 . These forces remained in the country until mid @-@ 2002 , fighting to secure remote areas of the country and participating in operations such as Operation Anaconda , the Fall of Mazar @-@ i @-@ Sharif , and the Battle of Qala @-@ i @-@ Jangi . The division also participated in fighting in the Shahi <unk> Valley in 2002 . Upon the return of the battalions , they were welcomed home and praised by President Bush . In 2003 , elements of the 2nd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division returned to Afghanistan to support US forces operating in the western region of the country . 
 Upon the return of the division headquarters and 1st Brigade , the 10th Mountain Division began the process of transformation into a modular division . On 16 September 2004 , the division headquarters finished its transformation . The 1st Brigade became the 1st Brigade Combat Team , while the 3rd Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division was activated for the first time . In January 2005 , the 4th Brigade Combat Team , 10th Mountain Division was activated at Fort Polk , Louisiana . 2nd Brigade Combat Team would not be transformed until September 2005 , pending a deployment to Iraq . 
 In late 2004 , 2nd Brigade Combat Team was deployed to Iraq supporting Operation Iraqi Freedom . The 2nd Brigade Combat Team undertook combat operations in Baghdad including the Green Zone and <unk> Grab prison camp , returning to the US in late 2005 . Around that time , the 1st Brigade Combat Team deployed back to Iraq , staying in the country until 2006 . 
 The 1st Brigade Combat Team and the 2nd Brigade Combat Team were scheduled to deploy to Iraq in fall 2009 , as a part of the 2009 – 2010 rotation to Iraq . As of summer 2009 , it was one of only a few brigades in the U.S. Army to be deployed 40 months or more in support of the War on Terrorism . 
 On February 26 , 2015 , the Associated Press reported that officials at Fort Drum said that about 1 @,@ 660 members of the 2nd Brigade Combat Team will deploy in the spring and summer to southern Afghanistan as part of the Resolute Support Mission . It will be the brigade 's fourth deployment to Afghanistan . Its last deployment ended in October 2013 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Ceawlin of Wessex = 
 Ceawlin ( also spelled <unk> and <unk> , died ca . 593 ) was a King of Wessex . He may have been the son of Cynric of Wessex and the grandson of Cerdic of Wessex , whom the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle represents as the leader of the first group of Saxons to come to the land which later became Wessex . Ceawlin was active during the last years of the Anglo @-@ Saxon expansion , with little of southern England remaining in the control of the native Britons by the time of his death . 
 The chronology of Ceawlin 's life is highly uncertain . The historical accuracy and dating of many of the events in the later Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle have been called into question , and his reign is variously listed as lasting seven , seventeen , or thirty @-@ two years . The Chronicle records several battles of Ceawlin 's between the years 556 and 592 , including the first record of a battle between different groups of Anglo @-@ Saxons , and indicates that under Ceawlin Wessex acquired significant territory , some of which was later to be lost to other Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms . Ceawlin is also named as one of the eight " bretwaldas " , a title given in the Chronicle to eight rulers who had overlordship over southern Britain , although the extent of Ceawlin 's control is not known . 
 Ceawlin died in 593 , having been deposed the year before , possibly by his successor , Ceol . He is recorded in various sources as having two sons , Cutha and Cuthwine , but the genealogies in which this information is found are known to be unreliable . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 The history of the sub @-@ Roman period in Britain is poorly sourced and the subject of a number of important disagreements among historians . It appears , however , that in the fifth century raids on Britain by continental peoples developed into migrations . The newcomers included Angles , Saxons , Jutes , and Frisians . These peoples captured territory in the east and south of England , but at about the end of the fifth century , a British victory at the battle of Mons Badonicus halted the Anglo @-@ Saxon advance for fifty years . Near the year 550 , however , the British began to lose ground once more , and within twenty @-@ five years , it appears that control of almost all of southern England was in the hands of the invaders . 
 The peace following the battle of Mons Badonicus is attested partly by Gildas , a monk , who wrote De Excidio et Conquestu Britanniae or On the Ruin and Conquest of Britain during the middle of the sixth century . This essay is a polemic against corruption and Gildas provides little in the way of names and dates . He appears , however , to state that peace had lasted from the year of his birth to the time he was writing . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle is the other main source that bears on this period , in particular in an entry for the year 827 that records a list of the kings who bore the title " bretwalda " , or " Britain @-@ ruler " . That list shows a gap in the early sixth century that matches Gildas 's version of events . 
 Ceawlin 's reign belongs to the period of Anglo @-@ Saxon expansion at the end of the sixth century . Though there are many unanswered questions about the chronology and activities of the early West Saxon rulers , it is clear that Ceawlin was one of the key figures in the final Anglo @-@ Saxon conquest of southern Britain . 
 = = Early West Saxon sources = = 
 The two main written sources for early West Saxon history are the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle and the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List . The Chronicle is a set of annals which were compiled near the year 890 , during the reign of King Alfred the Great of Wessex . They record earlier material for the older entries , which were assembled from earlier annals that no longer survive , as well as , from saga material that might have been transmitted orally . The Chronicle dates the arrival of the future " West Saxons " in Britain to 495 , when Cerdic and his son , Cynric , land at <unk> ora , or Cerdic 's shore . Almost twenty annals describing Cerdic 's campaigns , and those of his descendants appear interspersed through the next hundred years of entries in the Chronicle . Although these annals provide most of what is known about Ceawlin , the historicity of many of the entries is uncertain . 
 The West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List is a list of rulers of Wessex , including the lengths of their reigns . It survives in several forms , including as a preface to the [ B ] manuscript of the Chronicle . As with Chronicle , the list was compiled during the reign of Alfred the Great , and both the list and the Chronicle are influenced by the desire of their writers to use a single line of descent to trace the lineage of the Kings of Wessex through Cerdic to <unk> , a descendant of Woden and the legendary ancestor of the West Saxons . The result served the political purposes of the scribe , but is riddled with contradictions for historians . 
 The contradictions may be seen clearly by calculating dates by different methods from the various sources . The first event in West Saxon history , the date of which can be regarded as reasonably certain , is the baptism of Cynegils , which occurred in the late 630s , perhaps as late as 640 . The Chronicle dates Cerdic 's arrival to 495 , but adding up the lengths of the reigns as given in the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List , leads to the conclusion that Cerdic 's reign might have started in 532 , a difference of 37 years . Neither 495 nor 532 may be treated as reliable , however , the latter date relies on the presumption that the Regnal List is correct in presenting the Kings of Wessex as having succeeded one another , with no omitted kings , no joint kingships , and that the durations of the reigns are correct as given . None of these presumptions may be made safely . 
 The sources also are inconsistent on the length of Ceawlin 's reign . The Chronicle gives it as thirty @-@ two years , from 560 to 592 , but the Regnal Lists disagree : different versions give it as seven or seventeen years . A recent detailed study of the Regnal List dates the arrival of the West Saxons in England to 538 , and favours seven years as the most likely length of Ceawlin 's reign , with dates of 581 – 588 proposed . The sources do agree that Ceawlin is the son of Cynric and he usually is named as the father of Cuthwine . There is one discrepancy in this case : the entry for 685 in the [ A ] version of the Chronicle assigns Ceawlin a son , Cutha , but in the 855 entry in the same manuscript , Cutha is listed as the son of Cuthwine . Cutha also is named as Ceawlin 's brother in the [ E ] and [ F ] versions of the Chronicle , in the 571 and 568 entries , respectively . 
 Whether Ceawlin is a descendant of Cerdic is a matter of debate . <unk> of different West Saxon lineages give the impression of separate groups , of which Ceawlin 's line is one . Some of the problems in the Wessex genealogies may have come about because of efforts to integrate Ceawlin 's line with the other lineages : it was very important to the West Saxons to be able to trace their ancestors back to Cerdic . Another reason for doubting the literal nature of these early genealogies is that the etymology of the names of several early members of the dynasty do not appear to be Germanic , as would be expected in the names of leaders of an apparently Anglo @-@ Saxon dynasty . The name Ceawlin is one of the names that do not have convincing Anglo @-@ Saxon etymologies ; it seems more likely to be of native British origin . 
 The earliest sources do not use the term " West Saxon " . According to Bede 's Ecclesiastical History of the English People , the term is interchangeable with the Gewisse . The term " West Saxon " appears only in the late seventh century , after the reign of Cædwalla . 
 = = West Saxon expansion = = 
 Ultimately , the kingdom of Wessex occupied the southwest of England , but the initial stages in this expansion are not apparent from the sources . Cerdic 's landing , whenever it is to be dated , seems to have been near the Isle of Wight , and the annals record the conquest of the island in 530 . In 534 , according to the Chronicle , Cerdic died and his son Cynric took the throne ; the Chronicle adds that " they gave the Isle of Wight to their nephews , Stuf and <unk> " . These records are in direct conflict with Bede , who states that the Isle of Wight was settled by Jutes , not Saxons ; the archaeological record is somewhat in favour of Bede on this . 
 Subsequent entries in the Chronicle give details of some of the battles by which the West Saxons won their kingdom . Ceawlin 's campaigns are not given as near the coast . They range along the Thames valley and beyond , as far as Surrey in the east and the mouth of the Severn in the west . Ceawlin clearly is part of the West Saxon expansion , but the military history of the period is difficult to understand . In what follows the dates are as given in the Chronicle , although as noted above , these are earlier than now thought accurate . 
 = = 556 : Beran <unk> = = 
 The first record of a battle fought by Ceawlin is in 556 , when he and his father , Cynric , fought the native Britons at " Beran <unk> " , or <unk> 's Stronghold . This now is identified as <unk> Castle , an Iron Age hill fort in Wiltshire , near Swindon . Cynric would have been king of Wessex at this time . 
 = = 568 : Wibbandun = = 
 The first battle Ceawlin fought as king is dated by the Chronicle to 568 , when he and Cutha fought with Æthelberht , the king of Kent . The entry says " Here Ceawlin and Cutha fought against Aethelberht and drove him into Kent ; and they killed two ealdormen , <unk> and Cnebba , on Wibbandun . " The location of " Wibbandun " , which can be translated as " <unk> 's Mount " , has not been identified definitely ; it was at one time thought to be Wimbledon , but this now is known to be incorrect . This battle is notable as the first recorded conflict between the invading peoples : previous battles recorded in the Chronicle are between the Anglo @-@ Saxons and the native Britons . 
