 There are multiple examples of joint kingship in Anglo @-@ Saxon history , and this may be another : it is not clear what Cutha 's relationship to Ceawlin is , but it certainly is possible he was also a king . The annal for 577 , below , is another possible example . 
 = = 571 : <unk> = = 
 The annal for 571 reads : " Here Cuthwulf fought against the Britons at <unk> , and took four settlements : <unk> and Aylesbury , Benson and Eynsham ; and in the same year he passed away . " Cuthwulf 's relationship with Ceawlin is unknown , but the alliteration common to Anglo @-@ Saxon royal families suggests Cuthwulf may be part of the West Saxon royal line . The location of the battle itself is unidentified . It has been suggested that it was Bedford , but what is known of the early history of Bedford 's names , does not support this . This battle is of interest because it is surprising that an area so far east should still be in Briton hands this late : there is ample archaeological evidence of early Saxon and Anglian presence in the Midlands , and historians generally have interpreted Gildas 's De Excidio as implying that the Britons had lost control of this area by the mid @-@ sixth century . One possible explanation is , that this annal records a reconquest of land that was lost to the Britons in the campaigns ending in the battle of Mons Badonicus . 
 = = 577 : The lower Severn = = 
 The annal for 577 reads " Here Cuthwine and Ceawlin fought against the Britons , and they killed three kings , <unk> and <unk> and <unk> , in the place which is called Dyrham , and took three cities : Gloucester and Cirencester and Bath . " This entry is all that is known of these Briton kings ; their names are in an archaic form that makes it very likely that this annal derives from a much older written source . The battle itself has long been regarded as a key moment in the Saxon advance , since in reaching the Bristol Channel , the West Saxons divided the Britons west of the Severn from land communication with those in the peninsula to the south of the Channel . Wessex almost certainly lost this territory to Penda of Mercia in 628 , when the Chronicle records that " Cynegils and Cwichelm fought against Penda at Cirencester and then came to an agreement . " 
 It is possible that when Ceawlin and Cuthwine took Bath , they found the Roman baths still operating to some extent . Nennius , a ninth @-@ century historian , mentions a " Hot Lake " in the land of the Hwicce , which was along the Severn , and adds " It is surrounded by a wall , made of brick and stone , and men may go there to bathe at any time , and every man can have the kind of bath he likes . If he wants , it will be a cold bath ; and if he wants a hot bath , it will be hot " . Bede also describes hot baths in the geographical introduction to the Ecclesiastical History in terms very similar to those of Nennius . 
 Wansdyke , an early medieval defensive linear earthwork , runs from south of Bristol to near Marlborough , Wiltshire , passing not far from Bath . It probably was built in the fifth or sixth centuries , perhaps by Ceawlin . 
 = = 584 : Fethan leag = = 
 Ceawlin 's last recorded victory is in 584 . The entry reads " Here Ceawlin and Cutha fought against the Britons at the place which is named Fethan leag , and Cutha was killed ; and Ceawlin took many towns and countless war @-@ loot , and in anger he turned back to his own [ territory ] . " There is a wood named " <unk> " mentioned in a twelfth @-@ century document that relates to Stoke Lyne , in Oxfordshire , and it now is thought that the battle of Fethan leag must have been fought in this area . 
 The phrase " in anger he turned back to his own " probably indicates that this annal is drawn from saga material , as perhaps are all of the early Wessex annals . It also has been used to argue that perhaps , Ceawlin did not win the battle and that the chronicler chose not to record the outcome fully – a king does not usually come home " in anger " after taking " many towns and countless war @-@ loot " . It may be that Ceawlin 's overlordship of the southern Britons came to an end with this battle . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 About 731 , Bede , a Northumbrian monk and chronicler , wrote a work called the Ecclesiastical History of the English People . The work was not primarily a secular history , but Bede provides much information about the history of the Anglo @-@ Saxons , including a list early in the history of seven kings who , he said , held " imperium " over the other kingdoms south of the Humber . The usual translation for " imperium " is " overlordship " . Bede names Ceawlin as the second on the list , although he spells it " <unk> " , and adds that he was " known in the speech of his own people as <unk> " . Bede also makes it clear that Ceawlin was not a Christian — Bede mentions a later king , Æthelberht of Kent , as " the first to enter the kingdom of heaven " . 
 The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , in an entry for the year 827 , repeats Bede 's list , adds Egbert of Wessex , and also mentions that they were known as " bretwalda " , or " Britain @-@ ruler " . A great deal of scholarly attention has been given to the meaning of this word . It has been described as a term " of encomiastic poetry " , but there also is evidence that it implied a definite role of military leadership . 
 Bede says that these kings had authority " south of the Humber " , but the span of control , at least of the earlier bretwaldas , likely was less than this . In Ceawlin 's case the range of control is hard to determine accurately , but Bede 's inclusion of Ceawlin in the list of kings who held imperium , and the list of battles he is recorded as having won , indicate an energetic and successful leader who , from a base in the upper Thames valley , dominated much of the surrounding area and held overlordship over the southern Britons for some period . Despite Ceawlin 's military successes , the northern conquests he made could not always be retained : Mercia took much of the upper Thames valley , and the north @-@ eastern towns won in 571 were among territory subsequently under the control of Kent and Mercia at different times . 
 Bede 's concept of the power of these overlords also must be regarded as the product of his eighth @-@ century viewpoint . When the Ecclesiastical History was written , Æthelbald of Mercia dominated the English south of the Humber , and Bede 's view of the earlier kings was doubtless strongly coloured by the state of England at that time . For the earlier bretwaldas , such as Ælle and Ceawlin , there must be some element of anachronism in Bede 's description . It also is possible that Bede only meant to refer to power over Anglo @-@ Saxon kingdoms , not the native Britons . 
 Ceawlin is the second king in Bede 's list . All the subsequent bretwaldas followed more or less consecutively , but there is a long gap , perhaps fifty years , between Ælle of Sussex , the first bretwalda , and Ceawlin . The lack of gaps between the <unk> of the later bretwaldas has been used to make an argument for Ceawlin 's dates matching the later entries in the Chronicle with reasonable accuracy . According to this analysis , the next bretwalda , Æthelberht of Kent , must have been already a dominant king by the time Pope Gregory the Great wrote to him in 601 , since Gregory would have not written to an underking . Ceawlin defeated Æthelberht in 568 according to the Chronicle . Æthelberht 's dates are a matter of debate , but recent scholarly consensus has his reign starting no earlier than 580 . The 568 date for the battle at Wibbandun is thought to be unlikely because of the assertion in various versions of the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List that Ceawlin 's reign lasted either seven or seventeen years . If this battle is placed near the year 590 , before Æthelberht has established himself as a powerful king , then the subsequent annals relating to Ceawlin 's defeat and death may be reasonably close to the correct date . In any case , the battle with Æthelberht is unlikely to have been more than a few years on either side of 590 . The gap between Ælle and Ceawlin , on the other hand , has been taken as supporting evidence for the story told by Gildas in De Excidio of a peace lasting a generation or more following a Briton victory at Mons Badonicus . 
 Æthelberht of Kent succeeds Ceawlin on the list of bretwaldas , but the reigns may overlap somewhat : recent evaluations give Ceawlin a likely reign of 581 – 588 , and place Æthelberht 's accession near to the year 589 , but these analyses are no more than scholarly guesses . Ceawlin 's eclipse in 592 , probably by Ceol , may have been the occasion for Æthelberht to rise to prominence ; Æthelberht very likely was the dominant Anglo @-@ Saxon king by 597 . Æthelberht 's rise may have been earlier : the 584 annal , even if it records a victory , is the last victory of Ceawlin 's in the Chronicle , and the period after that may have been one of Æthelberht 's ascent and Ceawlin 's decline . 
 = = Wessex at Ceawlin 's death = = 
 Ceawlin lost the throne of Wessex in 592 . The annal for that year reads , in part : " Here there was great slaughter at Woden 's Barrow , and Ceawlin was driven out . " Woden 's Barrow is a tumulus , now called Adam 's Grave , at Alton Priors , Wiltshire . No details of his opponent are given . The medieval chronicler William of Malmesbury , writing in about 1120 , says that it was " the Angles and the British conspiring together " . Alternatively , it may have been Ceol , who is supposed to have been the next king of Wessex , ruling for six years according to the West Saxon Genealogical Regnal List . According to the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , Ceawlin died the following year . The relevant part of the annal reads : " Here Ceawlin and Cwichelm and <unk> perished . " Nothing more is known of Cwichelm and <unk> , although they may have been members of the Wessex royal house – their names fit the alliterative pattern common to royal houses of the time . 
 According to the Regnal List , Ceol was a son of Cutha , who was a son of Cynric ; and Ceolwulf , his brother , reigned for seventeen years after him . It is possible that some fragmentation of control among the West Saxons occurred at Ceawlin 's death : Ceol and Ceolwulf may have been based in Wiltshire , as opposed to the upper Thames valley . This split also may have contributed to Æthelberht 's ability to rise to dominance in southern England . The West Saxons remained influential in military terms , however : the Chronicle and Bede record continued military activity against Essex and Sussex within twenty or thirty years of Ceawlin 's death . 
 = Team Bath F.C. = 
 Team Bath was an English association football club affiliated with the University of Bath in the city of Bath , Somerset , in 1999 . The club was formed to allow the players to combine professional football with higher education . Team Bath rose rapidly through the English football league system , reaching the Conference South in its ninth season , but disbanded after one season at that level following a decision by the Football Conference and The Football League that its financial structure disqualified it from further promotion . 
 The club competed in the Western League for the first time in 2000 – 01 . Promotion that season , and again in 2002 – 03 , gained the club entry into the Southern League . The club gained significant media exposure for an FA Cup run in the 2002 – 03 season , when it reached the first round proper of the competition , becoming the first university team to compete at that stage since 1880 . After five seasons in the Southern League , Team Bath was promoted into the Conference South after winning the 2007 – 08 Southern League Playoff Final . 
 For their first four seasons , Team Bath 's home matches were played at the university 's sports grounds . In 2004 the club secured a deal to ground @-@ share with Bath City at Twerton Park , capable of holding more than 8 @,@ 000 supporters . Team Bath nevertheless struggled to attract fans , and generally had among the lowest average attendances in their leagues . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and early success = = = 
 In 1999 , TeamBath , the sports department of the University of Bath , set out to establish a football club that played within the English professional league structure , but also allowed the players to continue their education with studies at the university . In the 2000 – 01 season , the club entered the Western League , the tenth level of the English football league system . Paul Tisdale , a recently retired player who had appeared for Southampton and Yeovil Town was appointed as the team 's head coach . The team won promotion from Division One to the Premier Division of the league in their first season . They continued to be successful in their second year , but missed out on back @-@ to @-@ back promotions , finishing fourth in the league in their first season in the Premier Division . They competed in the FA Vase for the first time in 2001 – 02 , advancing to the third round of the competition before being eliminated by <unk> Town . 
 In their third season , Team Bath attracted global interest due to their involvement in the FA Cup . Playing in the competition for the first time , Bath beat Barnstaple Town 4 – 0 in the preliminary round to begin their campaign . They followed this up with victories over Backwell United , <unk> Heath Harlequins , and Newport County in the early stages of the qualifying rounds . They faced Horsham in the fourth qualifying round ; a place in the first round proper awaiting the victors . The match at Horsham 's ground finished 0 – 0 , and the sides returned to Bath for the replay , which Bath won 4 – 2 on penalties after a 1 – 1 draw . Their victory meant that Team became the first university side to compete in the first round of the competition since Oxford University , who won the competition in 1880 . Bath drew Mansfield Town at home , and despite the offer of reversing the fixture and playing at Mansfield 's Field Mill stadium , the club opted to play the match at their home ground at the university , securing permission from the local police and the city council to erect temporary seating for the match . The match , which drew a record home attendance for Team Bath of 5 @,@ 469 , was won convincingly by Mansfield , who were leading 3 – 0 by half @-@ time . Despite two late goals from Carl <unk> and Caleb Kamara @-@ Taylor , Bath lost the match 4 – 2 , and were eliminated from the cup . 
 The team was less successful in the FA Vase : after beating Fairford Town in a replay , Bath were knocked out of the competition by Lymington & New Milton in the second round . In the league , Team Bath won 27 of their 34 matches and were unbeaten at home to finish top of the Western League Premier Division and gain promotion to the Southern League . 
 = = = Southern League = = = 
 Team Bath played the 2003 – 04 season in the Southern League Western Division , one of two divisions that fed the league 's Premier Division . The side won 21 of their 40 matches and finished the season in sixth position . Despite their relative success , Team Bath struggled to attract spectators to their ground : their average home attendance of 103 was the lowest in the league , and their lowest attended matches were the 2 – 1 victory over Bedworth United , and their defeat by the same scoreline to Gresley Rovers , each of which had 55 recorded spectators . For the 2004 – 05 season , the non @-@ league structure was adjusted due to the introduction of a second division for the Football Conference . As a result of this , Team Bath 's sixth place in the Western Division was sufficient to " promote " them into the Premier Division of the Southern League . 
 The team struggled in each of the next two seasons , winning just 14 of their 42 league matches in each season , resulting in league finishes of 14th and 17th respectively . In 2004 – 05 , the club had its most successful FA Trophy campaign , reaching the Third round before being eliminated 2 – 1 by Histon . During the summer of 2006 , head coach Paul Tisdale left the club to take up the vacant manager 's position at Exeter City . He was replaced at Team Bath by Andy Tillson , a former Grimsby Town and Bristol Rovers defender . The 2006 – 07 season brought success to both Bath clubs ; Bath City won the Southern League , and Team Bath finished as runners @-@ up . In the playoffs , Team Bath won their semi final against Hemel Hempstead Town 3 – 1 , and advanced to play Maidenhead United in the final . Maidenhead , who had been relegated from the Conference South the season before , won the match 1 – 0 , consigning Team Bath to another season in the Southern League . Team Bath repeated their league form the following season , and once again finished as runners @-@ up , this time behind King 's Lynn . A 4 – 1 victory against <unk> in the playoff semi @-@ final , aided by a hat @-@ trick from the league 's top @-@ scorer Sean Canham , saw Bath reach their second successive playoff final . Team Bath improved on the previous season , beating Halesowen Town 2 – 1 in the final , Canham once again providing Bath with a decisive goal in the 89th minute . The win secured the team a place in the Conference South . 
 = = = Conference South = = = 
 For the 2008 – 09 season , Team Bath played at the highest level they achieved in their history . Competing in the Conference South , the club were two promotions away from The Football League . Early in the season Bath were competing for a play @-@ off berth , but failed to maintain their form , eventually finishing 11th in the table with 16 wins . Towards the end of the season , the Football Conference notified Team Bath that as they were not a limited company they would be ineligible for further promotions , and would no longer be allowed to compete in the FA Cup ; the club opted to resign from the Conference at the end of the season rather than restructure . Team Bath had at the time been discussing the possibility of a merger with Bath City , with the aim of getting the merged team into the Football League . 
 = = Management and financing = = 
 Team Bath were managed by University of Bath director of sport Ged Roddy . Although the " nucleus " of the side was made up of students , they were supplemented by semi @-@ professional players . The team was supported financially by the University of Bath , which according to an article published in the Bath Chronicle has declined to make detailed accounts publicly available , citing section 43 of the UK 's Freedom of Information Act . In the 2005 – 6 season £ 48 @,@ 510 was paid to players on sports scholarships , although no figures have been released for the amount paid to those not on scholarships . Neither has it been revealed how much was paid in rent for the use of Bath City 's Twerton Park stadium , nor the remuneration received by the club 's coaches . 
 = = Performance summary = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 Southern League Division One 
 Runners @-@ up ( 2 ) : 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 
 Western League Premier Division 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 2002 – 03 
 Western League Division One 
 Champions ( 1 ) : 2000 – 01 
 The FA Cup First round 
 2002 – 03 , 2007 – 08 & 2008 – 09 
 = Maurice Leyland = 
 Maurice Leyland ( 20 July 1900 – 1 January 1967 ) was an English cricketer who played 41 Test matches between 1928 and 1938 . In first @-@ class cricket , he represented Yorkshire between 1920 and 1946 , scoring over 1 @,@ 000 runs in 17 consecutive seasons . A left @-@ handed middle @-@ order batsman and occasional left @-@ arm spinner , Leyland was a Wisden Cricketer of the Year in 1929 . 
 Born in Harrogate , Leyland came from a cricketing family . After playing locally , he made his Yorkshire debut in 1920 , and appeared intermittently in the following two seasons . Although not statistically successful , he impressed judges at the club , and was a regular member of the team from 1923 . He steadily improved over the following seasons to reach the fringes of the England team and made his Test debut in 1928 against West Indies . That winter , he toured Australia — a controversial decision as he replaced the famous batsman Frank Woolley — and scored a century in his only Test of the series . He remained in the side until 1930 , but a loss of form in the next two seasons called his place into question . He recovered by scoring 1 @,@ 000 runs in August 1932 to secure his inclusion in the team to tour Australia in 1932 – 33 . 
 During that series , Leyland scored runs several times under pressure and by the time Australia toured England in 1934 , he was a leading batsman in the team . He held his place until 1938 when he was replaced in the team by younger batsmen for the series against Australia . Recalled for the final match , he scored 187 , his highest Test score in what became his last match . After military service in the Second World War , Leyland returned to the Yorkshire team for one season before announcing his retirement from regular first @-@ class cricket . He maintained his connection with Yorkshire , and served as the county coach between 1950 and 1963 . He died in 1967 . 
 Although he was neither aesthetically nor technically among the best batsmen , Leyland had a reputation for batting well under pressure . He performed most effectively against the best teams and bowlers , and in difficult situations ; his Test batting record is better than his first @-@ class figures , and against Australia his average is even higher . Outside of Tests , he had some success with the ball , and had it not been for the depth of spin bowling in Yorkshire , he might have been a leading bowler . He was one of the first to bowl left @-@ arm wrist @-@ spin , and may have invented the name to describe such deliveries — " <unk> " . Very popular with team @-@ mates and spectators , Leyland had a reputation as a humorist , and many stories were told about him . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Leyland was born in Bilton , an area of Harrogate , to Mercy ( née Lambert ) and Edward ( Ted ) Leyland . He was registered at birth as Morris Leyland but his name was usually spelt " Maurice " . His father was a stonemason and a well @-@ respected professional cricketer for Moorside in Lancashire . Leyland senior also acted as Moorside 's groundsman , and in later years continued that role at Harrogate , Headingley Cricket Ground and Edgbaston . Leyland junior joined his father in the Moorside team in 1912 , and by the age of fourteen had graduated to the Lancashire League . After military service in the First World War , he became a professional cricketer for Harrogate between 1918 and 1920 . From there he made appearances for the Yorkshire Council , and Yorkshire 's second team , for whom he bowled regularly ; when he reached the first team , he bowled infrequently in his first seasons . Around this time , he also played football for Harrogate . 
 During the early 1920s , the Yorkshire committee was attempting to find players to replace those whose careers had ended with the First World War . Late in the 1920 season , Leyland made his first @-@ class debut for Yorkshire , having played several times in the second team that summer . He played once , against Essex , scoring ten runs in his only innings , but this was his sole appearance that year . He had never previously attended a County Championship game . The following year , Leyland played in five first @-@ team matches , scoring 52 not out against Leicestershire , averaging just over 19 for the season . In the latter part of the 1922 season he played more regularly , replacing Norman Kilner in the team . Although Leyland 's batting figures were unimpressive , the summary of Yorkshire 's season in Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack stated that he " gave signs of promise as a forcing batsman and fielded very finely " . His highest score in 14 matches was 29 , but he was awarded his county cap , and critics within Yorkshire judged him to have great potential . 
 = = Established county cricketer = = 
 Leyland played regularly in the 1923 season and reached 1 @,@ 000 runs in first @-@ class cricket , a total he exceeded in each of the seventeen seasons between 1923 and the outbreak of war in 1939 . In 1923 , he scored seven fifties and averaged 27 @.@ 89 ; Wisden suggested that he would become a leading left @-@ handed batsman and that " his future seems assured " . In his history of Yorkshire County Cricket Club , Anthony Woodhouse states that Leyland gained valuable experience as part of a successful batting side . During this period , Yorkshire won the County Championship in four successive seasons from 1922 to 1925 . A later review of Leyland 's career in Wisden suggested that this team was one of Yorkshire 's strongest , but sometimes became over @-@ competitive and aggressive . The review stated that this environment " was a hard school for a young cricketer , but Leyland thrived on such discipline , and he has never lost his laugh . " 
 By the beginning of the 1924 season , Leyland was recognised in The Times as one of the most promising young professional batsmen in England ; the newspaper 's cricket correspondent noted that Leyland " is fully expected , in Yorkshire , to develop into a first @-@ rate left @-@ handed batsman . " He continued to improve that season , scoring 1 @,@ 259 runs at 30 @.@ 70 . In August , he scored his first century in first @-@ class cricket , hitting 133 not out in a drawn game against Lancashire ; later in the month , he scored another century . Leyland further improved his record in 1925 , hitting 1 @,@ 572 runs at 40 @.@ 30 . Wisden commented : " Leyland still further increased the big reputation he had made in the previous summer and ought , if all goes well with him , to attain the highest distinction . " By the end of the 1926 season , in which he scored 1 @,@ 561 runs at 39 @.@ 02 and hit five centuries , Leyland had established himself as one of the most reliable batsmen in the Yorkshire team . 
 Following the example of Wilfred Rhodes , several Yorkshire cricketers in the 1920s spent English winters coaching in India for the Maharaja of Patiala . Leyland coached in the winter of 1926 – 27 , along with Arthur Dolphin , the Yorkshire wicketkeeper . That same winter , a Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) team toured India ; although not chosen in the touring party , both Leyland and Dolphin played a handful of matches for the MCC . During the 1927 season Leyland scored 1 @,@ 625 runs at 41 @.@ 66 , and , against Middlesex , scored his first double @-@ century . Wisden suggested that he " was not so dependable as could have been desired " , but batted in an entertaining fashion . In August , he was selected in a trial game to assess players who might represent England in Test matches — he played against the England team for a side named " The Rest " — and scored 102 . In the winter of 1927 – 28 , Leyland once more coached in India for the Maharajah of Patiala . 
 Shortly after returning from India , Leyland married Constance ( Connie ) Russell in Harrogate on 29 March 1928 . In later years , Connie looked after the children of Herbert Sutcliffe during Yorkshire matches at Harrogate when their behaviour became too much for their own mother . Sutcliffe 's daughter later recalled Connie as " very stern and cross " , and the only person who could control her and her brother : " I was frightened to death . " 
 = = Test match cricketer = = 
 = = = Test debut and selection for Australian tour = = = 
 Like Leyland , the Yorkshire bowler Roy Kilner coached in India during 1927 – 28 . However , in doing so Kilner contracted a fever and died shortly after returning to England . With a weakened bowling attack , and affected by injuries and loss of form , Yorkshire pressed Leyland into service as an occasional bowler in the 1928 season . He had done little bowling for Yorkshire at this point ; the team possessed two slow left @-@ arm spinners in Kilner and Rhodes , leaving Leyland with little opportunity . Having never bowled 50 first @-@ class overs in a previous season , nor taken more than four wickets , he bowled over 500 overs in 1928 and took 35 wickets at an average of 34 @.@ 20 . At this stage , the Yorkshire authorities thought that he might fully take on Kilner 's bowling workload , or succeed Rhodes in the senior spinner 's position . Leyland also had his most effective season with the bat . He scored 1 @,@ 783 runs at an average of 54 @.@ 03 , and scored another double century . At the end of the season , Wisden commented : " [ Leyland ] can play both the games — the dogged defence when a bad position must be saved and a fine forcing game when it is necessary to make runs quickly . In the ordinary way his preference is for attack and he is a delightful batsman to watch . " 
 During June 1928 , Leyland was selected for another Test trial , playing for " The Rest " against England ; then in mid @-@ July he played for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's Cricket Ground . At the end of July , the MCC named the team to tour Australia for the 1928 – 29 Ashes series . Leyland was included in the team ; according to The Times , it would have been difficult to leave him out and his presence lifted the fielding ability of the side . His selection was controversial in the south of England , and particularly in Kent , as he took the place that the veteran Kent batsman Frank Woolley was expected to fill . One Kent supporter wrote that Leyland was a " cross bat village @-@ greener " . Pelham Warner , a selector at the time , claimed that Leyland 's superior fielding influenced the decision , but the cricket writer Alan Gibson suggests that the real choice was between Woolley and Phil Mead , two batsmen of similar age . In 1928 , the West Indies toured England , playing their first Test matches . The team did not perform well , but the England selectors picked strong teams to provide practice for the players . Leyland was selected for the last of the three Test matches . Making his debut on 11 August 1928 , he was dismissed for 0 by Herman Griffith in his only innings . 
 The MCC team which toured Australia was extremely strong in batting , and Leyland served as back @-@ up to the main batsmen . The English batting line @-@ up was settled for most of the series , leaving little opportunity for the back @-@ ups ; although Mead played in the first Test , he was subsequently left out to strengthen the bowling . Playing in other first @-@ class matches on the tour , Leyland scored centuries against South Australia and Queensland . With England 4 – 0 ahead in the series , Chapman stood down from the final Test ; although it is not clear why he did so , one possibility is that he wished to give as many members of the team as possible a chance to appear in the Tests . Alternatively , he may have felt that his batting form did not warrant a place in the team . Whatever the reason , Leyland took his place . England lost the match , but Leyland was successful . He scored 137 , his first Test century , and 53 not out . The report in Wisden stated : " [ He ] distinguished himself by two really delightful displays ... His exhibition of powerful , well @-@ timed driving past cover @-@ point will long be remembered by those who saw it . " Overall , in first @-@ class matches on the tour , he scored 614 runs at 43 @.@ 85 , but his bowling was ineffective on the hard pitches . Following his success in the last Test , Leyland was expected to become one of the leading English batsmen , and before the 1929 season he was named one of the Wisden Cricketers of the Year for his performances in the 1928 season . 
 = = = Test regular = = = 
 Leyland scored 1 @,@ 931 runs at 42 @.@ 91 in 1929 , and took 50 first @-@ class wickets in the season at an average of 30 @.@ 26 . In the match against Oxford University he took eight wickets and against Glamorgan he took five wickets in an innings for the first time in his career . Against Lancashire , in a match which Rhodes missed with injury , Leyland took the role of the main spinner and returned figures of seven wickets for 52 runs . After watching this performance , the cricket writer Neville Cardus judged that Leyland had bowled well and with spirit on a wet pitch which favoured spin bowling , but that he lacked the accuracy and flight required in left @-@ arm spin bowlers and exemplified by Rhodes . In another game , Cardus observed that Leyland seemed to be attempting left @-@ handed googly bowling . Following success in a trial game , Leyland kept his place in the Test team , playing all five matches against South Africa that summer to score 294 runs at an average of 42 @.@ 00 . In the Second Test , played at Lord 's , he scored 73 and 102 . 
 Leyland did not play in the first two matches of the 1930 Ashes series ; Woolley replaced him in the team but was unsuccessful and Leyland came in for the final three games . Leyland was little more effective , and his highest score in the series was 44 ; England lost 2 – 1 . More successful for Yorkshire , he scored five centuries for the county , and hit his highest score of the season against Lancashire — the eventual County Champions for 1930 . At the time , Yorkshire v Lancashire matches were mainly dour , slow @-@ scoring affairs , but Leyland played freely to score 211 not out in around 270 minutes . He hit two sixes in one over , and , according to Cardus , played " great and beautiful cricket " . Leyland 's best bowling performance that year came for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's , when he took seven for 94 in the first innings and nine wickets in the match . In all first @-@ class matches in 1930 , he scored 2 @,@ 175 runs at an average of 50 @.@ 58 , the first time he reached 2 @,@ 000 runs in a season , and took 53 wickets at 27 @.@ 92 . During the 1930 – 31 English winter , he toured South Africa with an MCC team . Owing to the absence of a regular opening batsman , Leyland opened the batting on several occasions and performed consistently during the tour . In first @-@ class matches , he scored 774 runs at 36 @.@ 85 and took nine wickets ; in the Test series , he scored 300 runs at 42 @.@ 85 , twice passing fifty . In the second game , he took three for 91 , his best bowling performance in Test matches . 
 = = = Bodyline tour = = = 
 Leyland struggled in the following two seasons . In 1931 , he scored just one century as his aggregate and average — 1 @,@ 228 runs at 38 @.@ 37 — both fell , although his increasing habit of succeeding against the best opposition continued when he scored 96 for Yorkshire against the Rest of England . With the ball , he took 12 wickets at an average over 40 . Despite his loss of form , Yorkshire won the County Championship for the first time since 1925 ; the team were also champions in the next two seasons and went on to win seven out of nine championships before the Second World War . Leyland played for the Players against the Gentlemen , but was not selected for any of the Tests in the three @-@ match series between England and New Zealand . Wisden later suggested that he was " stale " ; at the time , in reviewing candidates to tour Australia in 1932 – 33 , the Wisden editor believed that " no reason exists why Leyland should not regain his best form " . 
 At the beginning of the 1932 season , Leyland continued to struggle . Although he was chosen in two Test trial matches and scored 189 against Middlesex , he was left out of the England team for the only Test of the summer , and had little success in the first three months of the season . However , in August he made 1 @,@ 013 runs at 84 @.@ 14 , scoring four centuries and two innings over 90 . During this spell , Leyland shared a partnership of 149 runs in 55 minutes with Herbert Sutcliffe against Essex . That county had chosen two fast bowlers in an attempt to intimidate the Yorkshire batsmen . Ken Farnes and Morris Nichols bowled a succession of bouncers ; Farnes attempted fast leg theory bowling , a tactic which developed into Bodyline during the MCC tour of Australia in 1932 – 33 . Eventually , Sutcliffe began to hook the short ball and in six successive overs , he and Leyland added 102 runs , an unusually fast rate of scoring . Leyland faced little of the bowling , later remembering that he received only four deliveries in this period , hitting each for four . In total , he contributed only 45 runs to the partnership . Farnes was reduced to tears by the assault on his bowling , and these events possibly persuaded the MCC selectors to leave him out of the team for the 1932 – 33 tour . Leyland , on the other hand , was among the last names added to the touring party in mid @-@ August . At the end of the season , he scored 105 against the Rest of England for Yorkshire , his team playing as County Champions . In total , he scored 1 @,@ 980 runs at 52 @.@ 10 and took 23 wickets at 20 @.@ 86 . 
 England won the 1932 – 33 Ashes series 4 – 1 , but the cricket was overshadowed by controversy over the team 's use of Bodyline tactics . Leyland was not particularly successful in statistical terms . However , assessing the tour in Wisden , Sydney Southerton wrote that Leyland " fared on the whole extremely well ... he had batted finely in the Test matches at Adelaide and Brisbane " . He scored 306 runs in the five Test matches at an average of 34 @.@ 00 ; he began and ended the series with scores of 0 , but played innings of 83 and 86 in the decisive third and fourth Test matches , with his team under pressure when he batted . Gibson points out that both of his ducks came when England were in dominant positions . In all first @-@ class matches on the tour , Leyland scored 880 runs at 44 @.@ 00 , including two centuries against state teams . The former Australian batsmen Charlie Macartney suggested that , although " a useful player " , Leyland was hindered by his defensive approach . Going against his naturally aggressive approach made him seem " awkward " , and never allowed him to play at his best . Other Australian commentators had a more favourable opinion . 
 = = = Peak years = = = 
 Returning from Australia , Leyland scored 2 @,@ 317 first @-@ class runs in the 1933 season , the highest seasonal aggregate of his career . Averaging 50 @.@ 36 , he scored seven centuries . With the ball , he took 37 wickets at 28 @.@ 13 . In a game against Leicestershire in August , he took ten wickets for 94 runs , the only time in his career he took ten wickets in a match . The West Indies team toured England that season , but Leyland played only in the first Test ; he scored one run in his single innings . Leyland also scored over 2 @,@ 000 first @-@ class runs in 1934 , at an average of 53 @.@ 55 . Playing all five Test matches of the series against the touring Australian team , he scored 478 runs at an average of 68 @.@ 28 . His three centuries were scored when England were in difficult situations . A Wisden review of his career written in 1943 stated : " In 1934 Leyland reached the height of his powers . Ripe in technique , rich in experience , like granite in battle , he was in this season England 's greatest batsman . " 
 England lost the series 2 – 1 . The Australians were heavily dependent on the bowling of Clarrie Grimmett and Bill O 'Reilly . At the time , O 'Reilly was regarded as the best bowler in the world , and among the greatest of all time , but Leyland began a spell of relative dominance over him . In the second Test , Leyland scored 109 and shared a partnership of 129 with Les Ames ; in the next match , he hit 153 runs , sharing large partnerships with Patsy Hendren and Ames , and in the final Test , he played an innings of 110 . However , the rest of the England batting was unreliable ; reviewing the season , the Wisden editor Sydney Southerton wrote : " In nearly every match either Hendren , Leyland or Ames , instead of being able to go in and play a free , confident game , had to save or remedy a position seriously damaged by the quick fall of two or three wickets . " In addition to his batting successes , Leyland was generally the best outfielder in the England team . He also scored three centuries for Yorkshire , another for the Rest of England against Lancashire , the Champion County , and 80 for the Players against the Gentlemen at Lord 's . With the ball , he took 33 first @-@ class wickets . He was given a benefit match against Nottinghamshire ; his benefit eventually raised £ 3 @,@ 648 , at the time the third highest amount raised for a Yorkshire player . 
 During the winter of 1934 – 35 , Leyland toured the West Indies with an MCC team which lost the four @-@ Test series 2 – 1 . The English batsmen were overwhelmed by the pace bowlers of the West Indies team , and some MCC players complained that Learie Constantine , Manny Martindale and Leslie Hylton intimidated the visiting batsmen with short @-@ pitched bowling . Leyland played three Tests but scored only 36 runs in six innings . More successful in other first @-@ class games , he scored 347 runs at 21 @.@ 68 overall , and took 11 wickets . He scored 1 @,@ 815 runs at an average of 38 @.@ 61 in 1935 and took 32 wickets at 25 @.@ 46 . He played in four of the five Tests against South Africa — he missed the third with lumbago — to score 342 runs at 57 @.@ 00 . In the first and fourth Tests , he hit fifties , and in the final match scored 161 runs in 130 minutes , batting quickly throughout . However , England could not force a win , and having lost the second Test , were beaten 1 – 0 in the series . 
 After taking part in a tour of Jamaica by the Yorkshire team , on which he scored 115 and 75 in successive games , Leyland scored 1 @,@ 790 runs at 45 @.@ 89 in 1936 . He hit seven centuries , including an innings of 263 runs against Essex in the season , the highest first @-@ class score of his career . He played in two of the three Tests against India that season — he missed the second with injury — but only batted twice . In the first Test , he scored 60 runs against a strong bowling attack when England were in a difficult position . The home side won the series 2 – 0 . During the season , Leyland was among the first players chosen to tour Australia with the MCC in the forthcoming winter . 
 The MCC team was captained by G. O. B. Allen who added Leyland to the team selection committee during the tour . The team won the first two Tests , but lost the next three to lose the series 3 – 2 , and Wisden blamed a weakness in batting for the defeat . Leyland was one of the few batsmen excused : " Leyland , though very restrained , was one of the mainstays of the batting " . Before the series , England were expected to struggle severely against the bowling of O 'Reilly . According to Cardus , Leyland told O 'Reilly before the first Test : " Ah can tell thi one thing now for certain ... Ah 's got thee where Ah wants thi , Bill — and Ah thinks tha knows it . " 
 In the first Test , Leyland scored 126 after the team lost the first three wickets for 20 runs ; many critics judged this to be his greatest innings . At this point , he had scored four centuries in seven Test innings against Australia . He played an effective defensive innings in the second innings , and another in the second Test , when he was criticised for slow scoring . Then in the third Test , on a pitch made exceptionally difficult for batsmen by rain , England could only score 76 for nine ; Leyland scored 17 of those runs and according to Wisden , " was the one real success for England ... [ He ] never seemed in difficulties " . In the second innings , he scored a century In total , in five Test matches , he scored 441 runs at an average of 55 @.@ 12 . Australian critics viewed Leyland as one of England 's best batsmen , and gave him credit for England 's strong showing early in the series . In all first @-@ class games on the tour , he scored 902 runs at 50 @.@ 11 ; he was unsuccessful in three games the team played in New Zealand on completion of the main tour . 
 = = = Last years as a cricketer = = = 
 Leyland missed a substantial amount of cricket in 1937 with a broken finger , barely playing in July , and missing the Test series against New Zealand . He scored 1 @,@ 306 runs at 36 @.@ 27 and took 19 wickets . Injuries continued to trouble him in 1938 . He scored 1 @,@ 884 first class runs at 43 @.@ 81 , but a shoulder strain early in the season adversely affected his form . He was not selected for the first three Tests against Australia , not least as the England side contained several promising batsmen . However , he had his best season with the ball . A succession of hard , dry wickets gave fewer opportunities to orthodox spinners and Leyland took 63 wickets at 19 @.@ 32 . Early in the season , he took eight for 63 against Hampshire , the best figures of his career . Just as his batting form returned , and when he was likely to be recalled to the England side , Leyland broke his thumb in a match against Middlesex . However , he recovered in time to play in the final Test of the series . Australia 's victory in the fourth Test had given the team a 1 – 0 lead . 
 Wisden commented : " The inclusion once again of Leyland was a move which yielded splendid results . " Coming in to bat at number three , Leyland shared a partnership of 382 with Len Hutton , at the time a record English Test partnership for any wicket ; as of 2013 , it remains England 's highest partnership for the second wicket , and the highest for any wicket against Australia . As there was no time limit on the match , Leyland batted very cautiously and scored 187 in around six @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours before he was run out . Hutton went on to score 364 , at the time the highest score in Tests . England had batted deliberately slowly to frustrate the bowlers , and Cardus expressed his frustration to Leyland during an interval in play . Cardus wrote : " ' And even you , Maurice , ' I complained , in sorrow not anger , ' even you won 't hit the ball and give us some cricket . ' ' Hey , wait a minute , Mr Cardus , ' <unk> Leyland , as though pained at my protest , ' wait a minute — tha must remember that Ah 'm playing for me place in team . ' " England went on to win the match and level the series . Leyland 's innings was his highest in Tests , but this was his final match for England . In 41 Tests , he scored 2 @,@ 764 runs at 46 @.@ 06 and took six wickets . 
 In 1939 , the last season before the Second World War , Leyland scored 1 @,@ 238 runs at 39 @.@ 93 and took 23 wickets . He served in the army during the war : first as a sergeant instructor , and was later commissioned as lieutenant . Between his army duties , he played cricket in the Bradford League , and played for various wartime teams , including ones representing the army . In 1945 , he played some non @-@ first @-@ class games for teams representing Yorkshire and a first @-@ class game for Yorkshire against Lancashire . Choosing to continue his career after the war to help the Yorkshire team become re @-@ established , Leyland played a last full season in 1946 when he scored 632 runs at 21 @.@ 06 , with a highest score of 88 , and took 16 wickets at 14 @.@ 70 ; against Warwickshire , he took seven for 36 . During August 1946 , he announced his retirement , but in the following two seasons , he appeared in some end @-@ of @-@ season first @-@ class games . He ended his first @-@ class career in 1948 with 33 @,@ 660 runs at 40 @.@ 50 and 466 wickets at 29 @.@ 31 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After his retirement from the Yorkshire team , Leyland returned to play for Harrogate until 1950 , when he became chief coach , along with Arthur Mitchell , at Yorkshire . Mitchell was a dour , serious man but the contrast with the cheerier Leyland made an effective partnership . Leyland also served as a representative of the paper manufacturers Thomas Owen . In 1949 , he was among the first group of former professional cricketers to be awarded honorary membership of the MCC . He continued as a respected coach of Yorkshire until illness forced his retirement in 1963 . Suffering from Parkinson 's disease , he maintained some connections with Yorkshire cricket and always tried to attend matches played at Harrogate . In recognition of his achievements , the Harrogate grounds erected new gates which were named in his honour . Leyland died in a hospital at Knaresborough on 1 January 1967 . 
 = = Style , technique and personality = = 
 As a batsman , Leyland generally batted in the middle order or occasionally opened the batting . Early in his career , commentators suggested that his batting technique was faulty , even when he was statistically successful . His use of the cut shot was mistrusted by some Yorkshire critics , and they suspected that his preference for attacking play would be unsuccessful ; he was a faster scorer and more aggressive batsman than most of his Yorkshire contemporaries . Cardus suggested that , instead , he was in the line of " humorous Yorkshiremen which the broad nature of his county produces from time to time as a contrast to and leavening of the generally dour lump . There was a twinkle in his eye and there was a twinkle in his bat , no matter how grimly and straight it may occasionally be obliged to defend a difficult situation in Yorkshire . " The cricket writer E. W. Swanton observed that Leyland 's bat was often not straight when he played his shots — contrary to orthodox technique — but the speed of his footwork and his ability to watch the ball closely made up for any lapses . Opposing bowlers suggested that the impression was an illusion and that his bat was straight when he hit the ball . 
 Although Leyland was not a stylish batsman , he was effective . Cardus described him as " a sturdy cricketer , not tall , but his sloping bottle @-@ neck shoulders seemed to add inches to him and he had long arms of impressive thickness , veined with strength at the wrist ; also he was broad in the beam , with a <unk> smile on his cheerful open countenance . " He was a good driver of the ball , with a high backlift , and moved quickly and economically to reach the pitch of the ball . Cardus thought that his style of batting was representative of his character : " He put his nature into every stroke , and as soon as he had ' got bowling where he wanted it , ' he didn 't merely hit or drive it — he <unk> it . " At times , Leyland 's desire to score quickly brought about his dismissal . However , when necessary , he defended strongly and used his pads as a second line of defence if he missed the ball with his bat . 
 Critics judged Leyland a better Test than county batsman . His first @-@ class batting figures were not exceptional compared to other cricketers who played far fewer Test matches , but in Tests , his average is six runs an innings higher ; against Australia , the strongest of England 's opponents during his career , he averaged 56 , a further increase of ten runs . Gibson suggests that he rose to the big occasions , and that he performed best against the toughest opponents . According to Leyland 's obituary in The Times , " He was essentially a man for the big occasion , a batsman at his best in a crisis , and his favourite game was a Roses match or an Australian Test . England 's supporters often breathed a sigh of relief to see his burly figure purposefully striding to the wicket . " The writer R. C. Robertson @-@ Glasgow suggested that Leyland in a Test match was like the " four @-@ <unk> of ancient or romantic times . He was Horatius on the tottering bridge ; Hector , who alone stood between Troy and destruction . He was born to rescue . But he is more dangerous than those who are stubborn or grim . He has something of D 'Artagnan in him ; there is a gaiety besides the simplicity and strength ; seen in the slight list of the cap , and in a certain <unk> and optimism of gait . " 
 Although he did not have to face top @-@ class fast bowling in Test matches , he was successful against English fast bowlers such as Harold Larwood in county cricket , and he established his ascendancy over O 'Reilly , the world 's best bowler at the time . On one occasion , O 'Reilly held his head in his hands when he saw Leyland come out to bat , and was heard to say : " Oh , it 's that bloody Yorkshireman again ! " In later years , O 'Reilly vigorously denied that Leyland held the upper hand , responding to such suggestions by saying " You just check how many times I got him out ! " The cricket historian David Frith points out that " the answer is nine times in 16 Tests , but with decreasing frequency . In their Test encounters Leyland made 1 @,@ 412 runs at an average of 56 . " Robertson @-@ Glasgow noted that Leyland was almost anonymous in good batting conditions under little pressure ; he came to life in more difficult circumstances : " His element was foul weather . He would disappear into the haze of Bramall Lane , where a sterner sort of game was being played under the name of cricket , and entrench himself among the sawdust and smoke and off @-@ breaks and appeals , and do his raw , tough work in silence . " 
 Leyland was regarded by critics as a good fielder in almost any position . He bowled left @-@ arm spin , but contrary to the orthodox practice for a left @-@ arm spinner to use his fingers to spin the ball , usually bowled the ball from the back of his hand — the delivery known as the chinaman . He did not take bowling seriously , but enjoyed it . In this role , he was effective at times , but other players were used in the main spinner 's role for Yorkshire in preference to him , and he was generally used as back @-@ up , for example when the other bowlers had failed to dismiss well @-@ set batsmen . His Wisden obituary suggests that , had he played for another county , he might have developed into a world @-@ class all @-@ rounder . His lack of opportunity prompted him to experiment with wrist spin , and he later claimed that he originated the term " chinaman " to describe the delivery . Wisden suggests : " Whenever two batsmen were difficult to shift or something different was wanted someone in the Yorkshire team would say , ' Put on Maurice to bowl some of those Chinese things . ' Roy Kilner explained , ' It 's foreign stuff and you can 't call it anything else . ' " Another version was the Leyland believed that the particular delivery was only good enough " to get the Chinese out " . However , there are several theories over how the delivery came to be named . 
 Leyland was noted as a humorist in his playing days ; many stories are associated with him , although some are probably apocryphal . He told stories against himself . One story concerned his dismissal during a wartime match , in which he was out to a terrible delivery from a bowler who was badly out of practice . Leyland hit the ball in the air and was caught . He ruefully commented : " You know , I don 't get much practice against that stuff " . Another time , he described how he faced an over from O 'Reilly , as related in his obituary in The Cricketer : " ' First he bowled me an off @-@ break , then he bowled me a leg @-@ break ; then his googly , then a bumper , then one that went with his arm ... ' ' But that 's only five , Maurice . What about the last one ? ' ' Oh , that , ' said Maurice deprecatingly . ' That was a straight ' un and it bowled me . ' " Among his team @-@ mates , Leyland was known as " <unk> " , or " Turnip " , possibly a reference to his country upbringing . Robertson @-@ Glasgow and Cardus wrote prolifically on Leyland ; Gibson suggests that these pieces are among their best work . Leyland was popular with team @-@ mates , opponents and spectators around the world . Swanton concluded his obituary of Leyland : " No more courageous or determined cricketer ever buckled on pads for England . " 
 = Loose Fur = 
 Loose Fur is an American rock band comprising Wilco members Jeff Tweedy and Glenn Kotche , and Wilco collaborator Jim O 'Rourke . The trio first convened in May 2000 in preparation for a Tweedy performance at a festival in Chicago . Tweedy was offered the opportunity to collaborate with an artist of his choosing , and he decided to work with O 'Rourke . O 'Rourke brought Kotche to a rehearsal session , and the trio recorded an album 's worth of songs . The trio have since released two albums , 2003 's Loose Fur and 2006 's Born Again in the USA , for Drag City . The band has only toured once . 
 The band is noted for its influence on Wilco 's fourth album , Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . Tweedy was unhappy with how music from the initial recording sessions for the album was sounding , resulting in a lineup change for the band . Both O 'Rourke and Kotche replaced members of Wilco during the recording sessions for the album , and both contributed to the band 's recordings through 2007 's Sky Blue Sky . Kotche remains a member of Wilco as of 2016 . 
 = = Formation = = 
 In the winter of 1999 , Wilco lead singer Jeff Tweedy acquired a copy of Jim O 'Rourke 's 1997 album Bad Timing . The album featured four instrumental tracks that juxtaposed guitar parts with orchestration . Tweedy liked how O 'Rourke 's music was varied and " not easily categorized " . According to Tweedy : 
 Tweedy was invited to perform with a collaborator of his choice for the 2000 Noise Pop Festival in Chicago . The festival promoter offered to pair him with members of the Mekons , but Tweedy decided to collaborate with O 'Rourke . The pair met at O 'Rourke 's apartment a few days before the festival . They listened to gramophone records by T. Rex , Phil <unk> , and Roy Harper ; later that night they wrote material for the concert and agreed to meet the next day at the Wilco loft in Chicago . O 'Rourke invited Glenn Kotche , a drummer who played in a similar musical style , to the practice session . Tweedy found lyrical inspiration from word exercises ; for example , he picked out random words from a copy of TV Guide and formed abstract lines such as " you boil hearts and discuss birds " . He also sought to improve as a guitarist , taking influence from free jazz artists such as James " Blood " Ulmer . 
 On May 14 , 2000 , Jeff Tweedy played the Noise Pop Festival at Double Door in a concert that polarized Wilco fans . Natalie Merchant joined the band onstage , but left after Tweedy requested that she perform Utah Phillips ' murder ballad " Rock Salt and Nails " . Among the new material performed at the concert was " Laminated Cat " , a reworked version of a Wilco demo entitled " Not for the Season " — Tweedy was unhappy with the straightforwardness of Wilco 's version . The trio decided to name their band Loose Fur and recorded a six @-@ song album in the summer of 2000 . The band also made an uncredited appearance on O 'Rourke 's 2001 solo album Insignificance . The Loose Fur album was not released at the time because Tweedy was busy recording Wilco 's fourth album , Yankee Hotel Foxtrot . 
 = = Influence on Yankee Hotel Foxtrot = = 
 By winter 2000 , Wilco had completed enough material for an album release . However , Tweedy was dissatisfied with the " emotional center " of the recordings . He wanted the release to sound more like the music he had recorded with Loose Fur , although he " couldn 't put his finger on why . " Tweedy wanted the album to advance the sound of Wilco in a similar fashion as Being There and Summerteeth . He became irritated by Wilco drummer Ken Coomer because Coomer disliked playing consistent drum patterns each time that the band played a song . Wilco guitarist Jay Bennett also soured on Coomer because of the drummer 's lack of patience and consistency . Although he briefly considered adding Kotche as a secondary percussionist , Tweedy decided to replace Coomer with his Loose Fur bandmate : 
 Kotche re @-@ wrote the drum parts for the album almost immediately upon his acceptance into the band . In one instance , he reworked " I Am Trying to Break Your Heart " by adding parts played on hubcaps , crotales , and floor tiles . Although some members were unsure about the decision to replace Coomer with Kotche , the band unanimously supported the decision after hearing Kotche 's new percussion parts . According to Bennett : 
 Coomer wasn 't the only band member that struck a nerve with Tweedy during the recording sessions . Tweedy was unhappy with the way that Bennett mixed parts of the album , particularly the sequences between songs . Tweedy felt that Bennett was " burning out " while mixing the album , and invited Jim O 'Rourke to remix " I Am Trying to Break Your Heart " . Although Bennett conceded that O 'Rourke did a better job of mixing the song , animosity arose between the two engineers . O 'Rourke continued to remix more songs , and attempted to increase the drama of the album by reducing the contributions by the backing members of Wilco . He removed so many parts on some songs that only music by Tweedy , Kotche , and himself — the three members of Loose Fur — appeared on those pieces . 
 = = Recording career = = 
 On January 28 , 2003 , Loose Fur released the six @-@ track album that they recorded at the Wilco loft in 2000 . Unlike Yankee Hotel Foxtrot , Loose Fur featured only one overdub per song . The band played two shows in Brooklyn , NY in support of the album , playing their first live show as " Loose Fur " on December 6 , 2002 . 
 In October 2005 , Tweedy announced that the band was nearly finished recording their second Loose Fur album . The album , Born Again in the USA , was the first album to consist mostly of O 'Rourke lyrics since Insignificance . Unlike their first album , Loose Fur did not tour to support the album . In contrast to their eponymous debut , Born Again in the USA was heavier with more harmonized guitar parts . Both of their albums were received favorably by critics . Tweedy performed " The Ruling Class " and " Laminated Cat " on a solo performance DVD in 2005 . Glenn Kotche is still the drummer for Wilco , and Jim O 'Rourke is a regular collaborator with the band ; both performed on A Ghost Is Born and Sky Blue Sky . In a 2012 interview , drummer Glenn Kotche confirmed that while there are no definite dates selected to record a followup to Born Again In The USA , the three band members do plan on recording again . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Coral = 
 Corals are marine invertebrates in the class Anthozoa of phylum Cnidaria . They typically live in compact colonies of many identical individual polyps . The group includes the important reef builders that inhabit tropical oceans and secrete calcium carbonate to form a hard skeleton . 
 A coral " group " is a colony of myriad genetically identical polyps . Each polyp is a sac @-@ like animal typically only a few millimeters in diameter and a few centimeters in length . A set of tentacles surround a central mouth opening . An exoskeleton is excreted near the base . Over many generations , the colony thus creates a large skeleton that is characteristic of the species . Individual heads grow by asexual reproduction of polyps . Corals also breed sexually by spawning : polyps of the same species release gametes simultaneously over a period of one to several nights around a full moon . 
 Although some corals can catch small fish and plankton , using stinging cells on their tentacles , most corals obtain the majority of their energy and nutrients from photosynthetic unicellular dinoflagellates in the genus Symbiodinium that live within their tissues . These are commonly known as zooxanthellae and the corals that contain them are zooxanthellate corals . Such corals require sunlight and grow in clear , shallow water , typically at depths shallower than 60 metres ( 200 ft ) . Corals are major contributors to the physical structure of the coral reefs that develop in tropical and subtropical waters , such as the enormous Great Barrier Reef off the coast of Queensland , Australia . 
 Other corals do not rely on zooxanthellae and can live in much deeper water , with the cold @-@ water genus <unk> surviving as deep as 3 @,@ 000 metres ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) . Some have been found on the Darwin Mounds , north @-@ west of Cape Wrath , Scotland . Corals have also been found as far north as off the coast of Washington State and the Aleutian Islands . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 In his Scala Naturae , Aristotle classified corals as " <unk> " ( " plant @-@ animals " ) , animals that had characteristics of plants and were therefore hypothetically in between animals and plants . The Persian polymath Al @-@ Biruni ( d . 1048 ) classified sponges and corals as animals , arguing that they respond to touch . Nevertheless , people believed corals to be plants until the eighteenth century , when William Herschel used a microscope to establish that coral had the characteristic thin cell membranes of an animal . 
 The phylogeny of <unk> is not clearly understood and a number of different models have been proposed . Within the Hexacorallia , the sea anemones , coral anemones and stony corals may constitute a monophyletic grouping united by their eight @-@ fold symmetry and cnidocyte trait . The Octocorallia appears to be monophyletic , and primitive members of this group may have been <unk> . The cladogram presented here comes from a 2014 study by <unk> et al. which was based on the divergence of mitochondrial DNA within the group and on nuclear markers . 
 Corals are classified in the class Anthozoa of the phylum Cnidaria . They are divided into three subclasses , Hexacorallia , Octocorallia , and <unk> . The Hexacorallia include the stony corals , the sea anemones and the <unk> . These groups have polyps that generally have 6 @-@ fold symmetry . The Octocorallia include blue coral , soft corals , sea pens , and gorgonians ( sea fans and sea whips ) . These groups have polyps with 8 @-@ fold symmetry , each polyp having eight tentacles and eight mesenteries . <unk> are the tube @-@ dwelling anemones . 
 Fire corals are not true corals , being in the order <unk> ( sometimes known as <unk> ) of the class Hydrozoa . 
 = = Anatomy = = 
 Corals are sessile animals in the class Anthozoa and differ from most other cnidarians in not having a medusa stage in their life cycle . The body unit of the animal is a polyp . Most corals are colonial , the initial polyp budding to produce another and the colony gradually developing from this small start . In stony corals , also known as hard corals , the polyps produce a skeleton composed of calcium carbonate to strengthen and protect the organism . This is deposited by the polyps and by the coenosarc , the living tissue that connects them . The polyps sit in cup @-@ shaped depressions in the skeleton known as corallites . Colonies of stony coral are very variable in appearance ; a single species may adopt an encrusting , plate @-@ like , bushy , columnar or massive solid structure , the various forms often being linked to different types of habitat , with variations in light level and water movement being significant . 
 In soft corals , there is no stony skeleton but the tissues are often toughened by the presence of tiny skeletal elements known as sclerites , which are made from calcium carbonate . Soft corals are very variable in form and most are colonial . A few soft corals are <unk> , but the polyps of most are connected by sheets of coenosarc . In some species this is thick and the polyps are deeply embedded . Some soft corals are encrusting or form lobes . Others are tree @-@ like or whip @-@ like and have a central axial skeleton embedded in the tissue matrix . This is composed either of a fibrous protein called <unk> or of a calcified material . In both stony and soft corals , the polyps can be retracted , with stony corals relying on their hard skeleton and cnidocytes for defence against predators , with soft corals generally relying on chemical defences in the form of toxic substances present in the tissues known as terpenoids . 
 The polyps of stony corals have six @-@ fold symmetry while those of soft corals have eight . The mouth of each polyp is surrounded by a ring of tentacles . In stony corals these are cylindrical and taper to a point , but in soft corals they are pinnate with side branches known as pinnules . In some tropical species these are reduced to mere stubs and in some they are fused to give a paddle @-@ like appearance . In most corals , the tentacles are retracted by day and spread out at night to catch plankton and other small organisms . Shallow water species of both stony and soft corals can be zooxanthellate , the corals supplementing their plankton diet with the products of photosynthesis produced by these symbionts . The polyps interconnect by a complex and well @-@ developed system of gastrovascular canals , allowing significant sharing of nutrients and symbionts . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 <unk> feed on a variety of small organisms , from microscopic zooplankton to small fish . The polyp 's tentacles immobilize or kill prey using their nematocysts . These cells carry venom which they rapidly release in response to contact with another organism . A dormant nematocyst discharges in response to nearby prey touching the trigger ( <unk> ) . A flap ( operculum ) opens and its stinging apparatus fires the barb into the prey . The venom is injected through the hollow filament to immobilise the prey ; the tentacles then manoeuvre the prey to the mouth . 
 The tentacles then contract to bring the prey into the stomach . Once the prey is digested , the stomach reopens , allowing the elimination of waste products and the beginning of the next hunting cycle . They can scavenge drifting organic molecules and dissolved organic molecules . 
 = = = Intracellular symbionts = = = 
 Many corals , as well as other cnidarian groups such as <unk> ( a sea anemone ) form a symbiotic relationship with a class of dinoflagellate algae , zooxanthellae of the genus Symbiodinium . <unk> , a familiar pest among coral reef aquarium hobbyists , serves as a valuable model organism in the study of cnidarian @-@ algal symbiosis . Typically , each polyp harbors one species of algae . Via photosynthesis , these provide energy for the coral , and aid in calcification . As much as 30 % of the tissue of a polyp may be plant material . 
 The algae benefit from a safe place to live and consume the polyp 's carbon dioxide and nitrogenous waste . Due to the strain the algae can put on the polyp , stress on the coral often drives them to eject the algae . Mass ejections are known as coral bleaching , because the algae contribute to coral 's brown coloration ; other colors , however , are due to host coral pigments , such as green fluorescent proteins ( <unk> ) . Ejection increases the polyp 's chance of surviving short @-@ term stress — they can regain algae , possibly of a different species at a later time . If the stressful conditions persist , the polyp eventually dies . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Corals can be both gonochoristic ( unisexual ) and hermaphroditic , each of which can reproduce sexually and asexually . Reproduction also allows coral to settle in new areas . 
 = = = Sexual = = = 
 Corals predominantly reproduce sexually . About 25 % of hermatypic corals ( stony corals ) form single sex ( gonochoristic ) colonies , while the rest are hermaphroditic . 
 = = = = Broadcasters = = = = 
 About 75 % of all hermatypic corals " broadcast spawn " by releasing gametes — eggs and sperm — into the water to spread offspring . The gametes fuse during fertilization to form a microscopic larva called a planula , typically pink and elliptical in shape . A typical coral colony forms several thousand larvae per year to overcome the odds against formation of a new colony . 
 Synchronous spawning is very typical on the coral reef , and often , even when multiple species are present , all corals spawn on the same night . This synchrony is essential so male and female gametes can meet . Corals rely on environmental cues , varying from species to species , to determine the proper time to release gametes into the water . The cues involve temperature change , lunar cycle , day length , and possibly chemical signalling . Synchronous spawning may form hybrids and is perhaps involved in coral speciation . The immediate cue is most often sunset , which cues the release . The spawning event can be visually dramatic , clouding the usually clear water with gametes . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Brooding species are most often <unk> ( not reef @-@ building ) in areas of high current or wave action . <unk> release only sperm , which is negatively buoyant , sinking on to the waiting egg carriers who harbor unfertilized eggs for weeks . Synchronous spawning events sometimes occurs even with these species . After fertilization , the corals release planula that are ready to settle . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 <unk> exhibit positive phototaxis , swimming towards light to reach surface waters , where they drift and grow before descending to seek a hard surface to which they can attach and begin a new colony . They also exhibit positive <unk> , moving towards sounds that emanate from the reef and away from open water . High failure rates afflict many stages of this process , and even though millions of gametes are released by each colony , few new colonies form . The time from spawning to settling is usually two to three days , but can be up to two months . The larva grows into a polyp and eventually becomes a coral head by asexual budding and growth . 
 = = = Asexual = = = 
 Within a coral head , the genetically identical polyps reproduce asexually , either by budding ( <unk> ) or by dividing , whether longitudinally or transversely . 
 Budding involves splitting a smaller polyp from an adult . As the new polyp grows , it forms its body parts . The distance between the new and adult polyps grows , and with it , the coenosarc ( the common body of the colony ; see coral anatomy ) . Budding can be intratentacular , from its oral discs , producing same @-@ sized polyps within the ring of tentacles , or <unk> , from its base , producing a smaller polyp . 
 Division forms two polyps that each become as large as the original . Longitudinal division begins when a polyp broadens and then divides its <unk> ( body ) , effectively splitting along its length . The mouth divides and new tentacles form . The two polyps thus created then generate their missing body parts and exoskeleton . Transversal division occurs when polyps and the exoskeleton divide transversally into two parts . This means one has the basal disc ( bottom ) and the other has the oral disc ( top ) ; the new polyps must separately generate the missing pieces . 
 Asexual reproduction offers the benefits of high reproductive rate , delaying senescence , and replacement of dead modules , as well as geographical distribution . 
 = = = Colony division = = = 
 Whole colonies can reproduce asexually , forming two colonies with the same genotype . The possible mechanisms include fission , bailout and fragmentation . Fission occurs in some corals , especially among the family <unk> , where the colony splits into two or more colonies during early developmental stages . Bailout occurs when a single polyp abandons the colony and settles on a different substrate to create a new colony . Fragmentation involves individuals broken from the colony during storms or other disruptions . The separated individuals can start new colonies . 
 = = Reefs = = 
 Many corals in the order Scleractinia are hermatypic , meaning that they are involved in building reefs . Most such corals obtain some of their energy from zooxanthellae in the genus Symbiodinium . These are symbiotic photosynthetic dinoflagellates which require sunlight ; reef @-@ forming corals are therefore found mainly in shallow water . They secrete calcium carbonate to form hard skeletons that become the framework of the reef . However , not all reef @-@ building corals in shallow water contain zooxanthellae , and some deep water species , living at depths to which light cannot penetrate , form reefs but do not harbour the symbionts . 
 There are various types of shallow @-@ water coral reef , including fringing reefs , barrier reefs and atolls ; most occur in tropical and subtropical seas . They are very slow @-@ growing , adding perhaps one centimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in height each year . The Great Barrier Reef is thought to have been laid down about two million years ago . Over time , corals fragment and die , sand and rubble accumulates between the corals , and the shells of clams and other molluscs decay to form a gradually evolving calcium carbonate structure . Coral reefs are extremely diverse marine ecosystems hosting over 4 @,@ 000 species of fish , massive numbers of cnidarians , molluscs , crustaceans , and many other animals . 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 Although corals first appeared in the Cambrian period , some 542 million years ago , fossils are extremely rare until the Ordovician period , 100 million years later , when rugose and tabulate corals became widespread . Paleozoic corals often contained numerous <unk> symbionts . 
 <unk> corals occur in limestones and calcareous shales of the Ordovician and Silurian periods , and often form low cushions or branching masses of calcite alongside rugose corals . Their numbers began to decline during the middle of the Silurian period , and they became extinct at the end of the Permian period , 250 million years ago . 
 <unk> or horn corals became dominant by the middle of the Silurian period , and became extinct early in the Triassic period . The rugose corals existed in solitary and colonial forms , and were also composed of calcite . 
 The scleractinian corals filled the niche vacated by the extinct rugose and tabulate species . Their fossils may be found in small numbers in rocks from the Triassic period , and became common in the Jurassic and later periods . Scleractinian skeletons are composed of a form of calcium carbonate known as aragonite . Although they are geologically younger than the tabulate and rugose corals , the aragonite of their skeletons is less readily preserved , and their fossil record is accordingly less complete . 
 At certain times in the geological past , corals were very abundant . Like modern corals , these ancestors built reefs , some of which ended as great structures in sedimentary rocks . Fossils of fellow reef @-@ dwellers algae , sponges , and the remains of many echinoids , brachiopods , bivalves , gastropods , and trilobites appear along with coral fossils . This makes some corals useful index fossils . Coral fossils are not restricted to reef remnants , and many solitary fossils may be found elsewhere , such as <unk> , which occurs in England 's Gault clay formation . 
 = = Status = = 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 Coral reefs are under stress around the world . In particular , coral mining , agricultural and urban runoff , pollution ( organic and inorganic ) , overfishing , blast fishing , disease , and the digging of canals and access into islands and bays are localized threats to coral ecosystems . Broader threats are sea temperature rise , sea level rise and pH changes from ocean acidification , all associated with greenhouse gas emissions . In 1998 , 16 % of the world 's reefs died as a result of increased water temperature . 
 Approximately 10 % of the world 's coral reefs are dead . About 60 % of the world 's reefs are at risk due to human @-@ related activities . The threat to reef health is particularly strong in Southeast Asia , where 80 % of reefs are endangered . Over 50 % of the world 's coral reefs may be destroyed by 2030 ; as a result , most nations protect them through environmental laws . 
 In the Caribbean and tropical Pacific , direct contact between ~ 40 – 70 % of common seaweeds and coral causes bleaching and death to the coral via transfer of lipid @-@ soluble metabolites . Seaweed and algae proliferate given adequate nutrients and limited grazing by herbivores such as parrotfish . 
 Water temperature changes of more than 1 – 2 ° C ( 1 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 6 ° F ) or salinity changes can kill some species of coral . Under such environmental stresses , corals expel their Symbiodinium ; without them coral tissues reveal the white of their skeletons , an event known as coral bleaching . 
 Submarine springs found along the coast of Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula produce water with a naturally low pH ( relatively high acidity ) providing conditions similar to those expected to become widespread as the oceans absorb carbon dioxide . Surveys discovered multiple species of live coral that appeared to tolerate the acidity . The colonies were small and patchily distributed , and had not formed structurally complex reefs such as those that compose the nearby Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System . 
 = = = Protection = = = 
 Marine Protected Areas ( MPAs ) , Biosphere reserves , marine parks , national monuments world heritage status , fishery management and habitat protection can protect reefs from anthropogenic damage . 
 Many governments now prohibit removal of coral from reefs , and inform coastal residents about reef protection and ecology . While local action such as habitat restoration and herbivore protection can reduce local damage , the longer @-@ term threats of acidification , temperature change and sea @-@ level rise remain a challenge . 
 To eliminate destruction of corals in their indigenous regions , projects have been started to grow corals in non @-@ tropical countries . 
 = = Relation to humans = = 
 Local economies near major coral reefs benefit from an abundance of fish and other marine creatures as a food source . Reefs also provide recreational scuba diving and snorkeling tourism . These activities can damage coral but international projects such as Green Fins that encourage dive and snorkel centres to follow a Code of Conduct have been proven to mitigate these risks . 
 Live coral is highly sought after for aquaria . Soft corals are easier to maintain in captivity than hard corals . 
 = = = Jewelry = = = 
 Corals ' many colors give it appeal for necklaces and other jewelry . Intensely red coral is prized as a gemstone . Sometimes called fire coral , it is not the same as fire coral . Red coral is very rare because of overharvesting . 
 = = = Medicine = = = 
 In medicine , chemical compounds from corals are used for cancer , AIDS , pain , and other uses . Coral skeletons , e.g. <unk> are also used for bone grafting in humans . Coral <unk> , known as <unk> <unk> in Sanskrit , is widely used in traditional system of Indian medicine as a supplement in the treatment of a variety of bone metabolic disorders associated with calcium deficiency . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Coral reefs in places such as the East African coast are used as a source of building material . Ancient ( fossil ) coral limestone , notably including the Coral Rag Formation of the hills around Oxford ( England ) , was once used as a building stone , and can be seen in some of the oldest buildings in that city including the Saxon tower of St Michael at the Northgate , St. George 's Tower of Oxford Castle , and the mediaeval walls of the city . 
 = = = Climate research = = = 
 Annual growth bands in some corals , such as the deep sea bamboo corals ( <unk> ) , may be among the first signs of the effects of ocean acidification on marine life . The growth rings allow geologists to construct year @-@ by @-@ year chronologies , a form of incremental dating , which underlie high @-@ resolution records of past climatic and environmental changes using geochemical techniques . 
 Certain species form communities called microatolls , which are colonies whose top is dead and mostly above the water line , but whose perimeter is mostly submerged and alive . Average tide level limits their height . By analyzing the various growth morphologies , microatolls offer a low resolution record of sea level change . Fossilized microatolls can also be dated using Radiocarbon dating . Such methods can help to reconstruct Holocene sea levels . 
 Increasing sea temperatures in tropical regions ( ~ 1 degree C ) the last century have caused major coral bleaching , death , and therefore shrinking coral populations since although they are able to adapt and acclimate , it is uncertain if this evolutionary process will happen quickly enough to prevent major reduction of their numbers . 
 Though coral have large sexually @-@ reproducing populations , their evolution can be slowed by abundant asexual reproduction . Gene flow is variable among coral species . According to the biogeography of coral species gene flow cannot be counted on as a dependable source of adaptation as they are very stationary organisms . Also , coral longevity might factor into their <unk> . 
 However , adaptation to climate changes has been demonstrated in many cases . These are usually due to a shift in coral and zooxanthellae genotypes . These shifts in allelic frequencies have progressed toward more tolerant types of zooxanthellae . Scientists found that a certain scleractinian <unk> is becoming more common where sea temperature is high . <unk> able to tolerate warmer water seem to <unk> more slowly , implying an evolutionary trade @-@ off . 
 In the Gulf of Mexico , where sea temperatures are rising , cold @-@ sensitive staghorn and elkhorn coral have shifted in location . Not only have the symbionts and specific species been shown to shift , but there seems to be a certain growth rate favorable to selection . Slower @-@ growing but more heat @-@ tolerant corals have become more common . The changes in temperature and acclimation are complex . Some reefs in current shadows represent a refugium location that will help them adjust to the disparity in the environment even if eventually the temperatures may rise more quickly there than in other locations . This separation of populations by climatic barriers causes a realized niche to shrink greatly in comparison to the old fundamental niche . 
 = = = = Geochemistry = = = = 
 Corals are shallow , colonial organisms that integrate δ18O and trace elements into their skeletal aragonite ( polymorph of calcite ) crystalline structures , as they grow . Geochemistry anomalies within the crystalline structures of corals represent functions of temperature , salinity and oxygen isotopic composition . Such geochemical analysis can help with climate modeling . 
 = = = = = Strontium / calcium ratio anomaly = = = = = 
 Time can be attributed to coral geochemistry anomalies by correlating strontium / calcium minimums with sea surface temperature ( SST ) maximums to data collected from <unk> 3 @.@ 4 SSTA . 
 = = = = = Oxygen isotope anomaly = = = = = 
 The comparison of coral strontium / calcium minimums with sea surface temperature maximums , data recorded from <unk> 3 @.@ 4 SSTA , time can be correlated to coral strontium / calcium and δ18O variations . To confirm accuracy of the annual relationship between Sr / Ca and δ18O variations , a perceptible association to annual coral growth rings confirms the age conversion . Geochronology is established by the blending of Sr / Ca data , growth rings , and stable isotope data . El Nino @-@ Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) is directly related to climate fluctuations that influence coral δ18O ratio from local salinity variations associated with the position of the South Pacific convergence zone ( SPCZ ) and can be used for ENSO modeling . 
 = = = = = Sea surface temperature and sea surface salinity = = = = = 
 The global moisture budget is primarily being influenced by tropical sea surface temperatures from the position of the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . The Southern Hemisphere has a unique meteorological feature positioned in the southwestern Pacific Basin called the South Pacific Convergence Zone ( SPCZ ) , which contains a perennial position within the Southern Hemisphere . During ENSO warm periods , the SPCZ reverses orientation extending from the equator down south through Solomon Islands , Vanuatu , Fiji and towards the French Polynesian Islands ; and due east towards South America affecting geochemistry of corals in tropical regions . 
 Geochemical analysis of skeletal coral can be linked to sea surface salinity ( SSS ) and sea surface temperature ( SST ) , from El Nino 3 @.@ 4 SSTA data , of tropical oceans to seawater δ18O ratio anomalies from corals . ENSO phenomenon can be related to variations in sea surface salinity ( SSS ) and sea surface temperature ( SST ) that can help model tropical climate activities . 
 = = = = = Limited climate research on current species = = = = = 
 Climate research on live coral species is limited to a few studied species . Studying Porites coral provides a stable foundation for geochemical interpretations that is much simpler to physically extract data in comparison to <unk> species where the complexity of <unk> species skeletal structure creates difficulty when physically sampled , which happens to be one of the only multidecadal living coral records used for coral paleoclimate modeling . 
 = = = Aquaria = = = 
 The saltwater <unk> hobby has increasingly expanded , over recent years , to include reef tanks , fish tanks that include large amounts of live rock on which coral is allowed to grow and spread . These tanks are either kept in a natural @-@ like state , with algae ( sometimes in the form of an algae scrubber ) and a deep sand bed providing filtration , or as " show tanks " , with the rock kept largely bare of the algae and microfauna that would normally populate it , in order to appear neat and clean . 
 The most popular kind of coral kept is soft coral , especially <unk> and mushroom corals , which are especially easy to grow and propagate in a wide variety of conditions , because they originate in enclosed parts of reefs where water conditions vary and lighting may be less reliable and direct . More serious <unk> may keep small polyp stony coral , which is from open , brightly lit reef conditions and therefore much more demanding , while large polyp stony coral is a sort of compromise between the two . 
 = = = Aquaculture = = = 
 Coral aquaculture , also known as coral farming or coral gardening , is the cultivation of corals for commercial purposes or coral reef restoration . Aquaculture is showing promise as a potentially effective tool for restoring coral reefs , which have been declining around the world . The process bypasses the early growth stages of corals when they are most at risk of dying . Coral fragments known as " seeds " are grown in nurseries then replanted on the reef . Coral is farmed by coral farmers who live locally to the reefs and farm for reef conservation or for income . It is also farmed by scientists for research , by businesses for the supply of the live and ornamental coral trade and by private aquarium hobbyists . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 Further images : commons : Category : Coral reefs and commons : Category : Coral 
 = Norte Chico civilization = 
 The Norte Chico civilization ( also Caral or Caral @-@ Supe civilization ) was a complex pre @-@ Columbian society around that included as many as 30 major population centers in what is now the Norte Chico region of north @-@ central coastal Peru . The civilization flourished between the 4th and 2nd millennia BC , with the formation of the first city generally dated to around 3500 BC , at <unk> , in the Fortaleza area . It is from 3200 BC onward that large @-@ scale human settlement and communal construction become clearly apparent , which lasted until a period of decline around 1800 BC . Since the early 21st century , it has been established as the oldest known civilization in the Americas . 
 This civilization flourished at the confluence of three rivers , the Fortaleza , the Pativilca , and the Supe . These river valleys each have large clusters of sites . Further south , there are several associated sites along the Huaura River . 
 The alternative name , Caral @-@ Supe , is derived from the Sacred City of Caral in the Supe Valley , a large and well @-@ studied Norte Chico site . Complex society in Norte Chico arose a millennium after Sumer in Mesopotamia , was contemporaneous with the Egyptian pyramids , and predated the Mesoamerican Olmec by nearly two millennia . 
 In archaeological nomenclature , Norte Chico is a pre @-@ ceramic culture of the pre @-@ Columbian Late Archaic ; it completely lacked ceramics and apparently had almost no visual art . The most impressive achievement of the civilization was its monumental architecture , including large earthwork platform mounds and sunken circular plazas . Archaeological evidence suggests use of textile technology and , possibly , the worship of common god symbols , both of which recur in pre @-@ Columbian Andean cultures . Sophisticated government is assumed to have been required to manage the ancient Norte Chico . Questions remain over its organization , particularly the influence of food resources on politics . Some scholars have suggested that Norte Chico was founded on seafood and maritime resources , rather than development of an agricultural cereal and crop surpluses , as has been considered essential to the rise of other ancient civilizations . 
 Archaeologists have been aware of ancient sites in the area since at least the 1940s ; early work occurred at Aspero on the coast , a site identified as early as 1905 , and later at Caral further inland . 
 In the late 1990s Peruvian archaeologists , led by Dr. Ruth Shady Solís , provided the first extensive documentation of the civilization with work at Caral . A 2001 paper in Science , providing a survey of the Caral research , and a 2004 article in Nature , describing fieldwork and radiocarbon dating across a wider area , revealed Norte Chico 's full significance and led to widespread interest . 
 = = History and geography = = 
 Norte Chico has pushed back the horizon for complex societies in the Peruvian region by more than one thousand years . The Chavín culture , circa 900 BC , had long been considered the first civilization of the area . It is still regularly cited as such in general works . 
 The discovery of Norte Chico has also shifted the focus of research away from the highland areas of the Andes and lowlands adjacent to the mountains ( where the Chavín , and later Inca , had their major centers ) to the Peruvian littoral , or coastal regions . Norte Chico is located in a north @-@ central area of the coast , approximately 150 to 200 km north of Lima , roughly bounded by the <unk> Valley on the south and the <unk> Valley on the north . It comprises four coastal valleys : the Huaura , Supe , Pativilca , and Fortaleza ; known sites are concentrated in the latter three , which share a common coastal plain . The three principal valleys cover only 1 @,@ 800 km ² , and research has emphasized the density of the population centers . 
 The Peruvian littoral appears an " improbable , even aberrant " candidate for the " pristine " development of civilization , compared to other world centers . It is extremely arid , bounded by two rain shadows ( caused by the Andes to the east , and the Pacific trade winds to the west ) . The region is punctuated by more than 50 rivers that carry Andean snowmelt . The development of widespread irrigation from these water sources is seen as decisive in the emergence of Norte Chico ; since all of the monumental architecture at various sites has been found close to irrigation channels . 
 The radiocarbon work of Jonathan Haas et al . , found that 10 of 95 samples taken in the Pativilca and Fortaleza areas dated from before 3500 BC ; the oldest , dating from <unk> BC , provides " limited indication " of human settlement during the Pre @-@ Columbian Early Archaic era . Two dates of 3700 BC are associated with communal architecture , but are likely to be anomalous . It is from 3200 BC onward that large @-@ scale human settlement and communal construction are clearly apparent . Mann , in a survey of the literature in 2005 , suggests " sometime before 3200 BC , and possibly before 3500 BC " as the beginning date of the Norte Chico formative period . He notes that the earliest date securely associated with a city is 3500 BC , at <unk> , in the Fortaleza area of the north , based on Haas ' dates . 
 Haas ' early third millennium dates suggest that the development of coastal and inland sites occurred in parallel . But , from 2500 to 2000 BC , during the period of greatest expansion , the population and development decisively shifted toward the inland sites . All development apparently occurred at large interior sites such as Caral , though they remained dependent on fish and shellfish from the coast . The peak in dates is in keeping with Shady 's dates at Caral , which show habitation from 2627 BC to 2020 BC . That coastal and inland sites developed in tandem remains disputed , however ( see next section ) . 
 Circa 1800 BC , the Norte Chico civilization began to decline , with more powerful centers appearing to the south and north along the coast , and to the east inside the belt of the Andes . Norte Chico 's success at irrigation @-@ based agriculture may have contributed to its being eclipsed . One researcher notes that " when this civilization is in decline , we begin to find extensive canals farther north . People were moving to more fertile ground and taking their knowledge of irrigation with them . " It would be a thousand years before the rise of the next great Peruvian culture , the Chavín . 
 = = Geographical links = = 
 Cultural links with the highland areas have been noted by archaeologists . In particular , the links with the <unk> Religious Tradition have been suggested . 
 " Numerous architectural features found among the settlements of Supe , including subterranean circular courts , stepped pyramids and sequential platforms , as well as material remains and their cultural implications , excavated at Aspero and the valley sites we are digging ( Caral , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> ) , are shared with other settlements of the area that participated in what is known as the <unk> Religious Tradition . Most specific among these features are rooms with benches and hearths with subterranean ventilation ducts , wall niches , biconvex beads , musical flutes , etc . " 
 = = Maritime coast and agricultural interior = = 
 Research into Norte Chico continues , with many unsettled questions . Debate is ongoing over two related questions : the degree to which the flourishing of the Norte Chico was based on maritime food resources , and the exact relationship this implies between the coastal and inland sites . 
 = = = Confirmed diet = = = 
 A broad outline of the Norte Chico diet has been suggested . At Caral , the edible domesticated plants noted by Shady are squash , beans , <unk> , guava , <unk> , and <unk> . Haas et al. noted the same foods in their survey further north , while adding avocado and <unk> . In 2013 , good evidence for maize was also documented by Haas et al . ( see below ) . 
 There was also a significant seafood component at both coastal and inland sites . Shady notes that " animal remains are almost exclusively marine " at Caral , including clams and mussels , and large amounts of anchovies and sardines . That the anchovy fish reached inland is clear , although Haas suggests that " shellfish [ which would include clams and mussels ] , sea mammals , and seaweed do not appear to have been significant portions of the diet in the inland , non @-@ maritime sites " . 
 = = = Theory of a maritime foundations of Andean civilization = = = 
 The role of seafood in the Norte Chico diet has aroused debate . Much early fieldwork was done in the region of Aspero on the coast , before the full scope and inter @-@ connectedness of the several sites of the civilization were realized . In a 1973 paper , Michael E. Moseley contended that a maritime subsistence ( seafood ) economy had been the basis of the society and its remarkably early flourishing , a theory later elaborated as a " maritime foundation of Andean civilization " ( <unk> ) . He also confirmed a previously observed lack of ceramics at Aspero , and deduced that " hummocks " on the site constituted the remains of artificial platform mounds . 
 This thesis of a maritime foundation was contrary to the general scholarly consensus that the rise of civilization was based on intensive agriculture , particularly of at least one cereal . The production of agricultural surpluses had long been seen as essential in promoting population density and the emergence of complex society . Moseley 's ideas would be debated and challenged ( that maritime remains and their caloric contribution were overestimated , for example ) but have been treated as plausible as late as Mann 's summary of the literature in 2005 . 
 Concomitant to the maritime subsistence hypothesis was an implied dominance of sites immediately adjacent to the coast over other centers . This idea was shaken by the realization of the magnitude of Caral , an inland site . Supplemental to Shady 's 1997 article dating Caral , a 2001 Science news article emphasized the dominance of agriculture and also suggested that Caral was the oldest urban center in Peru ( and the entire Americas ) . It deprecated the idea that civilization might have begun adjacent to the coast and then moved inland . One archaeologist was quoted as suggesting that " rather than coastal antecedents to monumental inland sites , what we have now are coastal satellite villages to monumental inland sites . " 
 These assertions were quickly challenged by Sandweiss and Moseley , who observed that Caral , though the largest and most complex <unk> site , is not the oldest . They admitted the importance of agriculture to industry and to augment diet , while broadly affirming " the formative role of marine resources in early Andean civilization . " Scholars now agree that the inland sites did have significantly greater populations , and that there were " so many more people along the four rivers than on the shore that they had to have been dominant . " 
 The remaining question is which of the areas developed first and created a template for subsequent development . Haas rejects suggestions that maritime development at sites immediately adjacent to the coast was initial , pointing to contemporaneous development based on his dating . Moseley remains convinced that coastal Aspero is the oldest site , and that its maritime subsistence served as a basis for the civilization . 
 = = = Cotton and politics = = = 
 Cotton ( of the species Gossypium <unk> ) likely provided the basis of the dominance of inland over coast ( whether development was earlier , later , or contemporaneous ) . Though not edible , it was the most important product of irrigation in the Norte Chico , vital to the production of fishing nets ( that in turn provided maritime resources ) as well as to textiles and textile technology . Haas notes that " control over cotton allows a ruling elite to provide the benefit of cloth for clothing , bags , wraps , and adornment . " He is willing to admit to a mutual dependency dilemma : " The prehistoric residents of the Norte Chico needed the fish resources for their protein and the fishermen needed the cotton to make the nets to catch the fish . " Thus , identifying cotton as a vital resource produced in the inland does not by itself resolve the issue of whether the inland centers were a progenitor for the coast or vice versa — Moseley argues , for instance , that successful maritime centers would have moved inland to find cotton . The exact relationship between food resources and political organization remains unresolved . 
 Regardless of the status of maritime food resources , Norte Chico 's development is still remarkable for the apparent absence of a staple cereal . However , recent studies increasingly dispute this and point to maize as a dietary backbone of this and later pre @-@ Columbian American civilizations . Moseley found a small number of maize cobs in 1973 at Aspero ( also seen in site work in the 1940s and 50s ) but has since called the find " problematic " . 
 Increasing evidence has emerged about the importance of maize in this period . 
 " Archaeological testing at a number of sites in the Norte Chico region of the north central coast provides a broad range of empirical data on the production , processing , and consumption of maize . New data drawn from coprolites , pollen records , and stone tool residues , combined with 126 radiocarbon dates , demonstrate that maize was widely grown , intensively processed , and constituted a primary component of the diet throughout the period from 3000 to 1800 B.C. " 
 = = Social organization = = 
 = = = Government = = = 
 The Norte Chico chiefdoms were " almost certainly theocratic , though not brutally so , " according to Mann . Construction areas show possible evidence of feasting , which would have included music and likely alcohol , suggesting an elite able to both mobilize and reward the population . The degree of centralized authority is difficult to ascertain , but architectural construction patterns are indicative of an elite that , at least in certain places at certain times , wielded considerable power : while some of the monumental architecture was constructed incrementally , other buildings , such as the two main platform mounds at Caral , appear to have been constructed in one or two intense construction phases . As further evidence of centralized control , Haas points to remains of large stone warehouses found at <unk> , on the Pativilca , as emblematic of authorities able to control vital resources such as cotton . 
 Haas suggests that the labour mobilization patterns revealed by the archaeological evidence point to a unique emergence of human government , one of two alongside Sumer ( or three , if Mesoamerica is included as a separate case ) . While in other cases , the idea of government would have been borrowed or copied , in this small group , government was invented . Other archaeologists have rejected such claims as hyperbolic . 
 In exploring the basis of possible government , Haas suggests three broad bases of power for early complex societies : 
 economic , 
 ideology , and 
 physical . 
 He finds the first two present in ancient Norte Chico . 
 = = = = Economic = = = = 
 Economic authority would have rested on the control of cotton and edible plants and associated trade relationships , with power centered on the inland sites . Haas tentatively suggests that the scope of this economic power base may have extended widely : there are only two confirmed shore sites in the Norte Chico ( Aspero and <unk> ) and possibly two more , but cotton fishing nets and domesticated plants have been found up and down the Peruvian coast . It is possible that the major inland centers of Norte Chico were at the center of a broad regional trade network centered on these resources . 
 Discover magazine , citing Shady , suggests a rich and varied trade life : " [ Caral ] exported its own products and those of Aspero to distant communities in exchange for exotic imports : Spondylus shells from the coast of Ecuador , rich dyes from the Andean highlands , hallucinogenic snuff from the Amazon . " ( Given the still limited extent of Norte Chico research , such claims should be treated circumspectly . ) Other reports on Shady 's work indicate Caral traded with communities in the jungle farther inland and , possibly , with people from the mountains . 
 = = = = Ideology = = = = 
 Leaders ' ideological power was based on apparent access to deities and the supernatural . Evidence regarding Norte Chico religion is limited : an image of the Staff God , a leering figure with a hood and fangs , has been found on a gourd dated to 2250 BC . The Staff God is a major deity of later Andean cultures , and Winifred Creamer suggests the find points to worship of common symbols of gods . As with much other research at Norte Chico , the nature and significance of the find has been disputed by other researchers . 
 The act of architectural construction and maintenance may also have been a spiritual or religious experience : a process of communal exaltation and ceremony . Shady has called Caral " the sacred city " ( La ciudad <unk> ) : socio @-@ economic and political focus was on the temples , which were periodically remodeled , with major burnt offerings associated with the remodeling . 
 = = = = Physical = = = = 
 Haas notes the absence of any suggestion of physical bases of power , that is , defensive construction . There is no evidence of warfare " of any kind or at any level during the <unk> Period . " <unk> bodies , burned buildings , and other tell @-@ tale signs of violence are absent , and settlement patterns are completely non @-@ defensive . The evidence of the development of complex government in the absence of warfare is in marked contrast to archaeological theory , which suggests that human beings move away from kin @-@ based groups to larger units resembling " states " for mutual defense of often scarce resources . A vital resource was present : arable land generally , and the cotton crop specifically , but the move to greater complexity was apparently not driven by the need for defense or warfare . 
 = = Sites and architecture = = 
 Norte Chico sites are notable for exceptional collective density , as well as individual size . Haas argues that the density of sites in such a small area is globally unique for a nascent civilization . During the third millennium BC , Norte Chico may have been the most densely populated area of the world ( excepting , possibly , northern China ) . The Supe , Pativilca , Fortaleza , and Huaura River valleys each have several related sites . 
 Evidence from the ground @-@ breaking work of 1973 at Aspero , at the mouth of the Supe Valley , suggested a site of approximately 13 hectares ( 32 acres ) . Surveying of the midden suggested extensive prehistoric construction activity . Small @-@ scale terracing is noted , along with more sophisticated platform mound masonry . As many as eleven artificial mounds " could be " present . Moseley calls these " Corporate Labor Platforms " , given that their size , layout , and construction materials and techniques would have required an organized workforce . 
 The survey of the northern rivers found sites between 10 and 100 ha ( 25 and 247 acres ) ; between one and seven large platform mounds — rectangular , terraced pyramids — were discovered , ranging in size from 3 @,@ 000 m3 ( 110 @,@ 000 cu ft ) to over 100 @,@ 000 m3 ( 3 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 cu ft ) . Shady notes that the central zone of Caral , with monumental architecture , covers an area of just over 65 ha . Six platform mounds , numerous smaller mounds , two sunken circular plazas , and a variety of residential architecture were also discovered at this site . 
 The monumental architecture was constructed with quarried stone and river cobbles . Using reed " <unk> @-@ bags " , some of which have been preserved , laborers would have hauled the material to sites by hand . Roger Atwood of Archaeology magazine describes the process : 
 " Armies of workers would gather a long , durable grass known as <unk> in the highlands above the city , tie the grass strands into loosely meshed bags , fill the bags with boulders , and then pack the trenches behind each successive retaining wall of the step pyramids with the stone @-@ filled bags . " 
 In this way , the people of Norte Chico achieved formidable architectural success . The largest of the platforms mounds at Caral , the <unk> Mayor , measures 160 by 150 m ( 520 by 490 ft ) and rises 18 m ( 59 ft ) high . In its summation of the 2001 Shady paper , the BBC suggests workers would have been " paid or compelled " to work on centralized projects of this sort , with dried anchovies possibly serving as a form of currency . Mann points to " ideology , charisma , and skilfully timed reinforcement " from leaders . 
 = = Development and absent technologies = = 
 When compared to the common Eurasian models of the development of civilization , Norte Chico 's differences are striking . A total lack of ceramics persists across the period . The BBC observes that Norte Chico 's people would have roasted their various crops , with no pots to boil them . The lack of pottery was accompanied by a lack of archaeologically apparent art . In conversation with Mann , Alvaro Ruiz observes : " In the Norte Chico we see almost no visual arts . No sculpture , no carving or bas @-@ relief , almost no painting or drawing — the interiors are completely bare . What we do see are these huge mounds — and textiles . " 
 While the absence of ceramics appears anomalous , the presence of textiles is intriguing . <unk> ( or <unk> ) , string @-@ based recording devices , have been found at Caral , suggesting a writing , or " proto @-@ writing " , system at Norte Chico . ( The discovery was reported by Mann in Science in 2005 , but has not been formally published or described by Shady . ) The exact use of quipu in this and later Andean cultures has been widely debated . Originally it was believed to be simply a mnemonic used to record numeric information , such as a count of items bought and sold . Evidence has emerged that the quipu may also have recorded logographic information in the same way writing does . Research has focused on the much larger sample of a few hundred quipu dating to Inca times ; the Norte Chico discovery remains singular and undeciphered . 
 Other finds at Norte Chico have proved suggestive . While visual arts appear absent , the people may have played instrumental music : thirty @-@ two flutes , crafted from pelican bone , have been discovered . The leering face of the Staff God is another artifact that awaits explanation . While still fragmentary , such archaeological evidence corresponds to the patterns of later Andean civilization and may indicate that Norte Chico served as a template . Along with the specific finds , Mann highlights " the primacy of exchange over a wide area , the penchant for collective , festive civic work projects , [ and ] the high valuation of textiles and textile technology " within Norte Chico as patterns that would recur later in the Peruvian cradle of civilization . 
 = = Research controversies = = 
 The magnitude of the Norte Chico discovery has brought academic controversy in its wake . The " monumental feud " , as described by Archaeology , has included " public insults , a charge of plagiarism , ethics inquiries in both Peru and the United States , and complaints by Peruvian officials to the U.S. government . " The lead author of the seminal paper of April 2001 was Peruvian Ruth Shady , with co @-@ authors Jonathan Haas and Winifred Creamer , a married United States team ; the <unk> was reportedly suggested by Haas , in the hopes that the involvement of United States researchers would help secure funds for carbon dating as well as future research funding . Later , Shady charged the couple with plagiarism and insufficient attribution , suggesting the pair had received credit for her research , which had been going on since 1994 . 
 At issue is credit for the discovery of the civilization , naming it , and developing the theoretical models to explain it . That Shady was describing a civilization is clear in 1997 : ( " los <unk> de la <unk> en el Perú . " ) . While locating it on the Supe River , with Caral at its center , she suggested a larger geographic base for the society : 
 In 2004 , Haas et al. wrote : " Our recent work in the neighboring Pativilca and Fortaleza has revealed that Caral and Aspero were but two of a much larger number of major Late Archaic sites in the Norte Chico , " while only noting Shady in footnotes . Attribution of this type is what has angered Shady and her supporters . Shady 's position has been hampered by a lack of funding for archeological research in her native Peru , as well as the media advantages of North American researchers in disputes of this type . 
 Haas and Creamer were cleared of the plagiarism charge by their institutions . The Chicago Field Museum ’ s science advisory council rebuked Haas for press releases and web pages that gave too little credit to Shady and inflated the couple ’ s role as discoverers . The dispute remains heated . Scholars have concerns that it could make it more difficult for United States archaeologists to gain permission to work in Peru . 
 = 1981 Irish hunger strike = 
 The 1981 Irish hunger strike was the culmination of a five @-@ year protest during The Troubles by Irish republican prisoners in Northern Ireland . The protest began as the blanket protest in 1976 , when the British government withdrew Special Category Status for convicted paramilitary prisoners . In 1978 , after a number of attacks on prisoners leaving their cells to " slop out " , the dispute escalated into the dirty protest , where prisoners refused to leave their cells to wash and covered the walls of their cells with excrement . In 1980 , seven prisoners participated in the first hunger strike , which ended after 53 days . 
 The second hunger strike took place in 1981 and was a showdown between the prisoners and the Prime Minister , Margaret Thatcher . One hunger striker , Bobby Sands , was elected as a Member of Parliament during the strike , prompting media interest from around the world . The strike was called off after ten prisoners had starved themselves to death — including Sands , whose funeral was attended by 100 @,@ 000 people . The strike radicalised Irish nationalist politics , and was the driving force that enabled Sinn Féin to become a mainstream political party . 
 = = Background = = 
 There had been hunger strikes by Irish republican prisoners since 1917 , and twelve had previously died on hunger strike , including Thomas Ashe , Terence MacSwiney , Seán McCaughey , Michael Gaughan and Frank Stagg . After the introduction of internment in 1971 , Long Kesh — later known as HM Prison Maze — was run like a prisoner of war camp . Internees lived in dormitories and disciplined themselves with military @-@ style command structures , drilled with dummy guns made from wood , and held lectures on guerrilla warfare and politics . Convicted prisoners were refused the same rights as internees until July 1972 , when Special Category Status was introduced following a hunger strike by 40 Provisional Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) prisoners led by the veteran republican Billy McKee . Special Category , or political , status meant prisoners were treated similarly to prisoners of war ; for example , not having to wear prison uniforms or do prison work . In 1976 , as part of its policy of " criminalisation " , the British government brought an end to Special Category Status for newly convicted paramilitary prisoners in Northern Ireland . The policy was not introduced for existing prisoners , but for those convicted of offences after 1 March 1976 . The end to Special Category Status was a serious threat to the authority which the paramilitary leaderships inside prison had been able to exercise over their own men , as well as being a propaganda blow . 
 = = Blanket and dirty protests = = 
 On 14 September 1976 , newly convicted prisoner Kieran Nugent began the blanket protest , in which IRA and Irish National Liberation Army ( INLA ) prisoners refused to wear prison uniform and either went naked or fashioned garments from prison blankets . In 1978 , after a number of attacks on prisoners leaving their cells to " slop out " ( i.e. , empty their chamber pots ) , this escalated into the dirty protest , where prisoners refused to leave their cells to wash or slop out . To mitigate the build @-@ up of flies , they smeared their excrement on the walls of their cells . These protests aimed to re @-@ establish their political status by securing what were known as the " Five Demands " : 
 the right not to wear a prison uniform ; 
 the right not to do prison work ; 
 the right of free association with other prisoners , and to organise educational and recreational pursuits ; 
 the right to one visit , one letter and one parcel per week ; 
 full restoration of remission lost through the protest . 
 Initially , this protest did not attract a great deal of attention , and even the IRA regarded it as a side @-@ issue compared to their armed campaign . It began to attract attention when Tomás Ó <unk> , the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Armagh , visited the prison and condemned the conditions there . In 1979 , former MP Bernadette McAliskey stood in the election for the European Parliament on a platform of support for the protesting prisoners , and won 5 @.@ 9 % of the vote across Northern Ireland , even though Sinn Féin had called for a boycott of the election . Shortly after this , the broad @-@ based National H @-@ Block / Armagh Committee was formed , on a platform of support for the " Five Demands " , with McAliskey as its main spokesperson . The period leading up to the hunger strike saw assassinations by both republicans and loyalists . The IRA shot and killed a number of prison officers ; while loyalist paramilitaries shot and killed a number of activists in the National H @-@ Block / Armagh Committee and badly injured McAliskey and her husband in an attempt on their lives . 
 = = 1980 Hunger strike = = 
 On 27 October 1980 , republican prisoners in HM Prison Maze began a hunger strike . Many prisoners volunteered to be part of the strike , but a total of seven were selected to match the number of men who signed the Easter 1916 Proclamation of the Republic . The group consisted of IRA members Brendan Hughes , Tommy <unk> , Raymond McCartney , Tom <unk> , Sean McKenna , Leo Green , and Irish National Liberation Army ( INLA ) member John Nixon . On 1 December three prisoners in Armagh Women 's Prison joined the strike , including Mairéad Farrell , followed by a short @-@ lived hunger strike by several dozen more prisoners in HM Prison Maze . In a war of nerves between the IRA leadership and the British government , with McKenna lapsing in and out of a coma and on the brink of death , the government appeared to concede the essence of the prisoners ' five demands with a thirty @-@ page document detailing a proposed settlement . With the document in transit to Belfast , Hughes took the decision to save McKenna 's life and end the strike after 53 days on 18 December . 
 = = 1981 Hunger strike = = 
 In January 1981 it became clear that the prisoners ' demands had not been conceded . Prison authorities began to supply the prisoners with officially issued civilian clothing , whereas the prisoners demanded the right to wear their own clothing . On 4 February the prisoners issued a statement saying that the British government had failed to resolve the crisis and declared their intention of " hunger striking once more " . The second hunger strike began on 1 March , when Bobby Sands , the IRA 's former officer commanding ( OC ) in the prison , refused food . Unlike the first strike , the prisoners joined one at a time and at staggered intervals , which they believed would arouse maximum public support and exert maximum pressure on Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher . 
 The republican movement initially struggled to generate public support for the second hunger strike . The Sunday before Sands began his strike , 3 @,@ 500 people marched through west Belfast ; during the first hunger strike four months earlier the marchers had numbered 10 @,@ 000 . Five days into the strike , however , Independent Republican MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone Frank Maguire died , resulting in a by @-@ election . There was debate among nationalists and republicans regarding who should contest the election : Austin Currie of the Social Democratic and Labour Party expressed an interest , as did Bernadette McAliskey and Maguire 's brother Noel . After negotiations , and implied threats to Noel Maguire , they agreed not to split the nationalist vote by contesting the election and Sands stood as an Anti H @-@ Block candidate against Ulster Unionist Party candidate Harry West . Following a high @-@ profile campaign the election took place on 9 April , and Sands was elected to the British House of Commons with 30 @,@ 492 votes to West 's 29 @,@ 046 . 
 Sands ' election victory raised hopes that a settlement could be negotiated , but Thatcher stood firm in refusing to give concessions to the hunger strikers . She stated " We are not prepared to consider special category status for certain groups of people serving sentences for crime . Crime is crime is crime , it is not political " . The world 's media descended on Belfast , and several intermediaries visited Sands in an attempt to negotiate an end to the hunger strike , including <unk> de Valera , granddaughter of Éamon de Valera , Pope John Paul II 's personal envoy John Magee , and European Commission of Human Rights officials . With Sands close to death , the government 's position remained unchanged , with Secretary of State for Northern Ireland Humphrey Atkins stating " If Mr. Sands persisted in his wish to commit suicide , that was his choice . The Government would not force medical treatment upon him " . 
 = = = Deaths and end of strike = = = 
 On 5 May , Sands died in the prison hospital on the sixty @-@ sixth day of his hunger strike , prompting rioting in nationalist areas of Northern Ireland . Humphrey Atkins issued a statement saying that Sands had committed suicide " under the instructions of those who felt it useful to their cause that he should die " . Over 100 @,@ 000 people lined the route of his funeral , which was conducted with full IRA military honours . Margaret Thatcher showed no sympathy for his death , telling the House of Commons that " Mr. Sands was a convicted criminal . He chose to take his own life . It was a choice that his organisation did not allow to many of its victims " . 
 In the two weeks following Sands ' death , three more hunger strikers died . Francis Hughes died on 12 May , resulting in further rioting in nationalist areas of Northern Ireland , in particular Derry and Belfast . Following the deaths of Raymond <unk> and Patsy O 'Hara on 21 May , Tomás Ó <unk> , by then Primate of All Ireland , criticised the British government 's handling of the hunger strike . Despite this , Thatcher still refused to negotiate a settlement , stating " Faced with the failure of their discredited cause , the men of violence have chosen in recent months to play what may well be their last card " , during a visit to Belfast in late May . 
 Nine protesting prisoners contested the general election in the Republic of Ireland in June . Kieran Doherty and Paddy Agnew ( who was not on hunger strike ) were elected in Cavan – Monaghan and Louth respectively , and Joe McDonnell narrowly missed election in Sligo – Leitrim . There were also local elections in Northern Ireland around that time and although Sinn Féin did not contest them , some smaller groups and independents who supported the hunger strikers won seats , e.g. the Irish Independence Party won 21 seats , while the Irish Republican Socialist Party ( the INLA 's political wing ) and People 's Democracy ( a Trotskyist group ) won two seats each , and a number of pro @-@ hunger strike independent candidates also won seats . The British government rushed through the Representation of the People Act 1981 to prevent another prisoner contesting the second by @-@ election in Fermanagh and South Tyrone , which was due to take place following the death of Sands . 
 Following the deaths of Joe McDonnell and Martin <unk> the families of some of the hunger strikers attended a meeting on 28 July with Catholic priest Father Denis Faul . The families expressed concern at the lack of a settlement to the priest , and a decision was made to meet with Gerry Adams later that day . At the meeting Father Faul put pressure on Adams to find a way of ending the strike , and Adams agreed to ask the IRA leadership to order the men to end the hunger strike . The following day Adams held a meeting with six of the hunger strikers to outline a proposed settlement on offer from the British government should the strike be brought to an end . The strikers rejected the settlement , believing that accepting anything less than the " Five Demands " would be a betrayal of the sacrifice made by Bobby Sands and the other men who had died . 
 On 31 July the hunger strike began to break , when the mother of Paddy Quinn insisted on medical intervention to save his life . The following day Kevin Lynch died , followed by Kieran Doherty on 2 August , Thomas McElwee on 8 August and Michael Devine on 20 August . On the day Devine died , Sands ' election agent Owen Carron won the Fermanagh and South Tyrone by @-@ election with an increased number of votes . On 6 September the family of Laurence McKeown became the fourth family to intervene and asked for medical treatment to save his life , and <unk> Daly issued a statement calling on republican prisoners to end the hunger strike . A week later James Prior replaced Humphrey Atkins as Secretary of State for Northern Ireland , and met with prisoners in an attempt to end the strike . Liam McCloskey ended his strike on 26 September after his family said they would ask for medical intervention if he became unconscious , and it became clear that the families of the remaining hunger strikers would also intervene to save their lives . The strike was called off at 3 : 15 pm on 3 October , and three days later Prior announced partial concessions to the prisoners including the right to wear their own clothes at all times . The only one of the " Five Demands " still outstanding was the right not to do prison work . Following sabotage by the prisoners and the Maze Prison escape in 1983 the prison workshops were closed , effectively granting all of the " Five Demands " but without any formal recognition of political status from the government . 
 = = = Participants who died on hunger strike = = = 
 Over the summer of 1981 , ten hunger strikers had died . Their names , paramilitary affiliation , dates of death , and length of hunger strike are as follows : 
 The original pathologist 's report recorded the hunger strikers ' cause of death as " self @-@ imposed starvation " . This was later amended to simply " starvation " , after protests from the dead strikers ' families . The coroner recorded verdicts of " starvation , self @-@ imposed " . 
 = = = Other participants in the hunger strike = = = 
 Although ten men died during the course of the hunger strike , thirteen others began refusing food but were taken off hunger strike , either due to medical reasons or after intervention by their families . Many of them still suffer from the effects of the strike , with problems including digestive , visual , physical and neurological disabilities . 
 = = Consequences = = 
 The British press hailed the hunger strike as a triumph for Thatcher , with The Guardian newspaper stating " The Government had overcome the hunger strikes by a show of resolute determination not to be bullied " . At the time most thought the hunger strike a crushing defeat for the republicans , a view shared by many within the IRA and Sinn Féin , but Sands ' by @-@ election win was a propaganda victory , and the hunger strike became a Pyrrhic victory for Thatcher and the British government . Thatcher became a republican hate figure of Cromwellian proportions , with Danny Morrison describing her as " the biggest bastard we have ever known " . As with internment in 1971 and Bloody Sunday in 1972 , IRA recruitment was boosted , resulting in a new surge of paramilitary activity . There was an upsurge of violence after the comparatively quiet years of the late 1970s , with widespread civil disorder in Northern Ireland and rioting outside the British Embassy in Dublin . Security forces fired 29 @,@ 695 plastic bullets in 1981 , causing seven deaths , compared to a total of around 16 @,@ 000 bullets and four deaths in the eight years following the hunger strikes . The IRA continued its armed campaign during the seven months of the strike , killing 13 policemen , 13 soldiers , including five members of the Ulster Defence Regiment and five civilians . The seven months were one of the bloodiest periods of the Troubles with a total of 61 people killed , 34 of them civilians . Three years later the IRA tried to take their revenge on Thatcher with the Brighton hotel bombing , an attack on the Conservative party conference that killed five people and in which Thatcher herself only narrowly escaped death . 
 The hunger strike prompted Sinn Féin to move towards electoral politics . Sands ' election victory , combined with that of pro @-@ hunger strike candidates in the Northern Ireland local elections and Dáil elections in the Republic of Ireland , gave birth to the <unk> and ballot box strategy . Gerry Adams remarked that Sands ' victory " exposed the lie that the hunger strikers — and by extension the IRA and the whole republican movement — had no popular support " . The election victories of Doherty and Agnew also had political impact in the Republic of Ireland , as they denied power to Charles Haughey 's outgoing Fianna Fáil government . In 1982 Sinn Féin won five seats in the elections to the Northern Ireland Assembly , and in 1983 Gerry Adams won a seat in the UK general election . As a result of the political base built during the hunger strike , Sinn Féin continued to grow in the following two decades . After the United Kingdom general election , 2001 , it became the largest nationalist party in Northern Ireland and after the 2014 local and European elections held on both sides of the border , asserted it was now the largest party in Ireland . 
 In 2005 , the role of Gerry Adams was questioned by former prisoner Richard O 'Rawe , who was the public relations officer inside the prison during the strike . O 'Rawe states in his book <unk> that Adams prolonged the strike as it was of great political benefit to Sinn Féin and allowed Owen Carron to win Sands ' seat . This claim is denied by several hunger strikers and Brendan McFarlane , who was OC inside the prison during the hunger strike . McFarlane claims O 'Rawe 's version of events is confused and fragmentary , and states " We were desperate for a solution . Any deal that went some way to meeting the five demands would have been taken . If it was confirmed in writing , we 'd have grabbed it . . . There was never a deal , there was never a " take it or leave it " option at all " . 
 = = Commemorations = = 
 There are memorials and murals in memory of the hunger strikers in towns and cities across Ireland , including Belfast , Dublin , Derry , Crossmaglen and <unk> . Annual commemorations take place across Ireland for each man who died on the hunger strike , and an annual hunger strike commemoration march is held in Belfast each year , which includes a Bobby Sands memorial lecture . Several towns and cities in France have named streets after Bobby Sands , including Paris and Le Mans . The Iranian government also named a street running alongside the British embassy in Tehran after Bobby Sands , which was formerly called Winston Churchill Street . 
 A memorial to the men who died in the Irish Rebellion of 1798 , the Easter Rising and the hunger strike stands in Waverley Cemetery , Sydney , Australia , which is also the burial place of Michael Dwyer of the Society of United Irishmen . In 1997 <unk> 's Hartford Unit in the United States dedicated a monument to Bobby Sands and the other hunger strikers . The monument stands in a traffic circle known as " Bobby Sands Circle " , at the bottom of Maple Avenue near Goodwin Park . On 20 March 2001 Sinn Féin 's national chairperson Mitchel McLaughlin opened the National Hunger Strike Commemoration Committee 's exhibition at the Europa Hotel in Belfast , which included three original works of art from Belfast @-@ based artists . A separate exhibition was also launched in Derry the following month . Three films have been made based on the events of the hunger strike , Some Mother 's Son starring Helen Mirren , H3 ( which was co @-@ written by former hunger striker Laurence McKeown ) , and Steve McQueen 's Hunger . 
 = Colt McCoy = 
 Daniel " Colt " McCoy ( born September 5 , 1986 ) is an American football quarterback for the Washington Redskins of the National Football League ( NFL ) . He was drafted by the Cleveland Browns in the third round of the 2010 NFL Draft , after playing college football for the University of Texas . He has also been a member of the San Francisco 49ers . 
 McCoy was the starting quarterback for the Texas Longhorns from 2006 – 2009 and won the 2008 Walter Camp Award , was the 2008 Heisman Trophy runner @-@ up and was a 2009 Heisman finalist . McCoy is second to Boise State 's Kellen Moore in games won by a NCAA Division I quarterback . In his senior year , he won 13 of the top 15 major college player awards including quarterback of the year , offensive player of the year and outstanding football player of the year . 
 After sitting out the 2005 Longhorn season as a redshirt , McCoy was the starting quarterback for the 2006 Longhorn team . On November 4 , 2006 , McCoy threw his 27th touchdown pass in a win against Oklahoma State , to take sole possession of the Texas school record for most touchdowns ever thrown by a quarterback in a single season . Subsequently , in the 2006 Alamo Bowl on December 30 , McCoy threw two touchdowns against Iowa Hawkeyes football to tie Nevada 's David Neill for second place for freshman touchdowns in a single season . Also during the 2006 season , McCoy was named College Football News Big 12 Player of the Year and was named the quarterback to their " All Freshman Team " . Injuries caused him to miss portions of the final regular season games , but he was able to play for the entire duration of the Longhorns ' bowl game . 
 Leading the 2007 Longhorns , McCoy was somewhat less consistent . Through the first five games he threw nine interceptions — two more than he threw in the entire 2006 season . He went on to throw 18 interceptions during the 2007 season . 
 Leading the 2008 Texas Longhorn football team , McCoy and the Longhorns began the season with eight straight wins , including a win over then # 1 Oklahoma , # 6 Oklahoma State and # 11 Missouri . His performance helped the Longhorns rise at one point to the # 1 ranking in the national polls , although UT lost to Texas Tech University and finished ranked third in the BCS standings . In 2008 McCoy set school records for most career touchdown passes , most touchdown passes in a season , most total touchdowns by a Texas player , most career wins , and most career passing yards . In addition to setting passing records , McCoy led the team with 561 yards rushing and eleven rushing touchdowns , establishing a reputation as a dual threat quarterback . McCoy was named the 2008 AP Big 12 Offensive Player of the Year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 McCoy was born in Hobbs , New Mexico . He is the eldest of three children born to Steven Brad McCoy and Debra Kay ( Woodruff ) McCoy . He attended Jim Ned High School in Tuscola , Texas , population 714 , where he was coached in football by his father , Brad McCoy . He achieved several distinctions as a high school player , including two @-@ time Associated Press 2A Offensive MVP and First @-@ team All @-@ state selection . Over his career , he completed 536 @-@ of @-@ 849 passes ( 63 @.@ 1 % ) for 9 @,@ 344 yards and 116 TDs . He ranks as the all @-@ time leading passer in Texas Division 2A high school history and is fourth overall in Texas high school history . McCoy also served as Jim Ned High School 's punter as a junior and senior . During his sophomore year , McCoy was also playing free safety . However , after he suffered a concussion while tackling 215 @-@ pound Bangs High School running back Jacoby Jones ( not to be confused with the Baltimore Ravens wide receiver of the same name ) , his father decided not to let him play defense anymore . At the time Jim Ned was 8 – 0 , but as McCoy missed the next two games due to the concussion , Jim Ned 's season unraveled . McCoy also played in the 2003 Texas 2A State Championship against the San Augustine Wolves . Jim Ned lost 28 – 7 . 
 = = College career = = 
 McCoy attended the University of Texas at Austin , where he played for coach Mack Brown 's Texas Longhorns football team from 2005 to 2009 . Colt was a four @-@ year starter from 2006 @-@ 2009 . He won or shared the team 's MVP all four years , the only player in school history to do so . 
 = = = 2005 season = = = 
 As a freshman , he was given a redshirt year so he did not play during the team 's 2005 national championship season . He served as the quarterback for the scout team in practice against the starting defense . During this time , Matt McCoy ( no relation ) was officially listed as the number three quarterback behind Vince Young and Matt Nordgren . When Brown chose to play Matt McCoy in four separate game situations where Texas had a commanding lead , confusion arose as to which McCoy was in the game . Many sportscasters mistakenly referred to Matt McCoy as Colt McCoy , as Colt was the more widely known player . The following year , with Young forgoing his senior year to enter the NFL and Nordgren graduating , the position of starting quarterback for the defending National Champion Texas Longhorns came down to a competition between red @-@ shirt freshman Colt McCoy and true freshman newcomer Jevan Snead . 
 = = = 2006 season = = = 
 After winning out a close competition with Jevan Snead , McCoy became the 2006 starting quarterback for the University of Texas . The season opener saw McCoy lead the Longhorns to a 56 – 7 victory over North Texas , throwing for three touchdowns and rushing a yard for another , while throwing no interceptions . He was 12 @-@ 19 in passing , and ran for 27 yards to help set up a touchdown . In only his second pass as a college quarterback McCoy threw a 60 @-@ yard touchdown pass . He was the first Texas freshman quarterback to start and win a season @-@ opening game since Bobby Layne in 1944 . The next week , the Longhorns faced # 1 Ohio State at home . McCoy went 19 @-@ 32 , 156 yards , one TD , and one INT while rushing four times for a total of eight yards . Ohio State defeated the Longhorns 24 – 7 , ending the Longhorns 21 @-@ game winning streak . 
 Following wins over Rice , Iowa State , and Sam Houston State , McCoy got his first win over a ranked team , as well as his first come @-@ from @-@ behind victory , when he led the Longhorns over rival Oklahoma 28 – 10 in the Red River Shootout . McCoy threw for two touchdowns in the game . The two touchdowns by McCoy gave him 12 touchdown passes for the season , tied for third with Longhorn passer James Brown in the list of most touchdowns by a Texas freshman . 
 On October 14 , 2006 McCoy threw a Texas record six touchdown passes in the win against Baylor . The previous record of five touchdown passes had been held by James Brown ( set vs. Baylor in 1994 ) and Chris Simms ( vs. Oklahoma State in 2001 ) . On October 25 , 2006 , he was 9th in the nation with a quarterback rating of 165 @.@ 4 . 
 In the 2006 Oklahoma State game McCoy threw for his 27th passing touchdown of the season , giving him sole possession of the single @-@ season Texas record and putting him two TD 's shy of the NCAA single season record for freshman quarterbacks ( 29 ) . Coincidentally , this 27th pass was also for 27 yards . 
 During the November 11 , 2006 , game against Kansas State , McCoy suffered a stinger shoulder injury while rushing for a touchdown on the opening drive against Kansas State . Snead came in and played the remainder of the game . The Longhorns fell behind by as much as 21 points before Snead brought them back to within 3 , finally falling in an upset by the Wildcats 45 – 42 . There was speculation that Snead might be the starter for the final regular season game , because it was unknown whether McCoy would return for the Longhorns season closer against rival Texas A & M on November 24 , 2006 . However , McCoy was cleared to play the game against the Aggies . 
 With 20 seconds remaining in the Lone Star Showdown versus the Aggies , McCoy was injured by a " vicious , stadium @-@ hushing tackle " as Aggie defensive end Michael Bennett connected with his helmet against McCoy 's upper body after McCoy had thrown an incomplete pass . Replays showed both on television and in the stadium revealed the hit might have included " helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet " contact which is illegal in NCAA football only if done intentionally , but no flag was thrown . When the replay was shown in the stadium , the Longhorn fans erupted in boos before lapsing back into silence as McCoy lay on the ground writhing for ten minutes before being taken off the field on a cart . Mack Brown said after the game " I didn 't see it , but it sounded like 88 @,@ 000 ( fans ) thought it was dirty " . Fellow Longhorn Selvin Young said he thought the hit was a clean " textbook " hit . McCoy was taken to University Medical Center Brackenridge where he spent more than three hours undergoing an evaluation that included an X @-@ Ray , MRI , and a CAT scan . Longhorns trainer Kenny Boyd said the injury was a severe pinched nerve in McCoy 's neck . Boyd said that McCoy was expected to make a full recovery , but no timetable was set for McCoy to return to play . The injury to McCoy came one game @-@ clock minute after an A & M player , # 91 Kellen Heard had been ejected from the game for vicious blindside block on McCoy after he threw an interception , which was ruled excessive . An X @-@ Ray , MRI exam and CT scan showed " no structural damage to McCoy 's neck or shoulder " . 
 On December 1 , 2006 , the Longhorns issued a statement confirming that back @-@ up quarterback Jevan Snead had left the team and would transfer to an unspecified school . This meant there would be no scholarship quarterback available to play in the Longhorns ' bowl game if McCoy was not ready . On December 21 , 2006 , Texas announced that McCoy was cleared to start in the Alamo Bowl . In the 2006 Alamo Bowl played on December 30 , McCoy threw two touchdowns against Iowa to tie the NCAA freshman record of 29 touchdown passes established by Nevada 's David Neill in 1998 . This record has since been broken by Oklahoma 's Sam Bradford in the 2007 season . 
 = = = 2007 season = = = 
 After just one season with Texas , McCoy received a lot of media attention , including appearing on some lists of the nation 's top players of 2007 . In June 2007 , McCoy appeared on the cover of Dave Campbell 's Texas Football alongside Texas A & M quarterback Stephen McGee and TCU defensive end Tommy Blake . Additionally , Rivals.com named McCoy one of the top @-@ 10 quarterbacks going into the 2007 season . He also made the Athlon Sports first @-@ team All Big 12 . 
 On June 26 , 2007 , Maxwell Football Club president Ron Jaworski announced that McCoy had been named to the preseason watch list for the Maxwell Award . The initial list includes 64 players . The winner turned out to be Tim Tebow . In their 2007 season preview magazine , CBS Sportsline.com listed McCoy as one of twelve players on the “ Heisman Watch ” ; saying “ We were touting him for the Heisman midway through his freshman season until he was injured against Kansas State . Older and stronger , McCoy has an awesome receiving corps to make a run at the hardware for real . ” He is also one of the 35 quarterbacks placed on the 2007 Manning Award watch list . Further , the Davey O 'Brien National Quarterback Award Watch List added McCoy on August 21 , 2007 . 
 McCoy led the Longhorns , who were ranked number four in the pre @-@ season Associated Press Poll and Coaches Poll , to a 21 – 13 victory over unranked Arkansas State in the season opener . McCoy threw two touchdown passes and two interceptions . He also made two quick @-@ kick punts when the Longhorns lined up as if they were attempting to convert on fourth down . He averaged thirty yards per kick and both kicks were downed inside the opponent 's twenty yard @-@ line . In the second game , McCoy led the Longhorns to a 34 – 13 victory over # 19 @-@ ranked TCU . 
 The road opener was the first game ever played in the new home stadium of the UCF Knights . McCoy 's 47 passing attempts tied a Texas single @-@ game record . His 32 completions set a new school record , besting the 30 completed by Vince Young during the 2006 Rose Bowl and by Major Applewhite during two 1999 games . The final non @-@ conference game was against Rice , and McCoy completed 20 of his 29 passing attempts , accumulating 333 yards through the air . For the first time in the season , he did not throw an interception . McCoy and most of the Longhorn starting players were replaced by backups after the first drive of the second half . True freshman quarterback John Chiles made his first college appearance in the first quarter . He came onto the field beside McCoy and then McCoy trotted out to a slot receiver position . Chiles never looked to pass ; he ran up the middle for no gain . He came out of the game after that play and came back in the third quarter as McCoy 's replacement . On that drive , Chiles line up in the zone @-@ read offense and led the Longhorns 80 yards to a touchdown , carrying the ball four times for 49 yards . Chiles ' strong performance immediately led to media speculation as to how much playing time he will take from McCoy . 
 McCoy played the worst game of his career in an upset loss to the Kansas State Wildcats ; He threw for 200 yards and had four interceptions . He also suffered a concussion during the game and left the field just prior to the end of the first half and again prior to the end of the game . After that game , Sports Illustrated selected him as one of the season 's 10 " Most Disappointing College Players " and noted that he his nine interceptions thrown so far in 2007 were already two more than he threw in the entire 2006 season . Stewart Mandel of Sports Illustrated listed several factors contributing to the Longhorns ' struggles . He cited the off @-@ field problems as evidence that no Texas player has been able to show the superior leadership skills of Vince Young . Mandel said that McCoy , still only a sophomore , had not been able to completely fill that gap and that McCoy 's play had not been as good as during 2006 . He also said part of the blame is to be placed on an offensive line that lost several starters and has not been able to consistently protect McCoy . Finally , he noted that the running game had been " equally inconsistent . " It was the worst home @-@ field loss in Mack Brown 's time with Texas . For the Wildcats , the win over Texas was the first road victory over a top – ten team in school history . 
 McCoy and the Longhorns lost again the following week , in the 2007 Red River Shootout . The game was a back @-@ and @-@ forth affair that was ultimately won by Oklahoma 28 – 21 . OU 's freshman quarterback , Sam Bradford , was 21 – of – 32 for 244 yards and three touchdowns . McCoy was 19 – of – 26 for 324 yards and two touchdowns . McCoy threw one interception . McCoy played the game with his throwing arm bandaged from mid @-@ forearm to biceps . He held up physically despite taking four sacks and a blind @-@ side late hit after one play had been whistled dead . With the loss , Texas opened conference play 0 – 2 for the first time since 1956 , when they were in the Southwest Conference and one year before Darrell Royal became head coach of the Longhorns . 
 The Longhorns were in control of the Iowa State game almost from the very beginning and they routed the Cyclones 56 – 3 , the worst loss for the Cyclones since 1997 . Lined up in the spread offense on the first play from scrimmage , Colt McCoy scrambled away from a blitz and threw a pass to Jordan Shipley for a 58 @-@ yard touchdown . The offensive line provided great protection for Colt McCoy , who called most of the plays without huddling and directed the Longhorns to touchdowns on his first five series . He completed 23 of 30 passes for 298 yards , 4 touchdowns , and no interceptions . His most athletic play came early in the third quarter when he evaded three defenders on a play from the Cyclones ' 20 @-@ yardline . He twisted around and managed to stay upright long enough to throw a pass to Nate Jones in the end zone . He capped off his performance by making his first rushing touchdown of the season , a career @-@ long , 44 @-@ yard run in the third quarter . The play was designed to be a screen pass to the fullback . Mack Brown said , " Colt was as good today as I 've ever seen him . " Brown also praised McCoy for taking on more of a leadership role with the team . The Austin American @-@ Statesman said , " Colt McCoy is shedding his sophomore slump . In the past two games , he is 42 of 56 passing for 622 yards with six passing touchdowns , one rushing touchdown and just one interception . That translates to a quarterback rating of 200 @.@ 1 . " However , against Baylor on October 20 , Colt would go on to throw 2 interceptions and 1 touchdown , and against Nebraska the following week , McCoy completed less than 50 % of his passes and threw another interception . On the day after Thanksgiving , McCoy was 17 of 32 with 1 interception , while be sacked 4 times in the 38 @-@ 30 loss to Texas A & M. At the conclusion of the 2007 regular season , <unk> had thrown for 21 touchdowns and 18 interceptions . 
 In the 2007 Holiday Bowl , McCoy led the Longhorns to a 52 – 34 victory and won the offensive @-@ player MVP award . 
 = = = 2008 season = = = 
 On January 2 , 2008 , UT running back Jamaal Charles decided to forgo his senior season with Texas in favor of joining the NFL as a professional football player in the 2008 NFL Draft . With Charles ' departure , McCoy became the leading returning rusher for the 2008 Longhorns . 
 McCoy rose in the record books during the first four games of the season . On August 30 , 2008 , McCoy passed for 222 yards and rushed for 103 yards against FAU , becoming the 2nd player in UT history to pass for 200 and rush for 100 yards in more than one game ; the other being Vince Young . On September 20 Colt McCoy surpassed the Texas All @-@ Time record for the most passing TD 's with 62 while beating Rice 52 – 10 . The record was previously held by Major Applewhite . Through the first four games of 2008 , McCoy completed 80 % of his passes and had a quarterback rating of 209 @.@ 71 . 
 The Longhorns opened conference play against the Colorado Buffaloes and UT won 38 – 14 . McCoy threw for two touchdowns and moved past Ricky Williams into second on Texas ' all @-@ time list for touchdowns responsible for ( passing , rushing , receiving ) . McCoy at that point had 77 , while Williams had 76 with the Horns . UT continued conference play by defeating # 1 ranked Oklahoma Sooners in the 2008 Texas vs. Oklahoma football game . McCoy was 28 for 35 for 277 yards and one touchdown , bringing Texas to the position of the # 1 in the AP poll for the first time since 1984 . ( passing Alabama , Missouri , Oklahoma , and LSU . ) 
 On October 18 , against Missouri , McCoy completed the game with 337 yards on 29 @-@ of @-@ 32 passing with two touchdowns , rushed for two more and at one point completed a school @-@ record 17 passes in a row . His completion ratio of 79 % coming into the game improved as he completed 91 % of his passes in this game . His four touchdowns put him alone in first place for the most career touchdowns scored at Texas ( 82 ) , passing Vince Young ( 81 ) . 
 UT lost to Texas Tech with one second remaining in the game . McCoy gave a good performance but came up short as his Red Raider counterpart , Graham Harrell had an outstanding day . Following that loss , UT fell to # 4 in the BCS rankings . They climbed to # 3 the following week as the Horns beat Baylor and former # 3 Penn State lost . The win over Baylor was the <unk> win for the UT football program , which tied Notre Dame for 2nd in the list of college football 's ten most victorious programs . 
 McCoy led the Longhorns to a 35 – 7 road victory over the Kansas , ensuring their eighth consecutive season with ten or more wins per season . That is the longest active streak in the nation and it ties them with Miami ( 1985 – 92 ) for the second @-@ longest streak of all @-@ time . It was Colt McCoy 's 30th career win , which tied him with Vince Young for the school record . McCoy completed 24 of 35 passing attempts ( 71 % ) for 255 yards and 2 touchdown passes . He was also the leading rusher for both schools , rushing for 78 yards and a touchdown . McCoy 's two touchdown passes put him at 31 for the season , breaking his own school record . 
 McCoy had another strong performance against in @-@ state rival Texas A & M in the final game of the regular season . This is the longest running rivalry both schools and the biggest margin of victory in the history of the rivalry occurred when Texas beat A & M 48 – 0 in 1898 . McCoy and the Longhorns nearly equaled that record this year by producing a 49 – 9 victory , the second @-@ largest margin of victory for this rivalry series . 
 The win was the 31st for Colt McCoy , setting a new school record . McCoy rushed for two touchdowns and threw for 2 more . He completed 23 of 28 attempted passes ( 82 % ) for a total of 311 yards . That yardage put him at 3 @,@ 594 yards for the season — another school record . His longest pass of the evening , 68 yarder on a post route to Jordan Shipley late in the third quarter , ended up a yard short of being McCoy ’ s fifth touchdown of the evening . 
 On January 5 , 2009 , McCoy led the Longhorns to 24 – 21 victory over Ohio State in the Fiesta Bowl . McCoy completed 41 @-@ of @-@ 59 passes for 414 yards , two touchdowns and one interception . He was named the Offensive Player of the Game for his performance . 
 = = = 2009 season = = = 
 In his final season , McCoy led the Texas Longhorns to a perfect 12 – 0 regular season record , as well as a 13 @-@ 12 victory over the Nebraska Cornhuskers to win the Big 12 Championship in Cowboys Stadium . While becoming the most victorious quarterback in NCAA history with 45 career wins , McCoy was again the focal point of the Longhorn offense that scored 550 points in 2009 , ranked third in UT All @-@ Time season scoring ( behind only the 2005 , and 2008 teams ) . McCoy led a fast paced offense , with accurate , short passes in his repertoire . The Texas offense executed a total of 1 @,@ 053 plays in 14 games played in 2009 . His favorite target was WR Jordan Shipley ( # 8 ) , who went on to play in the NFL with the Cincinnati Bengals . 
 McCoy left the 2010 BCS National Championship Game against Alabama during Texas ' first offensive drive early in the first quarter with a right shoulder injury and was sidelined for the remainder of the game . McCoy was replaced by true freshman quarterback Garrett Gilbert . Alabama would go on to win the game 37 – 21 . 
 = = = Statistics = = = 
 As of the end of the 2009 season , McCoy 's statistics were as follows : 
 In the seventh game of 2008 , he completed 91 % . He finished the 2008 regular season with a 76 @.@ 7 % completion percentage , breaking the mark set by Daunte Culpepper for Central Florida , and was the Longhorns ' leading rusher with 576 yards and 11 rushing touchdowns . His record as a starter was 45 @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Records = = = 
 Alamo Bowl - Consecutive pass completions ( 11 ) 
 Fiesta Bowl - Plays , game ( 66 ) 
 Fiesta Bowl & BCS Bowl - Attempts , game ( 59 ) 
 Fiesta Bowl & BCS Bowl - Completions , game ( 41 ) 
 UT - Victories by a freshman ( 10 ) 
 UT - Passing Yards by a freshman , season ( 2 @,@ 570 ) 
 UT - Passing Yards , Season ( 3 @,@ 859 ) ( November 27 , 2008 vs. Texas A & M , surpassed Major Applewhite ) 
 UT - Passing Yards , Career ( 13 @,@ 253 ) 
 UT - Offensive Yards , Season ( 4 @,@ 420 ) 
 UT - Offensive Yards , Career ( 14 @,@ 824 ) 
 UT - Touchdown Passes by a freshman , game ( 6 ) 
 UT - Touchdown Passes by a freshman , season ( 29 ) 
 UT - Touchdown Passes , Game ( 6 ) ( October 14 , 2006 versus Baylor ) 
 UT - Touchdown Passes , Season ( 34 ) ( Broke own record of 29 on November 15 , 2008 vs. the Kansas Jayhawks ) 
 UT - Touchdown Passes , Career ( 112 ) ( Broke record on September 20 , 2008 versus Rice ) 
 UT - Total Touchdowns , Season ( 45 ) 
 UT - Total Touchdowns , Career ( 132 ) ( Broke record on October 18 , 2008 versus Missouri ) 
 UT - Total plays , Season ( 599 ) 
 UT - Total plays , Career ( 2 @,@ 092 ) 
 UT - Passing Attempts , Game : ( 58 ) Tied , ( January 5 , 2009 versus Ohio State Buckeyes ) , surpassed by Garrett Gilbert in 2010 
 UT - Passing Attempts , Season ( 470 ) 
 UT - Passing Attempts , Career ( 1645 ) 
 UT - Passing Completions by a freshman , Season ( 217 ) 
 UT - Passing Completions , Game ( 41 ) ( January 5 , 2009 versus Ohio State Buckeyes ) 
 UT - Passing Completions , Season ( 332 ) 
 UT - Passing Completions , Career ( 1157 ) 
 UT - Fastest to 1 @,@ 000 yards in a single season ( 4 games ) tied with David Ash , Major Applewhite and James Brown 
 UT - Consecutive Games with a Touchdown Pass ( 29 ) 
 UT - Consecutive Games with two Touchdown Passes ( 8 ) 
 UT - Games with a Touchdown Pass ( 48 ) 
 UT - Games with two Touchdown Passes ( 34 ) 
 UT - Highest Percentage of Completions , Game ( minimum 20 attempts ) ( 90 @.@ 6 % ) 
 UT - Consecutive Passing Completions , Game ( 18 ) ( October 25 , 2008 versus Oklahoma State ( surpassed his own record of 17 on October 18 , 2008 versus Missouri ) . 
 UT - Passing Efficiency , Season ( 173 @.@ 8 ) 
 UT - Passing Efficiency , Career ( 155 @.@ 0 ) 
 UT - Starts , Career ( 53 ) 
 UT - Games by a quarterback , career ( 53 ) 
 UT - Most 200 yard passing games , Season ( 12 ) 
 UT - Most 200 yard passing games , Career ( 38 ) 
 UT - Consecutive 300 passing yard games , ( 3 ) 
 UT - Most 300 yard passing games , Season ( 6 ) 
 UT - Most 300 yard passing games , Career ( 14 ) 
 UT - Most 300 yard total offense games , Season ( 11 ) 
 UT - Most 300 yard total offense games , Career ( 27 ) 
 UT - Most 400 yard passing games , Season ( 1 ) , tied with Chris Simms and Applewhite 
 UT - Most 400 yard passing games , Career ( 2 ) , tied with Applewhite 
 UT - Most 400 yard total offense games , Season ( 3 ) , broke his own record shared with Young 
 UT - Most 400 yard total offense games , Career ( 5 ) 
 Big 12 & UT - Highest Percentage of Completions , Season ( minimum 200 attempts ) : 76 @.@ 7 % 
 Big 12 & UT - Highest Percentage of Completions , Career ( minimum 700 attempts ) : 70 @.@ 3 % 
 NCAA , Big 12 & UT - Highest Single Season completion percentage : 76 @.@ 7 % . 
 NCAA , Big 12 & UT - Career Wins by a Starting Quarterback : 45 ( Took UT Record on November 27 , 2008 vs. Texas A & M , surpassed Vince Young . Also most career wins in FBS history ) , FBS record surpassed by Kellen Moore of Boise State 
 NCAA , Big 12 & UT - Colt McCoy is one of the three FBS quarterbacks to average 10 wins per season for four seasons . 
 NCAA , Big 12 & UT - Touchdown passes by a freshman , 29 , tied with David Neill 
 = = = College awards and honors = = = 
 BCS national champion ( 2006 ) 
 2006 " All Freshman Team " by College Football News 
 2006 “ National Freshman of the Year ” by The Sporting News and the Touchdown Club of Columbus 
 2006 Big 12 Offensive Newcomer of the Year by the Associated Press . 
 2006 Valero Alamo Bowl Offensive MVP 
 2008 Pacific Life Holiday Bowl Offensive MVP 
 2008 Big 12 Offensive Player of the Year by the Associated Press 
 2008 Second @-@ team All @-@ Big 12 by the Associated Press 
 2008 Walter Camp Award by the Walter Camp Foundation 
 2008 First @-@ team All @-@ America by the Walter Camp Foundation , FWAA , and Sports Illustrated 
 2008 Archie Griffin Award 
 2008 co @-@ Sporting News Player of the Year 
 2008 Heisman Memorial Trophy Runner @-@ up 
 2009 <unk> Fiesta Bowl Offensive MVP 
 2009 Unanimous first @-@ team All @-@ American , including first @-@ team honors from by Associated Press , AFCA , FWAA , Walter Camp Foundation , Rivals.com , Scout.com 
 2009 First @-@ team All @-@ Big 12 
 2009 Big 12 Offensive Player of the Year 
 2009 NCAA Quarterback of the Year 
 2009 Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award 
 2009 Davey O 'Brien Award 
 2009 Manning Award 
 2009 Chic Harley Award 
 2009 Maxwell Award 
 2009 Walter Camp Award by the Walter Camp Foundation 
 2009 Sporting News College Athlete of the Year 
 2009 Heisman Memorial Trophy Finalist , 3rd Place 
 2009 AT & T ESPN All @-@ America Player of the Year 
 Texas Longhorns # 12 retired 
 = = = = Candidate for Heisman and other national awards = = = = 
 McCoy was mentioned as a Heisman Trophy candidate in his freshman year ( 2006 ) and he appeared on the Athlon Sports pre @-@ season Heisman watch at the start of the 2007 season . 
 The talk became more widespread during his junior year as McCoy was mentioned by several analysts and voters as a potential 2008 Heisman winner . McCoy was the unanimous front @-@ runner in an October 20 poll of 10 Heisman voters conducted by the Rocky Mountain News . Tim Tebow , quarterback of the Florida Gators , had a vote as the 2007 winner . Seven games into the season he said that McCoy would have his vote at that point in the season . 
 In the 45 – 21 victory over Baylor , McCoy passed for 300 yards and five touchdowns . The Associated Press story commented , " And McCoy likely refueled his Heisman Trophy bid by completing 26 of 37 passes for his fourth 300 @-@ yard game this season , and eighth of his career , even without playing the final 12 minutes . The touchdowns went to four different receivers , though he did have two interceptions . " 
 On November 11 ( with UT holding an 8 @-@ 1 record ) Heisman voter Rodney Gilmore of ESPN.com had McCoy listed third of five Heisman candidates . Gilmore said , " I love his numbers ( 78 percent completion percentage , 28 TDs , only 7 interceptions and 2 @,@ 879 yards ) and his gutsy second @-@ half performance against Texas Tech . And I have not forgotten about his epic performance against Oklahoma just a few weeks ago . However , Harrell outplayed McCoy head @-@ to @-@ head in the showdown last week , so Harrell has a leg up on him for now , but McCoy is within striking distance . " That same day , the Rocky Mountain News poll listed Harrell first and McCoy second in their weekly poll of 10 Heisman voters . Harrell received 44 points and 7 first @-@ place votes while McCoy had 34 points and 2 first @-@ place votes . 
 After Oklahoma beat Texas Tech , Oklahoma quarterback Sam Bradford barely took the lead in the Rocky Mountain News poll of 10 Heisman Trophy voters . The Austin American @-@ Statesman reported , " Bradford leads Texas ’ Colt McCoy by just one point . In terms of first @-@ place votes , Bradford received five , while McCoy received three . The others went to Texas Tech ’ s Graham Harrell , who had led the poll since Tech ’ s win over Texas , and Florida ’ s Tim Tebow , last year ’ s Heisman winner . " 
 On November 25 , 2008 Colt McCoy was named one of three finalists for the Maxwell Award , which is presented to the top all @-@ around player in the country . The other finalists were Florida quarterback Tim Tebow , the prior year 's winner , and Texas Tech quarterback Graham Harrell . Oklahoma 's Sam Bradford was not selected as a finalist . McCoy also was named a finalist for the Davey O 'Brien Award , which goes to the country 's top quarterback . Bradford and Harrell were the other two candidates ; Tebow did not make the list for this award . 
 After McCoy led the Longhorns to a victory over rival , unranked Texas A & M ( a team he had lost to twice in the past ) , Sports Illustrated analyst Stewart Mandel said the quarterback took a big step towards claiming the Heisman Trophy . Mandel wrote , " From the Longhorns ' opening touchdown drive , in which he accounted for 67 of Texas ' 80 yards , McCoy was very much the one @-@ man wrecking crew he 's been all season long ... His final numbers in just over three quarters of work Thursday night : 23 @-@ of @-@ 28 passing for 311 yards and two touchdowns and 11 rushes for 49 yards , with touchdown runs of 16 and 14 yards . For the season , McCoy now has a 77 @.@ 6 completion percentage ( soon to be a new NCAA record ) for 3 @,@ 445 yards , 32 touchdowns and seven interceptions , plus 476 yards and 13 TDs running " Comparing McCoy to fellow Big 12 South quarterbacks Sam Bradford and Graham Harrell , Mandel said , " But here 's where McCoy stands out to me . Bradford , as talented as he is , is helped by the fact he has a trio of explosive receivers and two potential 1 @,@ 000 @-@ yard rushers behind him . Harrell has Michael Crabtree . Daniel has Jeremy Maclin . With all due respect to Jordan Shipley and Quan Cosby , McCoy is Texas ' offense . Much like Tim Tebow last season , he 's both his team 's leading passer and rusher . Also like Tebow — you have to wonder sometimes how he 's still standing . McCoy was sacked three times Thursday night and endured several brutal hits . Following his third @-@ quarter touchdown run , trainers attended to his shoulder on the sideline . But he was right back in there the next series . " Bradford and Harrell each had one regular @-@ season game left , against Oklahoma State and Baylor , respectively . Tebow had games remaining against Florida State and Alabama . 
 In the final 2008 Rocky Mountain News poll before the Heisman votes were announced , McCoy moved to the top of the list , but had a very thin lead over Sam Bradford and Tim Tebow , who were in second and third place , respectively . The poll had correctly predicted the Heisman winner in 18 of the previous 21 years . On December 10 , McCoy , Bradford , and Tebow were selected as the three finalists for the Heisman Trophy . Bradford won the trophy with 1 @,@ 726 total points , and McCoy finished second with 1 @,@ 604 points in the Heisman voting . 
 In 2009 , McCoy was again in strong consideration for the Heisman , even with the two previous Heisman winners coming back for their senior seasons . At the start of the season he and Tebow were considered the favorites . But McCoy 's numbers were down a little from 2008 , and despite leading his team to the BCS Championship game , his chances of winning disappeared during a close 13 @-@ 12 Big 12 Title game in which he threw 3 interceptions , no touchdowns and nearly threw the game away at the end . Despite this , he still had an outstanding season and was again named a finalist , this time along with Tim Tebow , Mark Ingram , Jr , Toby Gerhart and Ndamukong Suh . He became only the 2nd Longhorn , along with Ricky Williams , to be a two @-@ time Heisman finalist . He finished third behind Ingram and Gerhart . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 In October 2008 McCoy said he would stay at Texas for his senior year instead of leaving for the 2009 NFL Draft . McCoy was quoted as saying , " I 'm going to play here for four years . I 've been blessed to be able to play here . Not very many people get to [ start ] here for four years , so what an opportunity . And if the NFL is there for me , then I hope that I 'll get to keep playing , because I love to play this game . Hopefully , it will work out . " 
 After a 49 – 9 victory over Texas A & M on November 27 , 2008 , McCoy said that he still intended to come back for his senior year , but that it would be " foolish " for him not to ask the NFL to evaluate his draft prospects . McCoy said that if he were rated a first- or second @-@ round draft pick , he might change his mind about staying . McCoy said , " But at the same time , I want to play four years here . Not very many people have had the opportunity to do that . That 's something that 's real special to me and important to me . " 
 On December 8 , 2008 , after the Longhorns learned they had been passed over for the national championship game , McCoy said he would return to the team for his senior year . McCoy indicated he wanted to play for a national championship . He also said , " I ’ m coming back because we have a solid coaching staff , and I ’ m coming back because I feel like I can develop the young receivers we have . " 
 McCoy injured his throwing arm in the BCS title game against Alabama with a pinched nerve . He announced he would not attend the NFL Combine and instead performed during the University of Texas pro workout day . Opinions over McCoy 's potential in the NFL were mixed . Frank Cooney of USA Today noted that McCoy " fired mostly from a shotgun , has a low release point and might lack an NFL fastball . " He was listed by Cooney as the 3rd best QB draft choice in 2010 , behind Sam Bradford and Jimmy Clausen . 
 Prior to the draft , McCoy said he had " no expectations " . 
 = = = Cleveland Browns = = = 
 = = = = 2010 = = = = 
 McCoy was drafted in the third round as the 85th overall pick by the Cleveland Browns in the 2010 NFL Draft . One reporter commented that McCoy was drafted later than expected because " he lacks NFL size ... , has small hands and was injured in the last game of his career at Texas . " In response to being chosen by Cleveland , McCoy said , " I can 't wait to be a Cleveland Brown and that we 're going to win a lot of games . Cleveland has a little orange in their jerseys just like UT . It 's a perfect fit . " On July 23 , McCoy agreed to terms on a four @-@ year , $ 5 million contract . 
 Pointing out that Cleveland already had three quarterbacks , Browns president Mike Holmgren said McCoy would likely not play his first season with the team in order to develop him as an NFL quarterback . However , because injuries to starting quarterback Jake Delhomme and back @-@ up Seneca Wallace , McCoy made his first career start against the Pittsburgh Steelers in week 6 . McCoy completed 23 of 33 passes for 281 yards , a touchdown , and two interceptions in the Browns ' loss . He also scrambled four times for 22 yards . McCoy started the following week against the New Orleans Saints and contributed to the surprising victory over the defending Super Bowl champions 30 @-@ 17 in New Orleans . On November 7 , McCoy made his third consecutive start and led the Browns to another upset victory , this time against the New England Patriots 34 @-@ 14 . He then started again on November 14 against the New York Jets ; however the Browns lost in overtime with McCoy throwing for 205 yards and a touchdown . McCoy injured his ankle in week 11 against the Jacksonville Jaguars and missed the next three weeks before returning to start under center against the Cincinnati Bengals in week 15 . McCoy threw for 243 yards and 2 touchdowns with no interceptions , but Cleveland lost . In each of the final two games against division rivals Baltimore and Pittsburgh , McCoy threw 3 interceptions as the Browns lost both games . McCoy finished the season with 6 touchdowns against 9 interceptions . 
 = = = = 2011 = = = = 
 After a long awaited pre @-@ season after the agreements from the NFL lockout , and the release of Delhomme , McCoy became the starter for the Browns . In the home opener against the Bengals , McCoy threw 19 for 40 attempts throwing 213 yards with two touchdowns and one interception in a 27 @-@ 17 loss . The next two weeks , the Browns defeated the Indianapolis Colts and the Miami Dolphins with McCoy throwing combined 41 of 71 attempts , 421 yards , and 3 touchdowns with 1 interception . Against the Tennessee Titans in week 5 , Colt threw 1 touchdown and 1 interception in a 13 @-@ 31 loss . After a bye week , McCoy and the Browns lost to the Oakland Raiders 17 @-@ 24 , McCoy threw for 215 yards with 2 touchdowns and no interceptions . After the loss to the Oakland Raiders the Browns played the Seattle Seahawks and won 6 @-@ 3 as McCoy finished with 178 yards , no touchdowns , and 1 interception . Against the Pittsburgh Steelers in Week 14 , McCoy threw 2 interceptions and no touchdowns in a 3 @-@ 14 loss where McCoy would also sustain a concussion . His father raised eyebrows when he questioned whether or not McCoy 's team had properly evaluated him for the concussion prior to returning to the game . McCoy stated that he did not remember anything . James Harrison , the Steelers player responsible for the helmet @-@ to @-@ helmet hit on McCoy , was subsequently punished by being suspended for the Steelers ' next game against the San Francisco 49ers . 
 = = = = 2012 = = = = 
 McCoy spent the 2012 season backing up Browns ' rookie first round pick Brandon Weeden . When Weeden was injured against the Denver Broncos , McCoy completed 9 out of his 17 pass attempts for 79 yards . 
 = = = San Francisco 49ers = = = 
 = = = = 2013 = = = = 
 On April 1 , 2013 the Browns traded McCoy and a 2013 6th round pick to the San Francisco 49ers in exchange for San Francisco 's 2013 7th and 5th round picks . 
 = = = Washington Redskins = = = 
 = = = = 2014 = = = = 
 McCoy signed with the Washington Redskins on April 3 , 2014 . On October 19 , 2014 against the Tennessee Titans , McCoy replaced Kirk Cousins after halftime , with Washington trailing 10 @-@ 6 and Cousins having caused two turnovers . On his first pass , McCoy completed a 70 @-@ yd touchdown pass to Pierre Garçon . McCoy then went on to lead the Redskins on a game @-@ winning drive , winning the game 19 @-@ 17 . On October 27 , 2014 , McCoy was named the starter over Cousins , and had his first start on the team against the Dallas Cowboys . In his first start since 2011 , McCoy completed 25 of 30 passes for 300 yards with a rushing touchdown and an interception , earning an overtime victory against the Cowboys , his favorite team growing up . The team benched him for injured starting quarterback Robert Griffin III after McCoy 's two victories . The team lost the next 3 games without McCoy . On November 25 , it was reported that McCoy would replace the benched Griffin in the November 30 game against the Indianapolis Colts . McCoy was placed on injured reserve on December 16 due to a neck injury he suffered in a shutout loss to the St. Louis Rams . 
 = = = = 2015 = = = = 
 McCoy re @-@ signed with the Redskins on March 17 , 2015 . He spent the regular season as Kirk Cousins ' backup , getting into two games and going 7 @-@ for @-@ 11 for 128 yards and one touchdown for the season . 
 = = = = 2016 = = = = 
 McCoy signed a three @-@ year contract extension with the Redskins on March 9 , 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McCoy enjoys hunting , fishing , and playing golf . On May 29 , 2006 , he swam 300 yards across a lake to help save the life of Ken Herrington who was having a seizure on a small dock that extended into the privately owned lake . 
 While in Austin , Texas , Colt was active in the UT community service program including visits to the Austin 's Children 's Hospital and volunteering at the Children 's Miracle Network telethon . McCoy also took a trip to Peru to take care of some missionary work and also visited hospital patients . Colt McCoy was the roommate of his favorite receiving target at Texas , Jordan Shipley . McCoy 's father was the roommate of Shipley 's father at Abilene Christian University . Colt 's younger brother Case and Jordan 's younger brother <unk> were also roommates at the University of Texas and played the same positions as Colt and Jordan . McCoy has already extended a generous hearty healthy message to the children of Central Texas by joining the ambassadors of Scott & White Hospital Pediatric Division as they transitioned into new facilities in Temple , Texas in 2010 and Killeen , Texas in 2011 . 
 McCoy is a member of the Church of Christ , and attended Westover Hills Church of Christ in Austin , Texas . When living in Buffalo Gap , Colt attended and was very involved with the Oldham Lane Church of Christ . McCoy has participated in a church youth group since 2002 . His work has included landscaping yards for the elderly , visiting nursing homes , helping with meals on wheels and ministry . Fellow quarterback Tim Tebow said of McCoy , " I was really proud of him because I think he represents college football and his faith extremely well , too , which I really respect as well . I think he 's done a good job with everything he 's going through . " 
 His grandfather , Burl McCoy , is a member of the Abilene Christian University ( ACU ) Sports Hall of Fame for his exploits both as an athlete and as the former women 's basketball coach . Colt McCoy 's younger brother Chance McCoy was a wide receiver at ACU . His youngest brother Case McCoy quarterbacked at the University of Texas and now resides and works in the Austin area . 
 Some media features on Colt McCoy refer to him jokingly as " The Real McCoy " because of his performance on the field as well as his leadership and personality . 
 McCoy was selected to welcome President George W. Bush home to Texas after his second term ended on January 20 , 2009 . 
 On January 12 , 2010 , Colt became engaged to his girlfriend , Rachel <unk> , former middle @-@ distance Track and Field athlete for Baylor University , by proposing on the screen at <unk> @-@ Memorial Stadium in Austin . Their marriage took place on July 17 , 2010 . 
 = Commissions and Fees = 
 " Commissions and Fees " is the twelfth and penultimate episode of the fifth season of the American television drama series Mad Men and the 64th episode of the series overall . It is co @-@ written by Andre Jacquemetton and Maria Jacquemetton , and directed by Christopher Manley . It aired on the AMC channel in the United States on June 3 , 2012 . 
 It is now February , 1967 . Don ( Jon Hamm ) discovers that Lane ( Jared Harris ) stole money from the company and fires him . Sally 's ( Kiernan Shipka ) childhood comes to an end while she has a rendezvous with former neighbor Glen Bishop ( Marten Weiner ) . After Don expresses a yearning for more , Roger ( John Slattery ) gets him a meeting with Dow Chemical , a client that could shape the future of the company . When he returns home , Lane falls into a melancholic depression and loses hope for the future . 
 The episode received critical acclaim . The audience for " Commissions and Fees " rose from the previous episode and was watched by 2 @.@ 41 million viewers . It was also watched by 0 @.@ 8 million viewers in the age 18 @-@ 49 demographic , another gain . The resolution of main character Lane Pryce 's story received heavy media attention . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Lane has breakfast with a member of the American Association of Advertising Agencies , who praises his fiscal track record and asks him to serve as head of the association 's fiscal control committee . He accepts . Examining the company financial records , Bert Cooper ( Robert Morse ) finds Lane 's forged check and accuses Don of giving an unauthorized Christmas bonus . Don calls Lane into his office , shows him the check and serves him a drink . Lane pretends to be ignorant at first , but then apologizes while arguing that he was only taking his own money that he had previously invested and for which he had not been compensated . Don demands his resignation and gives him the weekend to think of an " elegant exit " , assuring him that this is the worst part of starting over . Lane wanders over to Joan 's ( Christina Hendricks ) office with the drink still in his hand , but she sends him away after he makes a lewd comment . 
 At a partners meeting , Pete ( Vincent Kartheiser ) says Jaguar would like to pay SCDP via a fee structure instead of straight commission . He adds that Jaguar 's tire supplier , Dunlop , is interested in meeting with SCDP . Later declaring that he is tired of meager accounts , Don tells Roger to arrange a meeting with Ed Baxter at Dow Chemical Company . Roger calls Dow the " Moby @-@ Dick " of accounts and reminds him that Ken Cosgrove ( Aaron Staton ) is hesitant about doing business with his father @-@ in @-@ law , but Don does not care . Over drinks , Roger tells Ken they are going after Dow Chemical but assures him he is not obligated to work on the account . Ken agrees to keep the proceedings secret from his wife if Roger agrees to force him onto the account and to exclude Pete from all meetings . Roger tells Don he arranged a meeting with Baxter on Monday . 
 As Betty Francis ( January Jones ) packs for a family ski vacation , Sally complains that she would rather spend the weekend with Don and Megan ( Jessica Paré ) . An angry Betty calls Don to say she is dropping Sally off at his apartment . To Megan 's surprise , Sally shows up at the apartment and informs her that she will be staying for the weekend . Megan later complains to Don for not telling her about Sally 's visit . Don confides that he had to fire Lane for embezzlement . Lane arrives home drunk to find that Rebecca has surprised him with a new Jaguar . She tells him her reasoning — he never spends on himself . He vomits , but , the next morning , reassures Rebecca ( Embeth Davidtz ) that he likes the car . Lane attempts to commit suicide in the middle of the night using the new car 's exhaust , but , in an ironic confirmation of Cooper 's earlier retort of Jaguars that " They don 't start ! " , the car fails to start . He then walks into SCDP 's empty office and types a letter at his desk . 
 Sally invites Glen to visit while Don and Megan are at work the next day . He agrees . The next morning , she waits for Megan to leave the apartment before rushing to change out of her pajamas . Glen arrives at the Draper apartment . They visit the American Museum of Natural History . He admits that he told friends he was going to " do it " with her , but that he thinks of her as a little sister . Feeling ill , Sally runs to the bathroom and finds blood on her underwear . Arriving home , Megan looks for Sally and sees Glen 's duffel bag . Sally takes a cab to the Francis house and sprints to the bathroom . She later hugs Betty tightly and explains that her menstrual cycle has started . Glen shows up at the Draper apartment and tells Megan that Sally left him at the museum . Betty phones and tells her that Sally " became a woman today , " and just needed her mother . Megan insists Glen stay until she can drive him to his train . Betty gives Sally a hot water bottle and assures her that starting her cycle means " everything is working . " 
 Roger rallies Don as they wait outside Baxter 's ( Ray Wise ) office . Inside , Don puts aside Baxter 's concerns about the advertised anti @-@ smoking letter and insists Dow Chemical needs a new agency , despite having 50 % of the market share . Don chides Baxter and his staff for allowing Dow to be satisfied with a 50 % market share when they should go after more - and SCDP is the agency that can help them do it . 
 Lane 's secretary drops off some company records with Joan , saying Lane has not arrived and his office door is locked . Joan tries to open Lane 's door to find it blocked , and is disturbed by a foul odor and the sight of an upturned end @-@ table . She goes into the neighbouring office , where Pete , Harry and Ken are conversing , and informs them . Pete hops up onto a couch to look into Lane 's office through the partition window ; he claps his hand over his mouth in shock , and Ken holds Joan as she bursts into tears . Back from their meeting with Dow , Don and Roger arrive to a nearly empty office . They soon discover Cooper , Pete and Joan seated in the break room and are informed by them that Lane hanged himself . Cooper tells them the other employees do not know yet , and were sent home on a contrived pretext . Don , Pete , and Roger force their way into Lane 's office and find his corpse dangling from the door . They cut it down and place it on the couch to preserve his dignity , against the advice from the police about not tampering with a crime scene . Roger picks up a note from the floor and opens it . He tells the group that it is Lane 's boilerplate resignation . 
 At home , Don offers to drive Glen back to his dormitory at Hotchkiss in Connecticut . Glen states that " everything you think is going to make you happy just turns to crap . " Don asks what Glen would do if he could do anything ; later in Don 's car , Glen drives and smiles as Don helps him steer . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jared Harris was told after the tenth episode read @-@ through by series creator Matt Weiner that Lane Pryce 's time was at an end . About Lane 's forced retirement , Harris stated : " In the beginning , he doesn 't know that 's the reason he 's being called into the office . Once it comes up , he thinks he can bluff his way out of it . And then he goes through all of these emotions , from anger to denial to depression to acceptance . It was all written in there . The [ script ] was very specific about the different turns he would take . " Harris continued about his character 's subsequent suicide : " When Matt told me [ the Jaguar ] idea , I laughed my ass off . When he said the car doesn 't start , I just laughed for about five minutes . Nothing goes right for [ Lane ] ... The sadness that I feel is that it 's been such an amazing experience . " Pete 's ( Vincent Kartheiser ) , Don 's ( Jon Hamm ) , and Roger 's ( John Slattery ) " shocked and chaotic " reactions to Lane 's corpse were the actors ' genuine reactions , according to Harris . 
 Series creator Matthew Weiner called the decision to write off Lane Pryce " a terrible thing to have to deal with . " He added , " You want to make sure that it 's worth it , that they 're going out with a bang and you 're not sacrificing someone who 's a great actor and a great musician in the orchestra . But also I feel like there have to be stakes . This year was filled with foreboding of violence and death , and the connection of that early summer between the riots , which resulted in death , police killing innocent people , and the Richard Speck murders and the guy on the Texas tower [ Charles Whitman ] . The randomness and the nihilism that was born from that was something that permeated the story . Lane 's story I thought was about someone who has undervalued themselves and that was his only way out , he thought . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received critical acclaim . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix wrote about the " palpable , painful sense of dread throughout this episode " , stating : " Though Lane 's tax trouble seemed to come out of nowhere a few weeks ago ... all of his behavior , and Don 's , felt very true to form , and not like characters acting in a way designed to create a specific end point . Lane was doomed , but by his own actions and foibles as much as by any plot engineering to get that noose around his neck . " The Guardian 's Paul McInnes felt the series was " recovering its poise " on its way to the season finale , stating : " After dallying with melodrama ( Pete and Beth Dawes , Harry and Hari Kinsey ) , the show has moved back towards the darker , more sophisticated narratives of cause and unexpected consequence . This week Lane may have taken his own life , but Don also got his mojo back and the two were directly related . " Verne Gay of Newsday compared the characters of Lane Pryce and Don Draper , stating : " Both have secret lives protected by carefully constructed façades . For both , the façade is everything — and Lane 's would simply fall away , like a line of dominoes when confronted with the consequences of his lie . A lie , after all , made in the service of his son . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Commissions and Fees " was watched by 2 @.@ 41 million viewers and received an adult 18 @-@ 49 rating of 0 @.@ 8 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 This episode received a nomination for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series for the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 Due to his nomination , Jared Harris submitted this episode for consideration for Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Drama Series for the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 = Qualcomm Snapdragon = 
 Snapdragon is a suite of system on a chip ( SoC ) semiconductor products designed and marketed by Qualcomm for mobile devices . The Snapdragon central processing unit ( CPU ) uses the ARM RISC instruction set , and a single SoC may include multiple CPU cores , a graphics processing unit ( GPU ) , a wireless modem , and other software and hardware to support a smartphone 's global positioning system ( GPS ) , camera , gesture recognition and video . Snapdragon semiconductors are embedded in devices of various systems , including Google Android mobile and Windows Phone devices . They are also used for netbooks , in cars , wearable devices and other devices . 
 The first Snapdragon product to be made available to consumer device manufacturers was the <unk> , which was released in November 2007 . It included the first 1 GHz processor for mobile phones . Qualcomm introduced its " Krait " microprocessor architecture in the second generation of Snapdragon SoCs in 2011 , allowing each processor core to adjust its speed based on the device 's needs . At the 2013 Consumer Electronics Show , Qualcomm introduced the first of the Snapdragon 800 series and renamed prior models as the 200 , 400 and 600 series . Several new iterations have been introduced since , such as the Snapdragon 805 , 810 , 615 and 410 . Qualcomm re @-@ branded its modem products under the Snapdragon name in December 2014 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ release = = = 
 Qualcomm announced it was developing the Scorpion central processing unit ( CPU ) in November 2005 . The Snapdragon system on chip ( SoC ) was announced in November 2006 and included the Scorpion processor , as well as other semiconductors . This also included Qualcomm 's first custom Hexagon digital signal processor ( DSP ) . 
 According to a Qualcomm spokesperson , it was named Snapdragon , because " Snap and Dragon sounded fast and fierce . " The following month , Qualcomm acquired <unk> Networks for an undisclosed amount ; it said <unk> 's <unk> / b / g and 802.11n Wi @-@ Fi technology would be integrated with the Snapdragon product suite . Early versions of Scorpion had a processor core design similar to the Cortex @-@ A8 . 
 = = = Early Snapdragon products = = = 
 The first Snapdragon shipments were of the <unk> in November 2007 . According to CNET , Snapdragon 's claim to fame was having the first 1 GHz mobile phone processor . Most smartphones at the time were using 500 MHz processors . The first generation of Snapdragon products supported a 720p resolution , 3D graphics and a 12 @-@ megapixel camera . By November 2008 , 15 device manufacturers decided to embed Snapdragon semiconductors in their consumer electronics products . 
 In November 2008 , Qualcomm announced it would also compete against Intel in the netbook processor market with dual @-@ core Snapdragon system @-@ on @-@ chips planned for late 2009 . It demonstrated a Snapdragon processor that consumed less power than Intel chips announced around the same time and claimed it would also cost less when released . That same month , Qualcomm introduced a Snapdragon @-@ based <unk> netbook called Kayak that used 1 @.@ 5 GHz processors and was intended for developing markets . 
 In May 2009 , Java SE was ported and optimized for Snapdragon . At the November 2009 Computex Taipei show , Qualcomm announced the <unk> addition to the Snapdragon product suite , which was based on 45 nanometer manufacturing processes . It featured a 1 @.@ 2 GHz processor and had lower power consumption than prior models . 
 = = = Adoption = = = 
 By late 2009 , smartphone manufacturers announced they would be using Snapdragon semiconductors in the Acer Liquid Metal , HTC HD2 , Toshiba <unk> and the Sony Ericsson Xperia X10 . Lenovo announced the first netbook product using Snapdragon SoCs that December . According to PC World , mobile devices using Snapdragon had better battery life and were smaller in size than those using other SoCs . 
 By June 2010 , Snapdragon chips were embedded in 20 available consumer devices and incorporated into 120 product designs in development . Apple had a dominant market position for smartphones at the time and did not incorporate Snapdragon into any of its products . The success of Snapdragon therefore relied on competing Android phones , such as Google 's Nexus One and the HTC Incredible , challenging Apple 's market position . Android devices did end up taking market share from the iPhone and predominantly used Snapdragon . As of July 2014 , the market share of Android phones had grown to 84 @.@ 6 percent . 
 There was an " unconfirmed but widely circulated report " speculating that Apple was going to start using Snapdragon SoCs in Verizon @-@ based iPhones . As of 2012 , Apple was still using their own semiconductor designs . Support for desktop Windows operating systems was added to Snapdragon in October 2010 . By 2011 Snapdragon was embedded in Hewlett Packard 's <unk> devices and had a 50 % market share of a $ 7 @.@ 9 billion smartphone processor market . By 2015 , Snapdragon was used in most non @-@ Apple smartphones . 
 Snapdragon chips are also used in most Android @-@ based <unk> , Snapdragon products have also been used in virtual reality products , in vehicles like the Maserati <unk> and Cadillac <unk> and in other applications . 
 = = = Later models = = = 
 In June 2010 , Qualcomm began sampling the third generation of Snapdragon products ; two dual @-@ core 1 @.@ 2 GHz system on chips ( SoC ) called the Mobile Station Modem ( MSM ) <unk> and <unk> . The <unk> was for GSM , UMTS and HSPA + networks , while the <unk> was for <unk> and <unk> networks . That November Qualcomm announced the MSM8960 for LTE networks . 
 In early 2011 , Qualcomm announced a new processor architecture called Krait , which used the ARM <unk> instruction set , but was based on Qualcomm 's own processor design . The processors were called S4 and had a feature named Asynchronous Symmetrical Multi @-@ Processing ( <unk> ) , meaning each processor core adjusted its clock speed and voltage based on the device 's activity in order to optimize battery usage . Prior models were renamed to S1 , S2 and S3 to distinguish each generation . 
 The S4 @-@ based generation of Snapdragon SoCs began shipping to product manufacturers with the MSM8960 in February 2012 . In benchmark tests by Anandtech , the MSM8960 had better performance than any other processor tested . In an overall system benchmark , the <unk> obtained a score of 907 , compared to 528 and 658 for the Galaxy Nexus and HTC <unk> respectively . In a Quadrant benchmark test , which assesses raw processing power , a dual @-@ core Krait processor had a score of 4 @,@ 952 , whereas the quad @-@ core Tegra 3 was just under 4 @,@ 000 . The quad @-@ core version , <unk> , was made available in July 2012 . It was the first Snapdragon SoC to use Qualcomm 's Adreno 320 graphics processing unit ( GPU ) . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 Adoption of Snapdragon contributed to Qualcomm 's transition from a wireless modem company to one that also produces a wider range of hardware and software for mobile devices . In July 2011 Qualcomm acquired certain assets from <unk> in order to incorporate its gesture recognition intellectual property into Snapdragon SoCs . In mid @-@ 2012 Qualcomm announced the Snapdragon software development kit ( SDK ) for Android devices at the <unk> developer conference . The SDK includes tools for facial recognition , gesture recognition , noise cancellation and audio recording . That November Qualcomm acquired some assets from <unk> Development in order to integrate its stylus and gesture recognition technology into Snapdragon products . It also collaborated with Microsoft to optimize Windows Phone 8 for Snapdragon semiconductors . 
 = = Description and current models = = 
 Snapdragon system on chip products typically include a graphics processing unit ( GPU ) , a global positioning system ( GPS ) and a cellular modem integrated into a single circuit board . It has software included that operates graphics , video and picture @-@ taking . There are 14 different Snapdragon products under the 200 , 400 , 600 and the 800 series spanning from low to high @-@ end respectively . Some of their components include the Adreno graphics processing , the Qualcomm Hexagon DSP and processors using Qualcomm 's S4 processor architecture . In addition to smartphones , the 400 series is used in smart watches and the <unk> is intended for electronics in cars . 
 The current Snapdragon naming schema was implemented after the Snapdragon 800 family was announced at the 2013 Consumer Electronics Show ; prior models were renamed to the 200 , 400 or 600 series . The 400 family is entry @-@ level , the 600 is mass @-@ market or mid @-@ range , and 800 family is for high @-@ end phones . 
 The entry @-@ level 200 series was expanded with six new processors using 28 nanometer manufacturing and dual or quad @-@ core options in June 2013 . The Snapdragon 805 was released that November . The 410 , which is intended for low @-@ cost phones in developing nations , was announced the following month . In January 2014 , Qualcomm introduced a modified version of the Snapdragon 600 called <unk> that is intended for in @-@ car infotainment screens , backup cameras , and other driver assistance products . The quad @-@ core Snapdragon 610 and eight @-@ core 615 were announced in February 2014 . The Snapdragon 808 and 810 were announced in April 2014 . As of July 2014 , the 810 contained the fastest processor in the Snapdragon line . 
 The entry @-@ level Snapdragon 210 , intended for low @-@ cost phones , was announced in September 2014 . In February 2015 , Qualcomm re @-@ branded its stand @-@ alone modem products under the Snapdragon name ; they were distinguished from SoCs using the " x " designation , such as the X7 or <unk> modem . 
 According to CNET , these phones were growing in US market share and ranked highly in CNET reviews due to their responsiveness . Snapdragon SoCs are also used in most Windows phones and most phones entering the market in mid @-@ 2013 . The LG G2 was the first phone to market using the Snapdragon 800 in August 2013 . 
 = = = Benchmark tests = = = 
 Benchmark tests of the Snapdragon 800 's processor by PC Magazine found that its processing power was comparable to similar products from Nvidia . Benchmarks of the Snapdragon 805 found that the Adreno 420 GPU resulted in a 40 percent improvement in graphics processing over the Adreno 330 in the Snapdragon 800 , though there was only slight differences in processor benchmarks . Benchmarks of the Snapdragon 801 inside an HTC One found a " bump all around " in benchmark improvements over the 800 . In 2015 , Samsung 's decision not to use the Snapdragon 810 in its upcoming Galaxy S6 , had a significant detrimental impact on Snapdragon 's revenues and reputation . Benchmark tests by Ars Technica confirmed rumors that the 810 under @-@ performed lower @-@ end models and had overheating issues . A Qualcomm spokesperson said these tests were done with early versions of the 810 that weren ’ t ready for commercial use . An updated version was released and was found to moderately improve thermal throttling , GPU clock speeds , memory latency , and memory bandwidth when tested in a commercial product , the <unk> Mi Note Pro . 
 = The Hounds of Baskerville = 
 " The Hounds of Baskerville " is the second episode of the second series of the BBC crime drama series Sherlock , which follows the modern @-@ day adventures of Sherlock Holmes , and was first broadcast by BBC One on 8 January 2012 . It was written by co @-@ creator Mark Gatiss , who also portrays Mycroft Holmes , Sherlock 's brother in the series , and was directed by Paul McGuigan . The episode is a contemporary adaptation of The Hound of the Baskervilles , one of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle 's most famous works . 
 In the episode , Holmes ( Benedict Cumberbatch ) and his crime @-@ solving partner John Watson ( Martin Freeman ) take on the case of Henry Knight ( Russell Tovey ) , who 20 years earlier witnessed the brutal killing of his father by a " gigantic hound " on Dartmoor . The investigation leads the pair to Baskerville , a military research base . In the conclusion it is revealed that the hounds were images induced by a mind @-@ altering drug , a chemical weapon whose creator was in fact the real murderer of Henry 's father . 
 Because of the popularity of the novel , Gatiss felt a greater responsibility to include familiar elements of the story than he did when adapting the lesser @-@ known stories . The script was intended to follow elements of the horror genre and make the episode scary . As opposed to traditional ghost stories , Gatiss 's plot focused on more contemporary horrors , conspiracy theories and genetic modification . Filming was done throughout May 2011 , with additional shots taking place as late as August . Location shooting took place mostly across South Wales , though parts were shot in Dartmoor . The hound was created using visual effects . 
 After its broadcast on BBC One , the episode received consolidated figures of 10 @.@ 266 million viewers in the United Kingdom . This rating , although a slight drop from the previous episode , still represented the second largest audience in British television the week it aired . Critical reaction toward the episode was largely positive , with reviewers praising both the modernisation and its tonal fidelity to the original . Critics praised Cumberbatch , Freeman , and Tovey , as well as Sherlock 's " mind palace " sequence . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sherlock ( Benedict Cumberbatch ) and John ( Martin Freeman ) receive a visit from Henry Knight ( Russell Tovey ) , who witnessed his father 's death by a " gigantic hound " at Dartmoor 20 years ago . After years of therapy , Henry visited the site again , only to see the hound again , prompting his request for help . Though initially dismissive , Sherlock is soon interested by Henry 's use of " hound " instead of " dog " . Sherlock and John arrive in Dartmoor to find the hound is a local legend . They visit Baskerville , a nearby Ministry of Defence research base , using Mycroft 's ( Mark Gatiss ) security pass . After Mycroft 's credentials cause a security alert , Dr. Bob Frankland ( Clive Mantle ) vouches for Sherlock 's identity , despite knowing the truth . Frankland says he was a friend of Henry 's father and is concerned for Henry 's well @-@ being . 
 Henry tells John and Sherlock about the words " Liberty " and " In " in his dreams . Sherlock , John , and Henry then visit the hollow in the hope of finding the hound . On the way , John notices what seems to be Morse code signals ( these were unrelated ; they were headlight flashes from a group of doggers ) . When Sherlock and Henry arrive at the hollow , they both see the hound . At a local inn , Sherlock is visibly shaken and confesses he saw the hound . John tries calming him , suggesting he 's imagining things . Sherlock reacts with anger , denying there is anything wrong with him . John tries to interview Henry 's therapist , Louise Mortimer ( Sasha Behar ) . However , they are interrupted by Frankland , who blows his cover . Meanwhile , Henry hallucinates the hound is stalking his home . 
 The next morning Sherlock realises " hound " may be an acronym rather than a word . The pair run into DI Lestrade ( Rupert Graves ) who was sent by Mycroft to keep an eye on Sherlock . They interrogate the innkeepers about a past order for meat that John has spotted , which struck him as odd for a vegetarian restaurant . The innkeepers kept a dog on the moor to boost the tourist trade , but assure the investigators they had put it down . This explanation satisfies Lestrade but not Sherlock , who insists the dog he saw was monstrous . Calling Mycroft , Sherlock gains access to Baskerville again . Searching the lower levels of the genetics labs , John finds himself trapped and then hears growling which he assumes is the hound . Locking himself in an empty cage , he calls Sherlock , who rescues him . Sherlock deduces a chemical weapon designed to trigger violent hallucinations was responsible . Retreating into his " mind palace " , a memory technique , Sherlock realises " Liberty " and " In " stands for Liberty , Indiana . After viewing confidential files , he sees " H.O.U.N.D. " was a secret C.I.A. project aimed at creating a hallucinatory anti @-@ personnel chemical weapon , but the project was abandoned several years before . Sherlock realises Frankland , who participated in the project , has continued it in secret . 
 After John receives a call from Mortimer that Henry has run off with a gun , John , Sherlock and Lestrade run to the hollow to find Henry about to commit suicide . Sherlock explains the hound was an hallucination ; his father was actually killed by Frankland , who was wearing a gas mask and a sweater with " H.O.U.N.D. Liberty , In " on it ; a child couldn 't cope with this , so his mind tricked him . Every time Henry came back , Frankland gassed him with the hallucinogen ; the chemical agent is the fog they encountered at the hollow , triggered by pressure pads in the area . As Henry calms down , they all see the innkeepers ' dog ; John shoots it . Sherlock finds and catches Frankland at the scene . Henry realises that Frankland murdered Henry 's father , because he found him testing the drug . Frankland flees into the base 's minefield and gets blown up . As Sherlock and John prepare to leave the next morning , John wonders why he saw the hound in the lab despite not having inhaled the gas from the hollow . He realises that he was poisoned by leaking pipes in the laboratory earlier . He later realises Sherlock locked him in the labs in order to test his theory . He also points out Sherlock was wrong for once ; he believed the drug was in Henry 's sugar and put it in John 's coffee . 
 In the closing scenes , Mycroft oversees the release of Jim Moriarty ( Andrew Scott ) from a holding cell in which he has written Sherlock 's name all over the walls . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In June 2011 , it was announced that Russell Tovey would appear in Sherlock series two in its second episode . Tovey , who liked Sherlock for staying true to the style of the novels despite its modern twist , said of the experience : " It 's amazing to be a part of it " , adding , " I got to act with Benedict and Martin which was awesome " . The actor also explained that during his scenes , " We did about two and a half weeks of night shoots in Cardiff and I felt like I had jetlag . " In terms of Henry 's character , Tovey did not want him to be a " <unk> wreck " , but rather mature and truthful as well as damaged and haunted . Gatiss also made Henry display signs of survivor guilt . Tovey 's nephew auditioned for the part of a younger Henry , but another child actor was cast for the role as the nephew was considered too young . 
 = = = Background and writing = = = 
 The episode was based on The Hound of the Baskervilles , first serialised in 1901 @-@ 1902 ; it is considered one of Arthur Conan Doyle 's most famous Holmes stories , as it was written after Doyle killed off Sherlock and , consequently , sold well . It was also one of the most adapted novels in the Sherlock Holmes series . Because of its popularity , writer Mark Gatiss felt a greater responsibility to include familiar elements of the story than he did when adapting the lesser @-@ known stories . Conan Doyle had killed off his famous character in the 1893 story " The Final Problem " , but bowed to popular pressure to write another Holmes adventure . Gatiss observed that Conan Doyle 's weariness with the character is demonstrated by Holmes ' absence for half of The Hound of the Baskervilles , in which Doctor Watson 's role is foregrounded . 
 In contrast to the original , however , the producers decided to centre Sherlock in their adaptation , so Sherlock only threatens to stay behind in London . In addition , the three episodes of the second series show Sherlock dealing , respectively , with love , fear , and death . Here , the producers wanted Sherlock , an arch @-@ rationalist , to confront something that seemed impossible , especially since their Sherlock is still a young character who has not experienced fear yet . Freeman stated that when he sees the hound , Sherlock becomes " really terrified " and for some time , stops trusting the evidence he has seen . 
 The producers also considered how to make the dog believable because , according to Gatiss , audiences always find the dog disappointing in the adaptations . Therefore , Gatiss wanted the solution to be more than a " dog with luminous paint " . In one scene , Henry has an hallucination in his home , wherein the hound sets off the bright security lights in his back garden . That scene is apparently based on the experience of co @-@ creator Steven Moffat and his executive producer and wife Sue Vertue , who also have bright security lights and are frequently startled whenever the lights turn on at night . 
 There were other differences from the novel . Henry Knight was based on Sir Henry Baskerville , but the character Barrymore , a butler in the book , became an Army major . Another character , Fletcher , was original to the episode ; the character was based on Bertram Fletcher Robinson , the journalist who assisted Doyle with the novel . In another scene , John notices what appears to be Morse code , but it is unrelated to the case . Moffat named it the funniest instance where the producers take an element from Doyle 's works and " do something cheeky with it " . The Baskerville base was based on Porton Down military science research centre . While conducting research for the episode , Gatiss learned that artists and scientists made a luminous rabbit , using the green fluorescent protein of a jellyfish , which formed the basis for a side story involving a " glow @-@ in @-@ the @-@ dark " rabbit created at Baskerville by Dr. Stapleton , the mother of the child who wrote to Sherlock at the beginning of the episode requesting that he help her find her missing rabbit . In the episode , it is specified that the spliced @-@ in " GFP gene " that had allowed the rabbit to glow had come from a jellyfish of the species <unk> victoria . Also , Gatiss suggested the concept of a " mind palace " , a memory technique originating in Ancient Greece ; the idea came from a book by illusionist Derren Brown . This technique would lead Sherlock to the revelation of the secret H.O.U.N.D. project . 
 Early script drafts had Henry accidentally kill Louise Mortimer , but producers were never satisfied with this development , thinking Henry would have failed if she died . Writers also posited that Henry 's father 's murder involved revenge after he had an affair , but the producers and Gatiss found it easier to mention he died because he learned of Franklin 's experiments with the hallucinogenic gas . The ending also changed ; the final scene had originally involved Moriarty entering the Tower of London but that was held back for the following episode . 
 = = = Filming and effects = = = 
 " The Hounds of Baskerville " took around four weeks to film , with shooting mostly taking place throughout May 2011 . Additional scenes were shot later in July and August . Filming on location mostly took place across South Wales , with parts of the episode being shot on location in Dartmoor , even though the producers did not originally intend to do so . The first day took place at a cemetery . The producers were looking for a village in South Wales that was " very English @-@ looking . " Scenes of the fictional " Cross Keys " pub were filmed at the Bush Inn in St Hilary , Vale of Glamorgan . The production team donated £ 500 to the village after filming had finished . In one scene , after Sherlock first witnesses the hound , Sherlock makes deductions about a mother and son from a nearby table . In filming the scene , Cumberbatch has to recall multiple pages of monologue in front of camera , and had to talk faster than he was used to . 
 The scenes at Baskerville were filmed at a number of locations . The exterior was filmed at the gas works by <unk> near <unk> in Mid Glamorgan . The labs meanwhile were filmed in two separate locations , one of which was a microchip processing facility . The switch between two locations meant that the crew had to transport a lift set . The scenes in <unk> 's Hollow , where the hound was sighted , was filmed near Castell Coch . The reveal scenes in the hollow took two nights to film . At some point filming the scenes were delayed due to rain . The scenes shot in Dartmoor took place in areas such as Haytor and Hound Tor , the latter of which was said to be where the original story was set . 
 Throughout his scenes , Rupert Graves was tanned because before filming the episode , the actor was in Guadeloupe , an island on the Caribbean , appearing in Death in Paradise . As a result , Gatiss added mention that Lestrade went on holiday in the script . In the original episode , John was to hallucinate the hound at a meat storage locker . However , after visiting such a locker in Bristol , the producers came to realise that it would be too expensive , and cold for Freeman , forcing them to change the setting to the Baskerville labs . In one scene , Sherlock is driving a Land Rover with John as a passenger after their arrival at Dartmoor ; John was originally going to be the one driving the car , however Freeman cannot drive . In the client scenes , Tovey had to smoke a herbal cigarette as it was illegal to smoke real cigarettes on set . Throughout the episode , the production crew used split <unk> in certain scenes , a camera technique where two separate camera angles are at the same focus on screen . The episode also includes shots of the hound , which was produced by visual effects . Although the series used computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) in the past , it was the first time a visual effect was made on a large scale . However , there was no guide for the cast to interact with . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Hounds of Baskerville " was first broadcast on BBC One on Sunday , 8 January 2012 between 8 : 30 p.m. and 10 : 00 p.m. It received preliminary overnight figures of 8 @.@ 16 million viewers with a 29 per cent audience share . It was down by almost 400 @,@ 000 from the previous week , but it was still the most seen broadcast in its timeslot , beating ITV1 drama Wild at Heart . When final ratings are factored , the episode saw an increase of more than two million viewers , totalling 10 @.@ 266 million viewers , making it the second most viewed programme for the week . The episode was later repeated on the digital channel BBC Three on Saturday , 14 January 2012 from 7pm , and was seen by 710 @,@ 000 viewers . It also became the most @-@ watched programme of 2012 on the online BBC iPlayer as of May , with over 1 @.@ 6 million views . 
 The British Board of Film Classification awarded the episode a 12 certificate for " moderate threat and violence . " The episode , which is accompanied by an audio commentary by Moffat , Gatiss , Tovey and Vertue , was released with the remainder of the second series in the UK on DVD and Blu @-@ ray disc on 23 January 2012 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly positive . In a pre @-@ broadcast review , Terry Ramsey of The Daily Telegraph labelled the story 's shift from a Gothic house to a military research base " an inspired piece of modernisation " . He praised the two lead actors , and say that " the script is sharp and witty and the updating is clever , while remaining true to the original . A modern classic . " Serena Davies , also of The Daily Telegraph praised the episode for being " pacy , sharp and witty , as we 've come to expect from the Moffat and Gatiss crack creative duo , and rather less inscrutable than the New Year episode . " Davies rated the episode four out of five stars . Chris Harvey , again from The Daily Telegraph identified a range of clues , cultural references and possible inspirations . He suggests that the scene in which " Sherlock Holmes clambered alone to the top of a Dartmoor mound and surveyed the landscape below , it appeared to be a direct visual reference to ... Wanderer above the Sea of Fog " by 19th century German Romantic landscape painter Caspar David Friedrich . Harvey also identified several references to Thomas Harris ' character Hannibal Lecter , plot similarities to the 2005 film Batman Begins , and jokes similar to Scooby @-@ Doo . 
 Sam Wollaston , for The Guardian , favourably compared " The Hounds of Baskerville " to " A Scandal in Belgravia " , writing that the episode " has a 21st @-@ century pace to it , and fizzes with the wit we 've come to expect from Sherlock ... [ recapturing ] the essence of The Hound of the Baskervilles ... like the original , it 's properly creepy " . The Radio Times 's David Butcher compared the episode to Steven Moffat 's series opener , " A Scandal in Belgravia " , saying this " is more of a creepy affair , all jittery camerawork , paranoia and suspense . " Christopher <unk> of Metro thought the episode was " the perfect marriage of misty , moor @-@ based foreboding and modern , fast @-@ paced thriller , " adding that " with a breakneck script and captivating acting from Benedict Cumberbatch , Sherlock offers about the fastest hour and a half of television going at the moment . " 
 Louisa Mellor of Den of Geek believed the episode was " well @-@ schooled " in the horror genre , " with plenty of freaking out and jumping at shadows . Arnold and Price 's elegant music came to the fore wonderfully in the largely wordless scenes of Watson and Henry 's fearful hallucinations . " Mellor was also appreciative of McGuigan 's " stylish hand " as director , particularly highlighting the " mind palace " sequence , as well as Tovey 's performance as Henry Knight and for " once again " seeing Watson 's role for being " more than just sigh exasperatedly at his flatmate and apologise to others on Sherlock 's behalf . " In summary , the reviewer stated " I can only echo Sherlock 's own closing words to Henry : " This case , thank you , it 's been brilliant " . " Chris Tilly of IGN rated the episode a " good " 7 out of 10 , but stated that although the it was " full of mystery and intrigue , " the central story " wasn 't strong enough to fill the 90 @-@ minute run @-@ time , running out of steam at the mid @-@ way point and padded out with irrelevant and at times exasperating efforts to throw the audience off the scent . " Tilly praised Cumberbatch 's performance as a mentally broke down Holmes , and Freeman for being " let off the leash this week , with Watson investigating solo on a couple of occasions , " and also thought Tovey was a " fine addition to the ensemble . " 
 David Lewis of CultBox called it " a pretty straightforward thriller about chemical warfare , cover @-@ ups and a colossal canine . It 's also suspenseful , spooky and superb . " The reviewer also commented on the hound 's appearance : " It isn 't [ mutant ] , of course — just an evil @-@ looking mutt hired by Gary and Billy to drum up business for their boozer — and happily , like all the previous hounds that have haunted Holmes in film and TV for nearly a hundred years , it looks gloriously rubbish when it finally appears . " Lewis rated the episode four out of five stars . Morgan Jeffery of Digital Spy thought the " The Hounds of Baskerville " was " an excellent installment of Sherlock — fun , moody and , at times , genuinely scary . " Jeffery felt that the final realisation of the hound was impressive , and praised the CGI work , as well as the performance of Cumberbatch and Freeman . 
 However , some critics gave the episode mixed to negative reviews . Tom Ryan of WhatCulture rated the episode two and a half out of five stars , summing up the review with ; " Given the popularity of the original book and the success thus far of the current TV series , it is safe to assume that last nights episode was perhaps the most eagerly anticipated installment of the show since its inception . Too bad then that it was so underwhelming . " The Guardian writer Stuart Heritage stated ; " Last night 's Hounds of Baskervilles wasn 't quite as rapturously received as other adventures , perhaps because of the amount of time that Cumberbatch and Freeman spent apart . The whole middle section , where Watson stormed off in a huff after being subjected to another one of Sherlock 's baroque " that man is left @-@ handed and also has dog hair on one of his socks " monologues , felt slow and flat precisely because there was none of the chemistry between the two leads that we 've come to expect from Sherlock . " Jim Shelley of the Daily Mirror stated that the episode was " a disappointment , " adding that the contrasting reveal of the hound from the original book was " a tedious treatise against vivisection . " However , Shelley stated that he enjoyed the " mind palace " scene . 
 = Taunton = 
 Taunton / <unk> / is the county town of Somerset , England . The built up area of the town had a population of 64 @,@ 621 in 2011 . 
 The town has over 1 @,@ 000 years of religious and military history , including a monastery in the 10th century and Taunton Castle which has origins in the Anglo Saxon period and was later the site of a priory . The Normans then built a stone structured castle , which belonged to the Bishops of Winchester . The current heavily reconstructed buildings are the inner ward , which now houses the Museum of Somerset and the Somerset Military Museum . The town is undergoing a regeneration project with redevelopment of the town centre . It has various transport links which support its central role in economy and commerce . These have included the Grand Western Canal which reached Taunton in 1839 and arrival of the railway in 1842 . It is the county town of Somerset . 
 Taunton is the site of Musgrove Park Hospital and Somerset County Cricket Club 's County Ground and is home to 40 Commando , Royal Marines . Central Taunton is part of the annual West Country Carnival circuit . It hosts the Taunton flower show , which has been held in Vivary Park since 1866 . The United Kingdom Hydrographic Office is located on Admiralty Way . 
 = = History = = 
 The town name derives from " Town on the River Tone " — or Tone Town . Cambria Farm which is now the site of a Park and ride close to Junction 25 of the M5 motorway was the site of a Bronze and Iron Age settlement and Roman farm . There was a Romano @-@ British village near the suburb of Holway , and Taunton was a place of considerable importance in Saxon times . The Saxon town was a burh with its own mint . King Ine of Wessex threw up an earthen castle here about 700 , but it was destroyed by his queen Æthelburg of Wessex in 722 , to prevent its seizure by rebels . 
 A monastery was founded before 904 . The bishops of Winchester owned the manor , and obtained the first charter for their " men of Taunton " from King Edward in 904 , freeing them from all royal and county tribute . At some time before the Domesday Survey Taunton had become a borough with very considerable privileges , and a population of around 1 @,@ 500 and 64 burgesses , governed by a <unk> appointed by the bishops . Somerton took over from Ilchester as the county town in the late thirteenth century , but it declined in importance and the status of county town transferred to Taunton about 1366 . Between 1209 and 1311 the manor of Taunton , which was owned by the Bishop of Winchester , increased two and a half times . The parishes of Staplegrove , Wilton and Taunton itself were part of the Taunton Deane Hundred . 
 In 1451 during the Wars of the Roses Taunton was the scene of a skirmish between Thomas de Courtenay , 13th Earl of Devon , and Baron <unk> . Queen Margaret and her troops passed through in 1471 to defeat at the Battle of Tewkesbury . In the Second Cornish Uprising of 1497 most of the Cornish gentry supported Perkin Warbeck 's cause and on 17 September a Cornish army some 6 @,@ 000 strong entered Exeter before advancing on Taunton . Henry VII sent his chief general , Giles , Lord Daubeney , to attack the Cornish and when Warbeck heard that the King 's scouts were at Glastonbury he panicked and deserted his army . Henry VII reached Taunton on 4 October 1497 where he received the surrender of the remaining Cornish army . The ringleaders were executed and others fined a total of £ 13 @,@ 000 . 
 Taunton Castle changed hands several times during the Civil War of 1642 – 45 but only along with the town . During the Siege of Taunton it was defended by Robert Blake , from July 1644 to July 1645 , with the town suffering destruction of many of the medieval and Tudor buildings . After the war , in 1662 , the keep was demolished and only the base remains . On 20 June 1685 the Duke of Monmouth crowned himself king of England at Taunton during the Monmouth Rebellion and in the autumn of that year Judge Jeffreys lived in the town during the Bloody Assizes that followed the Battle of Sedgemoor . 
 The town did not obtain a charter of incorporation until 1627 , which was renewed in 1677 . The charter lapsed in 1792 owing to vacancies for the members of the corporate body , and Taunton was not reincorporated until 1877 . The medieval fairs and markets of Taunton ( it still holds a weekly market today ) , were celebrated for the sale of woollen cloth called " <unk> " made in the town . On the decline of the woollen industry in the west of England , silk @-@ weaving was introduced at the end of the 18th century . 
 In 1839 the Grand Western Canal reached Taunton aiding trade to the south , which was further enhanced by the arrival of the railway in 1842 . 
 A permanent military presence was established in the town with the completion of <unk> Barracks in 1881 . 
 In World War II the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal formed part of the Taunton Stop Line , designed to prevent the advance of a German invasion . <unk> can still be seen along its length . 
 = = = Regeneration = = = 
 Taunton was named as a ' Strategically Important Town or City ' in the government 's Regional Spatial Strategy , allowing Somerset County Council to receive funding for large @-@ scale regeneration projects . In 2006 , the council revealed plans which it called " Project Taunton " . This would see the regeneration of the areas of Firepool , Tangier , the Retail town centre , the cultural quarter , and the River Tone , aiming to sustain Taunton as a central hub for business in the South West . 
 The Firepool area on the northern edge of Taunton town centre , adjacent to the main line railway station , currently includes a high proportion of vacant or undeveloped land . The Council is promoting a sustainable , high quality , employment @-@ led mixed use development . The Firepool project is set to attract 3 @,@ 000 new jobs and 500 new homes . 
 In Tangier , a brownfield area between Somerset College of Arts and Technology and the bus station , the project proposes to build small offices and more riverside housing . 
 The " Cultural Quarter " is the area along the river between Firepool and Tangier . The proposals have plans to extend riverside retail , an aim to attract more smaller , boutique businesses , such as those already found in the Riverside shopping centre . 
 Plans for the town centre include greater pedestrianisation and an increase in size and number of retail units . 
 Several sites along the River Tone are set to undergo renovation . Firepool Weir lock — long silted up — will be dredged during 2011 to allow boats to pass from the navigable section of the Tone through Taunton to the Bridgwater and Taunton Canal . Goodland Gardens has received a makeover and a new cafe , The Shed , has opened . Projects to develop Somerset Square ( the paved area next to the Brewhouse Theatre ) and <unk> Meadow ( country park near to SCAT ) have already been delivered . 
 The government sees Taunton 's traffic congestion problems as a serious obstacle to its continuing economic growth . An important part of the government 's growth strategy for the town is new road infrastructure consisting of a new link road ( Taunton 's Third Way ) which was completed 27 September 2011 at a cost of £ 7 @.@ 5 million , and a second link road ( the Northern Inner Distributor Road ) planned for completion by the end of 2014 at a cost of £ 21 million . The road would link Staplegrove Road with Priory Avenue , running across Station Road . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Taunton includes an area named Holway which was once a village in its own right . Holway was originally one of the Five Hundreds of Taunton Dean , the <unk> division or district of the three districts that made up Taunton Dean . The parish of Staplegrove is situated in the northern suburbs of Taunton . The parish , largely built by <unk> <unk> Construction Ltd in the 1970s , has a population of 1 @,@ 889 . 
 = = = Borough Council = = = 
 Taunton is the main settlement and administrative centre of the local government district of Taunton Deane . The district was formed on 1 April 1974 , under the Local Government Act 1972 , by a merger of the municipal borough of Taunton , Wellington urban district , Taunton Rural District , and Wellington Rural District . Taunton Deane was granted borough status in 1975 , perpetuating the mayoralty of Taunton . The district was given the name of an alternate form of the Taunton hundred . 
 Taunton Deane Borough Council consists of 55 councillors , of whom 20 are elected for wards in the town of Taunton . The wards are : <unk> & Holway ; Eastgate ; <unk> ; <unk> ; <unk> ; Manor & Wilton and <unk> & <unk> . Eastgate ward returns two councillors , with the remaining wards each returning three . 
 = = = County Council = = = 
 Somerset County Council is based at County Hall in Taunton , and consists of 58 councillors . The town of Taunton is included in six electoral divisions , each returning a single county councillor : Taunton East ; Taunton <unk> ; Taunton North ; Taunton South ; Taunton West and Taunton and Trull ( which also includes rural areas ) . Five councillors are members of the Liberal Democrats , and one is a Conservative . 
 = = = United Kingdom Parliament = = = 
 Taunton Deane is a county constituency represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . It is based on the town of Taunton but extends to include Wellington , many small villages and parts of Exmoor . The current MP is Rebecca Pow , a member of the Conservative Party . 
 = = = European Parliament = = = 
 Residents of Taunton also form part of the electorate for the South West England constituency for elections to the European Parliament . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Taunton lies on the River Tone between the Quantock , Blackdown and Brendon hills in an area known as the Vale of Taunton . 
 It is surrounded by many other large towns and cities which can be seen on this directional compass : 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 In the Taunton area Permian ( 295 – 250 million years ago ) red sandstones and breccia outcrop , while rocks of Triassic age ( 248 – 204 million years ago ) underlie much of Somerset and form the solid geology to the Somerset Moors and Levels . 
 = = = Nature reserves = = = 
 There are several local nature reserves in and around Taunton , which are protected under a statutory designation in Section 21 of the National Parks and Access to the Countryside Act 1949 . South Taunton Streams is an urban wetland , and in the northern suburbs is the Children 's Wood riverside reserve which provides a movement corridor for animals including otters along the banks of the River Tone . Birds occurring at the site include : kingfisher , dipper , grey wagtail , mute swan , grey heron and reed warbler . It is also home to butterflies such as the small and large skipper , marbled white , small heath and small copper , and to dragonflies and damselflies . 
 <unk> Riverside is a linear nature reserve along the bank of the River Tone providing alder and willow woodland , bramble , scrub and rough grassland . The wetter areas which are sometimes flooded include hemlock water dropwort , and yellow flag . Silk Mills Park and Ride includes landscaping and ponds in three areas next to the River Tone created when the park and ride was created . The woodland and grassland supports aquatic and marginal vegetation . There are a variety of birds , bats , reptiles and invertebrates . Frieze Hill Community Orchard has been converted from allotments to rough grassland and an orchard . The <unk> black and <unk> mill varieties of apples are among those grown . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Taunton has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of the country . The annual mean temperature is approximately 10 ° C ( 50 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Seasonal temperature variation is less extreme than most of the United Kingdom because of the adjacent sea temperatures . The summer months of July and August are the warmest with mean daily maxima of approximately 21 ° C ( 69 @.@ 8 ° F ) . In winter mean minimum temperatures of 1 ° C ( 33 @.@ 8 ° F ) or 2 ° C ( 35 @.@ 6 ° F ) are common . In the summer the Azores high pressure affects the south @-@ west of England , however convective cloud sometimes forms inland , reducing the number of hours of sunshine . Annual sunshine rates are slightly less than the regional average of 1 @,@ 600 hours . In December 1998 there were 20 days without sun recorded at Yeovilton . Most the rainfall in the south @-@ west is caused by Atlantic depressions or by convection . Most of the rainfall in autumn and winter is caused by the Atlantic depressions , which is when they are most active . In summer , a large proportion of the rainfall is caused by sun heating the ground leading to convection and to showers and thunderstorms . Average rainfall is around 700 mm ( 28 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , and June to August have the lightest winds . The predominant wind direction is from the south @-@ west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The town of Taunton ( which for population estimates includes the unparished area – or former municipal borough – plus the neighbouring parishes of Bishop 's Hull , <unk> , Norton Fitzwarren , Staplegrove , Trull and West Monkton ) had an estimated population of 61 @,@ 400 in 2001 . It is the largest town in the shire county of Somerset . 
 Taunton forms part of the larger borough of Taunton Deane which also includes the town of Wellington and surrounding villages . Taunton Deane had an estimated population of 109 @,@ 883 in 2010 . 
 The figures below are for the Taunton Deane area . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Taunton Deane had a low unemployment rate of 4 @.@ 1 % compared with the national average of 5 @.@ 0 % in 2005 . 
 Taunton is home to the United Kingdom Hydrographic Office ( <unk> ) which is an organisation within the Ministry of Defence responsible for providing navigational and other hydrographic information for national , civil and defence requirements . The <unk> is located on Admiralty Way and has a workforce of approximately 1100 staff . At the start of the Second World War chart printing moved to Taunton but the main office did not move until 1968 . 
 Taunton is also home to one of the head offices of Debenhams , Western Provident Association , Viridor and <unk> . 
 Moreover , the town is home to local offices for Defra , the Charity Commission for England and Wales , and General Electric . The first ever store of the multinational clothing retailer New Look opened in Taunton in 1969 . Taunton is also famous for the production of cider . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 Gray 's Almshouses on East Street were founded by Robert Gray in 1615 for poor single women . The red brick buildings bear the arms of Robert Gray , dated 1635 , and another arms of the Merchant Tailors . A small room is used as chapel and has original benches and a painted ceiling . It has been designated by English Heritage as a grade I listed building . St Margaret 's Almshouses was founded as a leper colony in the 12th century . Glastonbury Abbey acquired the patronage of the hospital in the late 13th century and rebuilt it as almshouses in the early 16th century . From 1612 to 1938 the building continued to be used as almshouses , cared for by a local parish . In the late 1930s it was converted into a hall of offices for the Rural Community Council and accommodation for the Somerset Guild of Craftsmen . It later fell into disrepair until the Somerset Buildings Preservation Trust with Falcon Rural Housing purchased and restored it for use as four dwellings of social housing . It is a grade II * listed building . 
 The grounds of Taunton Castle include the Somerset County Museum and The Castle Hotel , which incorporates the Castle Bow archway . Together with the municipal buildings they form a three @-@ sided group of buildings just beyond the Castle Bow archway from Fore Street . The centre of the square is used as a car park , and a plain brick edifice of Mecca Bingo hall makes up the west side of it . 
 The frontage of the Tudor Tavern ( now a branch of Caffè Nero ) in Fore Street dates from 1578 but the rest of the building is thought to date from the fourteenth century . 
 The area by the river north of the centre is surrounded by Morrisons supermarket , retirement housing and the Brewhouse Theatre . Towards the centre , is the <unk> Wharf Nightclub , Bridge Street and Goodlands Gardens . Currently a regeneration programme is being executed , north of Bridge Street , which will include redeveloping the County Cricket Ground . The cricket ground has hosted large open @-@ air music concerts for Elton John in 2006 and 2012 ; and for Rod Stewart in 2014 . 
 = = = Shopping = = = 
 <unk> Farm is a retail park close to the M5 motorway , with large stores including PC World , Currys , <unk> , Halfords , B & Q and Taunton 's second Sainsbury 's store . In addition , there is a ' Venue ' on the park , with restaurants , the Odeon cinema and Hollywood Bowl bowling . Now known as Riverside Retail Park . 
 Taunton has three other retail parks . Belvedere Retail Park is situated close to the town centre and consists of retailers such as <unk> , Laura Ashley and Johnsons Cleaners . St Johns Retail Park is just off <unk> , going towards the motorway and consists of two units . It is occupied by DFS and more recently joined by Go Outdoors , where two vacant units were amalgamated into one for their opening in April 2014 . Taunton 's second largest retail park is Priory Fields Retail Park and this is also just off of <unk> . It consists of five units plus an anchor store , Wickes Extra . It was redeveloped in 2003 to modernize the rather worn out appearance of the retail park and also to increase retail floor space . 
 The Old Market was a farmers market and took place on the Parade in front of Market House but this eventually moved to the Firepool area , although cattle trading on the site ceased in 2008 . A large indoor shopping centre to the east of the Parade was built on a site which had , at one time been a pig market . Although its official name is now Orchard , and before that the Old Market Centre , locals still refer to it as " The Pig Market " as one operated on the site from 1614 to 1882 . 
 County Walk is an indoor shopping complex in the centre with an anchor supermarket , Sainsbury 's , plus several other large national retailers such as Subway , Costa Coffee , Maplin and The Entertainer . 
 = = = Public parks = = = 
 There are a number of public parks around Taunton including Vivary Park , Goodlands Park and Victoria Park . The most notable is Vivary Park , located on land that was formerly a medieval fish farm , or vivarium , for Taunton Priory and Taunton Castle . Fronted by a pair of cast iron gates made by the Saracen Foundry of Glasgow , it contains the <unk> Stream , a tributary of the River Tone , which flows through the 7 @.@ 5 hectares ( 19 acres ) park , which is located near the centre of the town . It contains two main wide open spaces , as well as a war memorial dating from 1922 , a miniature golf course , tennis courts , two children 's playgrounds , a model railway track which was added in 1979 , and an 18 @-@ hole , 4620 @-@ yards , par @-@ 63 golf course . The park includes trees , rose beds and herbaceous borders , with around 56 @,@ 000 spring and summer bedding plants being used each year . The rose garden includes the Royal National Rose Society Provincial Trial Ground . Taunton Flower Show has been held annually in the park since the 19th century . It has been described as " The Chelsea of the West " , and attracts around 24 @,@ 000 visitors over its two days . Goodlands Gardens , located in the centre of the town , is behind the Debenhams department store and The Castle Hotel . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Taunton railway station is on the Bristol to Exeter line , the Reading to Taunton line , and the Cross @-@ Country Route . It is served and operated by First Great Western and served by CrossCountry , with services to Manchester , Birmingham , Cardiff , Bristol , London , Exeter , Plymouth and Penzance , as well as the rest of the West Country . There are generally one fast and one slow trains each hour to both Bristol Temple Meads and Exeter St Davids and one train to London Paddington . 
 The former railway route to Minehead is now a heritage railway known as the West Somerset Railway . 
 In 2009 , Project Taunton , the authority responsible for Taunton 's major regeneration project , revealed plans for Taunton metro rail , as part of their transport sustainability plan . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 Taunton also has good road links , having the M5 motorway junctions 25 ( Taunton ) and 26 ( Wellington ) close to the town , as well as other major roads such as the A38 and A358 . The Taunton bypass section of M5 , from <unk> @-@ 26 , opened in April 1974 , relieving the town of heavy holiday traffic on the A38 . Taunton Deane services are located between junctions 25 and 26 on the M5 . However , with the flourishing local economy , traffic is a problem with Somerset County Council giving a prediction of a significant increase based on 2001 levels . Two major new road have been undertaken since 2010 . The " Third Way " linking Bridge Street and castle Street opened in 2011 , and a Northern Inner Distributor Road between Staplegrove Road and Priory Avenue is due to open in March 2015 . 
 = = = = 2011 M5 motorway crash = = = = 
 On the evening of 4 November 2011 , 34 vehicles were involved in an accident close to junction 25 of the M5 motorway northbound , on the north eastern edge of the town at West Monkton . Seven people were confirmed as dead , with a further 51 injured . 
 = = = Buses and coaches = = = 
 Many local bus services are provided by The Buses of Somerset . In addition to town services , these run to destinations such as Minehead , Bridgwater and Weston @-@ Super @-@ Mare . Another major <unk> is Webberbus who run services to places such as Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare Bridgwater and Wellington . Other services are provided by Stagecoach South West and Hatch Green Coaches . 
 Taunton Bus station is run by The Buses of Somerset and is served by National Express coaches . 
 A cross @-@ town park and ride service is operated by The Buses of Somerset linking the Taunton gateway ( near the M5 Motorway ) and Silk Mills on the north @-@ west side of the town . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The nearest airports are Exeter International Airport and Bristol Airport ; both are within 40 mi ( 64 km ) of Taunton . 
 = = = Trams = = = 
 The Taunton Tramway was opened on 21 August 1901 . Six double deck cars operated on the 3 ft 6 in ( 1 @,@ 067 mm ) gauge line between the railway station and East Reach where the depot was situated . In 1905 the service was withdrawn for two months while the track was improved ; the cars were replaced at the same time by six single deck cars and the old double deckers were sold to Leamington Spa . A short extension beyond the station to <unk> was opened in 1909 , making the line 1 @.@ 66 miles ( 2 @.@ 7 km ) long . The price of its electricity was due to increase in 1928 which the company refused to pay so it offered to sell out but this was not accepted . The electricity was cut off on 28 May 1921 and so the system closed . 
 = = = Canal = = = 
 The Bridgwater and Taunton Canal is a navigable waterway which links Taunton with Bridgwater , which first opened in 1827 and having been closed to navigation in 1907 it re @-@ opened following restoration in 1994 . 
 = = Education = = 
 State secondary schools in Taunton include The Castle School , Heathfield Community School , Bishop Fox 's School and The Taunton Academy . Further Education is provided by Richard Huish College , The Taunton Academy ( which is sponsored by Richard Huish College ) and Somerset College of Arts and Technology . Heathfield Community School also has specialist Further Education provision for performing arts called The Space . Somerset College of Arts and Technology is a partner college of Plymouth University . There are three coeducational independent schools in Taunton : Queen 's College , King 's College and Taunton School . 
 In March 2009 , it was announced that Jim Knight , Minister of State for Schools and Families , had approved plans that would mean the closure of both <unk> Community School and the nearby St Augustine of Canterbury RC / CoE School both in the <unk> area of Taunton .. The schools closed in August 2010 , and were replaced in September 2010 by The Taunton Academy . 
 Provision for young people with Special Educational Needs in Taunton is provided by two Special Schools and one Complex Pupil Referral Unit . Sky College caters for boys aged 10 - 18 who have Social , Emotional and Mental Health difficulties . Selworthy School has pupils on roll between the ages of 4 and 19 who have complex and multiple learning difficulties whilst the Taunton Deane Partnership College is a complex PRU for children in Key Stages 2 , 3 and 4 as well as a Medical Tuition Service , Outreach & Advisory service and an Area Access Team . 
 = = Health Services = = 
 Taunton is within Somerset Primary Care Trust and is home to Musgrove Park Hospital , within Taunton and Somerset Foundation NHS Trust . This is one of two district hospitals within Somerset alongside Yeovil District Hospital . A Nuffield Hospital is also situated within the town , run privately by Nuffield Health . The town is also home to several doctor 's surgeries as well as a family planning clinic , occupational health centre and chiropractic clinic . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 The parish church of St. Mary Magdalene , built of sandstone more in the South Somerset style , preserves an attractive painted interior , but its most notable aspect is its 15th- and 16th @-@ century tower ( rebuilt in the mid @-@ 19th century ) , which is one of the best examples in the country and a 163 feet ( 50 m ) tall landmark . It was described by Simon Jenkins , an acknowledged authority on English churches , as " the finest in England . It makes its peace with the sky not just with a coronet but with the entire crown jewels cast in red @-@ brown stone . " The tower itself has 12 bells and 3 bells " hung dead " for the clock mechanism . 
 The parish church of St. James is also located near the centre of Taunton quite close to St. Mary Magdalene . The oldest parts of St. James Church are early @-@ 14th @-@ century , and there are fragments of 15th @-@ century glass in the west end . Like St. Mary 's it also has a sandstone tower but built to a much less impressive design . The tower was also , like St. Mary 's , rebuilt in the 19th century – in this case thought to be due to building defects in the original tower . The church backs onto the County Ground and forms a familiar backdrop to the popular cricket ground . 
 St George 's is the town 's Roman Catholic church and dates from the mid @-@ 19th century . It was the second Catholic church to be built in Taunton after the Reformation , replacing the much smaller St George 's Chapel . The main church building is designated by English Heritage as a Grade II * listed building , while the rectory is Grade II listed . 
 The Mary Street Unitarian Chapel , which dates from 1721 , is located on Mary Street in Taunton . Samuel Taylor Coleridge , while living Nether Stowey 16 miles ( 26 km ) away , came to the chapel to preach on several occasions . Dr. Malachi Blake , who founded the Taunton and Somerset Hospital in East Reach , Taunton , was also a preacher at the chapel , attending in 1809 in celebration of the fiftieth year of George the Third 's reign . The Chapel still has the original interior including Flemish oak pillars in the Corinthian style . The pews and pulpit are also in oak , and there is an early @-@ 18th @-@ century candelabra . 
 In the latter part of the 17th century , Taunton had two dissenting places of worship : " Paul 's Meeting " and the Baptist Meeting . Paul 's Meeting was built at the top of Paul Street soon after 1672 on part of a bowling green behind the Three Cups Inn , now The County Hotel , and rapidly became one of the largest congregations in the county . After Mayor <unk> sacked both Paul 's Meeting and the Baptist Meeting in 1683 , the dissenters were driven to worship in private houses on the outskirts of Taunton , where their assemblies were regularly raided by the Justices . Paul 's Meeting survived attempts to turn it into a workhouse and , with the coming of William and Mary , followed by the Toleration Act 1688 , was reopened . Hugh Willoughby , 15th Baron Willoughby of Parham , was educated in early life at Taunton Dissenters ' Academy . The Baptist Meeting became the Baptist New Meeting was registered in 1691 and rebuilt in 1721 as Mary Street Chapel . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Although at the centre of a large region stretching at least 30 miles ( 50 km ) in all directions , the town lacks a public building such as an assembly room , municipal hall or large covered space in which events and entertainments can be held . 
 Radio stations BBC Somerset , Tone FM and Apple FM broadcast from Taunton . 
 Until its closure in February 2013 , caused by financial difficulties , the small Brewhouse Theatre provided a busy programme of drama , dance , comedy , music , exhibitions and poetry by both local and national touring artists . Since closure , the building has been in the hands of Administrators . With support from Taunton Deane Borough Council , a grassroots voluntary group was able to reopen it in April 2014 . The Brewhouse Theatre and Arts Centre has been fully open since this date . 
 The <unk> @-@ Morris Arts Centre also operates as a theatre and is based at Heathfield Community School on the northern outskirts of the town . 
 Several concerts are held each year Taunton 's largest church , St Mary Magdalene . In recent years The Sixteen , The Tallis Scholars and Gabrieli Consort have all performed to full capacity audiences . 
 Taunton is home to several choirs and orchestras who perform in the town 's churches and independent schools ' chapels . Many local musical and drama groups are members of the Taunton Association of Performing Arts ( <unk> ) which produces a diary and anti @-@ clash calendar of performances in and around the town . 
 = = = Popular culture references = = = 
