 Taunton is mentioned in The Remains of the Day by Kazuo Ishiguro , Tinker , Tailor , Soldier , Spy by John le Carré , Evelyn Waugh 's Scoop and was given the fictitious name of " <unk> " by Thomas Hardy . 
 Taunton also features in So Long , and Thanks for All the Fish by Douglas Adams part of The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy series of books . 
 Comedian Bill Bailey mentions the town in his stand @-@ up DVD Part Troll , claiming to have taken part in a teleportation experiment sponsored by Taunton Cider . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Taunton Rugby Football Club is an English rugby union club that is based in Taunton . They currently play in National League 2 South , having achieved back @-@ to @-@ back promotions in 2009 and 2010 . 
 The County Ground was originally home to Taunton Cricket Club , which was formed in 1829 and played at the County Ground until 1977 before moving to Moorfields , Taunton in conjunction with Taunton Vale Hockey Club , after which the County Ground has been solely used by Somerset County Cricket Club . Somerset CCC was formed in 1875 , but the club did not achieve first class status until 1891 . The County Ground has a capacity of 8 @,@ 500 and the ends are called the River End and the Old Pavilion End . It is the current home of the England women 's cricket team . The Somerset Cricket Museum is situated by the County Ground . 
 Taunton Cricket Club have since 2002 been located at the new Taunton Vale Sports Club Ground , in Staplegrove , which features two cricket fields . The Taunton Vale ground is also a regular home venue for Somerset 's Second XI . Taunton Deane Cricket Club have a ground adjacent to Vivary Park , while Taunton St Andrews Cricket Club are located at the nearby Wyvern Sports and Social Club . All three clubs play in the West of England Premier League or one of its feeder leagues . 
 Taunton Town F.C. are a football club , who play at Wordsworth Drive in the town . They were formed in 1947 by a few local businessmen as Taunton F.C. , changing to the current name in 1968 , and played their first friendly fixture in 1948 . For most of their history , Taunton were members of the Western League . They spent a six @-@ season spell in the Southern League from 1977 , and after a further period in the Western League , returned to the Southern League in 2002 , after winning the FA Vase in 2001 . After the latest re @-@ organisation of the English football league system , the club are currently members of the Southern League Division One South & West . 
 Somerset Vikings are a Rugby League Club who were formed at the beginning of 2003 as part of the Rugby Football League 's plans to develop the game further beyond the traditional areas in the north of England . Initially the side was made up of a mixture of Royal Marines based in Taunton and Exeter together with a number of local rugby union players keen to try the 13 @-@ man code . The Vikings play at Hyde Park which is the home of the Taunton R.F.C. , a rugby union club , which was formed in 1875 . 
 The Taunton Tigers is a semi @-@ professional basketball team competing in the English Basketball League Men 's Division 1 . The team play all their home games at <unk> Leisure Centre , which has a capacity of 500 seats . 
 Taunton Racecourse is close to the Blackdown Hills and about 2 miles ( 3 km ) from the centre of Taunton . Although racing had been held in the area previously , the first race at the present site was held on 21 September 1927 . The stands are called the Orchard Stand and the Paddock Stand which provide catering facilities and are used for meetings and conferences on days when racing is not taking place . 
 Volleyball Taunton are a local volleyball club that have played for a number of years , more recently in the Exeter & District League . They train and play their home games at <unk> Leisure Centre . 
 There is an oval motor racing circuit at <unk> which is close to the Somerset / Devon border , it is frequently referred to as the Taunton Banger racing circuit although it is around 11 miles ( 18 km ) from central Taunton . 
 Local skateboarders raised £ 183 @,@ 000 for a replacement skatepark at Hamilton Gault Park which opened in May 2010 . 
 Taunton <unk> is a community mountain bike project in partnership with the Forestry Commission who are developing a series of <unk> and downhill ( DH ) style mountain bike trails just outside the town . Run by volunteers from the local close @-@ knit riding community and funded solely by kind donations , they are also involved with the redevelopment of the " Norton Dirt Jumps " . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 The following people were born or have lived in Taunton : 
 Joseph <unk> – ( 1634 – 1668 ) . English Puritan Nonconformist pastor and author . 
 Colin Addison – former professional footballer and manager . Born in Taunton 8 May 1940 . 
 Jenny Agutter – actress . Born in Taunton 20 December 1952 . 
 William Larkins Bernard – architect ( 1 October 1843 – 22 July 1922 ) . Born in Taunton . 
 Andrew Bicknell – actor . Born in Taunton 17 June 1956 . 
 Pattie Boyd – Actress and model , born 17 March 1944 . Former wife of both George Harrison and Eric Clapton . 
 Deborah <unk> MBE - Para @-@ equestrian who won three gold medals at the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens and three medals at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London . Born in Taunton 10 May 1966 , and currently lives in Trull , a village on the outskirts of Taunton . 
 John Crockford – publisher . 
 William Crotch – Noted composer and Principal of the Royal Academy of Music . Buried at Bishops Hull Church , Taunton . 
 Stephen Daldry – Three @-@ time Academy Award nominated and Tony Award winning theatre and film director and producer . 
 Charles George Gordon – British general , known as Gordon of Khartoum . Was educated at <unk> School , now a retirement complex off Shoreditch Road , and also lodged in a house next to the Temple Methodist Church . 
 Antony <unk> – Astronomer and Nobel Prize for Physics winner 
 Rebecca Huxtable <unk> in Taunton . British radio personality and producer , currently co @-@ producing The Scott Mills Show on BBC Radio 1 
 Alexander William Kinglake – barrister , travel writer and historian ( 5 August 1809 – 2 January 1891 ) . Born at Wilton House near Taunton . 
 Scott Laird – English footballer currently playing for Scunthorpe United . 
 Lee Martin – footballer who currently plays for Millwall F.C .. Born in Taunton 9 February 1987 . 
 Deborah Meaden – business mogul , philanthropist , star of T.V series Dragons Den . Born in Taunton 11 February 1959 . 
 William Ellis Metford – ( 1824 – 1899 ) – engineer , best known for the Metford rifling in the .303 Lee @-@ Metford service rifle of the late nineteenth century , born in Taunton . 
 Ciara Michel – Member of Team GB Olympic Volleyball squad , the first GB volleyball team to play in the Olympic games . 
 Frank Montague Moore ( 1877 – 1967 ) – painter and the first director of the Honolulu Museum of Art , born in Taunton 
 Alfred B. Mullett – architect to Abraham Lincoln . Born in Taunton ( 7 April 1834 – 20 October 1890 ) . 
 Justin Pipe - professional darts player 
 James Purefoy – actor , one of the stars of the joint HBO @-@ BBC series , Rome . Born in Taunton 3 June 1964 . 
 Gary Rhodes – celebrity chef who was head chef at The Castle Hotel from 1986 – 1990 . 
 Viv Richards – former West Indies cricketer . Born in Antigua , resident in Taunton while playing for Somerset 1974 – 1986 . 
 Andy Robinson – former England rugby union international and head coach . Now head coach of Scotland . Born in Taunton 3 April 1964 
 Miranda Shearer – Author . Born in Taunton 11 May 1982 , but resident of Spaxton , later Over Stowey and Taunton . 
 Hugh Trenchard , 1st Viscount Trenchard – Military officer involved in establishment of Royal Air Force ( 3 February 1873 – 10 February 1956 ) . Born in Taunton . 
 Marcus Trescothick – England cricketer , given Taunton Deane Citizenship Award in 2005 . 
 Sir Charles Trevelyan , 1st Baronet – Governor of Madras ( 2 April 1807 – 19 June 1886 ) . Born in Taunton . 
 Phil Vickery – Celebrity Chef 
 Frederick Porter Wensley – chief constable of Scotland Yard CID ( 1865 – 1949 ) Born in Taunton . 
 David Henry Wilson – English writer , known for his children 's stories such as the Jeremy James series . 
 = = Twinning = = 
 Taunton is twinned with Lisieux in France , <unk> in Germany , and Taunton , Massachusetts in the US . 
 = Angolan Civil War = 
 The Angolan Civil War ( Portuguese : Guerra civil <unk> ) was a major civil conflict in Angola , beginning in 1975 and continuing , with some interludes , until 2002 . The war began immediately after Angola became independent from Portugal in November 1975 . Prior to this , a decolonisation conflict , the Angolan War of Independence ( 1961 – 74 ) , had taken place . The following civil war was essentially a power struggle between two former liberation movements , the People 's Movement for the Liberation of Angola ( MPLA ) and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola ( UNITA ) . At the same time , the war served as a surrogate battleground for the Cold War and large @-@ scale direct and indirect international involvement by opposing powers such as the Soviet Union , Cuba , South Africa and the United States was a major feature of the conflict . 
 The MPLA and UNITA had different roots in the Angolan social fabric and mutually incompatible leaderships , despite their shared aim of ending colonial rule . Although both had socialist leanings , for the purpose of mobilising international support they posed as " Marxist – Leninist " and " anti @-@ communist " , respectively . A third movement , the National Front for the Liberation of Angola ( FNLA ) , having fought the MPLA alongside UNITA during the war for independence and the decolonization conflict , played almost no role in the Civil War . Additionally , the Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda ( FLEC ) , an association of separatist militant groups , fought for the independence of the province of Cabinda from Angola . 
 The 27 @-@ year war can be divided roughly into three periods of major fighting – from 1975 to 1991 , 1992 to 1994 , and from 1998 to 2002 – broken up by fragile periods of peace . By the time the MPLA finally achieved victory in 2002 , more than 500 @,@ 000 people had died and over one million had been internally displaced . The war devastated Angola 's infrastructure , and severely damaged the nation 's public administration , economic enterprises , and religious institutions . 
 The Angolan Civil War was notable due to the combination of Angola 's violent internal dynamics and massive foreign intervention . The war became a Cold War struggle , as both the Soviet Union and the United States , along with their respective allies , provided significant military assistance to parties in the conflict . Moreover , the Angolan conflict became entangled with the Second Congo War in the neighbouring Democratic Republic of the Congo , as well as with the Namibian War of Independence . 
 = = Outline of main combatants = = 
 Angola 's three rebel movements had their roots in the anti @-@ colonial movements of the 1950s . The MPLA was primarily an urban based movement in Luanda and its surrounding area . It was largely composed of <unk> people . By contrast the other two major anti @-@ colonial movements were <unk> based groups , the FNLA and UNITA . The FNLA largely consisted of Bakongo people hailing from Northern Angola . UNITA , an offshoot of the FNLA , was mainly composed of Ovimbundu people from the Central highlands . 
 = = = MPLA = = = 
 Since its formation in the 1950s , the MPLA 's main social base has been among the Ambundu people and the multiracial intelligentsia of cities such as Luanda , Benguela and Huambo . During its anti @-@ colonial struggle of 1962 – 74 , the MPLA was supported by several African countries , as well as by the Soviet Union . In the decolonization conflict of 1974 – 75 , Cuba became the MPLA 's strongest ally , sending significant contingents of combat and support personnel to Angola . This support , as well as that of several other countries of the Eastern Bloc , e.g. Romania and East Germany , was maintained during the Civil War . 
 = = = FNLA = = = 
 The FNLA formed parallel to the MPLA , and was initially devoted to defending the interests of the Bakongo people and supporting the restoration of the historical Kongo Empire . However , it rapidly developed into a nationalist movement , supported in its struggle against Portugal by the government of Mobutu Sese Seko in Zaire . During the early 1960s , the FNLA was also supported by the People 's Republic of China , but when UNITA was founded in the mid @-@ 1960s , China switched its support to this new movement , because the FNLA had shown little real activity . The United States refused to give the FNLA support during the movement 's war against Portugal , which was a NATO ally of the U.S. ; however , the FNLA did receive U.S. aid during the decolonization conflict and later during the Civil Wars . 
 = = = UNITA = = = 
 UNITA 's main social basis were the Ovimbundu of central Angola , who constituted about one third of the country 's population , but the organization also had roots among several less numerous peoples of eastern Angola . UNITA was founded in 1966 by Jonas Savimbi , who until then had been a prominent leader of the FNLA . During the anti @-@ colonial war , UNITA received some support from the People 's Republic of China . During the subsequent decolonization conflict , the United States decided to support UNITA , and considerably augmented their aid to UNITA during the Civil War . However , in the latter period , UNITA 's main ally was the Republic of South Africa . 
 = = Roots of the conflict = = 
 Angola , like most African countries , became constituted as a nation through colonial intervention . In Angola 's case , its colonial power – Portugal – was present and active in the territory , in one way or another , for over four centuries . 
 = = = Ethnic divisions = = = 
 The original population of this territory were dispersed Khoisan groups . These were absorbed or pushed southwards , where residual groups still exist , by a massive influx of Bantu people who came from the north and east . 
 The Bantu influx began around 500 BC , and some continued their migrations inside the territory well into the 20th century . They established a number of major political units , of which the most important was the Kongo Empire whose centre was located in the northwest of what today is Angola , and which stretched northwards into the west of the present Democratic Republic of the Congo ( DRC ) , the south and west of the contemporary Republic of Congo and even the southernmost part of Gabon . 
 Also of historical importance were the Ndongo and <unk> kingdoms to the south of the Kongo Empire , in the Ambundu area . Additionally , the Lunda Empire , in the south @-@ east of the present day DRC , occupied a portion of what today is north @-@ eastern Angola . In the south of the territory , and the north of present @-@ day Namibia , lay the <unk> kingdom , along with minor realms on the central highlands . All these political units were a reflection of ethnic cleavages that slowly developed among the Bantu populations , and were instrumental in consolidating these cleavages and fostering the emergence of new and distinct social identities . 
 = = = Portuguese colonialism = = = 
 At the end of the 15th century , Portuguese settlers made contact with the Kongo Empire , maintaining a continuous presence in its territory and enjoying considerable cultural and religious influence thereafter . In 1575 , Portugal established a settlement and fort called Saint Paul of Luanda on the coast south of the Kongo Empire , in an area inhabited by Ambundu people . Another fort , Benguela , was established on the coast further south , in a region inhabited by ancestors of the Ovimbundu people . 
 Neither of these Portuguese settlement efforts was launched for the purpose of territorial conquest . It is true that both gradually came to occupy and farm a broad area around their initial bridgeheads ( in the case of Luanda , mostly along the lower Kwanza River ) . However , their main function was trade – overwhelmingly the slave trade . Slaves were bought from African intermediaries and sold to Brazil and the Caribbean . In addition , Benguela developed a commerce in ivory , wax , and honey , which they bought from Ovimbundu caravans which fetched these goods from among the <unk> peoples in the eastern part of what is now Angola . 
 Nonetheless , the Portuguese presence on the Angolan coast remained limited for much of the colonial period . The degree of real colonial settlement was minor , and , with few exceptions , the Portuguese did not interfere by means other than commercial in the social and political dynamics of the native peoples . There was no real delimitation of territory ; Angola , to all intents and purposes , did not yet exist . 
 In the 19th century , the Portuguese began a more serious program of advancing into the continental interior . However , their intention was less territorial occupation and more establishing a de facto overlordship which allowed them to establish commercial networks as well as a few settlements . In this context , they also moved further south along the coast , and founded the " third bridgehead " of <unk> . In the course of this expansion , they entered into conflict with several of the African political units . 
 Territorial occupation only became a central concern for Portugal in the last decades of the 19th century , during the European powers ' " Scramble for Africa " , especially following the 1884 Berlin Conference . A number of military expeditions were organized as preconditions for obtaining territory which roughly corresponded to that of present @-@ day Angola . However , as late as 1906 only about 6 % of that territory was effectively occupied , and the military campaigns had to continue . By the mid @-@ 1920s , the limits of the territory were finally fixed , and the last " primary resistance " was quelled in the early 1940s . It is thus reasonable to talk of Angola as a defined territorial entity from this point onwards . 
 = = = Build @-@ up to independence and rising tensions = = = 
 In 1961 , the FNLA and the MPLA , based in neighbouring countries , began a guerrilla campaign against Portuguese rule on several fronts . The Portuguese Colonial War , which included the Angolan War of Independence , lasted until the Portuguese regime 's overthrow in 1974 through a leftist military coup in Lisbon . When the timeline for independence became known , most of the roughly 500 @,@ 000 ethnic Portuguese Angolans fled the territory during the weeks before or after that deadline . Portugal left behind a newly independent country whose population was mainly composed by Ambundu , Ovimbundu , and Bakongo peoples . The Portuguese that lived in Angola accounted for the majority of the skilled workers in public administration , agriculture , and industry ; once they fled the country , the national economy began to sink into depression . 
 The South African government initially became involved in an effort to counter the Chinese presence in Angola , which was feared might escalate the conflict into a local theatre of the Cold War . In 1975 , South African Prime Minister B.J. Vorster authorized Operation Savannah , which began as an effort to protect engineers constructing the dam at <unk> , after unruly UNITA soldiers took over . The dam , paid for by South Africa , was felt to be at risk . The South African Defence Force ( SADF ) despatched an armoured task force to secure <unk> , and from this Operation Savannah escalated , there being no formal government in place and thus no clear lines of authority . The South Africans came to commit thousands of soldiers to the intervention , and ultimately clashed with Cuban forces assisting the MPLA . 
 = = 1970s = = 
 = = = Independence = = = 
 After the Carnation Revolution in Lisbon and the end of the Angolan War of Independence , the parties of the conflict signed the <unk> Accords on 15 January 1975 . In July 1975 , the MPLA violently forced the FNLA out of Luanda , and UNITA voluntarily withdrew to its stronghold in the south . By August , the MPLA had control of 11 of the 15 provincial capitals , including Cabinda and Luanda . South Africa intervened on 23 October , sending between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 troops from Namibia into southern Angola in order to support the FNLA and UNITA . Zaire , in a bid to install a pro @-@ Kinshasa government and thwart the MPLA 's drive for power , deployed armored cars , paratroopers , and three infantry battalions to Angola in support of the FNLA . Within three weeks , South African and UNITA forces had captured five provincial capitals , including Novo Redondo and Benguela . In response to the South African intervention , Cuba sent 18 @,@ 000 soldiers as part of a large @-@ scale military intervention nicknamed Operation Carlota in support of the MPLA . Cuba had initially provided the MPLA with 230 military advisers prior to the South African intervention . The Cuban intervention proved decisive in repelling the South African @-@ UNITA advance . The FNLA were likewise routed at the Battle of Quifangondo and forced to retreat towards Zaire . The defeat of the FNLA allowed the MPLA to consolidate power over the capital Luanda . 
 Agostinho Neto , the leader of the MPLA , declared the independence of the Portuguese Overseas Province of Angola as the People 's Republic of Angola on 11 November 1975 . UNITA declared Angolan independence as the Social Democratic Republic of Angola based in Huambo , and the FNLA declared the Democratic Republic of Angola based in <unk> . FLEC , armed and backed by the French government , declared the independence of the Republic of Cabinda from Paris . The FNLA and UNITA forged an alliance on 23 November , proclaiming their own coalition government based in Huambo with Holden Roberto and Jonas Savimbi as co @-@ Presidents , and José <unk> and Johnny Pinnock Eduardo as co @-@ Prime Ministers . 
 In early November 1975 , the South African government warned Savimbi and Roberto that the South African Defence Force ( SADF ) would soon end operations in Angola despite the failure of the coalition to capture Luanda and therefore secure international recognition for their government . Savimbi , desperate to avoid the withdrawal of South Africa , asked General <unk> Viljoen to arrange a meeting for him with Prime Minister of South Africa John Vorster , who had been Savimbi 's ally since October 1974 . On the night of 10 November , the day before the formal declaration of independence , Savimbi secretly flew to Pretoria to meet Vorster . In a reversal of policy , Vorster not only agreed to keep his troops in Angola through November , but also promised to withdraw the SADF only after the OAU meeting on 9 December . The Soviets , well aware of South African activity in southern Angola , flew Cuban soldiers into Luanda the week before independence . While Cuban officers led the mission and provided the bulk of the troop force , 60 Soviet officers in the Congo joined the Cubans on 12 November . The Soviet leadership expressly forbade the Cubans from intervening in Angola 's civil war , focusing the mission on containing South Africa . 
 In 1975 and 1976 most foreign forces , with the exception of Cuba , withdrew . The last elements of the Portuguese military withdrew in 1975 and the South African military withdrew in February 1976 . However , Cuba 's troop force in Angola increased from 5 @,@ 500 in December 1975 to 11 @,@ 000 in February 1976 . Sweden provided humanitarian assistance to both the SWAPO and the MPLA in the mid @-@ 1970s , and regularly raised the issue of UNITA in political discussions between the two movements . 
 = = = Clark Amendment = = = 
 President of the United States Gerald Ford approved covert aid to UNITA and the FNLA through Operation IA Feature on 18 July 1975 , despite strong opposition from officials in the State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency ( CIA ) . Ford told William Colby , the Director of Central Intelligence , to establish the operation , providing an initial US $ 6 million . He granted an additional $ 8 million on 27 July and another $ 25 million in August . 
 Two days before the program 's approval , Nathaniel Davis , the Assistant Secretary of State , told Henry Kissinger , the Secretary of State , that he believed maintaining the secrecy of IA Feature would be impossible . Davis correctly predicted the Soviet Union would respond by increasing involvement in the Angolan conflict , leading to more violence and negative publicity for the United States . When Ford approved the program , Davis resigned . John Stockwell , the CIA 's station chief in Angola , echoed Davis ' criticism saying that success required the expansion of the program , but its size already exceeded what could be hidden from the public eye . Davis ' deputy , former U.S. ambassador to Chile Edward Mulcahy , also opposed direct involvement . Mulcahy presented three options for U.S. policy towards Angola on 13 May 1975 . Mulcahy believed the Ford administration could use diplomacy to campaign against foreign aid to the communist MPLA , refuse to take sides in factional fighting , or increase support for the FNLA and UNITA . He warned however that supporting UNITA would not sit well with Mobutu Sese Seko , the president of Zaire . 
 Dick Clark , a Democratic Senator from Iowa , discovered the operation during a fact @-@ finding mission in Africa , but Seymour Hersh , a reporter for The New York Times , revealed IA Feature to the public on 13 December 1975 . Clark proposed an amendment to the Arms Export Control Act , barring aid to private groups engaged in military or paramilitary operations in Angola . The Senate passed the bill , voting 54 – 22 on 19 December 1975 , and the House of Representatives passed the bill , voting 323 – 99 on 27 January 1976 . Ford signed the bill into law on 9 February 1976 . Even after the Clark Amendment became law , then @-@ Director of Central Intelligence , George H. W. Bush , refused to concede that all U.S. aid to Angola had ceased . According to foreign affairs analyst Jane Hunter , Israel stepped in as a proxy arms supplier for South Africa after the Clark Amendment took effect . Israel and South Africa established a longstanding military alliance , in which Israel provided weapons and training , as well as conducting joint military exercises . 
 The U.S. government vetoed Angolan entry into the United Nations on 23 June 1976 . Zambia forbade UNITA from launching attacks from its territory on 28 December 1976 after Angola under MPLA rule became a member of the United Nations . 
 = = = ' Cuba 's Vietnam ' = = = 
 The Vietnam War tempered foreign involvement in Angola 's civil war as neither the Soviet Union nor the United States wanted to be drawn into an internal conflict of highly debatable importance in terms of winning the Cold War . CBS <unk> Walter Cronkite spread this message in his broadcasts to " try to play our small part in preventing that mistake this time . " The Politburo engaged in heated debate over the extent to which the Soviet Union would support a continued offensive by the MPLA in February 1976 . Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and Premier Alexei Kosygin led a faction favoring less support for the MPLA and greater emphasis on preserving détente with the West . Leonid Brezhnev , the then head of the Soviet Union , won out against the dissident faction and the Soviet alliance with the MPLA continued even as Neto publicly reaffirmed its policy of non @-@ alignment at the 15th anniversary of the First Revolt . 
 The MPLA government and Cuban troops had control over all southern cities by 1977 , but roads in the south faced repeated UNITA attacks . Savimbi expressed his willingness for rapprochement with the MPLA and the formation of a unity , socialist government , but he insisted on Cuban withdrawal first . " The real enemy is Cuban colonialism , " Savimbi told reporters , warning , " The Cubans have taken over the country , but sooner or later they will suffer their own Vietnam in Angola . " MPLA and Cuban troops used flame throwers , bulldozers , and planes with napalm to destroy villages in a 1 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) wide area along the Angola @-@ Namibia border . Only women and children passed through this area , " Castro Corridor , " because MPLA troops had shot all males ten years of age or older to prevent them from joining the UNITA . The napalm killed cattle to feed government troops and to retaliate against UNITA sympathizers . A number of civilians fled from their homes ; 10 @,@ 000 going south to Namibia and 16 @,@ 000 east to Zambia , where they lived in refugee camps . 
 = = = Shaba invasions = = = 
 About 1 @,@ 500 members of the Front for the National Liberation of the Congo ( FNLC ) invaded Shaba , Zaire , from eastern Angola on 7 March 1977 . The FNLC wanted to overthrow Mobutu , and the MPLA government , suffering from Mobutu 's support for the FNLA and UNITA , did not try to stop the invasion . The FNLC failed to capture Kolwezi , Zaire 's economic heartland , but took <unk> and <unk> . The Zairean army ( the Forces Armées <unk> ) was defeated without difficulty and the FNLC continued to advance . On 2 April , Mobutu appealed to William <unk> of Cameroon , Chairman of the Organization of African Unity , for assistance . Eight days later , the French government responded to Mobutu 's plea and airlifted 1 @,@ 500 Moroccan troops into Kinshasa . This force worked in conjunction with the Zairean army , the FNLA and Egyptian pilots flying French @-@ made Zairean Mirage fighter aircraft to beat back the FNLC . The counter @-@ invasion force pushed the last of the militants , along with numerous refugees , into Angola and Zambia in April 1977 . 
 Mobutu accused the MPLA , Cuban and Soviet governments of complicity in the war . While Neto did support the FNLC , the MPLA government 's support came in response to Mobutu 's continued support for Angola 's FNLA The Carter Administration , unconvinced of Cuban involvement , responded by offering a meager $ 15 million @-@ worth of non @-@ military aid . American timidity during the war prompted a shift in Zaire 's foreign policy towards greater engagement with France , which became Zaire 's largest supplier of arms after the intervention . Neto and Mobutu signed a border agreement on 22 July 1977 . 
 John Stockwell , the CIA 's station chief in Angola , resigned after the invasion , explaining in the April 1977 The Washington Post article " Why I 'm Leaving the CIA " that he had warned Secretary of State Henry Kissinger that continued American support for anti @-@ government rebels in Angola could provoke a war with Zaire . He also said that covert Soviet involvement in Angola came after , and in response to , U.S. involvement . 
 The FNLC invaded Shaba again on 11 May 1978 , capturing Kolwezi in two days . While the Carter Administration had accepted Cuba 's insistence on its non @-@ involvement in Shaba I , and therefore did not stand with Mobutu , the U.S. government now accused Castro of complicity . This time , when Mobutu appealed for foreign assistance , the U.S. government worked with the French and Belgian militaries to beat back the invasion , the first military cooperation between France and the United States since the Vietnam War . The French Foreign Legion took back Kolwezi after a seven @-@ day battle and airlifted 2 @,@ 250 European citizens to Belgium , but not before the FNLC massacred 80 Europeans and 200 Africans . In one instance , the FNLC killed 34 European civilians who had hidden in a room . The FNLC retreated to Zambia , vowing to return to Angola . The Zairean army then forcibly evicted civilians along Shaba 's border with Angola . Mobutu , wanting to prevent any chance of another invasion , ordered his troops to shoot on sight . 
 <unk> negotiations between the MPLA and Zairean governments led to a peace accord in 1979 and an end to support for insurgencies in each other 's respective countries . Zaire temporarily cut off support to the FLEC , the FNLA and UNITA , and Angola forbade further activity by the FNLC . 
 = = = Nitistas = = = 
 Neto 's Interior Minister , Nito Alves , had successfully put down Daniel <unk> 's Eastern Revolt and the Active Revolt during Angola 's War of Independence . Factionalism within the MPLA became a major challenge to Neto 's power by late 1975 and he gave Alves the task of once again clamping down on dissent . Alves shut down the Cabral and <unk> Committees while expanding his influence within the MPLA through his control of the nation 's newspapers and state @-@ run television . Alves visited the Soviet Union in October 1976 . When he returned , Neto began taking steps to neutralize the threat he saw in the Nitistas , followers of Alves . Neto called a plenum meeting of the Central Committee of the MPLA . Neto formally designated the party Marxist @-@ Leninist , abolished the Interior Ministry , the official branch of the MPLA used by the Nitistas , and established a Commission of Enquiry . Neto used the commission , officially created to examine and report factionalism , to target the Nitistas , and ordered the commission to issue a report of its findings in March 1977 . Alves and Chief of Staff José Van @-@ Dunem , his political ally , began planning a coup d 'état against Neto . 
 Alves represented the MPLA at the 25th Soviet Communist Party Congress in February 1977 and may have then obtained support for the coup from the Soviet Union . Alves and Van @-@ Dunem planned to arrest Neto on 21 May before he arrived at a meeting of the Central Committee and before the commission released its report . The MPLA changed the location of the meeting shortly before its scheduled start , throwing the plotters ' plans into disarray , but Alves attended the meeting and faced the commission anyway . The commission released its report , accusing him of factionalism . Alves fought back , denouncing Neto for not aligning Angola with the Soviet Union . After twelve hours of debate , the party voted 26 to 6 to dismiss Alves and Van @-@ Dunem from their positions . 
 Ten armored cars with the Armed Forces for the Liberation of Angola ( FAPLA ) 8th Brigade broke into São Paulo prison at 4 a.m. on 27 May , killing the prison warden and freeing more than 150 supporters , including 11 who had been arrested only a few days before . The brigade took control of the radio station in Luanda at 7 a.m. and announced their coup , calling themselves the MPLA Action Committee . The brigade asked citizens to show their support for the coup by demonstrating in front of the presidential palace . The Nitistas captured Bula and <unk> , generals loyal to Neto , but Neto had moved his base of operations from the palace to the Ministry of Defence in fear of such an uprising . Cuban troops retook the palace at Neto 's request and marched to the radio station . After an hour of fighting , the Cubans succeeded and proceeded to the barracks of the 8th Brigade , recaptured by 1 : 30 p.m. While the Cuban force captured the palace and radio station , the Nitistas kidnapped seven leaders within the government and the military , shooting and killing six . 
 The MPLA government arrested tens of thousands of suspected Nitistas from May to November and tried them in secret courts overseen by Defense Minister Iko Carreira . Those who were found guilty , including Van @-@ Dunem , Jacobo " Immortal Monster " Caetano , the head of the 8th Brigade , and political commissar Eduardo Evaristo , were then shot and buried in secret graves . At least 18 @,@ 000 followers ( or alleged followers ) of Nito Alves were estimated to have been killed by Cuban and MPLA troops in the aftermath over a period that lasted up to two years , with some estimates claiming as high as 70 @,@ 000 dead . The coup attempt had a lasting effect on Angola 's foreign relations . Alves had opposed Neto 's foreign policy of non @-@ alignment , evolutionary socialism , and <unk> , favoring stronger relations with the Soviet Union , which he wanted to grant military bases in Angola . While Cuban soldiers actively helped Neto put down the coup , Alves and Neto both believed the Soviet Union supported Neto 's ouster . Cuban Armed Forces Minister Raúl Castro sent an additional four thousand troops to prevent further dissension within the MPLA 's ranks and met with Neto in August in a display of solidarity . In contrast , Neto 's distrust of the Soviet leadership increased and relations with the USSR worsened . In December , the MPLA held its first party Congress and changed its name to the MPLA @-@ Worker 's Party ( MPLA @-@ PT ) . The <unk> coup took a toll on the MPLA 's membership . In 1975 , the MPLA reached 200 @,@ 000 members . After the first party congress , that number decreased to 30 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Rise of dos Santos = = = 
 The Soviets , trying to increase their influence in Luanda , began sending busts of Vladimir Lenin , a plane full of brochures with Leonid Brezhnev 's speech at the February 1976 Party Congress , and two planes full of pamphlets denouncing Mao Zedong , to Angola . They sent so many busts that they ran out in the summer of 1976 and requested more from the CPSU Propaganda Department . Despite the best efforts of the Soviet propaganda machine and persistent lobbying by G. A. Zverev , the Soviet chargé d 'affaires , Neto stood his ground , refusing to grant the permanent military bases the Soviets so desperately wanted in Angola . Neto allies like Defense Minister Iko Carreira and MPLA General Secretary Lúcio Lara also irked the Soviet leadership through their policies and personalities . With Alves out of the picture , the Soviet Union promoted Prime Minister Lopo do Nascimento , another ' internationalist ' , against Neto , a ' careerist , ' for the MPLA 's leadership . Neto moved swiftly to crush his adversary . The MPLA @-@ PT 's Central Committee met from 6 to 9 December . The Committee concluded the meeting by firing Nascimento as both Prime Minister and as Secretary of the Politburo , the Director of National Television , and the Director of Jornal de Angola . Commander C. R. <unk> resigned as Second Deputy Prime Minister and a member of the Politburo . Later that month the Committee abolished the positions of Prime Minister and Deputy Prime Minister . Paving the way for dos Santos , Neto increased the ethnic composition of the MPLA @-@ PT 's political bureau as he replaced the hardline Old Guard with new blood . On 5 July 1979 , Neto issued a decree requiring all citizens to serve in the military for three years upon reaching the age of 18 . The MPLA gave a report to the UN claiming $ 293 million in property damage from South African attacks between 1976 and 1979 , asking for compensation on 3 August 1979 . The Popular Movement for the Liberation of Cabinda , a <unk> separatist rebel group , attacked a Cuban base near <unk> on 11 August . 
 President Neto died from inoperable cancer in Moscow on 10 September 1979 . The MPLA declared 45 days of mourning . The government held his funeral at the Palace of the People on 17 September . Many foreign dignitaries , including Organization of African Unity President William R. Tolbert , Jr. of Liberia , attended . The Central Committee of the MPLA unanimously voted in favor of José Eduardo dos Santos as President . He was sworn in on 21 September . Under dos Santos ' leadership , Angolan troops crossed the border into Namibia for the first time on 31 October , going into <unk> . The next day , the governments of Angola , Zambia , and Zaire signed a non @-@ aggression pact . 
 = = 1980s = = 
 In the 1980s , fighting spread outward from southeastern Angola , where most of the fighting had taken place in the 1970s , as the National Congolese Army ( ANC ) and SWAPO increased their activity . The South African government responded by sending troops back into Angola , intervening in the war from 1981 to 1987 , prompting the Soviet Union to deliver massive amounts of military aid from 1981 to 1986 . The USSR gave the MPLA more than US $ 2 billion in aid in 1984 . In 1981 , newly elected United States President Ronald Reagan 's U.S. assistant secretary of state for African affairs , Chester Crocker , developed a linkage policy , tying Namibian independence to Cuban withdrawal and peace in Angola . 
 The South African military attacked insurgents in <unk> Province on 12 May 1980 . The Angolan Ministry of Defense accused the South African government of wounding and killing civilians . Nine days later , the SADF attacked again , this time in Cuando @-@ Cubango , and the MPLA threatened to respond militarily . The SADF launched a full @-@ scale invasion of Angola through <unk> and Cuando @-@ Cubango on 7 June , destroying SWAPO 's operational command headquarters on 13 June , in what Prime Minister Pieter Willem Botha described as a " shock attack " . The MPLA government arrested 120 Angolans who were planning to set off explosives in Luanda , on 24 June , foiling a plot purportedly orchestrated by the South African government . Three days later , the United Nations Security Council convened at the behest of Angola 's ambassador to the UN , E. de <unk> , and condemned South Africa 's incursions into Angola . President Mobutu of Zaire also sided with the MPLA . The MPLA government recorded 529 instances in which they claim South African forces violated Angola 's territorial sovereignty between January and June 1980 . 
 Cuba increased its troop force in Angola from 35 @,@ 000 in 1982 to 40 @,@ 000 in 1985 . South African forces tried to capture Lubango , capital of <unk> province , in Operation Askari in December 1983 . Also , in order to enhance MPLA 's combat capacity , Romania sent 150 flight instructors and other aviation personnel , who contributed to the establishment of an Angolan Military Aviation School . 
 On 2 June 1985 , American conservative activists held the Democratic International , a symbolic meeting of anti @-@ Communist militants , at UNITA 's headquarters in Jamba . Primarily funded by Rite Aid founder Lewis <unk> and organized by anti @-@ communist activists Jack Abramoff and Jack Wheeler , participants included Savimbi , Adolfo Calero , leader of the Nicaraguan Contras , Pa Kao Her , Hmong Laotian rebel leader , U.S. Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North , South African security forces , <unk> Wardak , Afghan Mujahideen leader , Jack Wheeler , American conservative policy advocate , and many others . The Reagan administration , although unwilling to publicly support the meeting , privately expressed approval . The governments of Israel and South Africa supported the idea , but both respective countries were deemed inadvisable for hosting the conference . 
 The participants released a communiqué stating , 
 " We , free peoples fighting for our national independence and human rights , assembled at Jamba , declare our solidarity with all freedom movements in the world and state our commitment to cooperate to liberate our nations from the Soviet Imperialists . " 
 The United States House of Representatives voted 236 to 185 to repeal the Clark Amendment on 11 July 1985 . The MPLA government began attacking UNITA later that month from Luena towards <unk> along the Benguela Railway in a military operation named <unk> II , taking <unk> on 18 September . The MPLA government tried unsuccessfully to take UNITA 's supply depot in <unk> from <unk> . While the attack failed , very different interpretations of the attack emerged . UNITA claimed Portuguese @-@ speaking Soviet officers led FAPLA troops while the government said UNITA relied on South African paratroopers to defeat the MPLA attack . The South African government admitted to fighting in the area , but said its troops fought SWAPO militants . 
 = = = War intensifies = = = 
 By 1986 , Angola began to assume a more central role in the Cold War , with the Soviet Union , Cuba and other Eastern bloc nations enhancing support for the MPLA government , and American conservatives beginning to elevate their support for Savimbi 's UNITA . Savimbi developed close relations with influential American conservatives , who saw Savimbi as a key ally in the U.S. effort to oppose and rollback Soviet @-@ backed , non @-@ democratic governments around the world . The conflict quickly escalated , with both Washington and Moscow seeing it as a critical strategic conflict in the Cold War . 
 The Soviet Union gave an additional $ 1 billion in aid to the MPLA government and Cuba sent an additional 2 @,@ 000 troops to the 35 @,@ 000 @-@ strong force in Angola to protect Chevron oil platforms in 1986 . Savimbi had called Chevron 's presence in Angola , already protected by Cuban troops , a " target " for UNITA in an interview with Foreign Policy magazine on 31 January . 
 In Washington , Savimbi forged close relationships with influential conservatives , including Michael Johns ( the Heritage Foundation 's foreign policy analyst and a key Savimbi advocate ) , Grover Norquist ( President of Americans for Tax Reform and a Savimbi economic advisor ) , and others , who played critical roles in elevating escalated U.S. covert aid to Savimbi 's UNITA and visited with Savimbi in his Jamba , Angola headquarters to provide the Angolan rebel leader with military , political and other guidance in his war against the MPLA government . With enhanced U.S. support , the war quickly escalated , both in terms of the intensity of the conflict and also in its perception as a key conflict in the overall Cold War . 
 In addition to escalating its military support for UNITA , the Reagan administration and its conservative allies also worked to expand recognition of Savimbi as a key U.S. ally in an important Cold War struggle . In January 1986 , Reagan invited Savimbi to meet with him at the White House . Following the meeting , Reagan spoke of UNITA winning a victory that " electrifies the world " at the White House in January 1986 . Two months later , Reagan announced the delivery of Stinger surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles as part of the $ 25 million in aid UNITA received from the U.S. government . Jeremias Chitunda , UNITA 's representative to the U.S. , became the Vice President of UNITA in August 1986 at the sixth party congress . Fidel Castro made Crocker 's proposal , the withdrawal of foreign troops from Angola and Namibia , a prerequisite to Cuban withdrawal from Angola on 10 September . 
 UNITA forces attacked <unk> in Cuanza Norte province on 8 February 1986 . <unk> alleged UNITA massacred civilians in <unk> in <unk> Province later that month , on 26 February . The South African government agreed to Crocker 's terms in principle on 8 March . Savimbi proposed a truce regarding the Benguela railway on 26 March , saying MPLA trains could pass through as long as an international inspection group monitored trains to prevent their use for counter @-@ insurgency activity . The government did not respond . In April 1987 Fidel Castro sent Cuba 's Fiftieth Brigade to southern Angola , increasing the number of Cuban troops from 12 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 . The MPLA and American governments began negotiating in June 1987 . 
 = = = Cuito Cuanavale and New York Accords = = = 
 UNITA and South African forces attacked the MPLA 's base at Cuito Cuanavale in Cuando Cubango province from 13 January to 23 March 1988 , in the second largest battle in the history of Africa , after the Battle of El Alamein , the largest in sub @-@ Saharan Africa since World War II . Cuito Cuanavale 's importance came not from its size or its wealth but its location . South African Defense Forces maintained an overwatch on the city using new , G5 artillery pieces . Both sides claimed victory in the ensuing Battle of Cuito Cuanavale . 
 With that manoeuvre , Fidel Castro claimed that he increased the cost to South Africa of continuing to fight in Angola and placed Cuba in its most aggressive combat position of the war , arguing that he was preparing to leave Angola with his opponents on the defensive . According to the Cubans , the political , economical and technical cost to South Africa of maintaining its presence in Angola proved too much . Conversely , the South Africans believe they indicated their resolve to the superpowers by preparing a nuclear test that ultimately forced the Cubans into a settlement . 
 Cuban troops were alleged to have used nerve gas against UNITA troops during the civil war . Belgian criminal <unk> Dr. Aubin <unk> , studied alleged evidence , including samples of war @-@ gas " identification kits " found after the battle at Cuito Cuanavale , claimed that " there is no doubt anymore that the Cubans were using nerve gases against the troops of Mr. Jonas Savimbi . " 
 The Cuban government joined negotiations on 28 January 1988 , and all three parties held a round of negotiations on 9 March . The South African government joined negotiations on 3 May and the parties met in June and August in New York and Geneva . All parties agreed to a ceasefire on 8 August . Representatives from the governments of Angola , Cuba , and South Africa signed the New York Accords , granting independence to Namibia and ending the direct involvement of foreign troops in the civil war , in New York City on 22 December 1988 . The United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 626 later that day , creating the United Nations Angola Verification Mission ( UNAVEM ) , a peacekeeping force . UNAVEM troops began arriving in Angola in January 1989 . 
 = = = Ceasefire = = = 
 As the Angolan Civil War began to take on a diplomatic component , in addition to a military one , two key Savimbi allies , The Conservative Caucus ' Howard Phillips and the Heritage Foundation 's Michael Johns visited Savimbi in Angola , where they sought to persuade Savimbi to come to the United States in the spring of 1989 to help the Conservative Caucus , the Heritage Foundation and other conservatives in making the case for continued U.S. aid to UNITA . 
 President Mobutu invited 18 African leaders , Savimbi , and dos Santos to his palace in Gbadolite in June 1989 for negotiations . Savimbi and dos Santos met for the first time and agreed to the Gbadolite Declaration , a ceasefire , on 22 June , paving the way for a future peace agreement . President Kenneth Kaunda of Zambia said a few days after the declaration that Savimbi had agreed to leave Angola and go into exile , a claim Mobutu , Savimbi , and the U.S. government disputed . Dos Santos agreed with Kaunda 's interpretation of the negotiations , saying Savimbi had agreed to temporarily leave the country . 
 On 23 August , dos Santos complained that the U.S. and South African governments continued to fund UNITA , warning such activity endangered the already fragile ceasefire . The next day Savimbi announced UNITA would no longer abide by the ceasefire , citing Kaunda 's insistence that Savimbi leave the country and UNITA disband . The MPLA government responded to Savimbi 's statement by moving troops from Cuito Cuanavale , under MPLA control , to UNITA @-@ occupied <unk> . The ceasefire broke down with dos Santos and the U.S. government blaming each other for the resumption in armed conflict . 
 = = 1990s = = 
 Political changes abroad and military victories at home allowed the government to transition from a nominally communist state to a nominally democratic one . Namibia 's declaration of independence , internationally recognized on 1 April , eliminated the threat to the MPLA from South Africa , as the SADF withdrew from <unk> . The MPLA abolished the one @-@ party system in June and rejected Marxist @-@ Leninism at the MPLA 's third Congress in December , formally changing the party 's name from the MPLA @-@ PT to the MPLA . The National Assembly passed law 12 / 91 in May 1991 , coinciding with the withdrawal of the last Cuban troops , defining Angola as a " democratic state based on the rule of law " with a multi @-@ party system . Observers met such changes with skepticism . American journalist Karl Maier wrote : " In the New Angola ideology is being replaced by the bottom line , as security and selling expertise in weaponry have become a very profitable business . With its wealth in oil and diamonds , Angola is like a big swollen carcass and the vultures are swirling overhead . Savimbi 's former allies are switching sides , lured by the aroma of hard currency . " Savimbi also reportedly purged some of those within UNITA whom he may have seen as threats to his leadership or as questioning his strategic course . Among those killed in the purge were Tito <unk> and his family in 1991 . Savimbi denied his involvement in the <unk> killing and blamed it on UNITA dissidents . 
 = = = Black , Manafort , Stone and Kelly = = = 
 Government troops wounded Savimbi in battles in January and February 1990 , but not enough to restrict his mobility He went to Washington , D.C. in December and met with President George H. W. Bush again , the fourth of five trips he made to the United States . Savimbi paid Black , Manafort , Stone , and Kelly , a lobbying firm based in Washington , D.C. , $ 5 million to lobby the Federal government for aid , portray UNITA favorably in Western media , and acquire support among politicians in Washington . Savimbi was highly successful in this endeavour . 
 Senators Larry Smith and Dante Fascell , a senior member of the firm , worked with the Cuban American National Foundation , Representative Claude Pepper of Florida , Neal Blair 's Free the Eagle , and Howard Phillips ' Conservative Caucus to repeal the Clark Amendment in 1985 . From the amendment 's repeal in 1985 to 1992 the U.S. government gave Savimbi $ 60 million per year , a total of $ 420 million . A sizable amount of the aid went to Savimbi 's personal expenses . Black , Manafort filed foreign lobbying records with the U.S. Justice Department showing Savimbi 's expenses during his U.S. visits . During his December 1990 visit he spent $ 136 @,@ 424 at the Park Hyatt hotel and $ 2 @,@ 705 in tips . He spent almost $ 473 @,@ 000 in October 1991 during his week @-@ long visit to Washington and Manhattan . He spent $ 98 @,@ 022 in hotel bills , at the Park Hyatt , $ 26 @,@ 709 in limousine rides in Washington and another $ 5 @,@ 293 in Manhattan . Paul Manafort , a partner in the firm , charged Savimbi $ 19 @,@ 300 in consulting and additional $ 1 @,@ 712 in expenses . He also bought $ 1 @,@ 143 worth of " survival kits " from Motorola . When questioned in an interview in 1990 about human rights abuses under Savimbi , Black said , " Now when you 're in a war , trying to manage a war , when the enemy ... is no more than a couple of hours away from you at any given time , you might not run your territory according to New Hampshire town meeting rules . " 
 = = = Bicesse Accords = = = 
 President dos Santos met with Savimbi in Lisbon , Portugal and signed the Bicesse Accords , the first of three major peace agreements , on 31 May 1991 , with the mediation of the Portuguese government . The accords laid out a transition to multi @-@ party democracy under the supervision of the United Nations ' UNAVEM II mission , with a presidential election to be held within a year . The agreement attempted to demobilize the 152 @,@ 000 active fighters and integrate the remaining government troops and UNITA rebels into a 50 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Angolan Armed Forces ( FAA ) . The FAA would consist of a national army with 40 @,@ 000 troops , navy with 6 @,@ 000 , and air force with 4 @,@ 000 . While UNITA largely did not disarm , the FAA complied with the accord and demobilized , leaving the government disadvantaged . 
 Angola held the first round of its 1992 presidential election on 29 – 30 September . Dos Santos officially received 49 @.@ 57 % of the vote and Savimbi won 40 @.@ 6 % . As no candidate received 50 % or more of the vote , election law dictated a second round of voting between the top two contenders . Savimbi , along with eight opposition parties and many other election observers , said the election had been neither free nor fair . An official observer wrote that there was little UN supervision , that 500 @,@ 000 UNITA voters were disenfranchised and that there were 100 clandestine polling stations . Savimbi sent Jeremias Chitunda , Vice President of UNITA , to Luanda to negotiate the terms of the second round . The election process broke down on 31 October , when government troops in Luanda attacked UNITA . Civilians , using guns they had received from police a few days earlier , conducted house @-@ by @-@ house raids with the Rapid Intervention Police , killing and detaining hundreds of UNITA supporters . The government took civilians in trucks to the <unk> cemetery and Morro da Luz ravine , shot them , and buried them in mass graves . <unk> attacked Chitunda 's convoy on 2 November , pulling him out of his car and shooting him and two others in their faces . The MPLA massacred over ten thousand UNITA and FNLA voters nationwide in a few days in what was known as the Halloween Massacre . Savimbi said the election had neither been free nor fair and refused to participate in the second round . He then proceeded to resume armed struggle against the MPLA . 
 Then , in a series of stunning victories , UNITA regained control over <unk> , Huambo , M <unk> Kongo , Ndalatando , and <unk> , provincial capitals it had not held since 1976 , and moved against Kuito , Luena , and <unk> . Although the U.S. and South African governments had stopped aiding UNITA , supplies continued to come from Mobutu in Zaire . UNITA tried to wrest control of Cabinda from the MPLA in January 1993 . Edward <unk> , Head of the U.S. Liaison Office in Angola for the Clinton Administration , warned Savimbi that , if UNITA hindered or halted Cabinda 's production , the U.S. would end its support for UNITA . On 9 January , UNITA began a 55 @-@ day battle over Huambo , the War of the Cities . Hundreds of thousands fled and 10 @,@ 000 were killed before UNITA gained control on 7 March . The government engaged in an ethnic cleansing of Bakongo , and , to a lesser extent Ovimbundu , in multiple cities , most notably Luanda , on 22 January in the Bloody Friday massacre . UNITA and government representatives met five days later in Ethiopia , but negotiations failed to restore the peace . The United Nations Security Council sanctioned UNITA through Resolution 864 on 15 September 1993 , prohibiting the sale of weapons or fuel to UNITA . Perhaps the clearest shift in U.S. foreign policy emerged when President Bill Clinton issued Executive Order <unk> on 23 September , labeling UNITA a " continuing threat to the foreign policy objectives of the U.S. " By August 1993 , UNITA had gained control over 70 % of Angola , but the government 's military successes in 1994 forced UNITA to sue for peace . By November 1994 , the government had taken control of 60 % of the country . Savimbi called the situation UNITA 's " deepest crisis " since its creation . It is estimate that perhaps 120 @,@ 000 people were killed in the first eighteen months following the 1992 election , nearly half the number of casualties of the previous sixteen years of war . Both sides of the conflict continued to commit widespread and systematic violations of the laws of war with UNITA in particular guilty of indiscriminate shelling of besieged cities resulting in large death toll to civilians . The MPLA government forces used air power in indiscriminate fashion also resulting in high civilian deaths . The Lusaka Protocol of 1994 reaffirmed the Bicesse Accords . 
 = = = Lusaka Protocol = = = 
 Savimbi , unwilling to personally sign an accord , had former UNITA Secretary General Eugenio <unk> represent UNITA in his place . <unk> and Angolan Foreign Minister Venancio de Moura signed the Lusaka Protocol in Lusaka , Zambia on 31 October 1994 , agreeing to integrate and disarm UNITA . Both sides signed a ceasefire as part of the protocol on 20 November . Under the agreement the government and UNITA would cease fire and demobilize . 5 @,@ 500 UNITA members , including 180 militants , would join the Angolan national police , 1 @,@ 200 UNITA members , including 40 militants , would join the rapid reaction police force , and UNITA generals would become officers in the Angolan Armed Forces . Foreign mercenaries would return to their home countries and all parties would stop acquiring foreign arms . The agreement gave UNITA politicians homes and a headquarters . The government agreed to appoint UNITA members to head the Mines , Commerce , Health , and Tourism ministries , in addition to seven deputy ministers , ambassadors , the governorships of <unk> , Lunda Sul , and Cuando Cubango , deputy governors , municipal administrators , deputy administrators , and commune administrators . The government would release all prisoners and give amnesty to all militants involved in the civil war . Zimbabwean President Robert Mugabe and South African President Nelson Mandela met in Lusaka on 15 November 1994 to boost support symbolically for the protocol . Mugabe and Mandela both said they would be willing to meet with Savimbi and Mandela asked him to come to South Africa , but Savimbi did not come . The agreement created a joint commission , consisting of officials from the Angolan government , UNITA , and the UN with the governments of Portugal , the United States , and Russia observing , to oversee its implementation . Violations of the protocol 's provisions would be discussed and reviewed by the commission . The protocol 's provisions , integrating UNITA into the military , a ceasefire , and a coalition government , were similar to those of the <unk> Agreement that granted Angola independence from Portugal in 1975 . Many of the same environmental problems , mutual distrust between UNITA and the MPLA , loose international oversight , the importation of foreign arms , and an overemphasis on maintaining the balance of power , led to the collapse of the protocol . 
 = = = Arms monitoring = = = 
 In January 1995 , U.S. President Clinton sent Paul Hare , his envoy to Angola , to support the Lusaka Protocol and impress the importance of the ceasefire onto the Angolan government and UNITA , both in need of outside assistance . The United Nations agreed to send a peacekeeping force on 8 February . Savimbi met with South African President Mandela in May . Shortly after , on 18 June , the MPLA offered Savimbi the position of Vice President under dos Santos with another Vice President chosen from the MPLA . Savimbi told Mandela he felt ready to " serve in any capacity which will aid my nation , " but he did not accept the proposal until 12 August . The United States Department of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency 's Angola operations and analysis expanded in an effort to halt weapons shipments , a violation of the protocol , with limited success . The Angolan government bought six Mil Mi @-@ 17 from Ukraine in 1995 . The government bought L @-@ 39 attack aircraft from the Czechoslovakia in 1998 along with ammunition and uniforms from Zimbabwe Defence Industries and ammunition and weapons from Ukraine in 1998 and 1999 . U.S. monitoring significantly dropped off in 1997 as events in Zaire , the Congo and then Liberia occupied more of the U.S. government 's attention . UNITA purchased more than 20 FROG @-@ 7 scuds and three FOX 7 missiles from the North Korean government in 1999 . 
 The UN extended its mandate on 8 February 1996 . In March , Savimbi and dos Santos formally agreed to form a coalition government . The government deported 2 @,@ 000 West African and Lebanese Angolans in Operation Cancer Two , in August 1996 , on the grounds that dangerous minorities were responsible for the rising crime rate . In 1996 the Angolan government bought military equipment from India , two Mil Mi @-@ 24 attack helicopters and three Sukhoi Su @-@ 17 from Kazakhstan in December , and helicopters from Slovakia in March . 
 The international community helped install a Government of Unity and National Reconciliation in April 1997 , but UNITA did not allow the regional MPLA government to take up residence in 60 cities . The UN Security Council voted on 28 August 1997 , to impose sanctions on UNITA through Resolution 1127 , prohibiting UNITA leaders from traveling abroad , closing UNITA 's embassies abroad , and making UNITA @-@ controlled areas a no @-@ fly zone . The Security Council expanded the sanctions through Resolution 1173 on 12 June 1998 , requiring government certification for the purchase of Angolan diamonds and freezing UNITA 's bank accounts . 
 During the First Congo War , the Angolan government joined the coalition to overthrow Mobutu 's government due to Mobutu 's support for UNITA . Mobutu 's government fell on 16 May 1997 . In early October 1997 , Angola invaded the Republic of the Congo during its civil war , and helped <unk> <unk> 's rebels overthrow the government of Pascal <unk> . <unk> 's government had allowed UNITA use of cities in the Republic of Congo in order to circumvent sanctions . 
 The UN spent $ 1 @.@ 6 billion from 1994 to 1998 in maintaining a peacekeeping force . The Angolan military attacked UNITA forces in the Central Highlands on 4 December 1998 , the day before the MPLA 's fourth Congress . Dos Santos told the delegates the next day that he believed war to be the only way to ultimately achieve peace , rejected the Lusaka Protocol , and asked <unk> to leave . In February 1999 , the Security Council withdrew the last <unk> personnel . In late 1998 , several UNITA commanders , dissatisfied with Savimbi 's leadership , formed UNITA <unk> , a breakaway militant group . Thousands more deserted UNITA in 1999 and 2000 . 
 The Angolan military launched Operation Restore , a massive offensive , in September 1999 , recapturing N <unk> , Mungo and <unk> and <unk> , the site of Savimbi 's headquarters just one year before . The UN Security Council passed Resolution 1268 on 15 October , instructing United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan to update the Security Council to the situation in Angola every three months . Dos Santos offered an amnesty to UNITA militants on 11 November . By December , Chief of Staff General João de Matos said the Angolan Armed Forces had destroyed 80 % of UNITA 's militant wing and captured 15 @,@ 000 tons of military equipment . Following the dissolution of the coalition government , Savimbi retreated to his historical base in <unk> and prepared for battle . In order to isolate UNITA , the government forced civilians in countryside areas subject to UNITA influence to relocate to major cities . The strategy was successful isolating in UNITA but had adverse humanitarian consequences . 
 = = = Diamond trade = = = 
 UNITA 's ability to mine diamonds and sell them abroad provided funding for the war to continue even as the movement 's support in the Western world and among the local populace withered away . De Beers and <unk> , a state @-@ owned diamond @-@ mining monopoly , signed a contract allowing De Beers to handle Angola 's diamond exports in 1990 . According to the United Nation 's Fowler Report , Joe De Deker , a former stockholder in De Beers , worked with the government of Zaire to supply military equipment to UNITA from 1993 to 1997 . De Deker 's brother , Ronnie , allegedly flew from South Africa to Angola , directing weapons originating in Eastern Europe . In return , UNITA gave Ronnie bushels of diamonds worth $ 6 million . De Deker sent the diamonds to De Beer 's buying office in Antwerp , Belgium . De Beers openly acknowledges spending $ 500 million on legal and illegal Angolan diamonds in 1992 alone . The United Nations estimates Angolans made between three and four billion dollars through the diamond trade between 1992 and 1998 . The UN also estimates that out of that sum , UNITA made at least $ 3 @.@ 72 billion , or 93 % of all diamond sales , despite international sanctions . 
 Executive Outcomes ( EO ) , a private military company , played a major role in turning the tide for the MPLA , with one U.S. defense expert calling the EO the " best fifty or sixty million dollars the Angolan government ever spent . " Heritage Oil and Gas , and allegedly De Beers , hired EO to protect their operations in Angola . Executive Outcomes trained up to 5 @,@ 000 troops and 30 combat pilots in camps in Lunda Sul , Cabo Ledo , and <unk> . 
 = = = Cabinda separatism = = = 
 The territory of Cabinda is north of Angola proper , separated by a strip of territory 60 km ( 37 @.@ 3 mi ) long in the Democratic Republic of the Congo . The Portuguese Constitution of 1933 designated Angola and Cabinda as overseas provinces . In the course of administrative reforms during the 1930s to 1950s , Angola was divided into districts , and Cabinda became one of the districts of Angola . The Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda ( FLEC ) formed in 1963 during the broader war for independence from Portugal . Contrary to the organization 's name , Cabinda is an exclave , not an enclave . FLEC later split into the Armed Forces of Cabinda ( FLEC @-@ FAC ) and FLEC @-@ <unk> ( FLEC @-@ R ) . Several other , smaller FLEC factions later broke away from these movements , but FLEC @-@ R remained the most prominent because of its size and its tactics . FLEC @-@ R members cut off the ears and noses of government officials and their supporters , similar to the Revolutionary United Front of Sierra Leone in the 1990s . Despite Cabinda 's relatively small size , foreign powers and the nationalist movements coveted the territory for its vast reserves of petroleum , the principal export of Angola then and now . 
 In the war for independence , the division of <unk> versus <unk> peoples masked the inter @-@ ethnic conflict between the various native tribes , a division that emerged in the early 1970s . The Union of Peoples of Angola , the predecessor to the FNLA , only controlled 15 % of Angola 's territory during the independence war , excluding MPLA @-@ controlled Cabinda . The People 's Republic of China openly backed UNITA upon independence despite the mutual support from its adversary South Africa and UNITA 's pro @-@ Western tilt . The PRC 's support for Savimbi came in 1965 , a year after he left the FNLA . China saw Holden Roberto and the FNLA as the stooge of the West and the MPLA as the Soviet Union 's proxy . With the Sino @-@ Soviet split , South Africa presented the least odious of allies to the PRC . 
 Throughout the 1990s , <unk> rebels kidnapped and ransomed off foreign oil workers to in turn finance further attacks against the national government . FLEC militants stopped buses , forcing Chevron Oil workers out , and setting fire to the buses on 27 March and 23 April 1992 . A large @-@ scale battle took place between FLEC and police in <unk> on 14 May in which 25 mortar rounds accidentally hit a nearby Chevron compound . The government , fearing the loss of their prime source of revenue , began to negotiate with representatives from Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda @-@ Renewal ( FLEC @-@ R ) , Armed Forces of Cabinda ( FLEC @-@ FAC ) , and the Democratic Front of Cabinda ( FDC ) in 1995 . Patronage and bribery failed to assuage the anger of FLEC @-@ R and FLEC @-@ FAC and negotiations ended . In February 1997 , FLEC @-@ FAC kidnapped two <unk> SDN @-@ timber company employees , killing one and releasing the other after receiving a $ 400 @,@ 000 ransom . FLEC @-@ FLAC kidnapped eleven people in April 1998 , nine Angolans and two Portuguese , released for a $ 500 @,@ 000 ransom . FLEC @-@ R kidnapped five <unk> @-@ oil engineering employees , two Frenchman , two Portuguese , and an Angolan , in March 1999 . While militants released the Angolan , the government complicated the situation by promising the rebel leadership $ 12 @.@ 5 million for the hostages . When António Bento <unk> , the President of FLEC @-@ R , showed up , the Angolan army arrested him and his bodyguards . The Angolan army later forcibly freed the other hostages on 7 July . By the end of the year the government had arrested the leadership of all three rebel organizations . 
 = = 2000s = = 
 Illicit arms trading characterized much of the later years of the Angolan Civil War , as each side tried to gain the upper hand by buying arms from Eastern Europe and Russia . Israel continued in its role as a proxy arms dealer for the United States . On 21 September 2000 , a Russian freighter delivered 500 tons of Ukrainian 7 @.@ 62 mm ammunition to <unk> , a division of the Angolan government , with the help of a shipping agent in London . The ship 's captain declared his cargo " fragile " to minimize inspection . The next day , the MPLA began attacking UNITA , winning victories in several battles from 22 to 25 September . The government gained control over military bases and diamond mines in Lunda Norte and Lunda Sul , hurting Savimbi 's ability to pay his troops . 
 Angola agreed to trade oil to Slovakia in return for arms , buying six Sukhoi Su @-@ 17 attack aircraft on 3 April 2000 . The Spanish government in the Canary Islands prevented a Ukrainian freighter from delivering 636 tons of military equipment to Angola on 24 February 2001 . The captain of the ship had inaccurately reported his cargo , falsely claiming the ship carried automobile parts . The Angolan government admitted <unk> had purchased arms from <unk> , the Russian state @-@ owned arms company , and acknowledged the captain might have violated Spanish law by <unk> his cargo , a common practice in arms smuggling to Angola . 
 UNITA carried out several attacks against civilians in May 2001 in a show of strength . UNITA militants attacked <unk> on 7 May , killing 100 people and kidnapping 60 children and two adults . UNITA then attacked Baia @-@ do @-@ <unk> , followed by an attack on Golungo Alto , a city 200 kilometres ( 124 mi ) east of Luanda , a few days later . The militants advanced on Golungo Alto at 2 : 00 pm on 21 May , staying until 9 : 00 pm on 22 May when the Angolan military retook the town . They looted local businesses , taking food and alcoholic beverages before singing drunkenly in the streets . More than 700 villagers trekked 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) from Golungo Alto to Ndalatando , the provincial capital of Cuanza Norte , without injury . According to an aid official in Ndalatando , the Angolan military prohibited media coverage of the incident , so the details of the attack are unknown . Joffre Justino , UNITA 's spokesman in Portugal , said UNITA only attacked <unk> Alto to demonstrate the government 's military inferiority and the need to cut a deal . Four days later UNITA released the children to a Catholic mission in <unk> , a city 200 kilometres ( 124 mi ) from where UNITA kidnapped them . The national organization said the abduction violated their policy towards the treatment of civilians . In a letter to the bishops of Angola , Jonas Savimbi asked the Catholic Church to act as an intermediary between UNITA and the government in negotiations . The attacks took their toll on Angola 's economy . At the end of May 2001 , De Beers , the international diamond mining company , suspended its operations in Angola , ostensibly on the grounds that negotiations with the national government reached an impasse . 
 Militants of unknown affiliation fired rockets at United Nations World Food Program ( UNWFP ) planes on 8 June near Luena and again near Kuito a few days later . As the first plane , a Boeing 727 , approached Luena someone shot a missile at the aircraft , damaging one engine but not critically as the three @-@ man crew landed successfully . The plane 's altitude , 5 @,@ 000 metres ( 16 @,@ 404 ft ) , most likely prevented the assailant from identifying his target . As the citizens of Luena had enough food to last them several weeks , the <unk> temporarily suspended their flights . When the flights began again a few days later , militants shot at a plane flying to Kuito , the first attack targeting UN workers since 1999 . The UNWFP again suspended food aid flights throughout the country . While he did not claim responsibility for the attack , UNITA spokesman Justino said the planes carried weapons and soldiers rather than food , making them acceptable targets . UNITA and the Angolan government both said the international community needed to pressure the other side into returning to the negotiating table . Despite the looming humanitarian crisis , neither side guaranteed UNWFP planes safety . Kuito , which had relied on international aid , only had enough food to feed their population of 200 @,@ 000 . The <unk> had to fly in all aid to Kuito and the rest of the Central Highlands because militants ambushed trucks . Further complicating the situation , potholes in the Kuito airport strip slowed aid deliveries . Overall chaos reduced the amount of available oil to the point at which the UN had to import its jet fuel . 
 Government troops captured and destroyed UNITA 's <unk> base in Benguela province and <unk> base in Cuanza Sul in October 2001 . The Slovak government sold fighter jets to the Angolan government in 2001 in violation of the European Union Code of Conduct on Arms Exports . 
 = = = Death of Savimbi = = = 
 Government troops killed Jonas Savimbi on 22 February 2002 , in <unk> province . UNITA Vice President António Dembo took over , but died from diabetes 12 days later on 3 March , and Secretary @-@ General Paulo <unk> became UNITA 's leader . After Savimbi 's death , the government came to a crossroads over how to proceed . After initially indicating the counter @-@ insurgency might continue , the government announced it would halt all military operations on 13 March . Military commanders for UNITA and the MPLA met in <unk> and agreed to a cease @-@ fire . However , Carlos Morgado , UNITA 's spokesman in Portugal , said the UNITA 's Portugal wing had been under the impression General <unk> , the UNITA general who agreed to the ceasefire , had been captured more than a week earlier . Morgado did say that he had not heard from Angola since Savimbi 's death . The military commanders signed a Memorandum of Understanding as an addendum to the Lusaka Protocol in Luena on 4 April , with Santos and <unk> observing . 
 The United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1404 on 18 April , extending the monitoring mechanism of sanctions by six months . Resolutions 1412 and 1432 , passed on 17 May and 15 August respectively , suspended the UN travel ban on UNITA officials for 90 days each , finally abolishing the ban through Resolution 1439 on 18 October . UNAVEM III , extended an additional two months by Resolution 1439 , ended on 19 December . 
 UNITA 's new leadership declared the rebel group a political party and officially demobilized its armed forces in August 2002 . That same month , the United Nations Security Council replaced the United Nations Office in Angola with the United Nations Mission in Angola , a larger , non @-@ military , political presence . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The civil war spawned a disastrous humanitarian crisis in Angola , internally displacing 4 @.@ 28 million people – one @-@ third of Angola 's total population . The United Nations estimated in 2003 that 80 % of Angolans lacked access to basic medical care , 60 % lacked access to water , and 30 % of Angolan children would die before the age of five , with an overall national life expectancy of less than 40 years of age . 
 There was an exodus from rural areas in most of the country . Today the urban population represents slightly more than half of the population , according to the latest census . In many cases , people went into cities outside the traditional area of their ethnic group . There are now important Ovimbundu communities in Luanda , <unk> , and Lubango . There has been a degree of return , but at a slow pace , while many younger people are reluctant to go to a rural life that they never knew . 
 In rural areas , one problem is that some were for years been under the control of the MPLA @-@ government , while others were controlled by UNITA . Some of the population fled to neighbouring countries , while others went into remote mountainous areas . 
 = = = Humanitarian efforts = = = 
 The government spent $ 187 million settling internally displaced persons ( IDPs ) between 4 April 2002 , and 2004 , after which the World Bank gave $ 33 million to continue the settling process . The UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( OCHA ) estimated that fighting in 2002 displaced 98 @,@ 000 people between 1 January and 28 February alone . IDPs comprised 75 % of all landmine victims . The IDPs , unacquainted with their surroundings , frequently and predominantly fell victim to these weapons . Militant forces laid approximately 15 million landmines by 2002 . The HALO Trust began demining Angola in 1994 , and had destroyed 30 @,@ 000 landmines by July 2007 . 1 @,@ 100 Angolans and seven foreign workers are employed by the HALO Trust in Angola , with demining operations expected to finish by 2014 . 
 = = = Child soldiers = = = 
 Human Rights Watch estimates UNITA and the government employed more than 6 @,@ 000 and 3 @,@ 000 child soldiers respectively , some forcibly impressed , during the war . Additionally , human rights analysts found that between 5 @,@ 000 and 8 @,@ 000 underage girls were married to UNITA militants . Some girls were ordered to go and forage for food to provide for the troops – the girls were denied food if they did not bring back enough to satisfy their commander . After victories , UNITA commanders would be rewarded with women , who were often then sexually abused . The Angolan government and UN agencies identified 190 child soldiers in the Angolan army , and had relocated 70 of them by November 2002 , but the government continued to knowingly employ other underage soldiers . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In John Milius 's 1984 film Red Dawn , Bella , one of the Cuban officers who takes part in a joint Cuban @-@ Soviet invasion of the United States , is said to have fought in the conflicts in Angola , El Salvador , and Nicaragua . 
 Jack Abramoff wrote and co @-@ produced the film Red Scorpion with his brother Robert in 1989 . In the film , Dolph Lundgren plays Nikolai , a Soviet agent sent to assassinate an African revolutionary in a fictional country modeled on Angola . The South African government financed the film through the International Freedom Foundation , a front @-@ group chaired by Abramoff , as part of its efforts to undermine international sympathy for the African National Congress . While working in Hollywood , Abramoff was convicted for fraud and other offenses that he had committed during his concurrent career as a lobbyist . 
 The war provides a more comedic background story in the South African comedy The Gods Must Be Crazy 2 as a Cuban and an Angolan soldier repeatedly try to take each other prisoner , but ultimately part on ( more or less ) amicable terms . 
 The 2004 film The Hero , produced by Fernando Vendrell and directed by <unk> Gamboa , depicts the life of average Angolans in the aftermath of the civil war . The film follows the lives of three individuals : <unk> , a war veteran crippled by a landmine who returns to Luanda ; Manu , a young boy searching for his soldier father ; and Joana , a teacher who mentors the boy and begins a love affair with <unk> . The Hero won the 2005 Sundance World Dramatic Cinema Jury Grand Prize . A joint Angolan , Portuguese , and French production , The Hero was filmed entirely in Angola . 
 The character of Danny Archer in the 2006 film Blood Diamond , played by Leonardo DiCaprio , discusses on several occasions his service within the SADF during its intervention in the Angolan Civil War . As the film unfolds , it is revealed that he is a white Rhodesian orphan who ran away to South Africa only to be conscripted into the infamous 32 Battalion , with whom he saw combat in Angola around 1987 . 
 The Angolan Civil War is featured in the 2012 video game Call of Duty : Black Ops II , in which the player character assists Jonas Savimbi in a battle against MPLA forces . 
 Metal Gear Solid V : The Phantom Pain is partly set in the Angola — Zaire border region during the Angolan Civil War . 
 = Homer Davenport = 
 Homer Calvin Davenport ( March 8 , 1867 – May 2 , 1912 ) was a political cartoonist and writer from the United States . He is known for drawings that satirized figures of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era , most notably Ohio Senator Mark Hanna . Although Davenport had no formal art training , he became one of the highest paid political cartoonists in the world . Davenport also was one of the first major American breeders of Arabian horses and one of the founders of the Arabian Horse Club of America . 
 A native Oregonian , Davenport developed interests in both art and horses as a young boy . He tried a variety of jobs before gaining employment as a cartoonist , initially working at several newspapers on the West Coast , including The San Francisco Examiner , purchased by William Randolph Hearst . His talent for drawing and interest in Arabian horses dovetailed in 1893 at the Chicago Daily Herald when he studied and drew the Arabian horses exhibited at the World 's Columbian Exposition . When Hearst obtained the New York Morning Journal in 1895 , money was no object in his attempt to establish the Journal as a leading New York newspaper , and Hearst moved Davenport east in 1885 to be part of what is regarded as one of the greatest newspaper staffs ever assembled . Working with columnist Alfred Henry Lewis , Davenport created many cartoons in opposition to the 1896 Republican presidential candidate , former Ohio governor William McKinley , and Hanna , his campaign manager . McKinley was elected and Hanna elevated to the Senate ; Davenport continued to draw his sharp cartoons during the 1900 presidential race , though McKinley was again victorious . 
 In 1904 , Davenport was hired away from Hearst by the New York Evening Mail , a Republican paper , and there drew a favorable cartoon of President Theodore Roosevelt that boosted Roosevelt 's election campaign that year . The President in turn proved helpful to Davenport in 1906 when the cartoonist required diplomatic permission to travel abroad in his quest to purchase pure desertbred Arabian horses . In partnership with millionaire Peter Bradley , Davenport traveled extensively amongst the Anazeh people of Syria and went through a brotherhood ceremony with the Bedouin leader who guided his travels . The 27 horses Davenport purchased and brought to America had a profound and lasting impact on Arabian horse breeding . Davenport 's later years were marked by fewer influential cartoons and a troubled personal life ; he dedicated much of his time to his animal breeding pursuits , traveled widely , and gave lectures . He was a lifelong lover of animals and of country living ; he not only raised horses , but also exotic poultry and other animals . He died in 1912 of pneumonia , which he contracted after going to the docks of New York City to watch and chronicle the arrival of survivors of the Titanic . 
 = = Childhood and early career = = 
 Davenport was born in 1867 in the Waldo Hills , several miles south of Silverton , Oregon . His parents were Timothy Woodbridge and Florinda Willard ( Geer ) Davenport . He had an older sister , Orla , and his parents had previously lost two other children in infancy . Timothy Davenport was one of the founders of the Republican Party in Oregon and served as an Oregon state representative , state senator , and an Indian agent . He ran unsuccessfully for the United States House of Representatives in 1874 . Florinda was an admirer of the political cartoons of Thomas Nast that appeared in Harper 's Weekly . While pregnant with Homer , she developed a belief , which she viewed as a prophecy , that her child would become as famous a cartoonist as Nast . She was also influenced by the essay " How To Born [ sic ] A Genius , " by Russell <unk> , and closely followed his recommendations for diet and " concentration " during her pregnancy . She died of smallpox in 1870 , when Homer was three years old , and on her deathbed asked her husband to give Homer " every opportunity " to become a cartoonist . 
 Young Davenport was given a box of paints as a Christmas gift . At this stage of his youth , as his father later stated , Homer also had " horse on the brain , " and , cooped up inside during the winter of 1870 – 1871 , Timothy told Homer stories of Arab people and their horses . Soon after , at the age of three years and nine months , the boy used his paints to produce an image he called " Arabian horses . " He learned to ride on the family 's pet horse , Old John . Following his mother 's death , both of Davenport 's grandmothers helped raise him . When he was seven , he and his father moved to Silverton — the cartoonist later recounted that the move to the community , about 40 miles ( 64 km ) south of Portland and with a population of 300 at the time , was so he " might live in the Latin Quarter of that village and inhale any artistic atmosphere that was going to waste " . 
 Homer began to study music , and was allowed to help Timothy clerk at the store the elder Davenport purchased when he first moved to Silverton . Timothy required Homer to milk the cows , but otherwise Homer was to " study faces and draw . " He was well @-@ liked by the villagers , but they considered him shiftless — they did not consider drawing to be real work . He exhibited a love of animals , especially fast horses and fighting cocks . Davenport later wrote that his fascination with Arabian horses was reawakened in his adolescent years with his admiration of a picture of an Arabian @-@ type horse found on an empty can of horse liniment . He carefully cleaned the can and kept it as his " only piece of artistic furniture " for many years until forced to leave it behind when he moved to San Francisco . He also played in the community band in his formative years , and with that group young Davenport once traveled as far as Portland . 
 Davenport 's initial jobs were not successful . His first position outside Silverton began when a small circus came to town , and Davenport , in his late teenage years , left with it . He was assigned as a clown and to care for the circus 's small herd of horses , which he also sketched . He became disenchanted with the circus when he was told to brush the elephant 's entire body with linseed oil , a difficult task . He left the tour and tried to succeed as a jockey , despite being tall . Other early positions included clerking in a store , working as a railway fireman , and being a stoker on the Multnomah . Although his work took him from Silverton , for the remainder of his life , Davenport was often melancholy for his native Oregon , and in writing to relatives there , he repeatedly told them not to send him anything that would remind him of Silverton , because he would be plunged into despair . 
 = = Newspaper career = = 
 = = = West Coast years = = = 
 Davenport 's first job in journalism , in 1889 , was drawing for the Portland newspaper , The Oregonian , where he showed a talent for sketching events from memory . He was fired in 1890 , it was said , for poorly drawing a stove for an advertisement — he could not draw buildings and appliances well . By another story , he was let go when there was only work for one in the paper 's engraving department , and he was junior man . He then worked for the Portland Sunday Mercury , traveling to New Orleans for a prizefight in January 1891 between Jack Nonpareil Dempsey of Portland and Bob Fitzsimmons . When he returned , earned money through selling his drawings as postcards . 
 Davenport 's talent came to the attention of C.W. Smith , general manager of the Associated Press , and also Timothy Davenport 's first cousin . Smith got the young cartoonist a free pass on the railroad to San Francisco in 1891 and wrote a letter to the business manager of The San Francisco Examiner , essentially a demand that Davenport be hired . He was ; the Examiner 's business manager had been greatly impressed by doodles that Davenport drew while waiting . At the Examiner , Davenport was not a cartoonist , but a newspaper artist who illustrated articles — the technology to directly reproduce photographs in newspapers was still a few years away . After a year at the Examiner , he was fired ; several stories state that this occurred after he asked for a raise from his meager salary of $ 10 per week . 
 His work , including the New Orleans postcards , had attracted admirers , who , in addition to Smith , helped him to get a job with the San Francisco Chronicle in 1892 . While there , he attracted reader attention for his ability to draw animals . He resigned in April 1893 because he wanted to go to Chicago and see the World 's Columbian Exposition , and his contacts secured him a position with the Chicago Herald . At the Herald , one of his jobs was to illustrate the horse races at Washington Park . He was dismissed from the Herald , and in one account ascribed his dismissal to going every day to visit and sketch the Arabian horses on exhibit at the World 's Fair . However , more likely , the poor economy and the end of the fair caused the Herald to lay him off , and Davenport suggested as much in a 1905 interview . While at the Daily Herald , he married San Francisco 's Daisy Moor , who traveled to Chicago to marry him . 
 Davenport returned to San Francisco and regained his position at the Chronicle . This time , he was allowed to caricature California political figures . By then , William Randolph Hearst owned the Examiner . In his early days as a newspaper tycoon , Hearst followed Davenport 's cartoons in the Chronicle , and when the cartoonist became well known for his satires of figures in the 1894 California gubernatorial campaign , hired him , more than doubling his salary . When a famous horse died and the Examiner lacked an image , Davenport , who had seen the animal the previous year , drew it from memory . Impressed , Hearst purchased the original drawing . Davenport took his responsibilities as political cartoonist seriously , traveling to Sacramento , the state capital , to observe the legislative process and its participants . 
 = = = Transfer to New York Journal = = = 
 Hearst had been successful in California with the Examiner , and sought to expand operations to the nation 's largest city , New York . Several newspapers were available for sale , including The New York Times , but Hearst then lacked the resources to purchase them . In September 1895 , having lost most of its circulation and its advertisers over the past year , Cincinnati publisher John R. McLean made his New York Morning Journal available at a price within Hearst 's means , and he bought it for $ 180 @,@ 000 . Hearst changed the name to the New York Journal and began to assemble what Hearst biographer Ben Procter deemed one of the greatest staffs in newspaper history . Under editor @-@ in @-@ chief Willis J. Abbot , the well paid staff included foreign correspondent Richard Harding Davis , columnist Alfred Henry Lewis , and humorist Bill Nye . Contributors included Mark Twain and Stephen Crane . Davenport was among a number of talented staff on the Examiner whom Hearst transferred to New York and employed on the Journal at a high salary . 
 In 1896 , a presidential election year , Davenport was sent to Washington to meet and study some of the Republican Party 's potential candidates , such as Speaker of the House Thomas B. Reed . Hearst 's Journal was a Democratic paper , and Davenport would be expected to harshly caricature the Republican presidential candidate . The Republicans were anxious to take over the White House from Democrat Grover Cleveland ; they were widely expected to do so , as the Democrats were blamed for the economic Panic of 1893 , which had brought depression to the nation for the past three years . None of the potential Democratic candidates seemed particularly formidable , and the Republican nominee was expected to win in a landslide . 
 Reporters and illustrators on the Journal often worked in pairs . Davenport was teamed with Lewis and the two soon forged a solid relationship . In early 1896 , Lewis went to Ohio to investigate the leading candidate for the Republican presidential nomination , that state 's former governor , William McKinley . To interview the candidate , Lewis was required to undergo an interview himself , with McKinley 's political manager , Cleveland industrialist Mark Hanna . Hanna had set aside his business career to manage McKinley 's campaign , and was paying all expenses for a political machine which helped make McKinley the frontrunner in the Republican race . Lewis got his interview with McKinley , then remained in Ohio , investigating Hanna . In 1893 , Governor McKinley had been called upon to pay the obligations of a friend for whom he had co @-@ signed loans ; Hanna and other McKinley supporters had bought up or paid these debts . Lewis viewed Hanna as controlling McKinley , able to ruin the candidate by calling in the purchased notes . Becoming increasingly outraged by what he deemed as Hanna 's purchase of the Republican nomination , and so likely the presidency , Lewis began to popularize this view in the pages of the Journal . The first Davenport cartoon depicting Hanna appeared soon after . 
 = = = 1896 election and Mark Hanna = = = 
 McKinley , with the exception of his 1893 financial crisis , had avoided scandal and carefully guarded his image , making him difficult to attack . Hanna proved an easier target . Although Davenport had depicted Hanna in his cartoons before the Republican convention in June , these efforts were uninspired . This changed once Davenport got a look at his subject while attending the 1896 Republican National Convention in St. Louis . After three days spent closely observing Hanna managing the convention to secure McKinley 's nomination and passage of a platform supporting the gold standard , Davenport was impressed with Hanna 's dynamic behavior . Convinced that he could effectively lampoon Hanna , Davenport 's cartoons became more effective . Hanna was a tall man ; Davenport exaggerated this trait , in part by shrinking everybody else . He also increased Hanna 's already substantial girth . Hanna 's short sideburns were lengthened and made rougher — Davenport described them as " like an <unk> cedar board " . Davenport borrowed from the animal kingdom for his creation , drawing Hanna 's ears so they stuck out like a monkey 's . The cartoonist described Hanna 's eyes as like a parrot 's , leaving no movement unseen , or as those of a circus elephant — scanning the street for peanuts . 
 The resultant caricature of Hanna was given props such as moneybags and laborer 's skulls to rest his feet upon , as well as cufflinks engraved with the dollar sign to wear with his plaid businessman 's suits . He was often accompanied by William McKinley , usually drawn as a shrunken though dignified figure dominated by the giant Hanna . Even so , Davenport felt the figure seemed to lack something until the cartoonist took the dollar signs from the cufflink and placed them inside every check of the cartoon Hanna 's suit . Davenport likely acted at the suggestion of his cartoonist colleague at the Journal , M. de Lipman , who had depicted McKinley as Buddha in a loincloth with Hanna as his attendant , robes ablaze with an array of dollar signs . According to Hearst biographer Kenneth Whyte , " whatever its origins , Davenport 's ' plutocratic plaid ' , as it became known , was an instant hit . " 
 In July 1896 , the Democrats nominated former Nebraska congressman William Jennings Bryan for president . Bryan had electrified the Democratic National Convention with his Cross of Gold speech . Bryan was an eloquent supporter of " free silver " , a policy which would inflate the currency by allowing silver bullion to be submitted by the public and converted into coins even though the intrinsic value of a silver dollar was about half its stated value . Bryan 's candidacy divided the Democratic Party and its supporters , and caused many normally Democratic papers to abandon him . Hearst called a meeting of his senior staff to decide the Journal 's policy . Though few favored the Democrat , Hearst decided , " <unk> the guns ; we are going to fight for Bryan . " 
 Davenport 's cartoons had an effect on Hanna . West Virginia Senator Nathan B. Scott remembered being with Hanna as he viewed his caricature wearing a suit covered with dollar signs , trampling women and children underfoot , and hearing the Ohioan state , " that hurts " . Hanna could not make public appearances without having to field questions about the cartoons . Nevertheless , publisher J.B. Morrow , a friend of both McKinley and his campaign manager , stated that Hanna " took his course regardless of local criticism " . McKinley made no attempt to deflect criticism from Hanna and in fact kept a file of Davenport cartoons that particularly amused him . Despite Hanna 's discomfiture , both men were content to have Hanna attacked if it meant that McKinley would not be . 
 Most of the cartoons Davenport drew during the 1896 campaign were simple in execution and somber in mood . One , for example , depicts Hanna walking down Wall Street , bags of money in each hand and a grin on his face . Another shows only Hanna 's hand and wrist — and McKinley dangling from his fob chain . One that is intended to be funny depicts McKinley as a small boy accompanied by Hanna as nursemaid ; McKinley tugs at Hanna 's skirts , wanting to go into a shop where the labor vote is for sale . Another shows Hanna wearing a Napoleon hat ( McKinley was said to resemble the late emperor ) , raising a mask of McKinley 's face to his own . 
 Davenport 's cartoons ran a few times per week in the Journal , generally on an inside page . They were , however , widely reprinted — including in Bryan 's campaign materials — and according to Whyte , " nothing in any paper came close to matching their impact [ on the presidential race ] " . Hanna biographer William T. Horner noted , " Davenport 's image of Hanna in a suit covered with dollar signs remains an iconic view of the man to this day " . 
 Despite great public excitement after his nomination , Bryan was unable to overcome his disadvantages in financing , organization , lack of party unity , and public mistrust of the Democrats , and he was defeated in the November election . A few days after the election , Davenport went to Republican headquarters in New York to be formally introduced to the man he had so sharply characterized . As witnesses such as Vice President @-@ elect Garret Hobart came in to see the good @-@ humored proceedings , Hanna told Davenport , " I admire your genius and execution , but damn your conception . " 
 With the 1896 campaign over , a reporter asked Davenport in February 1897 who would replace Hanna as a special subject of his cartoons , and Davenport replied , " Hanna is by no means out of the way . He will probably continue a good subject for some time . " Hanna , having declined the position of Postmaster General , secured appointment to the Senate when McKinley made Ohio 's aging senior senator , John Sherman , his Secretary of State . Until 1913 , state legislatures , not the people , elected senators , and so Hanna had to seek election to a full term when the Ohio General Assembly met in January 1898 . Hanna campaigned in the 1897 legislative election , and was elected to the Senate in his own right the following January , in a very close vote . Davenport drew cartoons against Hanna in the senatorial race . Nevertheless , when he attended the legislature 's meeting in Columbus , he wore a Hanna button , and seemed happy after Hanna 's triumph . When asked why , he replied , " that insures me six more years at him , and he 's a good subject " . 
 = = = 1897 to 1901 = = = 
 The 1896 campaign made Davenport famous and well paid , earning $ 12 @,@ 000 per year , the highest compensation of any cartoonist of his time . Hearst , who had lost a fortune but who had established the Journal as one of New York 's most influential newspapers , also gave him a $ 3 @,@ 000 bonus with which to take a trip to Europe with Daisy . In London , Davenport interviewed and drew the elderly former prime minister , William Gladstone . In Venice , he came upon a large statue of Samson . He was impressed by the large muscles of the work , and immediately conceived of it as representing America 's powerful corporate trusts , the status of which was then a major political issue . A large , powerful , grass @-@ skirted figure representing the trusts would be seen with McKinley and Hanna in Davenport 's cartoons during the President 's re @-@ election bid in 1900 . 
 In 1897 , Davenport was sent to Carson City , Nevada , to cover the heavyweight championship fight between boxers Bob Fitzsimmons and Jim Corbett , a match heavily promoted by the Journal . Fitzsimmons won . Davenport traveled to Nevada by way of Silverton , visiting there for the first time since becoming famous . The following year , Davenport went to Asbury Park , New Jersey , to watch Corbett in training . Davenport both interviewed him and made several drawings which the Journal published , including one of cartoonist and boxer sparring . 
 Davenport 's drawings left few public figures unscathed ; he even caricatured himself and his boss , Hearst . Ultimately , Davenport 's work became so well recognized for skewering political figures he considered corrupt , that in 1897 his opponents attempted to pass a law banning political cartoons in New York . The bill , introduced in the state legislature with the prodding of U.S. Senator Thomas C. Platt , ( R @-@ NY ) , did not pass , but the effort inspired Davenport to create one of his most famous works : " No Honest Man Need Fear Cartoons . " 
 In 1897 and into 1898 , the Hearst papers pounded a drumbeat for war with Spain . Davenport drew cartoons depicting President McKinley as cowardly and unwilling to go to war because it might harm Wall Street . Once the Spanish – American War was under way , one of the American war heroes was Admiral George Dewey , victor at the Battle of Manila Bay , who was welcomed home in 1899 with celebrations and the gift of a house . The admiral promptly deeded the residence over to his newlywed wife , a Catholic , turning public opinion ( especially among Protestants ) against him . However , resentment eased after Davenport depicted Dewey on his bridge during the battle , with the caption , " Lest we forget " . 
 In 1899 , Davenport returned to Europe , covering the Dreyfus case in Rennes . In 1900 , the presidential election again featured McKinley defeating Bryan , and again featured Davenport , reprising his depictions of Hanna , this time aided by the giant figure of the trusts . Also a subject of Hearst 's cartoonists was McKinley 's running mate , war hero and New York Governor Theodore Roosevelt , presented as a child with a Rough Rider 's outfit and little self @-@ control . 
 = = = 1901 to 1912 = = = 
 The Journal was renamed the American in 1901 . Davenport continued there until 1904 , eventually earning $ 25 @,@ 000 per year , a very large salary at the time . Following Hearst 's policy , he relentlessly attacked President Roosevelt , who had succeeded the assassinated McKinley in September 1901 . Davenport both <unk> and wrote for the American ; one column mockingly alleged that the new President had hidden all portraits of previous presidents in the White House basement , with the visitor left to view a large portrait of Roosevelt as well @-@ armed Rough Rider . 
 Nevertheless , the Republicans wooed Davenport , seeking to deprive the Democrats of one of their weapons , and eventually President and cartoonist met . In 1904 , Davenport left the American for the New York Evening Mail , a Republican paper , to be paid $ 25 @,@ 000 for the final six months of 1904 ( most likely paid by the party 's backers ) and an undisclosed salary after that . The 1904 presidential campaign featured Roosevelt , seeking a full term in his own right , against the Democratic candidate , Judge Alton B. Parker of New York . Again Davenport affected the campaign , this time with a cartoon of Uncle Sam with his hand on Roosevelt 's shoulder , " He 's good enough for me " . The Republicans spent $ 200 @,@ 000 reproducing it ; the image was used as cover art on sheet music for marches written in support of Roosevelt . 
 Although Davenport continued at the Evening Mail after Roosevelt was elected , the quality of his work declined ; fewer and fewer of his images were selected for inclusion in Albert Shaw 's Review of Reviews . He also began to devote large periods to other activities ; in 1905 , he spent months in his home state of Oregon , first visiting Silverton and then showing , at Portland 's Lewis and Clark Exposition , the animals he bred . 
 Beginning in 1905 , Davenport traveled on the <unk> lecture circuit , giving engaging talks , during which he sketched on stage . He sometimes appeared on the same program as Bryan , though on different days , and like him drew thousands of listeners . In 1906 , he traveled to the Middle East to purchase Arabian horses from their native land , and then wrote a book about his experiences . Davenport authored an autobiographical book , The Diary of a Country Boy , and collections of his cartoons , including The Dollar or the Man and Cartoons by Davenport . Apparently as a joke , Davenport once included The Belle ( or sometimes , Bell ) of Silverton and Other Oregon Stories in a list of his publications , and reference books for years listed it among his works . A book of that name did not exist , however . Some speculate that this was an early working title for The Country Boy . 
 Davenport 's marriage had failed by 1909 , and he suffered a breakdown that year , related to his ongoing divorce case . As he recovered , he announced a forthcoming series to be available for license to newspapers , " Men I have sketched " . This project was aborted when , in 1911 , Davenport was invited by Hearst to return to the American . He was on assignment for the American on April 19 , 1912 , when he met the RMS Carpathia at the docks in New York to draw the survivors of the RMS Titanic . He drew three cartoons , but upon leaving his office was in a " highly nervous state " . That evening he fell ill at the apartment of a friend , Mrs. William Cochran , a medium and spiritualist . Diagnosed with pneumonia , he died in her home two weeks later , on May 2 , 1912 . Hearst paid for eight doctors to treat Davenport , and later for an elaborate funeral — the publisher had Davenport 's body returned to his beloved Silverton for burial . Addison Bennett of The Oregonian wrote , " Yes , Homer has come home for the last time , home to wander again never " . 
 = = Arabian horse breeder = = 
 In addition to his cartooning , Davenport is remembered for playing a key role in bringing some of the earliest desertbred or <unk> Arabian horses to America . A longtime admirer of horses , Davenport stated in 1905 , " I have dreamed of Arabian horses all my life . " He had been captivated by the beauty of the Arabians brought to the Chicago Columbian Exposition in 1893 . Upon learning that these horses had remained in America and had been sold at auction , he sought them out , finding most of the surviving animals in 1898 in the hands of millionaire fertilizer magnate Peter Bradley of Hingham , Massachusetts . Davenport bought some Arabian horses outright between 1898 and 1905 , paying $ 8 @,@ 500 for one stallion , but he later partnered with Bradley in the horse business . Among his purchases , he managed to gather all but one of the surviving horses that had been a part of the Chicago Exhibition . 
 = = = Desert journey = = = 
 In 1906 , Davenport , with Bradley 's financial backing , used his political connections , particularly those with President Theodore Roosevelt , to obtain the diplomatic permissions required to travel into the lands controlled by the Ottoman Empire . Roosevelt himself was interested in breeding quality cavalry horses , had tried but failed to get Congress to fund a government cavalry stud farm , and considered Arabian blood useful for army horses . Davenport originally intended to travel alone , but was soon joined by two young associates anxious for an adventure in the Middle East : C.A. " Arthur " Moore , Jr . , and John H. " Jack " Thompson , Jr . He traveled throughout what today is Syria and Lebanon , and successfully brought 27 horses to America . 
 To travel to the Middle East and purchase horses , Davenport needed to obtain diplomatic permission from the government of the Ottoman Empire , and specifically from Sultan Abdul Hamid II . In December 1905 , Davenport approached President Roosevelt for help , and in January 1906 , Roosevelt provided him a letter of support that he was able to present to the Turkish Ambassador to the United States , <unk> Bey , who contacted the Sultan . To the surprise of both Davenport and the Ambassador , the permit , called an <unk> , was granted , allowing the export of " six or eight " horses . Davenport and his traveling companions left the United States on July 5 , 1906 , traveling to France by ship and from there to Constantinople by train . Upon arrival , the <unk> was authenticated , and clarified that Davenport would be allowed to export both mares and stallions . Davenport 's accomplishment was notable for several reasons . It was the first time Arabian horses officially had been allowed to be exported from the Ottoman Empire in 35 years . It was also notable that Davenport not only was able to purchase stallions , which were often available for sale to outsiders , but also mares , which were treasured by the Bedouin ; the best war mares generally were not for sale at any price . 
 Before Davenport left Constantinople to travel to Aleppo and then into the desert , he visited the royal stables , and also took advantage of an opportunity to view the Sultan during a public appearance . He displayed his artistic ability and talent for detail by sketching several portraits of Abdul Hamid II from memory about a half @-@ hour after observing him , as Davenport believed the ruler unwilling to have his image drawn . Davenport 's personal impression of the Sultan was sympathetic , viewing him as a frail , elderly man burdened by the weight of his office but kind and fatherly to his children . Davenport compared his appearance as a melding of the late congressman from Maine , Nelson Dingley , with merchant and philanthropist Nathan Straus , commenting of the Sultan , " I thought ... that no matter what crimes had been charged to him , his expressionless soldiers , his army and its leaders were possibly more to blame than he . " Believing that he needed to keep his sketches a secret , he carried the sketch book in a hidden pocket throughout his journey , and at customs smuggled it onto the steamer home hidden inside a bale of hay . 
 One reason for Davenport 's success in obtaining high @-@ quality , pure @-@ blooded Arabian horses was his ( possibly accidental ) decision to breach protocol and visit <unk> Haffez , a Bedouin who served as a liaison between the Ottoman government and the tribal people of the Anazeh , before calling upon the Governor of Syria , Nazim Pasha . Haffez considered the timing of Davenport 's visit a great honor , and gave Davenport his finest mare , a war mare named * <unk> . Not to be outdone , the Pasha gave Davenport the stallion * Haleb , who was a well @-@ respected sire throughout the region , known as the " Pride of the Desert . " Haleb had been given to the Pasha as a reward for keeping the camel tax low . Haffez then personally escorted Davenport into the desert , and at one point in the journey the two men took an oath of brotherhood . Haffez helped arrange for the best @-@ quality horses to be presented , negotiated fair prices , and verified that their pedigrees were <unk> . Davenport chronicled this journey in his 1908 book , My Quest of the Arabian Horse . 
 The impact of the 17 stallions and 10 mares purchased by Davenport was of major importance to the Arabian horse breed in America . While what are now called " Davenport " bloodlines can be found in thousands of Arabian horse pedigrees , there are also some preservation breeders whose horses have bloodlines that are entirely descended from the horses he imported . Davenport 's efforts , as well as those of his successors , allowed the Arabian horse in America to be bred with authentic Arabian type and pure bloodlines . 
 = = = Arabians in America = = = 
 Upon his return to America , his newly imported horses became part of his Davenport Desert Arabian Stud in Morris Plains , New Jersey . By 1908 , however , the Davenport Desert Arabian Stud was listed in the Arabian Stud Book as located in Hingham , Massachusetts , and he remained closely affiliated with Bradley 's Hingham Stock Farm , which became the sole owner of the horses after Davenport 's death in 1912 . In 1908 , Davenport became one of the five incorporators of the Arabian Horse Club of America ( now the Arabian Horse Association ) . The United States Department of Agriculture ( USDA ) recognized the organization as the official registry for Arabian horses in 1909 . Prior to that time , the Thoroughbred stud books of both the United Kingdom and the United States also handled the registration of Arabian horses . The reason a new organization , separate from the American Jockey Club , was needed to register Arabians came about largely because of Davenport . He had meticulously sought horses with pure bloodlines and known breeding strains with the expert assistance of Haffez , but once out of the desert , he was not aware that he also needed to obtain written affidavits and other paperwork to document their bloodlines . Additionally , because his Arabians were not shipped via Britain , they were not certified by the United Kingdom 's Jockey Club before arriving in America , and without that authentication , the American Jockey Club refused to register his imported horses . Another factor may have influenced the organization 's stance : in a cartoon , Davenport had satirized Jockey Club President August Belmont . 
 Haleb in particular became widely admired by American breeders , and in addition to siring Arabians , he was also crossed with Morgan and Standardbred mares . In 1907 , Davenport entered the stallion into the Justin Morgan Cup , a horse show competition he won , defeating 19 Morgan horses . In 1909 , Haleb died under mysterious circumstances . Davenport believed the horse had been poisoned . He had the stallion 's skull and partial skeleton prepared and sent to the Smithsonian Institution , where it became part of the museum 's research collection . Davenport also purchased horses from the Crabbet Park Stud in England , notably the stallion * Abu Zeyd , considered the best son of his famous sire , <unk> . In 1911 , Davenport described * Abu Zeyd as " the grandest specimen of the Arabian horse I have ever seen and I will give a $ 100 cup to the owner of any horse than can beat him . " 
 Upon Davenport 's death , a significant number of his horses were obtained by W.R. Brown and his brother Herbert , where they became the foundation bloodstock for Brown 's Maynesboro Stud of Berlin , New Hampshire . Included in the purchase was * Abu Zeyd . The Maynesboro stud also acquired 10 mares from the Davenport estate . 
 = = Personal life and other interests = = 
 Davenport married Daisy Moor of San Francisco , who traveled to Chicago while the artist was working there , and the couple wed on September 7 , 1893 . They had three children : Homer Clyde , born 1896 ; Mildred , born 1899 ; and Gloria Ward , born 1904 . While living in a New York apartment between 1895 and 1901 not much is known of the Davenport home life except that the furnishings were luxurious . By 1901 , Davenport had bought both a house in East Orange , New Jersey , and a farm in Morris Plains , New Jersey . He kept many of the animals he collected and bred , including pheasants and horses , at East Orange , but decided to move both animals and himself to Morris Plains , and take the rail line dubbed the " Millionaire 's Special " to work in New York . He moved away from East Orange in 1906 , though he still owned the house as late as 1909 . In Morris Plains , the Davenports hosted large parties attended by celebrities , artists , writers , and other influential people of the day , including Ambrose Bierce , Lillian Russell , Thomas Edison , William Jennings Bryan , Buffalo Bill Cody , Frederick Remington , and the <unk> girls . Instead of using a regular guestbook , Davenport would have his guests sign the clapboard siding of his home to commemorate their visits . 
 Davenport bred various animals . " I was born with a love of horses and for all animals that do not hurt anything ... I feel happiest when I am with these birds and animals , " he said , " I am a part of them without anything to explain . " His understanding of the dynamics of purebred animal breeding was that deviation from the original , useful type led to degeneration of a breed . While best known as a horse breeder , he also raised pheasants — including exotic varieties from the Himalayas — and other breeds of birds . By 1905 he started a pheasant farm on his property in Morris Plains , gathering the birds he had kept on the west coast , and buying others from overseas using the profits from his first published book of cartoons . As of 1908 he owned the largest private collection of pheasants and wild waterfowl in America . At various times , his menagerie also contained angora goats , Persian fat @-@ tailed sheep , Sicilian donkeys , and Chinese ducks . Three times , he built up collections of cockfighting roosters , once selling them to finance his start the first time he lived and worked in San Francisco . 
 In addition to his interest in horses and birds , Davenport was also fond of dogs , notably a bull terrier named Duff , obtained as a puppy . Davenport taught Duff to do tricks and profited by loaning the dog to perform in vaudeville acts . In 1908 , Davenport involved himself in a controversy over the breeding of show @-@ quality dogs , stating that he thought breeding solely for show purposes was creating an animal that was of inferior quality . He targeted certain popular breeders of purebred collies as producing animals that had less intelligence , were of poor temperament , and lacked utility . He pointedly named famous breeders whom he felt were making particularly poor decisions . 
 The Davenport marriage did not last ; Daisy did not share many of her husband 's interests and intensely disliked Silverton . In 1909 they separated , and the parting was acrimonious . Homer initially returned to New York to live , but soon suffered a breakdown ; he spent months recuperating in a resort hotel in San Diego , California , at the expense of his friend , sporting goods mogul Albert Spalding . Though he deeded his two properties over to Daisy , she sued for alimony , and had Homer held in contempt by a New York court for failure to pay support when he was not working . He returned to New York and obtained a new stock farm at Holmdel , New Jersey , in 1910 . Though his father died in 1911 , he began to pull his life together and returned to cartooning . He met a new companion , referred to in his papers only as " <unk> " , whom he intended to marry once his divorce case was concluded . However , he died before his scheduled August 1912 trial date . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Davenport 's cartoons have had a lasting impact on the public image of Mark Hanna , both on how he was perceived at the time and on how he is remembered today . Early Hanna biographer Herbert Croly , writing in 1912 , the year Davenport died , deemed his subject portrayed as a " monster " by the " powerful but brutal caricatures of Homer Davenport " . According to Horner , the portrayal of Hanna that has stood the test of time is one that depicts him " side by side with a gigantic figure representing the trusts , and a tiny , childlike , William McKinley . He will forever be known as " Dollar Mark " , thanks to Homer Davenport and many other columnists who drew him as a malevolent presence . McKinley biographer Margaret Leech regretted Davenport 's effect on the former president 's image : " the representation of McKinley as pitiable and victimized was a poor service to his reputation . The graphic impression of his spineless subservience to Hanna would long outlive the lies of [ Journal columnist ] Alfred Henry Lewis . " 
 According to Davenport 's biographers , Leland Huot and Alfred Powers , his Arabian horses " were to perpetuate his fame on and on into future years more than his political cartoons , so that in ten thousand stables today he is known as having been a great , great man " . Today , the term " CMK " , meaning " Crabbet / Maynesboro / Kellogg " , is a label for specific lines of " Domestic " or " American @-@ bred " Arabian horses . It describes the descendants of horses imported to America from the desert or from Crabbet Park Stud in the late 1800s and early 1900s then bred on in the US by the Hamidie Society , Randolph Huntington , Spencer Borden , Davenport , W.R. Brown 's Maynesboro Stud , W. K. Kellogg , Hearst 's San Simeon Stud , and " General " J. M. Dickinson 's Traveler 's Rest Stud . 
 Silverton , Oregon , gives tribute to Davenport during its annual Homer Davenport Community Festival , held annually in August . The festival began in 1980 . 
 = = Books = = 
 In addition to his newspaper cartoons and postcards , Davenport wrote or provided illustrations for the following books : 
 Davenport , Homer C. ( 1898 ) . Cartoons by Homer Davenport . New York : De Witt Publishing House . OCLC <unk> . 
 Republished : Davenport , Homer C. ; Gus Frederick ( 2006 ) . Cartoons by Davenport – Annotated Re @-@ Issue . Silverton , Oregon : Heron Graphics . 
 Traubel , Horace l . ; H. Davenport ( 1900 ) . The Dollar or The Man ? The Issue of the Day . Boston : Small , Maynard and Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Richardson , T.D. ; Davenport , Homer ( 1901 ) . Wall Street by the back door . New York : Wall Street Library Publishing Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Davenport , Homer C. ( 1949 ) [ 1909 ] . My Quest of the Arabian Horse . New York : B.W. Dodge and Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Republished by The Arabian Horse Club of America , Best Publishing , Boulder , Colorado , <unk> : <unk> 
 Davenport , Homer C. ( 1910 ) . The country boy ; the story of his own early life . New York : G.W. Dillingham Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 Davenport , Homer ; Daniel , Dan ( n.d. ) . Play Ball ! ! ! . New York : Bowne & Co . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Methamphetamine = 
 Methamphetamine ( contracted from N @-@ <unk> ) is a strong central nervous system ( CNS ) stimulant that is mainly used as a recreational drug and less commonly as a treatment for attention deficit hyperactivity disorder and obesity . Methamphetamine was discovered in 1893 and exists as two enantiomers : <unk> @-@ methamphetamine and <unk> @-@ methamphetamine . Methamphetamine properly refers to a specific chemical , the racemic free base , which is an equal mixture of levomethamphetamine and dextromethamphetamine in their pure amine forms . It is rarely prescribed due to concerns involving human neurotoxicity and potential for recreational use as an aphrodisiac and euphoriant , among other concerns , as well as the availability of safer substitute drugs with comparable treatment efficacy . <unk> is a much stronger CNS stimulant than levomethamphetamine . Both enantiomers are neurotoxic and addictive . 
 Both methamphetamine and dextromethamphetamine are illicitly trafficked and sold owing to their potential for recreational use . The highest prevalence of illegal methamphetamine use occurs in parts of Asia , Oceania , and in the United States , where racemic methamphetamine , levomethamphetamine , and dextromethamphetamine are classified as schedule II controlled substances . <unk> is available as an over @-@ the @-@ counter ( OTC ) drug for use as an inhaled nasal decongestant in the United States . Internationally , the production , distribution , sale , and possession of methamphetamine is restricted or banned in many countries , due to its placement in schedule II of the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances treaty . While dextromethamphetamine is a more potent drug , racemic methamphetamine is sometimes illicitly produced due to the relative ease of synthesis and limited availability of chemical precursors . 
 In low doses , methamphetamine can elevate mood , increase alertness , concentration and energy in fatigued individuals , reduce appetite and promote ( initial ) weight loss . At higher doses , it can induce psychosis , breakdown of skeletal muscle , seizures and bleeding in the brain . Chronic high @-@ dose use can precipitate unpredictable and rapid mood swings , prominent delusions and violent behavior . <unk> , methamphetamine 's ability to increase energy has been reported to lift mood and increase sexual desire to such an extent that users are able to engage in sexual activity continuously for several days . Methamphetamine is known to have a high addiction liability ( i.e. compulsive methamphetamine use ) and dependence liability ( i.e. withdrawal symptoms occur when methamphetamine use ceases ) . Heavy recreational use of methamphetamine may lead to a post @-@ acute @-@ withdrawal syndrome , which can persist for months beyond the typical withdrawal period . Unlike amphetamine , methamphetamine is neurotoxic to humans , damaging both dopamine and serotonin neurons in the CNS . This damage includes adverse changes in brain structure and function , such as reductions in grey matter volume in several brain regions and adverse changes in markers of metabolic integrity . 
 Methamphetamine belongs to the substituted phenethylamine and substituted amphetamine chemical classes . It is related to the other <unk> as a positional isomer of these compounds , which share the common chemical formula : <unk> . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Medical = = = 
 In the United States , methamphetamine hydrochloride , under the trade name Desoxyn , has been approved by the FDA for treating ADHD and obesity in both adults and children ; however , the FDA also indicates that the limited therapeutic usefulness of methamphetamine should be weighed against the inherent risks associated with its use . Methamphetamine is sometimes prescribed off label for narcolepsy and idiopathic hypersomnia . In the United States , methamphetamine 's <unk> form is available in some over @-@ the @-@ counter ( OTC ) nasal decongestant products . 
 As methamphetamine is associated with a high potential for misuse , the drug is regulated under the Controlled Substances Act and is listed under schedule II in the United States . Methamphetamine hydrochloride dispensed in the United States is required to include a boxed warning regarding its potential for recreational misuse and addiction liability . 
 = = = Recreational = = = 
 Methamphetamine is often used recreationally for its effects as a potent euphoriant and stimulant as well as aphrodisiac qualities . According to a National Geographic TV documentary on methamphetamine , " an entire subculture known as party and play is based around methamphetamine use " . Members of this San Francisco sub @-@ culture , which consists almost entirely of gay male methamphetamine users , will typically meet up through internet dating sites and have sex . Due to its strong stimulant and aphrodisiac effects and inhibitory effect on ejaculation , with repeated use , these sexual encounters will sometimes occur continuously for several days on end . The crash following the use of methamphetamine in this manner is very often severe , with marked hypersomnia ( excessive daytime sleepiness ) . Methamphetamine use has also been noted among men having sex with men in New York City . 
 = = Contraindications = = 
 Methamphetamine is contraindicated in individuals with a history of substance use disorder , heart disease , or severe agitation or anxiety , or in individuals currently experiencing arteriosclerosis , glaucoma , hyperthyroidism , or severe hypertension . The USFDA states that individuals who have experienced hypersensitivity reactions to other stimulants in the past or are currently taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors should not take methamphetamine . The USFDA also advises individuals with bipolar disorder , depression , elevated blood pressure , liver or kidney problems , mania , psychosis , Raynaud 's phenomenon , seizures , thyroid problems , tics , or Tourette syndrome to monitor their symptoms while taking methamphetamine . Due to the potential for stunted growth , the USFDA advises monitoring the height and weight of growing children and adolescents during treatment . 
 = = Side effects = = 
 = = = Physical = = = 
 The physical effects of methamphetamine can include loss of appetite , hyperactivity , dilated pupils , flushed skin , excessive sweating , increased movement , dry mouth and teeth grinding ( leading to " meth mouth " ) , headache , irregular heartbeat ( usually as accelerated heartbeat or slowed heartbeat ) , rapid breathing , high blood pressure , low blood pressure , high body temperature , diarrhea , constipation , blurred vision , dizziness , twitching , numbness , tremors , dry skin , acne , and pale appearance . Methamphetamine that is present in a mother 's bloodstream can pass through the placenta to a fetus and can also be secreted into breast milk . Infants born to methamphetamine @-@ abusing mothers were found to have a significantly smaller gestational age @-@ adjusted head circumference and birth weight measurements . Methamphetamine exposure was also associated with neonatal withdrawal symptoms of agitation , vomiting and fast breathing . This withdrawal syndrome is relatively mild and only requires medical intervention in approximately 4 % of cases . 
 = = = = Meth mouth = = = = 
 Methamphetamine users and addicts may lose their teeth abnormally quickly , regardless of the route of administration , from a condition informally known as meth mouth . The condition is generally most severe in users who inject the drug , rather than swallow , smoke , or inhale it . According to the American Dental Association , meth mouth " is probably caused by a combination of drug @-@ induced psychological and physiological changes resulting in xerostomia ( dry mouth ) , extended periods of poor oral hygiene , frequent consumption of high @-@ calorie , carbonated beverages and bruxism ( teeth grinding and clenching ) " . As dry mouth is also a common side effect of other stimulants , which are not known to contribute severe tooth decay , many researchers suggest that methamphetamine associated tooth decay is more due to users ' other choices . They suggest the side effect has been exaggerated and stylized to create a stereotype of current users to deter new ones . 
 = = = = Sexually transmitted infection = = = = 
 Methamphetamine use was found to be related to higher frequencies of unprotected sexual intercourse in both HIV @-@ positive and unknown casual partners , an association more pronounced in HIV @-@ positive participants . These findings suggest that methamphetamine use and engagement in unprotected anal intercourse are co @-@ occurring risk behaviors , behaviors that potentially heighten the risk of HIV transmission among gay and bisexual men . Methamphetamine use allows users of both sexes to engage in prolonged sexual activity , which may cause genital sores and abrasions as well as priapism in men . Methamphetamine may also cause sores and abrasions in the mouth via bruxism , increasing the risk of sexually transmitted infection . 
 Besides the sexual transmission of HIV , it may also be transmitted between users who share a common needle . The level of needle sharing among methamphetamine users is similar to that among other drug injection users . 
 = = = Psychological = = = 
 The psychological effects of methamphetamine can include euphoria , dysphoria , changes in libido , alertness , apprehension and concentration , decreased sense of fatigue , insomnia or wakefulness , self @-@ confidence , sociability , irritability , restlessness , grandiosity and repetitive and obsessive behaviors . Methamphetamine use also has a high association with anxiety , depression , amphetamine psychosis , suicide , and violent behaviors . 
 = = = Neurotoxicity and <unk> response = = = 
 Unlike amphetamine , methamphetamine is directly neurotoxic to dopamine neurons in both lab animals and humans . Moreover , methamphetamine neurotoxicity is associated with an increased risk of Parkinson 's disease , an effect which partially arises through excessive cytosolic and synaptic production of reactive oxygen species and autoxidation of dopamine . In addition to dopaminergic neurotoxicity , a review of evidence in humans also indicated that high @-@ dose methamphetamine use can be neurotoxic to serotonin neurons . It has been demonstrated that a high core temperature is correlated with an increase in the neurotoxic effects of methamphetamine . As a result of methamphetamine @-@ induced neurotoxicity to dopamine neurons , chronic use may also lead to post @-@ acute withdrawal which persists months beyond the typical withdrawal period . 
 Magnetic resonance imaging studies on human methamphetamine users have also found evidence of neurodegeneration , or adverse <unk> changes in brain structure and function . In particular , methamphetamine appears to cause <unk> and hypertrophy of white matter , marked shrinkage of hippocampi , and reduced gray matter in the cingulate cortex , limbic cortex , and <unk> cortex in recreational methamphetamine users . Moreover , evidence suggests that adverse changes in the level of biomarkers of metabolic integrity and synthesis occur in recreational users , such as a reduction in N @-@ <unk> and creatine levels and elevated levels of choline and <unk> . 
 Methamphetamine has been shown to activate TAAR1 in human astrocytes and generate cAMP as a result . Activation of astrocyte @-@ localized TAAR1 appears to function as a mechanism by which methamphetamine attenuates membrane @-@ bound <unk> ( <unk> ) levels and function in these cells . 
 = = Overdose = = 
 A methamphetamine overdose may result in a wide range of symptoms . A moderate overdose of methamphetamine may induce symptoms such as : abnormal heart rhythm , confusion , difficult and / or painful urination , high or low blood pressure , high body temperature , over @-@ active and / or over @-@ responsive reflexes , muscle aches , severe agitation , rapid breathing , tremor , urinary hesitancy , and an inability to pass urine . An extremely large overdose may produce symptoms such as adrenergic storm , methamphetamine psychosis , substantially reduced or no urine output , cardiogenic shock , bleeding in the brain , circulatory collapse , dangerously high body temperature , pulmonary hypertension , kidney failure , rapid muscle breakdown , serotonin syndrome , and a form of stereotypy ( " tweaking " ) . A methamphetamine overdose will likely also result in mild brain damage due to dopaminergic and serotonergic neurotoxicity . Death from methamphetamine poisoning is typically preceded by convulsions and coma . 
 = = = Psychosis = = = 
 Abuse of methamphetamine can result in a stimulant psychosis which may present with a variety of symptoms ( e.g. paranoia , hallucinations , delirium , delusions ) . A Cochrane Collaboration review on treatment for amphetamine , dextroamphetamine , and methamphetamine abuse @-@ induced psychosis states that about 5 – 15 % of users fail to recover completely . The same review asserts that , based upon at least one trial , antipsychotic medications effectively resolve the symptoms of acute amphetamine psychosis . Amphetamine psychosis may also develop occasionally as a treatment @-@ emergent side effect . 
 = = = Emergency treatment = = = 
 The USFDA states that acute methamphetamine intoxication is largely managed by treating the symptoms and treatments may initially include administration of activated charcoal and sedation . There is not enough evidence on hemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis in cases of methamphetamine intoxication to determine their usefulness . Forced acid diuresis ( e.g. , with vitamin C ) will increase methamphetamine excretion but is not recommended as it may increase the risk of aggravating acidosis , or cause seizures or rhabdomyolysis . Hypertension presents a risk for intracranial hemorrhage and , if severe , is typically treated with intravenous <unk> or nitroprusside . Blood pressure often drops gradually following sufficient sedation with a benzodiazepine and providing a calming environment . 
 Antipsychotics such as haloperidol are useful in treating agitation and psychosis from methamphetamine overdose . Beta blockers with lipophilic properties and CNS penetration such as metoprolol and <unk> may be useful for treating CNS and cardiovascular toxicity . The mixed alpha- and beta @-@ blocker <unk> is especially useful for treatment of concomitant tachycardia and hypertension induced by methamphetamine . The phenomenon of " unopposed alpha stimulation " has not been reported with the use of beta @-@ blockers for treatment of methamphetamine toxicity . 
 = = = Addiction = = = 
 Current models of addiction from chronic drug use involve alterations in gene expression in certain parts of the brain , particularly the nucleus accumbens . The most important transcription factors that produce these alterations are ΔFosB , cAMP response element binding protein ( CREB ) , and nuclear factor kappa B ( <unk> ) . ΔFosB plays a crucial role in the development of drug addictions , since its overexpression in D1 @-@ type medium spiny neurons in the nucleus accumbens is necessary and sufficient for most of the behavioral and neural adaptations that arise from addiction . Once ΔFosB is sufficiently overexpressed , it induces an addictive state that becomes increasingly more severe with further increases in ΔFosB expression . It has been implicated in addictions to alcohol , cannabinoids , cocaine , methylphenidate , nicotine , opioids , phencyclidine , propofol , and substituted amphetamines , among others . 
 ΔJunD , a transcription factor , and G9a , a histone methyltransferase enzyme , both directly oppose the induction of ΔFosB in the nucleus accumbens ( i.e. , they oppose increases in its expression ) . Sufficiently overexpressing ΔJunD in the nucleus accumbens with viral vectors can completely block many of the neural and behavioral alterations seen in chronic drug abuse ( i.e. , the alterations mediated by ΔFosB ) . ΔFosB also plays an important role in regulating behavioral responses to natural rewards , such as palatable food , sex , and exercise . Since both natural rewards and addictive drugs induce expression of ΔFosB ( i.e. , they cause the brain to produce more of it ) , chronic acquisition of these rewards can result in a similar pathological state of addiction . ΔFosB is the most significant factor involved in both amphetamine addiction and amphetamine @-@ induced sex addictions , which are compulsive sexual behaviors that result from excessive sexual activity and amphetamine use . These sex addictions ( i.e. , drug @-@ induced compulsive sexual behaviors ) are associated with a dopamine dysregulation syndrome which occurs in some patients taking dopaminergic drugs , such as amphetamine or methamphetamine . 
 = = = = Treatment and management = = = = 
 Cognitive behavioral therapy is currently the most effective clinical treatment for psychostimulant addictions in general . As of May 2014 , there is no effective pharmacotherapy for methamphetamine addiction . Methamphetamine addiction is largely mediated through increased activation of dopamine receptors and co @-@ localized NMDA receptors in the nucleus accumbens . Magnesium ions inhibit NMDA receptors by blocking the receptor calcium channel . 
 = = = Dependence and withdrawal = = = 
 Tolerance is expected to develop with regular methamphetamine use and , when used recreationally , this tolerance develops rapidly . In dependent users , withdrawal symptoms are positively correlated with the level of drug tolerance . Depression from methamphetamine withdrawal lasts longer and is more severe than that of cocaine withdrawal . 
 According to the current Cochrane review on drug dependence and withdrawal in recreational users of methamphetamine , " when chronic heavy users abruptly discontinue [ methamphetamine ] use , many report a time @-@ limited withdrawal syndrome that occurs within 24 hours of their last dose " . Withdrawal symptoms in chronic , high @-@ dose users are frequent , occurring in up to 87 @.@ 6 % of cases , and persist for three to four weeks with a marked " crash " phase occurring during the first week . Methamphetamine withdrawal symptoms can include anxiety , drug craving , dysphoric mood , fatigue , increased appetite , increased movement or decreased movement , lack of motivation , sleeplessness or sleepiness , and vivid or lucid dreams . 
 = = Interactions = = 
 Methamphetamine is metabolized by the liver enzyme CYP2D6 , so CYP2D6 inhibitors will prolong the elimination half @-@ life of methamphetamine . Methamphetamine also interacts with monoamine oxidase inhibitors ( MAOIs ) , since both MAOIs and methamphetamine increase plasma catecholamines ; therefore , concurrent use of both is dangerous . Methamphetamine may decrease the effects of sedatives and depressants and increase the effects of antidepressants and other stimulants as well . Methamphetamine may counteract the effects of <unk> and antipsychotics due to its effects on the cardiovascular system and cognition respectively . The pH of gastrointestinal content and urine affects the absorption and excretion of methamphetamine . Specifically , acidic substances will reduce the absorption of methamphetamine and increase urinary excretion , while alkaline substances do the opposite . Due to the effect pH has on absorption , proton pump inhibitors , which reduce gastric acid , are known to interact with methamphetamine . 
 = = Pharmacology = = 
 = = = Pharmacodynamics = = = 
 Methamphetamine has been identified as a potent full agonist of trace amine @-@ associated receptor 1 ( TAAR1 ) , a G protein @-@ coupled receptor ( GPCR ) that regulates brain catecholamine systems . Activation of TAAR1 increases cyclic adenosine monophosphate ( cAMP ) production and either completely inhibits or reverses the transport direction of the dopamine transporter ( DAT ) , norepinephrine transporter ( NET ) , and serotonin transporter ( SERT ) . When methamphetamine binds to TAAR1 , it triggers transporter phosphorylation via protein kinase A ( PKA ) and protein kinase C ( PKC ) signaling , ultimately resulting in the internalization or reverse function of monoamine transporters . Methamphetamine is also known to increase intracellular calcium , an effect which is associated with DAT phosphorylation through a Ca2 + / calmodulin @-@ dependent protein kinase ( <unk> ) -dependent signaling pathway , in turn producing dopamine efflux . TAAR1 also has been shown to reduce the firing rate of neurons through direct activation of G protein @-@ coupled inwardly @-@ rectifying potassium channels . TAAR1 activation by methamphetamine in astrocytes appears to negatively modulate the membrane expression and function of <unk> , a type of glutamate transporter . 
 In addition to the plasma membrane monoamine transporters , methamphetamine inhibits uptake and induces efflux of neurotransmitters and other substrates at the vesicular monoamine transporters , VMAT1 and VMAT2 . In neurons , methamphetamine induces monoamine neurotransmitter efflux through VMAT2 , resulting in the outflow of monoamines from synaptic vesicles into the cytosol ( intracellular fluid ) of the presynaptic neuron . Other transporters that methamphetamine is known to inhibit are SLC22A3 and SLC22A5 . SLC22A3 is an <unk> monoamine transporter that is present in astrocytes , and SLC22A5 is a high @-@ affinity carnitine transporter . 
 Methamphetamine is also an agonist of the alpha @-@ 2 adrenergic receptors and sigma receptors with a greater affinity for <unk> than <unk> , and inhibits monoamine oxidase A ( MAO @-@ A ) and monoamine oxidase B ( MAO @-@ B ) . Methamphetamine is known to inhibit the CYP2D6 liver enzyme as well . <unk> is a stronger psychostimulant ( approximately ten times on striatal dopamine ) , but levomethamphetamine has stronger peripheral effects , a longer half @-@ life , and longer perceived effects among addicts . At high doses , both enantiomers of methamphetamine can induce similar stereotypy and methamphetamine psychosis , but shorter psychodynamic effect for levomethamphetamine . 
 = = = Pharmacokinetics = = = 
 Following oral administration , methamphetamine is well @-@ absorbed into the bloodstream , with peak plasma methamphetamine concentrations achieved in approximately 3 @.@ 13 – 6 @.@ 3 hours post ingestion . Methamphetamine is also well absorbed following inhalation and following intranasal administration . Due to the high lipophilicity of methamphetamine , it can readily move through the blood – brain barrier faster than other stimulants , where it is more resistant to degradation by monoamine oxidase . The amphetamine metabolite peaks at 10 – 24 hours . It is excreted by the kidneys , with the rate of excretion into the urine heavily influenced by urinary pH . When taken orally , 30 – 54 % of the dose is excreted in urine as methamphetamine and 10 – 23 % as amphetamine . Following IV doses , about 45 % is excreted as methamphetamine and 7 % as amphetamine . The half @-@ life of methamphetamine is variable with a range of 5 – 30 hours . 
 CYP2D6 , dopamine β @-@ hydroxylase , flavin @-@ containing monooxygenase , butyrate @-@ CoA ligase , and glycine N @-@ acyltransferase are the enzymes known to metabolize methamphetamine or its metabolites in humans . The primary metabolites are amphetamine and 4 @-@ <unk> ; other minor metabolites include : 4 @-@ hydroxyamphetamine , 4 @-@ hydroxynorephedrine , 4 @-@ hydroxyphenylacetone , benzoic acid , hippuric acid , norephedrine , and phenylacetone , the metabolites of amphetamine . Among these metabolites , the active sympathomimetics are amphetamine , 4 ‑ hydroxyamphetamine , 4 ‑ hydroxynorephedrine , 4 @-@ <unk> , and norephedrine . 
 The main metabolic pathways involve aromatic para @-@ hydroxylation , aliphatic alpha- and beta @-@ hydroxylation , N @-@ oxidation , N @-@ dealkylation , and deamination . The known metabolic pathways include : 
 = = = = Detection in biological fluids = = = = 
 Methamphetamine and amphetamine are often measured in urine or blood as part of a drug test for sports , employment , poisoning diagnostics , and forensics . Chiral techniques may be employed to help distinguish the source the drug to determine whether it was obtained illicitly or legally via prescription or prodrug . Chiral separation is needed to assess the possible contribution of levomethamphetamine , which is an active ingredients in some OTC nasal decongestants , toward a positive test result . Dietary zinc supplements can mask the presence of methamphetamine and other drugs in urine . 
 = = Physical and chemical properties = = 
 Methamphetamine is a chiral compound with two enantiomers , dextromethamphetamine and levomethamphetamine . At room temperature , the free base of methamphetamine is a clear and colorless liquid with an odor characteristic of geranium leaves . It is soluble in diethyl ether and ethanol as well as miscible with chloroform . In contrast , the methamphetamine hydrochloride salt is odorless with a bitter taste . It has a melting point between 170 to 175 ° C ( 338 to 347 ° F ) and , at room temperature , occurs as white crystals or a white crystalline powder . The hydrochloride salt is also freely soluble in ethanol and water . 
 = = = Degradation = = = 
 Bleach exposure time and concentration are correlated with destruction of methamphetamine . Methamphetamine in soils has shown to be a persistent pollutant . Methamphetamine is largely degraded within 30 days in a study of bioreactors under exposure to light in wastewater . 
 = = = Synthesis = = = 
 <unk> methamphetamine may be prepared starting from phenylacetone by either the Leuckart or reductive amination methods . In the Leuckart reaction , one equivalent of phenylacetone is reacted with two equivalents of N @-@ <unk> to produce the formyl amide of methamphetamine plus carbon dioxide and methylamine as side products . In this reaction , an iminium cation is formed as an intermediate which is reduced by the second equivalent of N @-@ <unk> . The intermediate formyl amide is then hydrolyzed under acidic aqueous conditions to yield methamphetamine as the final product . Alternatively , phenylacetone can be reacted with methylamine under reducing conditions to yield methamphetamine . 
 = = History , society , and culture = = 
 Amphetamine , discovered before methamphetamine , was first synthesized in 1887 in Germany by Romanian chemist Lazăr <unk> who named it <unk> . Shortly after , methamphetamine was synthesized from ephedrine in 1893 by Japanese chemist Nagai <unk> . Three decades later , in 1919 , methamphetamine hydrochloride was synthesized by pharmacologist Akira Ogata via reduction of ephedrine using red phosphorus and iodine . 
 During World War II , methamphetamine was sold in tablet form under the brand name <unk> , produced by the Berlin @-@ based <unk> pharmaceutical company . It was used extensively by all branches of the German armed forces ( Luftwaffe pilots , in particular ) for its performance @-@ enhancing stimulant effects and to induce extended wakefulness . <unk> became colloquially known among the German troops as " Stuka @-@ Tablets " ( Stuka @-@ <unk> ) and " Herman @-@ Göring @-@ Pills " ( Hermann @-@ Göring @-@ <unk> ) . 
 Obetrol , patented by Obetrol Pharmaceuticals in the 1950s and indicated for treatment of obesity , was one of the first brands of pharmaceutical methamphetamine products . Due to the psychological and stimulant effects of methamphetamine , Obetrol became a popular diet pill in America in the 1950s and 1960s . Eventually , as the addictive properties of the drug became known , governments began to strictly regulate the production and distribution of methamphetamine . For example , during the early 1970s in the United States , methamphetamine became a schedule II controlled substance under the Controlled Substances Act . Currently , methamphetamine is sold under the trade name Desoxyn , trademarked by the Danish pharmaceutical company <unk> . As of January 2013 , the Desoxyn trademark had been sold to Italian pharmaceutical company <unk> . 
 = = = Present legal status = = = 
 The production , distribution , sale , and possession of methamphetamine is restricted or illegal in many jurisdictions . Methamphetamine has been placed in schedule II of the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances treaty . 
 = = Reference notes = = 
 = Castle = 
 A castle ( from Latin : castellum ) is a type of fortified structure built in Europe and the Middle East during the Middle Ages by nobility . Scholars debate the scope of the word castle , but usually consider it to be the private fortified residence of a lord or noble . This is distinct from a palace , which is not fortified ; from a fortress , which was not always a residence for nobility ; and from a fortified settlement , which was a public defence – though there are many similarities among these types of construction . Usage of the term has varied over time and has been applied to structures as diverse as hill forts and country houses . Over the approximately 900 years that castles were built , they took on a great many forms with many different features , although some , such as curtain walls and arrowslits , were commonplace . 
 A European innovation , castles originated in the 9th and 10th centuries , after the fall of the Carolingian Empire resulted in its territory being divided among individual lords and princes . These nobles built castles to control the area immediately surrounding them , and were both offensive and defensive structures ; they provided a base from which raids could be launched as well as protection from enemies . Although their military origins are often emphasised in castle studies , the structures also served as centres of administration and symbols of power . Urban castles were used to control the local populace and important travel routes , and rural castles were often situated near features that were integral to life in the community , such as mills and fertile land . 
 Many castles were originally built from earth and timber , but had their defences replaced later by stone . Early castles often exploited natural defences , lacking features such as towers and arrowslits and relying on a central keep . In the late 12th and early 13th centuries , a scientific approach to castle defence emerged . This led to the proliferation of towers , with an emphasis on flanking fire . Many new castles were polygonal or relied on concentric defence – several stages of defence within each other that could all function at the same time to maximise the castle 's firepower . These changes in defence have been attributed to a mixture of castle technology from the Crusades , such as concentric fortification , and inspiration from earlier defences , such as Roman forts . Not all the elements of castle architecture were military in nature , so that devices such as moats evolved from their original purpose of defence into symbols of power . Some grand castles had long winding approaches intended to impress and dominate their landscape . 
 Although gunpowder was introduced to Europe in the 14th century , it did not significantly affect castle building until the 15th century , when artillery became powerful enough to break through stone walls . While castles continued to be built well into the 16th century , new techniques to deal with improved cannon fire made them uncomfortable and undesirable places to live . As a result , true castles went into decline and were replaced by artillery forts with no role in civil administration , and country houses that were indefensible . From the 18th century onwards , there was a renewed interest in castles with the construction of mock castles , part of a romantic revival of Gothic architecture , but they had no military purpose . 
 = = Definition = = 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The word castle is derived from the Latin word castellum , which is a diminutive of the word castrum , meaning " fortified place " . The Old English <unk> , Old French <unk> or <unk> , French château , Spanish <unk> , Italian castello , and a number of words in other languages also derive from castellum . The word castle was introduced into English shortly before the Norman Conquest to denote this type of building , which was then new to England . 
 = = = Defining characteristics = = = 
 In its simplest terms , the definition of a castle accepted amongst academics is " a private fortified residence " . This contrasts with earlier fortifications , such as Anglo Saxon burhs and walled cities such as Constantinople and Antioch in the Middle East ; castles were not communal defences but were built and owned by the local feudal lords , either for themselves or for their monarch . Feudalism was the link between a lord and his vassal where , in return for military service and the expectation of loyalty , the lord would grant the vassal land . In the late 20th century , there was a trend to refine the definition of a castle by including the criterion of feudal ownership , thus tying castles to the medieval period ; however , this does not necessarily reflect the terminology used in the medieval period . During the First Crusade ( 1096 – 1099 ) , the Frankish armies encountered walled settlements and forts that they indiscriminately referred to as castles , but which would not be considered as such under the modern definition . 
 Castles served a range of purposes , the most important of which were military , administrative , and domestic . As well as defensive structures , castles were also offensive tools which could be used as a base of operations in enemy territory . Castles were established by Norman invaders of England for both defensive purposes and to pacify the country 's inhabitants . As William the Conqueror advanced through England , he fortified key positions to secure the land he had taken . Between 1066 and 1087 , he established 36 castles such as Warwick Castle , which he used to guard against rebellion in the English Midlands . 
 Towards the end of the Middle Ages , castles tended to lose their military significance due to the advent of powerful cannons and permanent artillery fortifications ; as a result , castles became more important as residences and statements of power . A castle could act as a stronghold and prison but was also a place where a knight or lord could entertain his peers . Over time the aesthetics of the design became more important , as the castle 's appearance and size began to reflect the prestige and power of its occupant . Comfortable homes were often fashioned within their fortified walls . Although castles still provided protection from low levels of violence in later periods , eventually they were succeeded by country houses as high status residences . 
 = = = Terminology = = = 
 Castle is sometimes used as a catch @-@ all term for all kinds of fortifications and , as a result , has been misapplied in the technical sense . An example of this is Maiden Castle which , despite the name , is an Iron Age hill fort which had a very different origin and purpose . 
 Although " castle " has not become a generic term for a manor house ( like château in French and Schloss in German ) , many manor houses contain " castle " in their name while having few if any of the architectural characteristics , usually as their owners liked to maintain a link to the past and felt the term " castle " was a masculine expression of their power . In scholarship the castle , as defined above , is generally accepted as a coherent concept , originating in Europe and later spreading to parts of the Middle East , where they were introduced by European Crusaders . This coherent group shared a common origin , dealt with a particular mode of warfare , and exchanged influences . 
 In different areas of the world , analogous structures shared features of fortification and other defining characteristics associated with the concept of a castle , though they originated in different periods and circumstances and experienced differing evolutions and influences . For example , shiro in Japan , described as castles by historian Stephen Turnbull , underwent " a completely different developmental history , were built in a completely different way and were designed to withstand attacks of a completely different nature " . While European castles built from the late 12th and early 13th century onwards were generally stone , shiro were predominantly timber buildings into the 16th century . 
 By the time Japanese and European cultures met in the late 16th century , fortification in Europe had moved beyond castles and relied on innovations such as the Italian trace italienne and star forts . Forts in India present a similar case ; when they were encountered by the British in the 17th century , castles in Europe had generally fallen out of use militarily . Like shiro , the Indian forts , <unk> or <unk> in Sanskrit , shared features with castles in Europe such as acting as a domicile for a lord as well as being fortifications . They too developed differently from the structures known as castles that had their origins in Europe . 
 = = Common features = = 
 = = = Motte = = = 
 A motte was an earthen mound with a flat top . It was often artificial , although sometimes it incorporated a pre @-@ existing feature of the landscape . The excavation of earth to make the mound left a ditch around the motte , called a moat ( which could be either wet or dry ) . " Motte " and " moat " derive from the same Old French word , indicating that the features were originally associated and depended on each other for their construction . Although the motte is commonly associated with the bailey to form a motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castle , this was not always the case and there are instances where a motte existed on its own . 
 " Motte " refers to the mound alone , but it was often surmounted by a fortified structure , such as a keep , and the flat top would be surrounded by a palisade . It was common for the motte to be reached over a flying bridge ( a bridge over the ditch from the counterscarp of the ditch to the edge of the top of the mound ) , as shown in the Bayeux Tapestry 's depiction of Château de Dinan . Sometimes a motte covered an older castle or hall , whose rooms became underground storage areas and prisons beneath a new keep . 
 = = = Bailey and enceinte = = = 
 A bailey , also called a ward , was a fortified enclosure . It was a common feature of castles , and most had at least one . The keep on top of the motte was the domicile of the lord in charge of the castle and a bastion of last defence , while the bailey was the home of the rest of the lord 's household and gave them protection . The barracks for the garrison , stables , workshops , and storage facilities were often found in the bailey . Water was supplied by a well or cistern . Over time the focus of high status accommodation shifted from the keep to the bailey ; this resulted in the creation of another bailey that separated the high status buildings – such as the lord 's chambers and the chapel – from the everyday structures such as the workshops and barracks . 
 From the late 12th century there was a trend for knights to move out of the small houses they had previously occupied within the bailey to live in fortified houses in the countryside . Although often associated with the motte @-@ and @-@ bailey type of castle , baileys could also be found as independent defensive structures . These simple fortifications were called ringworks . The enceinte was the castle 's main defensive enclosure , and the terms " bailey " and " enceinte " are linked . A castle could have several baileys but only one enceinte . Castles with no keep , which relied on their outer defences for protection , are sometimes called enceinte castles ; these were the earliest form of castles , before the keep was introduced in the 10th century . 
 = = = Keep = = = 
 A keep was a great tower and usually the most strongly defended point of a castle before the introduction of concentric defence . " Keep " was not a term used in the medieval period – the term was applied from the 16th century onwards – instead " donjon " was used to refer to great towers , or turris in Latin . In motte @-@ and @-@ bailey castles , the keep was on top of the motte . " Dungeon " is a corrupted form of " donjon " and means a dark , unwelcoming prison . Although often the strongest part of a castle and a last place of refuge if the outer defences fell , the keep was not left empty in case of attack but was used as a residence by the lord who owned the castle , or his guests or representatives . 
 At first this was usual only in England , when after the Norman Conquest of 1066 the " conquerors lived for a long time in a constant state of alert " ; elsewhere the lord 's wife presided over a separate residence ( domus , aula or mansio in Latin ) close to the keep , and the donjon was a barracks and headquarters . Gradually , the two functions merged into the same building , and the highest residential storeys had large windows ; as a result for many structures , it is difficult to find an appropriate term . The massive internal spaces seen in many surviving donjons can be misleading ; they would have been divided into several rooms by light partitions , as in a modern office building . Even in some large castles the great hall was separated only by a partition from the lord 's " chamber " , his bedroom and to some extent his office . 
 = = = Curtain wall = = = 
 Curtain walls were defensive walls enclosing a bailey . They had to be high enough to make scaling the walls with ladders difficult and thick enough to withstand bombardment from siege engines which , from the 15th century onwards , included gunpowder artillery . A typical wall could be 3 m ( 10 ft ) thick and 12 m ( 39 ft ) tall , although sizes varied greatly between castles . To protect them from undermining , curtain walls were sometimes given a stone skirt around their bases . <unk> along the tops of the curtain walls allowed defenders to rain missiles on enemies below , and battlements gave them further protection . Curtain walls were studded with towers to allow enfilading fire along the wall . Arrowslits in the walls did not become common in Europe until the 13th century , for fear that they might compromise the wall 's strength . 
 = = = Gatehouse = = = 
 The entrance was often the weakest part in a circuit of defences . To overcome this , the gatehouse was developed , allowing those inside the castle to control the flow of traffic . In earth and timber castles , the gateway was usually the first feature to be rebuilt in stone . The front of the gateway was a blind spot and to overcome this , projecting towers were added on each side of the gate in a style similar to that developed by the Romans . The gatehouse contained a series of defences to make a direct assault more difficult than battering down a simple gate . Typically , there were one or more portcullises – a wooden grille reinforced with metal to block a passage – and arrowslits to allow defenders to harry the enemy . The passage through the gatehouse was lengthened to increase the amount of time an assailant had to spend under fire in a confined space and unable to retaliate . 
 It is a popular myth that so @-@ called murder @-@ holes – openings in the ceiling of the gateway passage – were used to pour boiling oil or molten lead on attackers ; the price of oil and lead and the distance of the gatehouse from fires meant that this was impractical . They were most likely used to drop objects on attackers , or to allow water to be poured on fires to extinguish them . Provision was made in the upper storey of the gatehouse for accommodation so the gate was never left undefended , although this arrangement later evolved to become more comfortable at the expense of defence . 
 During the 13th and 14th centuries the barbican was developed . This consisted of a rampart , ditch , and possibly a tower , in front of the gatehouse which could be used to further protect the entrance . The purpose of a barbican was not just to provide another line of defence but also to dictate the only approach to the gate . 
 = = = Moat = = = 
 A moat was a defensive ditch with steep sides , and could be either dry or filled with water . Its purpose was twofold ; to stop devices such as siege towers from reaching the curtain wall and to prevent the walls from being undermined . Water moats were found in low @-@ lying areas and were usually crossed by a drawbridge , although these were often replaced by stone bridges . Fortified islands could be added to the moat , adding another layer of defence . Water defences , such as moats or natural lakes , had the benefit of dictating the enemy 's approach to the castle . The site of the 13th @-@ century Caerphilly Castle in Wales covers over 30 acres ( 12 ha ) and the water defences , created by flooding the valley to the south of the castle , are some of the largest in Western Europe . 
 = = = Other features = = = 
 Battlements were most often found surmounting curtain walls and the tops of gatehouses , and comprised several elements : crenellations , hoardings , machicolations , and loopholes . <unk> is the collective name for alternating crenels and merlons : gaps and solid blocks on top of a wall . <unk> were wooden constructs that projected beyond the wall , allowing defenders to shoot at , or drop objects on , attackers at the base of the wall without having to lean perilously over the crenellations , thereby exposing themselves to retaliatory fire . Machicolations were stone projections on top of a wall with openings that allowed objects to be dropped on an enemy at the base of the wall in a similar fashion to hoardings . 
 Arrowslits , also commonly called loopholes , were narrow vertical openings in defensive walls which allowed arrows or crossbow bolts to be fired on attackers . The narrow slits were intended to protect the defender by providing a very small target , but the size of the opening could also impede the defender if it was too small . A smaller horizontal opening could be added to give an archer a better view for aiming . Sometimes a sally port was included ; this could allow the garrison to leave the castle and engage besieging forces . It was usual for the latrines to empty down the external walls of a castle and into the surrounding ditch . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antecedents = = = 
 According to historian Charles Coulson the accumulation of wealth and resources , such as food , led to the need for defensive structures . The earliest fortifications originated in the Fertile Crescent , the Indus Valley , Egypt , and China where settlements were protected by large walls . Northern Europe was slower than the East to develop defensive structures and it was not until the Bronze Age that hill forts developed and began to spread across Europe . In the medieval period castles were influenced by earlier forms of elite architecture , contributing to regional variations . Importantly , while castles had military aspects , they contained a recognisable household structure within their walls , reflecting the multi @-@ functional use of these buildings . 
 = = = Origins ( 9th and 10th centuries ) = = = 
 The subject of the emergence of castles is a complex matter which has led to considerable debate . Discussions have typically attributed the rise of the castle to a reaction to attacks by Magyars , Muslims , and Vikings and a need for private defence . The breakdown of the Carolingian Empire led to the privatisation of government , and local lords assumed responsibility for the economy and justice . However , while castles proliferated in the 9th and 10th centuries the link between periods of insecurity and building fortifications is not always straightforward . Some high concentrations of castles occur in secure places , while some border regions had relatively few castles . 
 It is likely that the castle evolved from the practice of fortifying a lordly home . The greatest threat to a lord 's home or hall was fire as it was usually a wooden structure . To protect against this , and keep other threats at bay , there were several courses of action available : create encircling earthworks to keep an enemy at a distance ; build the hall in stone ; or raise it up on an artificial mound , known as a motte , to present an obstacle to attackers . While the concept of ditches , ramparts , and stone walls as defensive measures is ancient , raising a motte is a medieval innovation . 
 A bank and ditch enclosure was a simple form of defence , and when found without an associated motte is called a ringwork ; when the site was in use for a prolonged period , it was sometimes replaced by a more complex structure or enhanced by the addition of a stone curtain wall . Building the hall in stone did not necessarily make it immune to fire as it still had windows and a wooden door . This led to the elevation of windows to the first floor – to make it harder to throw objects in – and to change the entrance from ground floor to first floor . These features are seen in many surviving castle keeps , which were the more sophisticated version of halls . Castles were not just defensive sites but also enhanced a lord 's control over his lands . They allowed the garrison to control the surrounding area , and formed a centre of administration , providing the lord with a place to hold court . 
 Building a castle sometimes required the permission of the king or other high authority . In 864 the King of West Francia , Charles the Bald , prohibited the construction of <unk> without his permission and ordered them all to be destroyed . This is perhaps the earliest reference to castles , though military historian R. Allen Brown points out that the word <unk> may have applied to any fortification at the time . 
 In some countries the monarch had little control over lords , or required the construction of new castles to aid in securing the land so was unconcerned about granting permission – as was the case in England in the aftermath of the Norman Conquest and the Holy Land during the Crusades . Switzerland is an extreme case of there being no state control over who built castles , and as a result there were 4 @,@ 000 in the country . There are very few castles dated with certainty from the mid @-@ 9th century . Converted into a donjon around 950 , Château de <unk> @-@ la @-@ Fontaine in France is the oldest standing castle in Europe . 
 = = = 11th century = = = 
 From 1000 onwards , references to castles in texts such as charters increased greatly . Historians have interpreted this as evidence of a sudden increase in the number of castles in Europe around this time ; this has been supported by archaeological investigation which has dated the construction of castle sites through the examination of ceramics . The increase in Italy began in the 950s , with numbers of castles increasing by a factor of three to five every 50 years , whereas in other parts of Europe such as France and Spain the growth was slower . In 950 Provence was home to 12 castles , by 1000 this figure had risen to 30 , and by 1030 it was over 100 . Although the increase was slower in Spain , the 1020s saw a particular growth in the number of castles in the region , particularly in contested border areas between Christian and Muslim . 
 Despite the common period in which castles rose to prominence in Europe , their form and design varied from region to region . In the early 11th century , the motte and keep – an artificial mound surmounted by a palisade and tower – was the most common form of castle in Europe , everywhere except Scandinavia . While Britain , France , and Italy shared a tradition of timber construction that was continued in castle architecture , Spain more commonly used stone or mud @-@ brick as the main building material . 
 The Muslim invasion of the Iberian Peninsula in the 8th century introduced a style of building developed in North Africa reliant on <unk> , pebbles in cement , where timber was in short supply . Although stone construction would later become common elsewhere , from the 11th century onwards it was the primary building material for Christian castles in Spain , while at the same time timber was still the dominant building material in north @-@ west Europe . 
 Historians have interpreted the widespread presence of castles across Europe in the 11th and 12th centuries as evidence that warfare was common , and usually between local lords . Castles were introduced into England shortly before the Norman Conquest in 1066 . Before the 12th century , castles were as uncommon in Denmark as they had been in England before the Norman Conquest . The introduction of castles to Denmark was a reaction to attacks from Wendish pirates , and they were usually intended as coastal defences . The motte and bailey remained the dominant form of castle in England , Wales , and Ireland well into the 12th century . At the same time , castle architecture in mainland Europe became more sophisticated . 
 The donjon was at the centre of this change in castle architecture in the 12th century . Central towers proliferated , and typically had a square plan , with walls 3 to 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) thick . Their decoration emulated Romanesque architecture , and sometimes incorporated double windows similar to those found in church bell towers . <unk> , which were the residence of the lord of the castle , evolved to become more spacious . The design emphasis of donjons changed to reflect a shift from functional to decorative requirements , imposing a symbol of lordly power upon the landscape . This sometimes led to compromising defence for the sake of display . 
 = = = Innovation and scientific design ( 12th century ) = = = 
 Until the 12th century , stone @-@ built and earth and timber castles were contemporary , but by the late 12th century the number of castles being built went into decline . This has been partly attributed to the higher cost of stone @-@ built fortifications , and the obsolescence of timber and earthwork sites , which meant it was preferable to build in more durable stone . Although superseded by their stone successors , timber and earthwork castles were by no means useless . This is evidenced by the continual maintenance of timber castles over long periods , sometimes several centuries ; Owain Glyndŵr 's 11th @-@ century timber castle at <unk> was still in use by the start of the 15th century , its structure having been maintained for four centuries . 
 At the same time there was a change in castle architecture . Until the late 12th century castles generally had few towers ; a gateway with few defensive features such as arrowslits or a portcullis ; a great keep or donjon , usually square and without arrowslits ; and the shape would have been dictated by the lay of the land ( the result was often irregular or curvilinear structures ) . The design of castles was not uniform , but these were features that could be found in a typical castle in the mid @-@ 12th century . By the end of the 12th century or the early 13th century , a newly constructed castle could be expected to be polygonal in shape , with towers at the corners to provide enfilading fire for the walls . The towers would have protruded from the walls and featured arrowslits on each level to allow archers to target anyone nearing or at the curtain wall . 
 These later castles did not always have a keep , but this may have been because the more complex design of the castle as a whole drove up costs and the keep was sacrificed to save money . The larger towers provided space for habitation to make up for the loss of the donjon . Where keeps did exist , they were no longer square but polygonal or cylindrical . Gateways were more strongly defended , with the entrance to the castle usually between two half @-@ round towers which were connected by a passage above the gateway – although there was great variety in the styles of gateway and entrances – and one or more portcullis . 
 A peculiar feature of Muslim castles in the Iberian Peninsula was the use of detached towers , called <unk> towers , around the perimeter as can be seen at the Alcazaba of Badajoz . Probably developed in the 12th century , the towers provided flanking fire . They were connected to the castle by removable wooden bridges , so if the towers were captured the rest of the castle was not accessible . 
 When seeking to explain this change in the complexity and style of castles , antiquarians found their answer in the Crusades . It seemed that the Crusaders had learned much about fortification from their conflicts with the Saracens and exposure to Byzantine architecture . There were legends such as that of <unk> – an architect from Palestine who reputedly went to Wales after the Crusades and greatly enhanced the castles in the south of the country – and it was assumed that great architects such as James of Saint George originated in the East . In the mid @-@ 20th century this view was cast into doubt . Legends were discredited , and in the case of James of Saint George it was proven that he came from Saint @-@ Georges @-@ d <unk> , in France . If the innovations in fortification had derived from the East , it would have been expected for their influence to be seen from 1100 onwards , immediately after the Christians were victorious in the First Crusade ( 1096 – 1099 ) , rather than nearly 100 years later . Remains of Roman structures in Western Europe were still standing in many places , some of which had flanking round @-@ towers and entrances between two flanking towers . 
 The castle builders of Western Europe were aware of and influenced by Roman design ; late Roman coastal forts on the English " Saxon Shore " were reused and in Spain the wall around the city of Ávila imitated Roman architecture when it was built in 1091 . Historian <unk> in Crusading warfare argued that the case for the influence of Eastern fortification on the West has been overstated , and that Crusaders of the 12th century in fact learned very little about scientific design from Byzantine and Saracen defences . A well @-@ sited castle that made use of natural defences and had strong ditches and walls had no need for a scientific design . An example of this approach is Kerak . Although there were no scientific elements to its design , it was almost impregnable , and in 1187 Saladin chose to lay siege to the castle and starve out its garrison rather than risk an assault . 
 After the First Crusade , Crusaders who did not return to their homes in Europe helped found the Crusader states of the Principality of Antioch , the County of Edessa , the Kingdom of Jerusalem , and the County of Tripoli . The castles they founded to secure their acquisitions were designed mostly by Syrian master @-@ masons . Their design was very similar to that of a Roman fort or Byzantine <unk> which were square in plan and had square towers at each corner that did not project much beyond the curtain wall . The keep of these Crusader castles would have had a square plan and generally be undecorated . 
 While castles were used to hold a site and control movement of armies , in the Holy Land some key strategic positions were left unfortified . Castle architecture in the East became more complex around the late 12th and early 13th centuries after the stalemate of the Third Crusade ( 1189 – 1192 ) . Both Christians and Muslims created fortifications , and the character of each was different . <unk> , the 13th @-@ century ruler of the Saracens , created structures with large rectangular towers that influenced Muslim architecture and were copied again and again , however they had little influence on Crusader castles . 
 = = = 13th to 15th centuries = = = 
 In the early 13th century , Crusader castles were mostly built by Military Orders including the Knights Hospitaller , Knights Templar , and Teutonic Knights . The orders were responsible for the foundation of sites such as Krak des Chevaliers , Margat , and Belvoir . Design varied not just between orders , but between individual castles , though it was common for those founded in this period to have concentric defences . 
 The concept , which originated in castles such as Krak des Chevaliers , was to remove the reliance on a central strongpoint and to emphasise the defence of the curtain walls . There would be multiple rings of defensive walls , one inside the other , with the inner ring rising above the outer so that its field of fire was not completely obscured . If assailants made it past the first line of defence they would be caught in the killing ground between the inner and outer walls and have to assault the second wall . 
 Concentric castles were widely copied across Europe , for instance when Edward I of England – who had himself been on Crusade – built castles in Wales in the late 13th century , four of the eight he founded had a concentric design . Not all the features of the Crusader castles from the 13th century were emulated in Europe . For instance , it was common in Crusader castles to have the main gate in the side of a tower and for there to be two turns in the passageway , lengthening the time it took for someone to reach the outer enclosure . It is rare for this bent entrance to be found in Europe . 
 One of the effects of the Livonian Crusade in the Baltic was the introduction of stone and brick fortifications . Although there were hundreds of wooden castles in Prussia and Livonia , the use of bricks and mortar was unknown in the region before the Crusaders . Until the 13th century and start of the 14th centuries , their design was heterogeneous , however this period saw the emergence of a standard plan in the region : a square plan , with four wings around a central courtyard . It was common for castles in the East to have arrowslits in the curtain wall at multiple levels ; contemporary builders in Europe were wary of this as they believed it weakened the wall . Arrowslits did not compromise the wall 's strength , but it was not until Edward I 's programme of castle building that they were widely adopted in Europe . 
 The Crusades also led to the introduction of machicolations into Western architecture . Until the 13th century , the tops of towers had been surrounded by wooden galleries , allowing defenders to drop objects on assailants below . Although machicolations performed the same purpose as the wooden galleries , they were probably an Eastern invention rather than an evolution of the wooden form . Machicolations were used in the East long before the arrival of the Crusaders , and perhaps as early as the first half of the 8th century in Syria . 
 The greatest period of castle building in Spain was in the 11th to 13th centuries , and they were most commonly found in the disputed borders between Christian and Muslim lands . Conflict and interaction between the two groups led to an exchange of architectural ideas , and Spanish Christians adopted the use of detached towers . The Spanish Reconquista , driving the Muslims out of the Iberian Peninsula , was complete in 1492 . 
 Although France has been described as " the heartland of medieval architecture " , the English were at the forefront of castle architecture in the 12th century . French historian François <unk> wrote : " The great revival in military architecture was led , as one would naturally expect , by the powerful kings and princes of the time ; by the sons of William the Conqueror and their descendants , the Plantagenets , when they became dukes of Normandy . These were the men who built all the most typical twelfth @-@ century fortified castles remaining to @-@ day " . Despite this , by the beginning of the 15th century , the rate of castle construction in England and Wales went into decline . The new castles were generally of a lighter build than earlier structures and presented few innovations , although strong sites were still created such as that of Raglan in Wales . At the same time , French castle architecture came to the fore and led the way in the field of medieval fortifications . Across Europe – particularly the Baltic , Germany , and Scotland – castles were built well into the 16th century . 
 = = = Advent of gunpowder = = = 
 Artillery powered by gunpowder was introduced to Europe in the 1320s and spread quickly . Handguns , which were initially unpredictable and inaccurate weapons , were not recorded until the 1380s . Castles were adapted to allow small artillery pieces – averaging between 19 @.@ 6 and 22 kg ( 43 and 49 lb ) – to fire from towers . These guns were too heavy for a man to carry and fire , but if he supported the butt end and rested the muzzle on the edge of the gun port he could fire the weapon . The gun ports developed in this period show a unique feature , that of a horizontal timber across the opening . A hook on the end of the gun could be latched over the timber so the gunner did not have to take the full recoil of the weapon . This adaptation is found across Europe , and although the timber rarely survives , there is an intact example at Castle <unk> in the Netherlands . Gunports were keyhole shaped , with a circular hole at the bottom for the weapon and a narrow slit on top to allow the gunner to aim . 
 This form is very common in castles adapted for guns , found in Egypt , Italy , Scotland , and Spain , and elsewhere in between . Other types of port , though less common , were horizontal slits – allowing only lateral movement – and large square openings , which allowed greater movement . The use of guns for defence gave rise to artillery castles , such as that of Château de Ham in France . Defences against guns were not developed until a later stage . Ham is an example of the trend for new castles to dispense with earlier features such as machicolations , tall towers , and crenellations . 
 Bigger guns were developed , and in the 15th century became an alternative to siege engines such as the trebuchet . The benefits of large guns over trebuchets – the most effective siege engine of the Middle Ages before the advent of gunpowder – were those of a greater range and power . In an effort to make them more effective , guns were made ever bigger , although this hampered their ability to reach remote castles . By the 1450s guns were the preferred siege weapon , and their effectiveness was demonstrated by Mehmed II at the Fall of Constantinople . 
 The response towards more effective cannons was to build thicker walls and to prefer round towers , as the curving sides were more likely to deflect a shot than a flat surface . While this sufficed for new castles , pre @-@ existing structures had to find a way to cope with being battered by cannon . An earthen bank could be piled behind a castle 's curtain wall to absorb some of the shock of impact . 
 Often , castles constructed before the age of gunpowder were incapable of using guns as their wall @-@ walks were too narrow . A solution to this was to pull down the top of a tower and to fill the lower part with the rubble to provide a surface for the guns to fire from . Lowering the defences in this way had the effect of making them easier to scale with ladders . A more popular alternative defence , which avoided damaging the castle , was to establish bulwarks beyond the castle 's defences . These could be built from earth or stone and were used to mount weapons . 
 = = = Bastions and star forts ( 16th century ) = = = 
 Around 1500 , the innovation of the angled bastion was developed in Italy . With developments such as these , Italy pioneered permanent artillery fortifications , which took over from the defensive role of castles . From this evolved star forts , also known as trace italienne . The elite responsible for castle construction had to choose between the new type that could withstand cannon fire and the earlier , more elaborate style . The first was ugly and uncomfortable and the latter was less secure , although it did offer greater aesthetic appeal and value as a status symbol . The second choice proved to be more popular as it became apparent that there was little point in trying to make the site genuinely defensible in the face of cannon . For a variety of reasons , not least of which is that many castles have no recorded history , there is no firm number of castles built in the medieval period . However , it has been estimated that between 75 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 were built in western Europe ; of these around 1 @,@ 700 were in England and Wales and around 14 @,@ 000 in German @-@ speaking areas . 
 Some true castles were built in the Americas by the Spanish and French colonies . The first stage of Spanish fort construction has been termed the " castle period " , which lasted from 1492 until the end of the 16th century . Starting with Fortaleza <unk> , " these castles were essentially European medieval castles transposed to America " . Among other defensive structures ( including forts and citadels ) , castles were also built in New France towards the end of the 17th century . In Montreal the artillery was not as developed as on the battle @-@ fields of Europe , some of the region 's outlying forts were built like the fortified manor houses of France . Fort Longueuil , built from 1695 – 1698 by a baronial family , has been described as " the most medieval @-@ looking fort built in Canada " . The manor house and stables were within a fortified bailey , with a tall round turret in each corner . The " most substantial castle @-@ like fort " near Montréal was Fort Senneville , built in 1692 with square towers connected by thick stone walls , as well as a fortified windmill . Stone forts such as these served as defensive residences , as well as imposing structures to prevent Iroquois incursions . 
 Although castle construction faded towards the end of the 16th century , castles did not necessarily all fall out of use . Some retained a role in local administration and became law courts , while others are still handed down in aristocratic families as hereditary seats . A particularly famous example of this is Windsor Castle in England which was founded in the 11th century and is home to the monarch of the United Kingdom . In other cases they still had a role in defence . Tower houses , which are closely related to castles and include pele towers , were defended towers that were permanent residences built in the 14th to 17th centuries . Especially common in Ireland and Scotland , they could be up to five storeys high and succeeded common enclosure castles and were built by a greater social range of people . While unlikely to provide as much protection as a more complex castle , they offered security against raiders and other small threats . 
 = = = Later use and revival castles = = = 
 According to archaeologists Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham , " the great country houses of the seventeenth to twentieth centuries were , in a social sense , the castles of their day " . Though there was a trend for the elite to move from castles into country houses in the 17th century , castles were not completely useless . In later conflicts , such as the English Civil War ( 1641 – 1651 ) , many castles were refortified , although subsequently slighted to prevent them from being used again . 
 Revival or mock castles became popular as a manifestation of a Romantic interest in the Middle Ages and chivalry , and as part of the broader Gothic Revival in architecture . Examples of these castles include Chapultepec in Mexico , Neuschwanstein in Germany , and Edwin Lutyens ' Castle Drogo ( 1911 – 1930 ) – the last flicker of this movement in the British Isles . While churches and cathedrals in a Gothic style could faithfully imitate medieval examples , new country houses built in a " castle style " differed internally from their medieval predecessors . This was because to be faithful to medieval design would have left the houses cold and dark by contemporary standards . 
 Artificial ruins , built to resemble remnants of historic edifices , were also a hallmark of the period . They were usually built as centre pieces in aristocratic planned landscapes . Follies were similar , although they differed from artificial ruins in that they were not part of a planned landscape , but rather seemed to have no reason for being built . Both drew on elements of castle architecture such as <unk> and towers , but served no military purpose and were solely for display . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Once the site of a castle had been selected – whether a strategic position or one intended to dominate the landscape as a mark of power – the building material had to be selected . An earth and timber castle was cheaper and easier to erect than one built from stone . The costs involved in construction are not well @-@ recorded , and most surviving records relate to royal castles . A castle with earthen ramparts , a motte , and timber defences and buildings could have been constructed by an unskilled workforce . The source of man @-@ power was probably from the local lordship , and the tenants would already have the necessary skills of felling trees , digging , and working timber necessary for an earth and timber castle . Possibly coerced into working for their lord , the construction of an earth and timber castle would not have been a drain on a client 's funds . In terms of time , it has been estimated that an average sized motte – 5 m ( 16 ft ) high and 15 m ( 49 ft ) wide at the summit – would have taken 50 people about 40 working days . An exceptionally expensive motte and bailey was that of Clones in Ireland , built in 1211 for £ 20 . The high cost , relative to other castles of its type , was because labourers had to be imported . 
 The cost of building a castle varied according to factors such as their complexity and transport costs for material . It is certain that stone castles cost a great deal more than those built from earth and timber . Even a very small tower , such as Peveril Castle , would have cost around £ 200 . In the middle were castles such as Orford , which was built in the late 12th century for £ 1 @,@ 400 , and at the upper end were those such as Dover , which cost about £ 7 @,@ 000 between 1181 and 1191 . Spending on the scale of the vast castles such as Château Gaillard ( an estimated £ 15 @,@ 000 to £ 20 @,@ 000 between 1196 and 1198 ) was easily supported by The Crown , but for lords of smaller areas , castle building was a very serious and costly undertaking . It was usual for a stone castle to take the best part of a decade to finish . The cost of a large castle built over this time ( anywhere from £ 1 @,@ 000 to £ 10 @,@ 000 ) would take the income from several manors , severely impacting a lord 's finances . Costs in the late 13th century were of a similar order , with castles such as Beaumaris and Rhuddlan costing £ 14 @,@ 500 and £ 9 @,@ 000 respectively . Edward I 's campaign of castle @-@ building in Wales cost £ 80 @,@ 000 between 1277 and 1304 , and £ 95 @,@ 000 between 1277 and 1329 . Renowned designer Master James of Saint George , responsible for the construction of Beaumaris , explained the cost : 
 In case you should wonder where so much money could go in a week , we would have you know that we have needed – and shall continue to need 400 masons , both cutters and layers , together with 2 @,@ 000 less skilled workmen , 100 carts , 60 wagons and 30 boats bringing stone and sea coal ; 200 quarrymen ; 30 smiths ; and carpenters for putting in the joists and floor boards and other necessary jobs . All this takes no account of the garrison ... nor of purchases of material . Of which there will have to be a great quantity ... The men 's pay has been and still is very much in arrears , and we are having the greatest difficulty in keeping them because they have simply nothing to live on . 
 Not only were stone castles expensive to build in the first place , but their maintenance was a constant drain . They contained a lot of timber , which was often unseasoned and as a result needed careful upkeep . For example , it is documented that in the late 12th century repairs at castles such as Exeter and Gloucester cost between £ 20 and £ 50 annually . 
 Medieval machines and inventions , such as the treadwheel crane , became indispensable during construction , and techniques of building wooden scaffolding were improved upon from Antiquity . When building in stone a prominent concern of medieval builders was to have quarries close at hand . There are examples of some castles where stone was quarried on site , such as Chinon , Château de Coucy and Château Gaillard . When it was built in 992 in France the stone tower at Château de Langeais was 16 metres ( 52 ft ) high , 17 @.@ 5 metres ( 57 ft ) wide , and 10 metres ( 33 ft ) long with walls averaging 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) . The walls contain 1 @,@ 200 cubic metres ( 42 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of stone and have a total surface ( both inside and out ) of 1 @,@ 600 square metres ( 17 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The tower is estimated to have taken 83 @,@ 000 average working days to complete , most of which was unskilled labour . 
 Many countries had both timber and stone castles , however Denmark had few quarries , and as a result , most of its castles are earth and timber affairs , or later on built from brick . Brick @-@ built structures were not necessarily weaker than their stone @-@ built counterparts . Brick castles are less common in England than stone or earth and timber constructions , and often it was chosen for its aesthetic appeal or because it was fashionable , encouraged by the brick architecture of the Low Countries . For example , when Tattershall Castle was built between 1430 and 1450 , there was plenty of stone available nearby , but the owner , Lord Cromwell , chose to use brick . About 700 @,@ 000 bricks were used to build the castle , which has been described as " the finest piece of medieval brick @-@ work in England " . Most Spanish castles were built from stone , whereas castles in Eastern Europe were usually of timber construction . 
 = = Social centre = = 
 Due to the lord 's presence in a castle , it was a centre of administration from where he controlled his lands . He relied on the support of those below him , as without the support of his more powerful tenants a lord could expect his power to be undermined . Successful lords regularly held court with those immediately below them on the social scale , but absentees could expect to find their influence weakened . Larger lordships could be vast , and it would be impractical for a lord to visit all his properties regularly so deputies were appointed . This especially applied to royalty , who sometimes owned land in different countries . 
 To allow the lord to concentrate on his duties regarding administration , he had a household of servants to take care of chores such as providing food . The household was run by a chamberlain , while a treasurer took care of the estate 's written records . Royal households took essentially the same form as baronial households , although on a much larger scale and the positions were more prestigious . An important role of the household servants was the preparation of food ; the castle kitchens would have been a busy place when the castle was occupied , called on to provide large meals . Without the presence of a lord 's household , usually because he was staying elsewhere , a castle would have been a quiet place with few residents , focused on maintaining the castle . 
 As social centres castles were important places for display . Builders took the opportunity to draw on symbolism , through the use of motifs , to evoke a sense of chivalry that was aspired to in the Middle Ages amongst the elite . Later structures of the Romantic Revival would draw on elements of castle architecture such as battlements for the same purpose . Castles have been compared with cathedrals as objects of architectural pride , and some castles incorporated gardens as ornamental features . The right to crenellate , when granted by a monarch – though it was not always necessary – was important not just as it allowed a lord to defend his property but because crenellations and other accoutrements associated with castles were prestigious through their use by the elite . Licences to crenellate were also proof of a relationship with or favour from the monarch , who was the one responsible for granting permission . 
 Courtly love was the <unk> of love between the nobility . Emphasis was placed on restraint between lovers . Though sometimes expressed through chivalric events such as tournaments , where knights would fight wearing a token from their lady , it could also be private and conducted in secret . The legend of Tristan and Iseult is one example of stories of courtly love told in the Middle Ages . It was an ideal of love between two people not married to each other , although the man might be married to someone else . It was not uncommon or ignoble for a lord to be adulterous – Henry I of England had over 20 bastards for instance – but for a lady to be promiscuous was seen as dishonourable . 
 The purpose of marriage between the medieval elites was to secure land . Girls were married in their teens , but boys did not marry until they came of age . There is a popular conception that women played a peripheral role in the medieval castle household , and that it was dominated by the lord himself . This derives from the image of the castle as a martial institution , but most castles in England , France , Ireland , and Scotland were never involved in conflicts or sieges , so the domestic life is a neglected facet . The lady was given a " marriage portion " of her husband 's estates – usually about a third – which was hers for life , and her husband would inherit on her death . It was her duty to administer them directly , as the lord administered his own land . Despite generally being excluded from military service , a woman could be in charge of a castle , either on behalf of her husband or if she was widowed . Because of their influence within the medieval household , women influenced construction and design , sometimes through direct patronage ; historian Charles Coulson emphasises the role of women in applying " a refined aristocratic taste " to castles due to their long term residence . 
 = = Location and landscape = = 
 The positioning of castles was influenced by the available terrain . Whereas hill castles such as <unk> were common in Germany , where 66 per cent of all known medieval were highland area while 34 per cent were on low @-@ lying land , they formed a minority of sites in England . Because of the range of functions they had to fulfil , castles were built in a variety of locations . Multiple factors were considered when choosing a site , balancing between the need for a defendable position with other considerations such as proximity to resources . For instance many castles are located near Roman roads , which remained important transport routes in the Middle Ages , or could lead to the alteration or creation of new road systems in the area . Where available it was common to exploit pre @-@ existing defences such as building with a Roman fort or the ramparts of an Iron Age hillfort . A prominent site that overlooked the surrounding area and offered some natural defences may also have been chosen because its visibility made it a symbol of power . Urban castles were particularly important in controlling centres of population and production , especially with an invading force , for instance in the aftermath of the Norman Conquest of England in the 11th century the majority of royal castles were built in or near towns . 
 As castles were not simply military buildings but centres of administration and symbols of power , they had a significant impact on the surrounding landscape . Placed by a frequently @-@ used road or river , the toll castle ensured that a lord would get his due toll money from merchants . Rural castles were often associated with mills and field systems due to their role in managing the lord 's estate , which gave them greater influence over resources . Others were adjacent to or in royal forests or deer parks and were important in their upkeep . Fish ponds were a luxury of the lordly elite , and many were found next to castles . Not only were they practical in that they ensured a water supply and fresh fish , but they were a status symbol as they were expensive to build and maintain . 
 Although sometimes the construction of a castle led to the destruction of a village , such as at Eaton <unk> in England , it was more common for the villages nearby to have grown as a result of the presence of a castle . Sometimes planned towns or villages were created around a castle . The benefits of castle building on settlements was not confined to Europe . When the 13th @-@ century Safad Castle was founded in Galilee in the Holy Land , the 260 villages benefitted from the inhabitants ' newfound ability to move freely . When built , a castle could result in the restructuring of the local landscape , with roads moved for the convenience of the lord . Settlements could also grow naturally around a castle , rather than being planned , due to the benefits of proximity to an economic centre in a rural landscape and the safety given by the defences . Not all such settlements survived , as once the castle lost its importance – perhaps succeeded by a manor house as the centre of administration – the benefits of living next to a castle vanished and the settlement depopulated . 
 During and shortly after the Norman Conquest of England , castles were inserted into important pre @-@ existing towns to control and subdue the populace . They were usually located near any existing town defences , such as Roman walls , although this sometimes resulted in the demolition of structures occupying the desired site . In Lincoln , 166 houses were destroyed to clear space for the castle , and in York agricultural land was flooded to create a moat for the castle . As the military importance of urban castles waned from their early origins , they became more important as centres of administration , and their financial and judicial roles . When the Normans invaded Ireland , Scotland , and Wales in the 11th and 12th centuries , settlement in those countries was predominantly non @-@ urban , and the foundation of towns was often linked with the creation of a castle . 
 The location of castles in relation to high status features , such as fish ponds , was a statement of power and control of resources . Also often found near a castle , sometimes within its defences , was the parish church . This signified a close relationship between feudal lords and the Church , one of the most important institutions of medieval society . Even elements of castle architecture that have usually been interpreted as military could be used for display . The water features of Kenilworth Castle in England – comprising a moat and several satellite ponds – forced anyone approaching a water castle entrance to take a very indirect route , walking around the defences before the final approach towards the gateway . Another example is that of the 14th @-@ century Bodiam Castle , also in England ; although it appears to be a state of the art , advanced castle it is in a site of little strategic importance , and the moat was shallow and more likely intended to make the site appear impressive than as a defence against mining . The approach was long and took the viewer around the castle , ensuring they got a good look before entering . Moreover , the gunports were impractical and unlikely to have been effective . 
 = = Warfare = = 
 As a static structure , castles could often be avoided . Their immediate area of influence was about 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) and their weapons had a short range even early in the age of artillery . However , leaving an enemy behind would allow them to interfere with communications and make raids . Garrisons were expensive and as a result often small unless the castle was important . Cost also meant that in peace time garrisons were smaller , and small castles were manned by perhaps a couple of watchmen and gate @-@ guards . Even in war , garrisons were not necessarily large as too many people in a defending force would strain supplies and impair the castle 's ability to withstand a long siege . In 1403 , a force of 37 archers successfully defended Caernarfon Castle against two assaults by Owain Glyndŵr 's allies during a long siege , demonstrating that a small force could be effective . 
 Early on , manning a castle was a feudal duty of vassals to their magnates , and magnates to their kings , however this was later replaced with paid forces . A garrison was usually commanded by a constable whose peace @-@ time role would have been looking after the castle in the owner 's absence . Under him would have been knights who by benefit of their military training would have acted as a type of officer class . Below them were archers and bowmen , whose role was to prevent the enemy reaching the walls as can be seen by the positioning of arrowslits . 
 If it was necessary to seize control of a castle an army could either launch an assault or lay siege . It was more efficient to starve the garrison out than to assault it , particularly for the most heavily defended sites . Without relief from an external source , the defenders would eventually submit . Sieges could last weeks , months , and in rare cases years if the supplies of food and water were plentiful . A long siege could slow down the army , allowing help to come or for the enemy to prepare a larger force for later . Such an approach was not confined to castles , but was also applied to the fortified towns of the day . On occasion , siege castles would be built to defend the besiegers from a sudden sally and would have been abandoned after the siege ended one way or another . 
 If forced to assault a castle , there were many options available to the attackers . For wooden structures , such as early motte @-@ and @-@ baileys , fire was a real threat and attempts would be made to set them alight as can be seen in the Bayeux Tapestry . Projectile weapons had been used since antiquity and the mangonel and <unk> – from Roman and Eastern origins respectively – were the main two that were used into the Middle Ages . The trebuchet , which probably evolved from the <unk> in the 13th century , was the most effective siege weapon before the development of cannons . These weapons were vulnerable to fire from the castle as they had a short range and were large machines . Conversely , weapons such as trebuchets could be fired from within the castle due to the high trajectory of its projectile , and would be protected from direct fire by the curtain walls . 
 <unk> or <unk> were siege engines that worked on the same principles as crossbows . With their origins in Ancient Greece , tension was used to project a bolt or javelin . Missiles fired from these engines had a lower trajectory than trebuchets or mangonels and were more accurate . They were more commonly used against the garrison rather than the buildings of a castle . Eventually cannons developed to the point where they were more powerful and had a greater range than the trebuchet , and became the main weapon in siege warfare . 
 Walls could be undermined by a sap . A mine leading to the wall would be dug and once the target had been reached , the wooden supports preventing the tunnel from collapsing would be burned . It would cave in and bring down the structure above . Building a castle on a rock outcrop or surrounding it with a wide , deep moat helped prevent this . A counter @-@ mine could be dug towards the besiegers ' tunnel ; assuming the two converged , this would result in underground hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . Mining was so effective that during the siege of Margat in 1285 when the garrison were informed a sap was being dug they surrendered . Battering rams were also used , usually in the form of a tree trunk given an iron cap . They were used to force open the castle gates , although they were sometimes used against walls with less effect . 
 As an alternative to the time @-@ consuming task of creating a breach , an escalade could be attempted to capture the walls with fighting along the walkways behind the battlements . In this instance , attackers would be vulnerable to <unk> . A safer option for those assaulting a castle was to use a siege tower , sometimes called a belfry . Once ditches around a castle were partially filled in , these wooden , movable towers could be pushed against the curtain wall . As well as offering some protection for those inside , a siege tower could overlook the interior of a castle , giving bowmen an advantageous position from which to unleash missiles . 
 = Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories = 
 Cosmic Stories ( also known as Cosmic Science @-@ Fiction ) and Stirring Science Stories were two American pulp science fiction magazines that published a total of seven issues in 1941 and 1942 . Both Cosmic and Stirring were edited by Donald A. Wollheim and launched by the same publisher , appearing in alternate months . Wollheim had no budget at all for fiction , so he solicited stories from his friends among the Futurians , a group of young science fiction fans including James Blish and C. M. Kornbluth . Isaac Asimov contributed a story , but later insisted on payment after hearing that F. Orlin Tremaine , the editor of the competing science fiction magazine Comet , was irate at the idea of a magazine that might " siphon readership from magazines that paid " , and thought that authors who contributed should be blacklisted . Kornbluth was the most prolific contributor , under several pseudonyms ; one of his stories , " Thirteen O 'Clock " , published under the pseudonym " Cecil Corwin " , was very successful , and helped to make his reputation in the field . The magazines ceased publication in late 1941 , but Wollheim was able to find a publisher for one further issue of Stirring Science Stories in March 1942 before war restrictions forced it to close again . 
 Other well @-@ known writers who appeared in the two magazines included Damon Knight and David H. Keller . Knight 's first published story , " Resilience " , appeared in the February 1941 issue of Stirring Stories , but the story was ruined by a misprint in a crucial word in the first sentence . Keller was an established writer in the field , but Wollheim was aware that Keller occasionally donated material to fanzines , and was able to obtain a story from him . The quality of the artwork was variable ; it included Elliot Dold 's last artwork in the science fiction field , for the cover of the July 1941 issue of Cosmic Stories , and several covers and interior drawings by Hannes Bok , who later became a well @-@ known artist in the field . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction had been published in the United States before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . By the end of the 1930s the field was booming , and between 1939 and 1941 a flood of new sf magazines appeared . In late 1940 , Donald A. Wollheim , an active science fiction fan and aspiring editor and writer , noticed a new magazine titled Stirring Detective and Western Stories on the newsstands . He wrote to the publishers , Albing Publications , to see if they were interested in adding a science fiction title to their list , and he was invited to their office . Wollheim later recalled the meeting : 
 It was a father and son , the son in his twenties , and the father in his fifties ; they were operating out of a desk in the corner of an advertising office , and what they had was credit from one of the news companies [ distributors ] , Kable or one of those outfits , and they said , ' We don 't have any capital , but if you can put the magazine together for nothing , we can go up to fifteen bucks for art , and we can do it . If the magazine succeeds , then we 'll be able to pay you a regular salary after the third issue . ' My attitude was that at least I 'd be getting the experience , and something was better than nothing . 
 Wollheim sent a letter out to his contacts in science fiction fandom , announcing the new magazines . Originally the plan had been to publish a single monthly title , but this was changed by the publisher to two alternating bimonthly magazines , to be called Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories . The first to appear was the February 1941 issue of Stirring Science Stories . Wollheim had announced a planned newsstand date of 15 December 1940 , but according to Damon Knight 's later recollection the magazine appeared in January 1941 . The two titles alternated months until the July 1941 issue of Cosmic Stories ( by that time retitled Cosmic Science @-@ Fiction on the cover ) , after which the magazines were cancelled . Some months later Wollheim was able to find another publisher , Manhattan Fiction Publications , and a fourth issue of Stirring appeared , dated March 1942 . Wartime constraints prevented the new publisher from continuing , and there were no more issues of either title . 
 An announcement in the January 1941 Writer 's Digest listed the payment rate as half a cent per word . This was a low rate , but it would have been on a par with many other magazines of the era , had Wollheim been able to achieve it . In the event he was able to start paying small amounts to his authors after the first couple of issues ; C.M. Kornbluth was paid for several of his later stories for the two magazines , though the rates were well below half a cent per word . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 Stirring Science Stories was presented by Wollheim as if it were two separate magazines bound together ; the first half of the magazine was titled " Stirring Science @-@ Fiction " , and the second half " Stirring Fantasy @-@ Fiction " . An editorial and letters section , titled " The Vortex " , separated the two . Wollheim described his approach in the first issue , saying " Stirring Science Stories isn 't really one magazine but two . A sort of Siamese twin embracing within its covers for the first time in publishing history a science fiction magazine and a weird @-@ fantasy magazine " . 
 Wollheim was a member of the Futurians , a group of New York science fiction fans , many of whom were also starting to be published writers . Some , including Isaac Asimov , Frederik Pohl , C. M. Kornbluth , and James Blish , were later to become very successful in the field . Robert A. W. Lowndes , another Futurian , took on the task of finding free material for Wollheim to fill the first two issues . Two of the Futurians ( Lowndes and Pohl ) were already working as editors of recently launched sf magazines , and there were many other paying markets for science fiction at that time , but the Futurians were so prolific that Wollheim was able to obtain much of his material from them . Wollheim also published some of his own stories in the two magazines . Kornbluth provided Wollheim with more stories than anyone else , using several aliases , including " Cecil Corwin " , " S.D. Gottesman " , and " Kenneth Falconer " . Other Futurians who contributed material included Blish , Lowndes , Walter <unk> , David Kyle , and John B. Michel ; the stories , often collaborations between two or more of the Futurians , were published under a variety of pseudonyms . Damon Knight 's first story , " Resilience " , appeared in the February 1941 issue of Stirring with an unfortunate printer 's error in the first sentence of the story that rendered the plot incomprehensible . Knight would later become a member of the Futurians , but he was still living in Oregon at the time the story appeared in print . 
 " Thirteen O 'Clock " , by Kornbluth , is generally regarded as the best story in the first issue of Stirring ; Knight describes it as " a delightful screwball fantasy " , and adds that it made Kornbluth 's reputation . Other stories from later issues that have been well @-@ received include " The Long Wall " , by Lowndes ; " The City in the Sofa " , " What Sorghum Says " , " The Golden Road " , and " The Words of Guru " , all by Kornbluth ; " The Real Thrill " by Blish ; and " The Goblins Will Get You " , by Michel . 
 Isaac Asimov contributed a story , " The Secret Sense " , which appeared in the March 1941 issue of Cosmic . After Wollheim acquired the story , Asimov met with F. Orlin Tremaine , the editor of Comet — a competing science fiction magazine — and discovered that Tremaine was irate at the idea of a magazine that might " siphon readership from magazines that paid " by taking stories without paying the authors . Tremaine felt that any author who contributed a story to these magazines should be blacklisted . Asimov acknowledged that a story of his would be appearing in Cosmic , but told Tremaine that he had been paid for it . In Asimov 's autobiographical anthology The Early Asimov he recalls that after hearing Tremaine 's comments he requested a token payment of $ 5 from Wollheim ; in Asimov 's autobiography In Memory Yet Green the sequence of events is given slightly differently , with Asimov asking Wollheim for payment , or else for the story to be published under a pseudonym , before the story was published . This was requested on the grounds that " even though the story might be worth nothing , my name was worth something " . Wollheim reluctantly agreed to a payment of $ 5 , commenting that it was an effective word rate of $ 2 @.@ 50 per word , since he was paying only for the use of Asimov 's name . Wollheim later commented that because of the payment he could sue Asimov for royalties whenever the latter 's name appeared in print . 
 In contrast to Tremaine 's attitude , John W. Campbell , the editor of the leading science fiction magazine , Astounding Science Fiction , was not concerned by Albing 's policy . Campbell felt that any story that an author was willing to give away would be so poor that the new magazines would not be competitive . Although Campbell was correct that the magazine was unable to compete with paying magazines , Wollheim managed to produce , in Damon Knight 's words , " a rather surprising level of quality " . 
 As well as stories from the Futurians , Wollheim was able to obtain some material from established names in the field , including David H. Keller and Clark Ashton Smith . Keller occasionally gave material to fan magazines , and Wollheim would have been aware of this when he began looking for free stories . 
 Wollheim was fortunate in obtaining a good deal of artwork from Hannes Bok , later to become a popular artist in the field . Bok was enthusiastic enough about Kornbluth 's " Thirteen O 'Clock " to produce more interior drawings than Wollheim had room for in that issue ; they were eventually used to advertise the magazine in later issues . For the February 1941 issue of Stirring Science Stories , the $ 15 art budget went to Leo Morey , an established artist . Morey 's cover was undistinguished ; Damon Knight commented later that the door to the airlock in the picture evidently did not fit , and that at $ 15 Morey was overpaid . Wollheim also obtained free art from Roy Hunt , an artist based in Denver . The cover for the July 1941 issue of Cosmic Stories was by Elliott Dold ; Dold was at one time regarded as one of the most important sf artists , but this was the last work he did in the science fiction field . The cover has been described by sf historian Mark Rich as " excellent ... [ it ] accurately illustrates a scene " from " Interference " , a story by Kornbluth published under the pseudonym " Walter C. Davies " . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Donald A. Wollheim was the editor for all issues of both Cosmic Stories and Stirring Science Stories . Cosmic had a single volume of three numbers ; Stirring also was numbered in volumes of three issues , but reached volume 2 number 1 with its last issue . Initially the two magazines appeared on an alternating bimonthly schedule , with Stirring 's first issue appearing in February 1941 and Cosmic 's first issue the following month ; after three issues each there was a long delay before a final issue of Stirring appeared in March 1942 . Cosmic was titled " Cosmic Science @-@ Fiction " on the cover for the second and third issues , though it remained " Cosmic Stories " on the masthead . The publisher for all issues of Cosmic and the first three issues of Stirring was Albing Publications of New York ; the final issue of Stirring was published by Manhattan Fiction Publications of New York . Both magazines were priced at 15 cents throughout . Stirring was pulp format and 128 pages long for the first three issues , and switched to large pulp format with 68 pages for the last issue . Cosmic was 130 pages for the first two issues , and 116 pages for the last issue ; all were in pulp format . 
 = Piedmont Park = 
 Piedmont Park is an urban park in Atlanta , Georgia , located about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) northeast of Downtown , between the Midtown and Virginia Highland neighborhoods . Originally the land was owned by Dr. Benjamin Walker , who used it as his out @-@ of @-@ town gentleman 's farm and residence . He sold the land in 1887 to the Gentlemen 's Driving Club ( later renamed the Piedmont Driving Club ) , who wanted to establish an exclusive club and racing ground for horse enthusiasts . The Driving Club entered an agreement with the Piedmont Exposition Company , headed by prominent Atlantan Charles A. Collier , to use the land for fairs and expositions and later gave the park its name . 
 The park was originally designed by Joseph Forsyth Johnson to host the first of two major expositions held in the park in the late 19th century . The Piedmont Exposition opened in October 1887 to great fanfare . The event was a success and set the stage for the Cotton States and International Exposition which was held in the park seven years later in 1895 . Both exhibitions showcased the prosperity of the region that had occurred during and after the Reconstruction period . In the early 20th century , a redesign plan called the Olmsted plan , was begun by the sons of New York Central Park architect , Frederick Law Olmsted . The effort led to the addition of scenic paths in the park and the joining of the park with the Ansley park system . 
 Over the years , the park has also served as an athletic center for the city . Atlanta 's first professional baseball team , the Atlanta Crackers , played in the park from 1902 to 1904 . Several important intercollegiate rivalries were also forged in the park including the University of Georgia vs. Georgia Tech baseball rivalry and Georgia versus Auburn football which has been called the " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " . 
 Throughout the 20th century , many improvements have been made in the park , including the addition of covered picnic areas , tennis facilities , the Lake Clara Meer dock and visitors center , and two playgrounds . In 2008 , a ground @-@ breaking ceremony was held for a 53 @-@ acre ( 210 @,@ 000 m2 ) extension to the park . On April 12 , 2011 , Mayor Kasim Reed cut the ribbon to open the first phase of a major expansion into the northern third of the park . Additional areas at the far north of the park ( near Ansley Mall ) are to be developed next . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Opening = = = 
 Atlanta was a rapidly growing city in the years before Piedmont Park . From 1860 to 1890 , the population jumped from 9 @,@ 554 to 65 @,@ 533 residents . Those years saw the opening of many education institutions such as Morehouse College ( 1867 ) , Clark College ( 1869 ) , Spelman College ( 1881 ) , Morris Brown College ( 1882 ) , Georgia School of Technology ( now known as the Georgia Institute of Technology ) ( 1885 ) , and Agnes Scott College ( 1890 ) . John B. Gordon , a distinguished Confederate general , was Governor of Georgia . 
 The area soon to be known as Piedmont Park was owned by Benjamin Walker , who purchased the 189 acres ( 0 @.@ 76 km2 ) in the 1830s from a man who had won the land in the land lottery . Walker farmed the land until , in 1887 , he sold the land to the Gentlemen 's Driving Club , known today as the Piedmont Driving Club , who planned " to form exclusive club and racing ground for horse enthusiasts " . The driving club entered into an agreement with the Piedmont Exposition Company to use the grounds around the track as exposition space . Charles A. Collier , a prominent Atlanta businessman and former lawyer , was president of the company . Soon after , a main building , grandstands , and club house were built for the track . 
 = = = The 1887 Piedmont Exposition = = = 
 The first exposition ever held in Piedmont Park , the Piedmont Exposition of 1887 , opened on October 10 . The main building constructed for the Exposition was 570 feet ( 170 m ) long , 126 feet ( 38 m ) wide , and two stories high . The first day opened with 20 @,@ 000 visitors . Samuel J. Randall opened the Exposition with a speech on the success of the resurrected post @-@ civil war south . When his speech concluded , General Pierce M. B. Young and his men fired cannons to signal the opening of the events . 
 Exhibitors showed off a variety of items including works of art , local raw materials like manganese marble , and wood work . Many prominent figures of the day were in attendance to see the displays . Governor David B. Hill of New York spoke at the event as well as President Grover Cleveland who attended with his wife , Frances Folsom . Over 50 @,@ 000 people were in attendance for Cleveland 's speech . When the exposition was over , civic leaders said that it had successfully expanded Atlanta 's reputation as a place to visit and to conduct business . 
 The Exposition was also a chance for Atlanta to prove that it was ready to host a world 's fair . The Executive Committee of the Fair was invited to attend the event under the bidding of Charles Reynolds , Secretary of the Piedmont Exposition Company . 
 = = = The " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " = = = 
 Five years later , Piedmont Park was the location of the second football game and the beginning of the " Deep South 's Oldest Rivalry " between Auburn University ( then named Agricultural and Mechanical College of Alabama ) and the University of Georgia . The game was arranged by former Johns Hopkins classmates , Dr. Charles Herty of Georgia and Dr. George Petrie of Auburn . Auburn won the game 10 – 0 . It was rumored afterward that Georgia 's mascot , a goat ( it wasn 't until 1921 that Georgia officially became the Bulldogs ) , was the main course at a barbecue held by Georgia fans after the game . 
 = = = Cotton States and International Exposition ( 1895 ) = = = 
 In 1894 , the Piedmont Exposition Company offered to sell the land to the city of Atlanta for $ 165 @,@ 000 @.@ 00 , but Mayor John B. Goodwin refused . Thus , The park remained in private hands and outside the city limits for another ten years . 
 The Cotton States and International Exposition which opened for 100 days beginning on September 18 , 1895 and ending December 31 , 1895 , attracted visitors from the U.S. and 13 countries . Over $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was spent on the transformation of Piedmont Park . The government allocated $ 250 @,@ 000 for the construction of a government building and many states and countries such as Argentina also had their own buildings . Also constructed for the fair were the Tropical gardens , now known as the Atlanta Botanical Garden , and Lake Clara Meer which was originally a pond but was expanded to 11 @.@ 5 acres ( 47 @,@ 000 m2 ) for the event . Today , the stone balustrades scattered around the park are the only part of the enormous main building . The park remains largely as Joseph Forsyth Johnson designed it for the exposition although some changes were made during the Olmsted planning phase . However , most of the buildings that were constructed for the exposition were made of local Georgia granite and the buildings were dismantled after the event so that the granite could be sold to absolve the debt that the city incurred to hold the fair . 
 Booker T. Washington delivered his famous Atlanta Exposition Speech at the Expo , which is " widely regarded as one of the most significant speeches in American history . " In his speech , Washington pushed for progress but not integration , a point that angered many other black leaders such as W. E. B. Du Bois . 
 Attractions included Buffalo Bill 's Wild West Show , the Liberty Bell , and the first public demonstration of C. Francis Jenkins and Thomas Armat 's motion picture projection device which they called the Phantoscope . John Philip Sousa 's " King Cotton " march was created for the expo and was performed at the ceremony , and was conducted by the composer himself . 
 After the Exposition , the park continued to be extremely popular and was a magnet for growth in the area . State fairs and holiday celebrations were held at the park . Street car lines to the park increased . It was a generally prosperous time . 
 = = = The beginnings of Atlanta baseball = = = 
 In March 1898 , the baseball fields were finally completed . On April 16 , 1898 , the first baseball game between Georgia and Georgia Tech , then known as the Georgia School of Technology , was played . From 1902 until 1904 , the Atlanta Crackers , the city 's original professional baseball team played ball on the fields of Piedmont Park before moving to a stadium on Ponce de Leon Avenue . 
 = = = The Olmsted plan = = = 
 The year 1904 for was a watershed time for the park . The preceding year , the prominent Atlantan George Washington Collier died . Collier had owned 202 acres ( 0 @.@ 82 km2 ) of land to the west and north of the park that was sold for $ 300 @,@ 000 to developers . The city bought the park for $ 98 @,@ 000 in 1904 , incorporating Piedmont Park into Atlanta 's city limits . Mayor Evan Howell agreed to purchase the park , but only if it included those developed areas adjacent to the park which would add approximately $ 35 @,@ 000 to $ 40 @,@ 000 in tax revenues annually . 
 The main developer of Collier 's land was Edwin Ansley , who created the Ansley Park subdivision under the guidelines set by the <unk> . The result was curvy streets surrounding " mini @-@ parks " comprising a total of 25 acres ( 100 @,@ 000 m2 ) . In 1912 , these parks were deeded to the city . 
 In 1909 , the sons of Frederick Law Olmsted , landscape architect for Central Park in New York , Carey and Frederick , Jr. were asked to design the park 's master plan while they were at work on Grant Park . The city agreed to pay $ 1 @,@ 800 for the plan , but Olmsted was concerned that Atlanta might not have enough money for the necessary improvements . 
 In 1910 , the brothers submitted a plan for the park that was to include a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) scenic path and driveways that would link Piedmont Park to the streets of Ansley Park . Joining the parks was a success and thereafter , the parks were known as Twin Parks . Although never fully implemented , the Olmsted plan had a great effect on the development in the surrounding area . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century growth and development = = = 
 The park 's first bathhouse was opened in 1911 . Swimming in the lake was allowed until 1973 , when the city opened a pool in the park . 
 On January 29 , 1913 , Calvin <unk> applied for a building permit to construct the Piedmont Park Apartments . The apartments were designed by Leila Ross Wilburn and were decidedly middle @-@ class unlike some of the other developments in the area . The apartments remained middle @-@ class up until about 1960 , and residents included such prominent Atlantans as accounting company president T. C. Dunlap and lawyer J. B. Stewart . In 1913 , seven clay courts were built where the 1895 Cotton States and International Exposition 's Manufacturers and Liberal Arts Building once was . Eight more courts were added in 1914 to accommodate the overwhelming demand . 
 Notable additions and buildings include the bandstand , built in 1915 ; a picnic shelter constructed by the WPA in 1936 ; the Noguchi " Playscapes " , completed in 1976 under the aegis of the High Museum and a grant from the National Endowment for the Arts and designed by world @-@ renowned artist and sculptor Isamu Noguchi , noteworthy as the only public work by Noguchi in the U.S. In 2002 , the dog park was opened . 
 The Noguchi " Playscapes " underwent restoration in 2005 under Eddie Granderson , public arts manager of the City of Atlanta . Jablonski Berkowitz Conservation Inc. was selected to do the restoration and assessments began in September of that year . The company was charged with bringing the playground up to safety codes and restoring the original paint . 
 = = = 2008 drought = = = 
 In January 2008 , city officials announced that the Peachtree Road Race , Atlanta Pride Festival , the Atlanta Jazz Festival , and the Dogwood Festival would not be held in the park due to extreme drought . Some festivals which don 't make use of green space were still allowed in the park . The Atlanta Arts Festival ran from September 12 – 14 , 2008 , and utilized only paved areas . Other festivals were temporarily moved to alternate venues , such as Centennial Olympic Park . The drought in Atlanta ended by late 2009 . In 2010 , several events returned to Piedmont Park , including the Dogwood Festival , the Jazz Festival , and Screen on the Green . 
 = = = 2011 expansion = = = 
 Approximately 50 acres ( 20 ha ) in the northwest portion of the 187 @-@ acre ( 76 ha ) park had remained woodlands into the 21st century . In 2007 , a park expansion plan called for a new parking deck as well as " open green space , bicycle and walking trails , formal and community gardens , an interactive water feature , children 's playgrounds , a skate park , athletic fields , and woodlands " . The project was expected to cost $ 72 million . 
 On April 23 , 2008 , a ground @-@ breaking ceremony was held at the Bathhouse for the 53 @-@ acre ( 21 ha ) expansion of the Park . The pool and bathhouse are part of a huge Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) renovation that cost around $ 7 @.@ 8 million and was completed in early summer 2009 . The renovation features accessibility , a warming kitchen , WiFi , a pool with beach entry , <unk> , current channel , vortex , fountains , separate splash pad , lap lanes , landscaped deck environment , and concessions . A new area featuring a Bocce ball court and green space with an arbor opened in May 2010 . 
 On April 12 , 2011 , Mayor Kasim Reed cut the ribbon to open the first phase of a major expansion into the northern third of the park . Areas opened include two oval @-@ shaped plazas ( " The <unk> " and " The Promenade " , which contains the interactive Legacy Fountain ) , the Lower Meadow , the Six Springs Wetlands , and a vastly expanded dog park . 
 = = = 2013 expansion = = = 
 Construction began in early 2013 on areas at the far north of the park , including The Northwoods , Piedmont Commons , and Piedmont Gardens . New park entrances are to be added at the eastern end of Westminster Dr. ( off Piedmont Ave . ) , the northern end of Dutch Valley Pl . , and at 1514 Monroe just south of Piedmont Ave . , on the site of Agnes & Muriel 's restaurant . Map There are already dirt trails that follow Clear Creek and the BeltLine northwards connecting the 2011 and 2013 expansion areas and providing pedestrian access to the Ansley Mall area north of the park , and to the BeltLine trail going further north . 
 = = Piedmont Park Conservancy = = 
 The Piedmont Park Conservancy is a 501 ( c ) 3 non @-@ profit organization that is in charge of park improvements and 90 percent of the Park 's daily maintenance care and security . The Conservancy was founded in 1989 to revitalize the rapidly deteriorating park . Since then , it has raised and invested $ 23 million in private funds making the park , once again , the most visited green space in Atlanta . 
 = = Activities and facilities = = 
 = = = Outdoor activities = = = 
 The park hosts several miles of paved paths suitable for walking , running , biking , and inline skating . Skate Escape across from the park at the 12th Street entrance rents both bikes and skates . On weekend afternoons , skateboarders and inline skaters often share the open , paved area inside the 12th Street entrance . 
 Piedmont Park has picnic shelters located just to the East of the north soccer field . There are also various picnic tables and benches throughout the park . Many visitors choose to picnic on the expansive lawns as well . The first grill in Piedmont Park was erected for the 1895 Cotton States Exposition where the administrative offices now sit . There are 22 grills throughout the park . No portable grills are allowed . 
 The Noguchi " <unk> " is located near the 12th Street Gate . The geometrically shaped , modernist playground includes a soaring swing set , slide , sand pit , climbing dome and more made of bright and exciting colors . Also in the park is a new playground known as Mayor 's Grove . It was designed as a Boundless Playgrounds and features a high level of accessibility and interactive play . 
 = = = Sports = = = 
 Piedmont Park is a popular place for organized sports . The Sharon E. Lester Tennis Center at Piedmont Park is a fully staffed , public facility with 12 lighted hard courts , offering leagues , lessons , and supplies . 
 The Active Oval has two softball fields , two soccer fields , and two beach volleyball courts , all ringed by a dirt running path . Kickball leagues also use the softball fields . 
 The park 's swimming center , once closed for renovations , re @-@ opened in summer of 2009 . 
 = = = Fishing and the lake = = = 
 The lake is located in the south east part of the park . Fishing is permitted in the lake , which is stocked with large mouth bass , crappie , bream , and catfish . A 2002 renovation of the lake added a new bridge connecting the two bodies of water and three fishing piers located around the lake . 
 Clara Meer Dock is located at the west corner of the lake . Just above the Dock sits the historic Visitor Center building . Clara Meer Dock forms an amphitheater @-@ like space nestled into the western end of the lake . Clara Meer Dock is often used for wedding ceremonies . Rental of the dock also includes the Visitor 's Center . The Visitor 's Center features a barrel ceiling with a painted mural called " A Day at the Park " by Ralph Gilbert . The center seats 40 persons inside and over 200 more on the adjoining lawn and dock . The Dock seats up to 120 for ceremony , or up to 100 for table dining or possible dance floor area . 
 Mayor 's Grove is the newer of the two playgrounds in Piedmont Park . It was designed as a Boundless playground and features a high level of accessibility and interactive play . 
 = = = Dogs = = = 
 With the exception of some festival weekends and special events , dogs are permitted in Piedmont Park , on leashes 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) or shorter for safety reasons . Owners must clean up after their dogs , and the park has a half @-@ dozen plastic bag dispensing stations to facilitate this . Several of the park 's water fountains also have a ground @-@ level basin for dogs to use . 
 Just north of the Park Road entrance bridge are two fenced @-@ in Dog Parks where friendly dogs ( and their owners ) can cavort with each other off @-@ leash . Brand new , vastly expanded parks for small and large dogs were opened in Apr 2011 . 
 The Leash @-@ free Alliance of Piedmont Park ( <unk> ) is a volunteer group that works with the Conservancy on dog park improvements , fundraising efforts , and clean up projects . 
 = = = Special events = = = 
 Piedmont Park is a central focal point of Atlanta 's Midtown community . The park is home to various annual celebrations and events , including Atlanta Pride Festival , the Atlanta Jazz Festival , the Atlanta Dogwood Festival , Music Midtown , and Festival Peachtree Latino . A summer series of classic films , Screen on the Green , is also aired in the park for local residents . 
 On the weekend and holidays , the park comes alive with music , intramural sports , and fun festivities . In 2004 , Georgia Shakespeare Festival added an annual series of free performances entitled " Shake on the Lake " with Lake Clara Meer as a backdrop . A centennial celebration was held for the park in June 2004 . In 2007 , the Allman Brothers Band and Dave Matthews Band played a concert with proceeds benefiting the planned expansion to the park . Dave Matthews Band 's performance was later released as a live DVD as well as their eighth live album , Live at Piedmont Park . Sir Paul McCartney performed in Piedmont Park to benefit the conservancy on August 15 , 2009 . The Eagles performed at the park on October 16 , 2010 , also as a benefit for the conservancy . In 2011 , Music Midtown returned from its five @-@ year hiatus , hosting headliners Coldplay and The Black Keys in Piedmont Park . 
 = = Park schedule = = 
 The park is open from 6 : 00 AM to 11 : 00 PM every day . 
 = Audition ( 1999 film ) = 
 Audition ( <unk> , <unk> ) is a 1999 Japanese horror film , based on the novel of the same name , directed by Takashi Miike . It is about a recent widower , <unk> Aoyama ( Ryo Ishibashi ) , whose son suggests that he find a new wife . Aoyama agrees , and with a friend , stages a phoney audition to meet a potential new partner in life . After interviewing several women , Aoyama becomes interested in Asami ( Eihi Shiina ) , who responds well to him , although as they begin to date , her dark past begins to affect their relationship . 
 Audition was originally started by the Japanese company Omega Project , who wanted to make a horror film after the great financial success of their previous production Ring . To create the film , the company purchased the rights to Ryu Murakami 's book Audition , and hired screenwriter Daisuke Tengan and director Miike to film an adaptation . The cast and crew consisted primarily of people Miike had worked with on previous projects , with the exception of Shiina , who had worked as a model prior to beginning a career in film . The film was shot in about three weeks in Tokyo . 
 The film premièred , with a few other Japanese horror films , at the Vancouver International Film Festival , but it began to receive much more attention when it was shown at the Rotterdam International Film Festival in 2000 , where it received the FIPRESCI Prize and the <unk> Award . Following a theatrical release in Japan , the film continued to play at festivals and had theatrical releases in the United States and United Kingdom , followed by several home media releases . Audition was received positively by Western film critics on its release , with many noting the final torture sequence in the film and how it contrasts with the non @-@ horrific scenes prior . The film has been listed on several Best Horror Film lists and has had an influence on other horror films and directors including Eli Roth and the Soska sisters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Shigeharu Aoyama ( Ryo Ishibashi ) , a middle @-@ aged widower of seven years , is urged by his 17 @-@ year @-@ old son , Shigehiko ( Tetsu Sawaki ) , to begin dating again . Aoyama 's friend Yasuhisa Yoshikawa ( Jun <unk> ) , a film producer , devises a mock casting audition at which young women audition for the " part " of Aoyama 's new wife . Aoyama agrees to the plan and is immediately enchanted by Asami Yamazaki ( Eihi Shiina ) , attracted to her apparent emotional depth . 
 Yoshikawa develops misgivings about Asami after he is unable to reach any of the references on her résumé , such as a music producer she claimed to work for , who is missing . However , Aoyama is so enthralled by her that he pursues her anyway . She lives in an empty apartment , containing a sack and a phone . For four days after the audition , she sits perfectly still next to the phone waiting for it to ring . When it finally does , she answers pretending that she never expected Aoyama to call . After several dates , she agrees to accompany him to a seaside hotel , where a smitten Aoyama intends to propose marriage . At the hotel , Asami reveals that she was abused as a child and shows burn scars on her body . After making love , Asami demands that Aoyama pledge his love to her and no one else . A deeply moved Aoyama agrees . In the morning , Asami is nowhere to be found . 
 Aoyama tries to track her down using her résumé , but as Yoshikawa warned , all of the contacts are dead ends . At the dance studio where she claimed to have trained , he finds a man with prosthetic feet . The bar where she claimed to work has been abandoned for a year following the murder and dismemberment of the owner . A passerby tells Aoyama that the police found three extra fingers , an extra ear , and an extra tongue when they recovered the body ; Aoyama has hallucinations of the body pieces . Meanwhile , Asami goes to Aoyama 's house and finds a photo of his late wife . Enraged , she drugs his liquor . Aoyama comes home , pours a drink , and begins feeling the effects of the drug . A flashback shows that the sack in Asami 's apartment contains a man missing both feet , his tongue , one ear and three fingers on one hand . He crawls out and begs for food . Asami vomits into a dog dish and places it on the floor for the man . The man sticks his face into the vomit and hungrily consumes it . 
 Aoyama collapses from the drug . Asami injects him with a paralytic agent that leaves his nerves alert , and tortures him with needles . She tells him that just like everyone else in her life , he has failed to love only her . She cannot tolerate his feelings for anyone else , even his own son . She inserts needles into his eyes , giggling as she does so . She then cuts off his left foot with piano wire . Shigehiko returns home as Asami begins to cut off Aoyama 's other foot , and she chases him upstairs . As she attacks the boy , Aoyama appears to suddenly wake up back in the hotel after he and Asami had sex , and his current ordeal seems to be only a nightmare ; Aoyama proposes marriage and Asami accepts . As he falls back asleep in the hotel , he returns to find his son struggling with Asami . Shigehiko kicks her downstairs , breaking her neck . Aoyama tells his son to call the police and stares at the dying Asami , who repeats what she said on one of their dates about her excitement on seeing him again . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Ryo Ishibashi as Shigeharu Aoyama ( <unk> <unk> , Aoyama Shigeharu ) 
 Eihi Shiina as Asami Yamazaki ( <unk> <unk> , Yamazaki Asami ) 
 Jun <unk> as Yasuhisa Yoshikawa ( <unk> , Yoshikawa Yasuhisa ) 
 Miyuki Matsuda as Ryoko Aoyama ( <unk> , Aoyama Ryoko ) 
 <unk> Negishi as Rie ( <unk> ) 
 Tetsu Sawaki as Shigehiko Aoyama ( <unk> <unk> , Aoyama Shigehiko ) 
 Shigeru Saiki as <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> no <unk> ) 
 Ken <unk> as Director ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Ren <unk> as Shimada ( <unk> ) 
 Renji Ishibashi as Old man in wheelchair ( <unk> , <unk> no <unk> ) 
 = = Themes = = 
 Audition has been read as both feminist and misogynist . Miike has stated that when he met journalists in the United Kingdom and France , he found they commented on the film 's feminist themes when Asami gets revenge on the men in her life . The film sets up Aoyama with traits and behaviours which could be considered sexist : a list of criteria for his bride to meet , and the phoney audition format he uses to search for future wife . Tom Mes , author of Agitator : The Cinema of Takashi Miike stated that the torture sequence , with the mutilation of Aoyama , can be seen as revenge from Asami . Dennis Lim of the Los Angeles Times examined similar themes , noting that the film as " ultimately about the male fear of women and female sexuality " , noting that women are blatantly objectified in the first half of the film and in the second half Asami " goes on to redress this imbalance " when she becomes an " avenging angel " . Chris <unk> , writing in the American Cinematographer , stated that one plausible approach to interpreting the film is to see the final act as a representation of Aoyama 's guilt at his mistreatment of women and his desire to dominate them . Aoyama develops a paranoid fantasy of an attacking object : because he harbours sadistic thoughts towards women , he develops a fear that the object will retaliate . Contrary to this , Miike has stated that the final torture scenes in the film are not a paranoid nightmare dreamed up by Aoyama . Mes has argued against the feminist portrayal of the film , noting that Asami is not motivated by an ideological agenda , and that acknowledging that she takes revenge on a man who has lied to her would be ignoring that she has also lied to Aoyama . Asami states " I want to tell you everything " during the torture scene , implying she had not been truthful before . Mes also notes that avenging angel theme contradicts the interpretation of a feminist @-@ themed revenge as one of people that Asami 's attacks was female . 
 In Audition , the character of Asami is a victim of child abuse . Colette Balmain , in her book Introduction to Japanese Horror Film , described Asami as " just one more face of the wronged women in Japanese culture ... They are victims of repression and oppression , and only death and loneliness remain for them " . " The film critic Robin Wood wrote that through her child abuse , Asami is taught that love and pain must be inseparable . The audience is led to identify with Asami through this victimization and also what Stephen <unk> described as a " patriarchal Japanese society " . Elvis Mitchell ( The New York Times ) stated that the theme of the film was : " the objectification of women in Japanese society and the mirror @-@ image horror of retribution it could create " . Tom Mes suggested that these themes can be witnessed in the scene where Asami feeds her mutilated prisoner and then turns into the childhood version of herself and pets him like a dog . Mes concludes that this is done to suggest that what had happened in Asami 's life had made her the violent adult seen in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The main production company behind Audition was the Japanese company Omega Project . Omega were originally behind the production of Hideo Nakata 's film Ring ; this was a great success in Japan and , subsequently , the rest of Asia . Omega had problems setting up the release of Ring in Korea and had the company <unk> Korea work on a Korean re @-@ adaptation of the Ring . The following year , in 1998 , Omega partnered again with <unk> Korea and other production companies including Creators Company Connection , Film Face , and <unk> to make the adaptation of Ryū Murakami 's 1997 novel Audition . Omega wanted to create a film different than supernatural @-@ themed Ring , and chose to adapt Murakami 's novel , which lacked this trait . To attempt something different , they hired a screenwriter ( Daisuke Tengan ) and a director ( Takashi Miike ) who were not known for working on horror films . Prior to Audition , Tengan was best known as a screenwriter for working with his father ( Shohei Imamura ) on The Eel , which won the Palme d 'Or in 1997 . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 To create Audition , Miike worked with many of his previous collaborators , such as cinematographer Hideo Yamamoto . Miike spoke of his cinematographer by saying that Yamamoto was : " very sensitive towards death . Both of his parents died very young , and it 's not something he talks about much " . Miike also noted that he felt that Yamamoto was : " living in fear , and that sensibility comes through in his work . It 's something I want to make the most of " . The film 's score was composed by Kōji Endō . Endō had previously composed work for Miike on films such as The Bird People in China . Yasushi Shimamura was the film 's editor . Shimamura had worked with Miike as early as Lady Hunter : Prelude To Murder in 1991 . 
 Actor Ryo Ishibashi wanted to work with Miike and agreed to the role . He commented that despite not being a great fan of horror films , he enjoyed scripts , such as that of Audition , that showcased human nature . Model Eihi Shiina was cast in the film as Asami . Shiina 's career was primarily as a model and she only began acting after being offered a film role while she was on holidays . Shiina first learned about Miike through his film Blues Harp , which made her interested in meeting the director . When Shiina first met Miike , they began talking about her opinions on love and relationships . On their second meeting , Miike asked Shiina to play the part of Asami . Shiina thought that the opinions and feelings she expressed to Miike were the reason she was cast in the role , and she tried to play the role as naturally as she could without going over the top . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Audition was shot in approximately three weeks , which was about one more week than usual for Miike 's films at the time . Scenes such as those in Asami 's apartment and at a restaurant were shot on location in a real apartment and a real restaurant . Outdoor scenes were shot in Tokyo , along intersections in Omotesandō . 
 The torture scene at the end of the film did not initially contain Asami 's lines " Kiri @-@ kiri @-@ kiri " . Shiina was initially whispering her lines while filming this scene , but after discussion with Miike , the two decided that having her say these lines would make the scene scarier . Ishibashi found that Miike was " having so much fun with that scene " , and that Miike was especially excited when Ishibashi 's character 's legs are cut off . For the special effects where Shiina 's character places acupuncture needles into Ishibashi , special effects make @-@ up was used to create a mask layer which was laid upon Ishibashi 's eyes , which is then pierced by the needles . 
 = = Release = = 
 Audition had its world premiere on October 2 , 1999 at the Vancouver International Film Festival . The premiere was part of a program of modern Japanese horror films at the festival , including Ring , Ring 2 , Shikoku and Gemini . Audition was screened at the 29th Rotterdam International Film Festival in Holland in early 2000 where it was shown as part of a Miike retrospective . Tom Mes stated that Audition received the most attention at Rotterdam , where it won the FIPRESCI Prize for the best film of competition . The FIPRESCI award was given by a jury of international film journalists , who grant this award during the Rotterdam International Film Festival . Only films not in competition qualify for the award . Audition also won the <unk> Award , voted by the Circle of Dutch Film journalists . 
 Audition was released theatrically in Japan on March 3 , 2000 . It received its American premier at the Seattle International Film Festival in 2000 . The film was first screened outside Festivals in the United States in early August 2001 . In the United Kingdom , Audition received screenings in 2000 at both <unk> and the Raindance Film Festival . It was released theatrically in the United Kingdom by Metro Tartan in mid @-@ March 2001 . It was Miike 's first film to be released theatrically in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Home media release = = = 
 Audition was released on DVD in the United States by Chimera on June 4 , 2002 . The DVD included an interview with Miike and a documentary on the Egyptian Theater in Los Angeles . A new DVD was released by Lionsgate in 2005 dubbed the " uncut special edition " . This release included an interview with Ryu Murakami , a selected scene commentary by Miike , and a clip from Bravo 's The 100 Scariest Movie Moments . Peter Schorn of IGN gave a negative review of the 2006 DVD , finding that the video was " <unk> to the point that a distracting , shifting <unk> frequently in backgrounds that draws the eye away from the actors " . IGN concluded that the : " overall image quality is soft and fuzzy , with weak black levels , murky shadow areas and less @-@ than @-@ impressive color saturation " . On October 6 , 2009 , Shout ! Factory released a DVD and Blu @-@ ray release of the film that featured an introduction by Miike and actress Eihi Shiina , a full audio commentary by Miike and screenwriter Daisuke Tengan , and a documentary featuring the cast . 
 Audition was released in the United Kingdom on DVD by Tartan Video on June 28 , 2004 . The disc contained an interview with Miike and liner notes by Joe Cornish . Matthew Leyland ( Sight & Sound ) reviewed this release , stating that the audio and visual presentation was " exemplary " while noting that the interview with Miike was the only noteworthy bonus feature on the disc . The film was later released by Arrow Video on February 29 , 2016 . The Arrow Video release was exclusively restored in 2K resolution and was scanned from a 35mm interpositive . 
 = = Reception = = 
 On Rotten Tomatoes , the film has an approval rating of 80 % , based on 70 reviews , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 3 / 10 . The site 's critical consensus reads : " An audacious , unsettling Japanese horror film from director Takashi Miike , Audition entertains as both a grisly shocker and a psychological drama " . On Metacritic , the film has a weighted average score of 69 out of 100 , based on 19 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Ken Eisner ( Variety ) gave the film a positive review . The reviewer referred to the film as a " truly shocking horror film " that was : " made even more disturbing by its haunting beauty " . Geoffrey Macnab , writing in Sight and Sound , referred to the film as a " slow @-@ burning but ultimately devastating horror pic " and said that : " It 's a virtuoso piece of film @-@ making with much more subtlety and depth than Miike 's other films " . The Hollywood Reporter 's Frank Scheck described the film as : " One of the most audacious , iconoclastic horror films in recent years " . Mark Schilling ( The Japan Times ) praised Shiina and Ishibashi 's acting , but noted that : " Among the film 's few irritants is a smarmy , <unk> bad guy turn by Renji Ishibashi as Asami 's wheelchair @-@ bound ballet instructor . He is a reminder of where too many other Miike films have headed -- straight for the video racks " . Schilling concluded that : " Miike is ready for a bigger role -- as one of the leading Japanese directors of his generation " . 
 In the early 2010s , Time Out conducted a poll with several authors , directors , actors and critics who have worked within the horror genre to vote for their top horror films . Audition placed at number 18 on their top 100 list . 
 Writers for Variety , the Hollywood Reporter and Sight & Sound all emphasized the film 's final scene . Scheck ( Hollywood Reporter ) stated that : " Miike lulls the audience into a state of complacency with a studied , slow @-@ moving , lightly comic first half before delivering a gruesome final section that makes Stephen King 's Misery look wholesome " ; the ending was : " all the more shocking for the clinical way in which it is presented " . Eisner ( Variety ) stated that it is only at the ending of the film that Audition : " breaks out of <unk> ghetto " . In his essay on themes in Audition , Robin Wood stated that most of Miike 's films are disturbing for : " what they have to tell us about the state of contemporary civilization ; they are not in the least disturbing in themselves , operating on some fantasy level of annihilation , with ' comic @-@ book ' violence " . In comparison , he stated that Audition is " authentically disturbing , and infinitely more horrifying : the first time I watched it - on DVD , at home , after warnings I had received - I was repeatedly tempted , through the last half hour , to turn it off " . Wood compared the film to Pier Paolo Pasolini 's Salò , or the 120 Days of Sodom , stating that the film was : " almost as unwatchable as the news reels - of Auschwitz , of the innocent victims of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and Vietnam , victims of Nazi or American dehumanization " . 
 Of the film 's success with Western audiences , Miike states that he was not surprised , but that he had : " no idea what goes on in the minds of people in the West and I don 't pretend to know what their tastes are . And I don 't want to start thinking about that . It 's nice that they liked my movie , but I 'm not going to start deliberately worrying about why or what I can do to make it happen again " . Actress Eihi Shiina stated that , in Japan , only a certain type of film fan would watch Audition . By comparison , she said , the film was seen by many more people overseas , which she attributed to " good timing " . 
 = = Aftermath and influence = = 
 After the release of Audition , Miike was going to adapt Murakami 's novel Coin Locker Babies , but the project failed to find financing to get started . 
 Audition has been described as an influence on " torture porn " . The term was invented by David Edelstein to describe films such as Saw , The Devil 's Rejects and Wolf Creek that offer " titillating and shocking " scenes that push the audience to the margins of depravity for them to " feel something " . Audition influenced American directors such as Eli Roth . Roth stated that Audition influenced him to make his film Hostel , with Miike even making a cameo as a satisfied customer of the kidnappers who let customers torture their victims . Richard Corliss , writing in Time , opined that Audition was different from torture porn films as : " unlike Saw and its imitators in the genre of torture porn , Audition doesn 't go for gore @-@ <unk> money shots . Miike 's films live inside their characters , taking the temperature of their longings , the ridiculous ambitions they chase so obsessively and their need to experience the extreme to prove they 're alive " . Audition was listed by twin directors Jen and Sylvia Soska as one of their favourite horror films , and with the sisters saying that it was an influence on their film American Mary . The directors noted the character of Asami , stating that an audience generally sees : " female characters in a horror film as the helpless victim . This film leads you in one direction , skillfully hinting at a darker storyline for the otherwise meek and slight Asami until the final 15 minutes where we are introduced to a merciless monster . A perfect personification of the irrational rage of a woman scorned " . 
 Deadline reported that executive producer Mario Kassar had begun work on an English language adaptation of Audition in 2014 . Richard Gray was brought on to serve as the remake 's director and screenwriter . The film 's storyline will be taken from the Murakami novel as opposed to an adaptation of Miike 's film , and the film will take place in North America . The new film is set to include scenes and locations in the novel that were not in the Miike 's film . 
 = Battle of Forts Clinton and Montgomery = 
 The Battle of Forts Clinton and Montgomery was an American Revolutionary War battle fought in the highlands of the Hudson River valley , not far from West Point , on October 6 , 1777 . British forces under the command of General Sir Henry Clinton captured Fort Clinton and Fort Montgomery , and then dismantled the Hudson River Chain . The purpose of the attack was to create a diversion to draw American troops from the army of General Horatio Gates , whose army was opposing British General John Burgoyne 's attempt to gain control of the Hudson . 
 The forts were garrisoned by about 600 Continental Army troops under the command of two brothers , General ( and Governor of New York ) George Clinton , and General James Clinton , while General Israel Putnam led additional troops at nearby Peekskill , New York . ( This battle is also sometimes called the " battle of the Clintons " due to the number of participants with that name . The brothers were probably not related to Sir Henry . ) Using a series of feints , Henry Clinton fooled Putnam into withdrawing most of his troops to the east , and then he landed over 2 @,@ 000 troops on the west side of the Hudson to assault the two forts . 
 After several hours of hiking through the hilly terrain , Clinton divided his troops to stage simultaneous assaults on the two forts . Although the approach to Fort Montgomery was contested by a company armed with a small field piece , they attacked the two forts at nearly the same time and captured them after a relatively short battle . More than half the defenders were killed , wounded , or captured . The British followed up this success with raids as far north as Kingston before being recalled to New York City . The action came too late to be of any assistance to Burgoyne , who surrendered his army on October 17 . The only notable consequences of the action were the casualties suffered and the British destruction of the two forts on their departure . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Hudson River valley was a strategically critical area throughout the American Revolutionary War . Through this area moved supplies , men and materials between the New England states and those further south , something that became even more vitally important when the British largely abandoned New England as an objective of military control later in the war . In June 1777 , General John Burgoyne began an attempt to gain control of this key area by moving south from the British province of Quebec . After his early success at Ticonderoga , his campaign become bogged down in logistical difficulties , not reaching Saratoga , New York until mid @-@ September . Burgoyne held expectations that his campaign would be supported by military forces based in New York City under the command of General William Howe , and that the forces would meet at Albany , about 40 miles ( 64 km ) south of Saratoga . 
 Apparently as result of poor communications with Lord Germain , Britain 's Secretary of State for the Colonies and the political official in charge of the conflict , General Howe decided instead to attempt the capture of Philadelphia , and sailed south with much of his army in July , leaving Sir Henry Clinton in command at New York . Howe 's instructions to General Clinton were primarily to hold New York City , and to only engage in offensive operations that were consistent with that goal . His instructions to Clinton on July 30 included a promise that reinforcements would arrive ( but without any promised time ) , and that Clinton should consider making a move " in favor or General Burgoyne 's approaching Albany , with security to Kingsbridge " if the opportunity presented itself . A letter from Howe reached Burgoyne on August 3 informing him of his move to Philadelphia , and of Clinton 's instructions . Clinton wrote a letter on September 12 ( received by Burgoyne on the 21st , after the Battle of Freeman 's Farm ) that he would " make a push at [ Fort ] Montgomery in about ten days " if " you think 2000 men can assist you effectually " . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = American defenses = = = 
 The highland region of the Hudson River valley ( near West Point ) was defended by Continental Army troops and state militia under the command of Major General Israel Putnam , who was based at Peekskill . Several miles upriver from Peekskill , just above the <unk> Gorge where <unk> Creek enters the Hudson , the Americans had placed a chain across the Hudson to prevent British naval vessels from sailing further upriver . The chain 's western end was guarded by Fort Montgomery ( named for the late General Richard Montgomery ) , which also overlooked the gorge to the south . Also on the west side of the river , south of the gorge , they had established Fort Clinton ( probably named for General James Clinton ) . Fort Montgomery , which was still undergoing construction , was under the command of General ( and Governor of New York ) George Clinton , while Fort Clinton was under the command of his older brother James . Their combined forces numbered about 600 . 
 The primary camp at Peekskill , which any British naval movements would need to pass , had roughly 600 men . Of the men at the three sites , about 1 @,@ 000 were regular troops , while the remainder were short @-@ term New York militia . Putnam 's forces had originally been larger , but General Washington had ordered some of Putnam 's troops to assist either his ( Washington 's ) defense against Howe or Gates ' defense against Burgoyne , and a number of local militia companies had been dismissed when Howe 's movements became known . Putnam received word of the arrival of transports in New York on September 29 , and wrote Governor Clinton for assistance , who immediately came south from Kingston to take charge of the forts . 
 = = = British movements = = = 
 In mid @-@ September ( around the time he wrote the letter to Burgoyne ) , Sir Henry Clinton had around 7 @,@ 000 men , including around 3 @,@ 000 poorly trained Loyalists , to defend New York City . His letter to Burgoyne had been predicated on the expectation that the expected reinforcements would arrive in time for him to make a move up the Hudson within ten days . On September 29 , he received a letter from Burgoyne ( written after Freeman 's Farm ) in response to his that was a direct plea for action . 
 By the end of September , 1 @,@ 700 additional troops were landed from the fleet arriving at New York . On October 3 , Sir Henry started up the Hudson River with 3 @,@ 000 men in three frigates and a number of smaller vessels . The next day , he landed some troops near Tarrytown as a feint to draw Putnam 's troops from Peekskill . These troops marched about and then reboarded the ships , which continued north . He then made a similar feinting maneuver at Verplanck 's Point , just three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south of Peekskill on October 5 , where he dislodged a poorly manned American outpost . These feinting maneuvers completely fooled Putnam , who drew his troops back into the eastern highlands and sent messages across the Hudson for reinforcements . 
 Shortly before this last movement , Sir Henry received a dispatch from Burgoyne . In it , Burgoyne explicitly appeals to Clinton for instruction on whether he should attempt to advance or retreat , based on the likelihood of Clinton 's arrival at Albany for support . He indicated that if he did not receive a response by October 12 , he would be forced to retreat . ( Clinton 's response , not written until October 7 , was a markedly formal response , indicating that he was providing the requested diversion , and had no expectation of reaching Albany , adding that " Sir Henry Clinton cannot presume to give any Orders to General Burgoyne " , as Burgoyne outranked him . Fortunately for Clinton none of the three copies of this letter reached Burgoyne ; all of the messengers carrying them were captured . ) 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the foggy morning of October 6 , Sir Henry Clinton landed 2 @,@ 100 men at Stony Point on the west side of the Hudson and , with the assistance of a Loyalist guide , marched them up onto a local rise called the " <unk> " . After descending the other side to a place called Doodletown , they encountered a scouting party that Governor Clinton had sent out for reconnaissance , which retreated toward Fort Clinton after a brief exchange of fire . Sir Henry then divided his force into two attack groups to take the forts . A force of about 900 men under Lieutenant Colonel Campbell , composed of the 52nd and 57th regiments , a detachment of Hessian chasseurs , and about 400 Loyalists led by Beverley Robinson , began the 7 miles ( 11 km ) trek around the gorge toward Fort Montgomery , while Sir Henry waited with the remaining 1 @,@ 200 men at Doodletown before starting on the trail to Fort Clinton in order to give Campbell time to make the longer journey before beginning simultaneous attacks on the two forts . 
 Governor Clinton , when alerted to the first skirmish , had immediately sent to Putnam for reinforcements . Shortly after sending that message he learned from scouts that Sir Henry 's forces were divided . While waiting for reinforcements ( that never came because of Sir Henry 's successful feints ) his brother James sent 100 men from Fort Clinton toward Doodletown , while he sent another company from Fort Montgomery to oppose Campbell 's force . 
 = = = Fort Montgomery = = = 
 The detachment from Fort Montgomery numbered about 100 men , and included a small artillery piece commanded by Captain John Lamb . Setting up a defensive position about one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the fort , they engaged Campbell 's tired forces with spirit . While they were eventually forced to retreat , they were able to spike the field piece before abandoning it to the British . After another stand closer to the fort , supported by 12 @-@ pound piece , they again retreated ( again not before spiking the cannon ) . Due to this dogged defense , Campbell was not in position until about one hour before sunset ( having left Doodletown at around 10 am ) . Offered the chance to surrender , Governor Clinton refused , and the battle was joined . 
 Campbell arrayed the Loyalists on the left , the German chasseurs in the center , and the British regiments on the right . Despite vigorous defense and the death of Colonel Campbell , the British forces broke into the fort , where they engaged in a near massacre to avenge the loss of Campbell and other officers . James Clinton narrowly escaped being killed by bayonet when his orderly book deflected the weapon 's point . He and a portion of the fort 's garrison escaped into the woods north of the fort . 
 = = = Fort Clinton = = = 
 The main approach to Fort Clinton was via a narrow strip of land about 400 yards ( 370 m ) wide between a small lake and the river , which , in addition to being covered by the fort 's cannons , Governor Clinton had protected by placing abatis to impeded the British advance . Sir Henry sent the 63rd Foot around the lake to attack the fort from the northwest , while he first sent the light companies of the 7th and 26th regiments and a company of Anspach grenadiers against the main works , followed by the 26th Foot and a detachment from the 17th Light Dragoons , and then the remaining British and German companies . As at Fort Montgomery , the defenders were eventually overwhelmed . Those that surrendered , however , were not subjected to some of the savagery that took place to the north . A number of the garrison , including General Clinton , escaped by scrambling down the embankment to the river , where gunboats took them to safety across the river . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 The British casualties were 41 killed and 142 wounded . The Americans had 26 officers and 237 enlisted men captured and about 75 killed and wounded apart from wounded prisoners ; most of them from the garrison of Fort Clinton . The Americans were also forced to destroy a number of boats in the area , as unfavorable winds prevented them from escaping upriver . The next day Sir Henry sent a small detachment to Fort Constitution , a small outpost opposite West Point , and demanded its surrender . The lightly manned garrison at first refused , but it retreated on October 8 in the face of a larger attack force . 
 Governor Clinton and General Putnam strategized on their next move . Clinton opted to move north with troops on the western shore , as a defense against attacks further upriver , while Putnam would take steps to defend against attacks to the east . 
 = = = Further British action = = = 
 Captain James Wallace had begun clearing the river of American @-@ laid obstacles following the battle . By October 13 he was able to report that the river was clear as far north as Esopus . Sir Henry had by then returned to New York due to illness , leaving General John Vaughan in charge at the forts . Due to delays sending transports with reinforcements north , a flotilla carrying Vaughan and 1 @,@ 700 men did not depart until October 15 , with orders from Clinton to " proceed up Hudson 's river , to feel for General Burgoyne , to assist his operations " . They anchored that evening near Esopus . ( It has been speculated that this movement had an effect on the surrender negotiations then ongoing at Saratoga . Due to the slow pace of even horse @-@ based communications , it seems unlikely that General Gates was aware of this movement until after the surrender terms were agreed on October 17 . ) Vaughan 's troops burned Esopus the next day , and then sailed further north , where they raided the Livingston estate , seat of the noted Patriot family . The fleet was pursued by Putnam on the eastern shore . Putnam 's forces , which had grown considerably due to the arrival of militia companies from Connecticut , posed a significant enough threat to Vaughan that he then withdrew back to the boats . 
 On October 17 , Sir Henry received a request for 3 @,@ 000 men from General Howe ( probably sent after Washington 's failed attack on Germantown ) to support the occupation of Philadelphia . As the New York garrison was the already thinned by the operation on the Hudson , Clinton recalled Vaughan and the garrison holding the two forts . The forts were destroyed and the troops evacuated on October 26 . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 The site of Fort Clinton was largely demolished to make way for U.S. Route 9W and the Bear Mountain Bridge , which was completed in 1924 . What remains is preserved within the bounds of Bear Mountain State Park , which also includes the ghost town of Doodletown . Fort Montgomery is a National Historic Landmark , a designation it received in 1972 , when it was also placed on the National Register of Historic Places . It is now located in the Fort Montgomery State Historic Site . 
 = Hoxne Hoard = 
 The Hoxne Hoard ( / <unk> / HOK @-@ <unk> ) is the largest hoard of late Roman silver and gold discovered in Britain , and the largest collection of gold and silver coins of the fourth and fifth century found anywhere within the Roman Empire . Found by Eric Lawes , a metal detectorist in the village of Hoxne in Suffolk , England , on 16 November 1992 , the hoard consists of 14 @,@ 865 Roman gold , silver and bronze coins from the late fourth and early fifth centuries , and approximately 200 items of silver tableware and gold jewellery . The objects are now in the British Museum in London , where the most important pieces and a selection of the rest are on permanent display . In 1993 , the Treasure Valuation Committee valued the hoard at £ 1 @.@ 75 million ( today £ 3 @.@ 21 million ) . 
 The hoard was buried as an oak box or small chest filled with items in precious metal , sorted mostly by type with some in smaller wooden boxes and others in bags or wrapped in fabric . Remnants of the chest , and of fittings such as hinges and locks , were recovered in the excavation . The coins of the hoard date it after AD 407 , which coincides with the end of Britain as a Roman province . The owners and reasons for burial of the hoard are unknown , but it was carefully packed and the contents appear consistent with what a single very wealthy family might have owned . Given the lack of large silver serving vessels and of some of the most common types of jewellery , it is likely that the hoard represents only a part of the wealth of its owner . 
 The Hoxne Hoard contains several rare and important objects , including a gold body @-@ chain and silver @-@ gilt pepper @-@ pots ( piperatoria ) , including the Empress pepper pot . The Hoxne Hoard is also of particular archaeological significance because it was excavated by professional archaeologists with the items largely undisturbed and intact . The find has helped to improve the relationship between metal detectorists and archaeologists , and influenced a change in English law regarding finds of treasure . 
 = = Archaeological history = = 
 = = = Discovery and initial excavation = = = 
 The hoard was discovered in a field of a farm , about 2 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) southwest of the village of Hoxne in Suffolk , on 16 November 1992 . Peter Whatling , the tenant farmer , had lost a hammer and asked his friend Eric Lawes , a retired gardener and amateur metal detectorist , to help look for it . While searching the field with his metal detector , Lawes discovered silver spoons , gold jewellery and numerous gold and silver coins . After retrieving a few items , he and Whatling notified the landowners ( Suffolk County Council ) , and the police , without attempting to dig out any more objects . 
 The following day , a team of archaeologists from the Suffolk Archaeological Unit carried out an emergency excavation of the site . The entire hoard was excavated in a single day , with the removal of several large blocks of unbroken material for laboratory excavation . The area within a radius of 30 metres ( 98 ft ) from the find spot was searched using metal detectors . Peter Whatling 's missing hammer was also recovered and donated to the British Museum . 
 The hoard was concentrated in a single location , within the completely decayed remains of a wooden chest . The objects had been grouped within the chest ; for example , pieces such as ladles and bowls were stacked inside each other , and other items were grouped in a way consistent with being held within an inner box . Some items had been disturbed by burrowing animals and ploughing , but the overall amount of disturbance was low . It was possible to determine the original layout of the artefacts within the container , and the existence of the container itself , due to Lawes ' prompt notification of the find , which allowed it to be excavated in situ by professional archaeologists . 
 The excavated hoard was taken to the British Museum . The discovery was leaked to the press , and on 19 November , the Sun newspaper ran a front @-@ page story , alongside a picture of Lawes with his metal detector . Although the full contents of the hoard and its value were unknown , the newspaper article claimed that the hoard was worth £ 10 million . In response to the unexpected publicity , the British Museum held a press conference at the museum on 20 November to announce the discovery . Newspapers lost interest in the hoard quickly , allowing British Museum curators to sort , clean and stabilize the hoard without further disruption from the press . The initial cleaning and basic conservation of the hoard was completed within a month of its discovery . 
 = = = Inquest and valuation = = = 
 On 3 September 1993 , a Coroner 's inquest was held at Lowestoft , and the hoard was declared a treasure trove , meaning that it was deemed to have been hidden with the intention of being recovered at a later date . Under English common law , anything declared as such belongs to the Crown if no one claims title to it . However , at the time , the customary practice was to reward anyone who found and reported a treasure trove promptly with money equivalent to the market value of the treasure , with the money being provided by the national institution that wished to acquire the treasure . In November 1993 , the Treasure Trove Reviewing Committee valued the hoard at £ 1 @.@ 75 million ( today £ 3 @.@ 21 million ) , which was paid to Lawes , as finder of the treasure . He shared his reward with the farmer , Peter Whatling . Three years later , the 1996 Treasure Act made it a legal requirement that the finder and the landowner should be rewarded equally . 
 = = = Subsequent archaeological investigations = = = 
 In September 1993 , after the field of the hoard find was ploughed , the Suffolk County Council Archaeological Service surveyed the field , finding four gold coins and 81 silver coins , all considered part of the same hoard . Both earlier Iron Age and later mediaeval materials were also discovered , but there was no evidence of a Roman settlement in the vicinity . 
 In 1994 , in response to illegal metal detecting near the hoard find , a follow @-@ up excavation of the field was carried out by the Suffolk County Council Archaeological Service . The hoard burial hole was re @-@ excavated , and a single post hole at the southwest corner was identified ; this may have been the location of a marker post to enable the depositors of the cache to locate and recover it in the future . Soil was removed in 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) spits for analysis in the area 1 @,@ 000 square metres ( 11 @,@ 000 sq ft ) around the find spot , and metal detectors were used to locate metal artefacts . This excavation recovered 335 items datable to the Roman period , mostly coins but also some box fittings . A series of late Bronze Age or early Iron Age post holes , which may have formed a structure , were found . However , no structural features of the Roman period were detected . 
 The coins discovered during the 1994 investigation were spread out in an ellipse centred on the hoard find spot , running east – west up to a distance of 20 metres ( 66 ft ) on either side . This distribution can be explained by the fact that , in 1990 , the farmer carried out deep ploughing in an east – west direction on the part of the field where the hoard was found . Previously ( since 1967 or 1968 , when the land was cleared for agricultural use ) , the farmer had ploughed in a north – south direction , but the absence of coins north and south of the find spot suggests that the ploughing before 1990 had not disturbed the hoard . 
 = = Items discovered = = 
 The hoard is mainly made up of gold and silver coins and jewellery , amounting to a total of 3 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 7 @.@ 7 lb ) of gold and 23 @.@ 75 kilograms ( 52 @.@ 4 lb ) of silver . It had been placed in a wooden chest , made mostly or entirely of oak , that measured approximately 60 × 45 × 30 cm ( 23 @.@ 6 × 17 @.@ 7 × 11 @.@ 8 in ) . Within the chest , some objects had evidently been placed in smaller boxes made of yew and cherry wood , while others had been packed in with woollen cloth or hay . The chest and the inner boxes had decayed almost completely after being buried , but fragments of the chest and its fittings were recovered during the excavation . The main objects found are : 
 569 gold coins ( solidi ) 
 14 @,@ 272 silver coins , comprising 60 <unk> and 14 @,@ 212 siliquae 
 24 bronze coins ( nummi ) 
 29 items of jewellery in gold 
 98 silver spoons and ladles 
 A silver tigress , made as a handle for a vessel 
 4 silver bowls and a small dish 
 1 silver beaker 
 1 silver vase or juglet 
 4 pepper pots , including the " Empress " Pepper Pot 
 <unk> items such as toothpicks 
 2 silver locks from the decayed remains of wooden or leather caskets 
 Traces of various organic materials , including a small ivory <unk> 
 = = = Coins = = = 
 The Hoxne Hoard contains 569 gold solidi , struck between the reigns of Valentinian I ( 364 – 75 ) and Honorius ( 393 – 423 ) ; 14 @,@ 272 silver coins , including 60 <unk> and 14 @,@ 212 siliquae , struck between the reigns of Constantine II ( 337 – 40 ) and Honorius ; and 24 bronze nummi . 
 The most significant coin find from the end of Roman Britain , the hoard contains all major denominations of coinage of the time , and many examples of clipped silver coinage typical of late Roman Britain . The only find from Roman Britain with a larger number of gold coins was the Eye Hoard found in 1780 or 1781 , for which there are poor records . The largest single Romano @-@ British hoard was the <unk> Hoard , of 54 @,@ 951 third @-@ century coins , but these were debased radiates with little precious @-@ metal content . The Frome Hoard , unearthed in Somerset in April 2010 , contains 52 @,@ 503 coins minted between 253 and 305 , also mostly debased silver or bronze . Larger hoards of Roman coins have been found at Misrata , Libya and reputedly also at Evreux , France ( 100 @,@ 000 coins ) and Komin , Croatia ( 300 @,@ 000 coins ) . 
 The gold solidi are all close to their theoretical weight of 4 @.@ 48 g ( 1 ⁄ 72 of a Roman pound ) . The fineness of a solidus in this period was 99 % gold . The total weight of the solidi in the hoard is almost exactly 8 Roman pounds , suggesting that the coins had been measured out by weight rather than number . Analysis of the siliquae suggests a range of fineness of between 95 % and 99 % silver , with the highest percentage of silver found just after a reform of the coinage in 368 . Of the siliquae , 428 are locally produced imitations , generally of high quality and with as much silver as the official siliquae of the period . However , a handful are cliché forgeries where a core of base metal has been wrapped in silver foil . 
 = = = = Historical spread and minting = = = = 
 Coins are the only items in the Hoxne Hoard for which a definite date and place of manufacture can be established . All of the gold coins , and many of the silver coins , bear the names and portraits of the emperor in whose reign they were minted . Most also retain the original mint marks that identify where they were minted , illustrating the Roman system of regional mints producing coins to a uniform design . The coins ' manufacture has been traced back to a total of 14 sources : Trier , Arles and Lyon ( in Gaul ) , Ravenna , Milan , Aquileia , Rome ( in modern Italy ) ; Siscia ( modern Croatia ) , Sirmium ( modern Serbia ) , Thessaloniki ( Greece ) , Constantinople , Cyzicus , Nicomedia , and Antioch ( modern Turkey ) . 
 The coins were minted under three dynasties of Roman emperors . The earliest are the successors of the Constantinian dynasty , followed by the <unk> emperors , and finally the Theodosian emperors . The collegiate system of rule ( or Consortium imperii ) meant that imperial partners would mint coins in each other 's names at the mints under their jurisdiction . The overlapping reigns of Eastern and Western emperors often allow changes of type to be dated to within part of a reign . So the latest coins in the hoard , of Western ruler Honorius ( 393 – 423 ) and his challenger Constantine III ( 407 – 11 ) , can be demonstrated to belong to the earlier parts of their reigns as they correspond to the lifetime of the Eastern Emperor Arcadius , who died in 408 . Thus , the coins provide a terminus post quem or earliest possible date for the deposition of the hoard of 408 . 
 The siliquae in the Hoard were struck mainly at Western mints in Gaul and Italy . It is unknown whether this is because coins from further East rarely reached Britain through trade , or because the Eastern mints rarely struck siliquae . The production of coins seems to follow the location of the Imperial court at the time ; for instance , the concentration of Trier coins is much greater after 367 , perhaps associated with Gratian moving his court to Trier . 
 = = = = Clipping of the silver coins = = = = 
 Almost every silver siliqua in the hoard has had its edge clipped to some degree . This is typical of Roman silver coin finds of this period in Britain , although clipped coins are very unusual through the rest of the Roman Empire . The clipping process invariably leaves the imperial portrait on the front of the coin intact , but often damages the mint mark , inscription , and the image on the obverse . 
 The reasons for the clipping of coins are controversial . Possible explanations include fraud , a deliberate attempt to maintain a stable ratio between gold and silver coins , or an official attempt to provide a new source of silver bullion while maintaining the same number of coins in circulation . 
 The huge number of clipped coins in the Hoxne Hoard has made it possible for archaeologists to observe the process of coin @-@ clipping in detail . The coins were evidently cut face @-@ up to avoid damaging the portrait . The average level of clipping is roughly the same for coins dating from 350 onwards . 
 = = = Gold jewellery = = = 
 All the jewellery in the hoard is gold , and all gold items in the hoard , other than coins , are jewellery . None of the jewellery is unequivocally masculine , although several pieces , like the rings , might have been worn by either gender . There is one body chain , six necklaces , three rings , and nineteen bracelets . The total weight of the gold jewellery is about 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , and the average metal content of the jewellery pieces is 91 @.@ 5 % gold ( about 22 carat ) , with small proportions in the metal of silver and copper . 
 The most important gold item in the hoard is the body chain , which consists of four finely looped gold chains , made using the " loop @-@ in @-@ loop " method called " fox tail " in modern jewellery , and attached at front and back to plaques . At the front , the chains have terminals in the shape of lions ' heads and the plaque has jewels mounted in gold cells , with a large amethyst surrounded by four smaller garnets alternating with four empty cells , which probably held pearls that have decayed . At the back , the chains meet at a mount centred on a gold solidus of Gratian ( r . 375 – 383 ) , which has been converted from an earlier use , probably as a pendant , and which may have been a family heirloom . Body chains of this type appear in Roman art , sometimes on the goddess Venus or nymphs ; some examples have erotic contexts , but they are also worn by respectable high @-@ ranking ladies . They may have been regarded as a suitable gift for a bride . The Hoxne body chain , worn tightly , would fit a woman with a bust @-@ size of 76 – 81 cm ( 30 – 32 in ) . Few body chains have survived ; one of the most complete , from the early Byzantine era and found in Egypt , is also in the British Museum . 
 One of the necklaces features lion @-@ headed terminals , and another includes stylized dolphins . The other four are relatively plain loop @-@ in @-@ loop chains , although one has a Chi @-@ Rho symbol ( <unk> ) on the clasp , the only Christian element in the jewellery . Necklaces of similar lengths would normally be worn in the Roman period with a pendant , but no pendants were found in the hoard . The three rings were originally set with gems , which might have been natural gemstones , or pieces of coloured glass ; however , these were taken from the rings before they were buried , perhaps for reuse . The rings are of similar design , one with an oval bezel , one with a circular bezel , and one with a large oblong bezel . The 19 bracelets buried in the hoard include three sets of four matching gold bracelets . Though many similar bracelets have survived , sets of four are most unusual ; they may have been worn two on each arm , or possibly were shared by two related women . One set has been decorated by <unk> the gold with lateral and transverse grooves ; the other two sets bear pierced @-@ work geometric designs . Another five bracelets bear hunting scenes , common in Late Roman decorative art . Three have the designs executed in pierced @-@ work , whereas two others are in repoussé . One bracelet is the sole gold item in the hoard to carry an inscription : it reads " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " in Latin , meaning " Use [ this ] happily , Lady Juliane " . The expression <unk> felix ( or sometimes uti felix ) is the second most common inscriptional formula on items from Roman Britain , and is used to wish good luck , well @-@ being and joy . The formula is not specifically Christian , but it sometimes occurs in an explicitly Christian context , for example , together with a Chi @-@ Rho symbol . 
 The jewellery may have represented the " reserve " items rarely or never used from the collection of a wealthy woman or family . Some of the most common types of jewellery are absent ; brooches , pendants , and ear @-@ rings for example . Items set with gems are notably missing , although they were very much in the taste of the day . Catherine Johns , former Senior Curator for Roman Britain at the British Museum , speculates that the current or favourite jewellery of the owner was not included in the hoard . 
 = = = Silver items = = = 
 The hoard contains about 100 silver and silver @-@ gilt items ; the number is imprecise because there are unmatched broken parts . They include a statuette of a leaping tigress , made as a handle for an object such as a jug or lamp ; four pepper @-@ pots ( piperatoria ) ; a beaker ; a vase or juglet ( a small jug ) ; four bowls ; a small dish ; and 98 silver spoons and ladles . The beaker and juglet are decorated with similar leaf and stem patterns , and the juglet has three gilded bands . In contrast , the small bowls and dish are plain , and it is presumed that the owners of the Hoard had many more such items , probably including the large decorated dishes found in other hoards . Many pieces are gilded in parts to accentuate the decoration . The technique of fire @-@ gilding with mercury was used , as was typical at the time . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 The pepper @-@ pots include one vessel , finely modelled after a wealthy or imperial lady , which soon became known as the " Empress " pepper @-@ pot . The woman 's hair , jewellery , and clothing are carefully represented , and gilding is used to emphasize many details . She is holding a scroll in her left hand , giving the impression of education as well as wealth . Other pepper @-@ pots in the hoard are modelled into a statue of Hercules and Antaeus , an ibex , and a hare and hound together . Not all such spice dispensers held pepper — they were used to dispense other spices as well — but are grouped in discussions as pepper @-@ pots . Each of those found in this hoard has a mechanism in the base to rotate an internal disc , which controls the aperture of two holes in the base . When fully open , the containers could have been filled using a funnel ; when part @-@ open they could have been shaken over food or drink to add the spices . 
 <unk> is generally translated as pepper @-@ pot , and black pepper is considered the most likely condiment these were used for . Pepper is only one of a number of expensive , high @-@ status spices which these vessels might have dispensed , however . The piperatoria are rare examples of this type of Roman silverware , and according to Johns the Hoxne finds have " significantly expanded the date range , the typology and the iconographic scope of the type " . The trade and use of pepper in this period has been supported with evidence of mineralized black pepper at three Northern Province sites recovered in the 1990s , and from the Vindolanda tablets which record the purchase of an unspecified quantity of pepper for two denarii . Archaeological sites with contemporary finds have revealed spices , including coriander , poppy , celery , dill , summer savory , mustard , and fennel . 
 They just couldn 't get enough of it , wars were fought over it . And if you look at Roman recipes , every one starts with : ' Take pepper and mix with ... ' ( Christine McFadden , food writer ) 
 When the Romans came to Britain they brought a lot of material culture and a lot of habits with them that made the people of Britain feel Roman ; they identified with the Roman culture . Wine was one of these – olive oil was another – and pepper would have been a more valuable one in this same sort of ' set ' of <unk> . ( Roberta Tomber , British Museum Visiting Fellow ) 
 So regularly filling a large silver pepper pot like ours would have taken its toll on the grocery bills . And the household that owned our pepper pot had another three silver pots , for pepper or other spice – one shaped as Hercules in action , and two in the shape of animals . This is dizzying extravagance , the stuff of bankers ' bonuses . But the pepper pots are just a tiny part of the great hoard of buried treasure . ( Neil MacGregor , British Museum Director ) 
 = = = = Other silver pieces = = = = 
 The tigress is a solid @-@ cast statuette weighing 480 grams ( 17 oz ) and measuring 15 @.@ 9 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) from head to tail . She was designed to be soldered onto some other object as its handle ; traces of tin were found beneath her rear paws , which have a " smoothly concave curve " . She looks most aesthetically pleasing when the serpentine curves of her head , back , rump , and tail form a line at an angle of about 45 ° , when the rear paws are flat , allowing for their curve . Her gender is obvious as there are six engorged teats under her belly . She is carefully decorated on her back , but her underside is " quite perfunctorily finished " . Her stripes are represented by two engraved lines , with a black niello inlay between them , in most places not meeting the engraved lines . Neither her elongated body , nor the distribution of the stripes are accurate for the species ; she has a long dorsal stripe running from the skull along the spine to the start of the tail , which is typical of tabby cats rather than tigers . The figure has no stripes around her tail , which thickens at the end , suggesting a thick fur tip as in a lion 's tail , which tigers do not have , although Roman art usually gives them one . 
 The large collection of spoons includes 51 <unk> , which are small spoons with shallow bowls and long , tapering handles with a pointed end which was used to pierce eggs and spear small pieces of food — as the Romans did not use forks at the table . There are 23 <unk> , which are much rarer , having large rather shallow spoons with shorter , bird @-@ headed handles ; and about 20 deep round spoons or small ladles and strainer @-@ spoons . Many are decorated with abstract motifs and some with dolphins or fanciful marine creatures . Many of the spoons are decorated with a Christian monogram cross or Chi @-@ Rho symbol , and sometimes , also with the Greek letters alpha and omega ( an appellation for Jesus , who is described as the alpha and omega in the Book of Revelation ) . Three sets of ten spoons , and several other spoons , are decorated with such Christian symbols . As is often the case with Roman silver spoons , many also have a Latin inscription on them , either simply naming their owner or wishing their owner long life . In total , eight different people are named ; seven on the spoons , and one on the single beaker in the hoard : Aurelius Ursicinus , <unk> , <unk> , Faustinus , Peregrinus , Quintus , Sanctus , and <unk> . The most common name is " Aurelius Ursicinus " , which occurs on a set of five <unk> and five ladles . It is unknown whether any of the people named in these inscriptions would have been involved in hiding the hoard or were even alive at the time it was buried . 
 Although only one of these inscriptions is explicitly Christian ( vivas in deo ) , inscriptions on silver spoons comprising a name followed by vivas or <unk> usually can be identified as Christian in other late Roman hoards ; for example the Mildenhall Treasure has five spoons , three with Chi @-@ Rho monograms , and two with vivas inscriptions ( <unk> <unk> and <unk> <unk> ) . The formula vir bone vivas also occurs on a spoon from the Thetford Hoard , but whereas the Thetford Hoard spoons have mostly pagan inscriptions ( e.g. Dei <unk> [ ni ] <unk> " of the god <unk> <unk> [ the Mead begotten ] " ) , the Hoxne Hoard does not have any inscriptions of a specifically pagan nature , and the hoard may be considered to have come from a Christian household ( or households ) . It often is assumed that Roman spoons with Chi @-@ Rho monograms or the vivas in deo formula are either christening spoons ( perhaps presented at adult baptism ) or were used in the Eucharist ceremony , but that is not certain . 
 There are also a number of small items of uncertain function , described as toiletry pieces . Some are picks , others perhaps scrapers , and three have empty sockets at one end , which probably contained organic material such as bristle , to make a brush . The size of these would be appropriate for cleaning the teeth or applying cosmetics , among other possibilities . 
 The average purity of the silver items is 96 % . The remainder of the metal is made up of copper and a small amount of zinc , with trace amounts of lead , gold , and bismuth present . The zinc is likely to have been present in a copper brass used to alloy the silver when the objects were made , and the lead , gold , and bismuth probably were present in the unrefined silver ore . 
 = = = Iron and organic materials = = = 
 The iron objects found in the hoard are likely to all be from the remains of the outer wooden chest . These comprise large iron rings , double @-@ spiked loops and hinges , strap hinges , probable components of locks , angle brackets , wide and narrow iron strips , and nails . 
