 A few days later William Wordsworth with his brother John and their friend Mr Simpson made a trip up Helvellyn , setting out after breakfast and returning home at ten that evening . A year later , in October 1801 , William and his sister Dorothy rode to Legburthwaite ( to the inn at Thirlspot ) and then to the top of Helvellyn before returning the same way . Dorothy recorded that it had been a glorious day . They had mists both above and below them , but the sun shone through and their views extended from the Scottish mountains to the sea at Cartmel . Wordsworth ’ s poem , Inmate of a mountain dwelling ( 1816 ) , celebrating the captivating power of the old mountain , was dedicated " To ... on her first ascent to the summit of Helvellyn . " 
 John Keats speaks of Wordsworth " on Helvellyn 's summit , wide awake ... " in a sonnet that celebrates the poet and other artists . A portrait of Wordsworth , deep in thought among the clouds on the summit of Helvellyn , was painted by Benjamin Robert Haydon in 1842 , an example of romanticism in portraiture . 
 An early casualty of the mountain was the artist Charles Gough , who slipped and fell from Striding Edge in April 1805 . Three months later a shepherd heard a dog barking near Red Tarn and went to investigate . He found Gough 's skeleton , his hat split in two , and his dog still in attendance . Initial newspaper reports that the dog had survived by eating the remains of her dead master were quickly forgotten . Gough became regarded as a martyr to the romantic ideal , and his dog <unk> was celebrated for her attachment and fidelity to her long @-@ dead master . William Wordsworth and Sir Walter Scott both wrote poems about the scene ; Francis Danby and Edwin Landseer both painted it . A memorial stone to Gough was erected on Helvellyn in 1890 and quotes part of Wordsworth 's poem " Fidelity . " 
 A small tourist industry began to grow up around the mountain , with inns providing ponies and guides as well as accommodation for the visitors , and guidebooks being published for visitors . Jonathan Otley ’ s guidebook of 1823 described the view from the summit and claimed it gave a more complete view of the Lake District than any other point . William Ford , in his guidebook of 1839 recommended the Horse Head Inn at Wythburn as a good place to stay and where a guide could be hired " at a moderate charge " ; he went on to describe the climb up Whelp Side and the view from the top . Harriet Martineau in 1855 described the ascent from Patterdale . Ponies could be taken as far as Red Tarn , where there were stakes to tether them while undertaking the final part on foot via Swirral Edge . " Though trying to <unk> nerves , " she said , " there is no real danger " ; the other ridge " is always fool @-@ hardy to do " , and " every one knows " the story of Charles Gough . She also mentioned three routes from the west : one by Grisedale Tarn , one from the Nag ’ s Head at Wythburn , " the shortest , but by far the steepest , " and a third from Legburthwaite ( that is , from the inn at Thirlspot . ) An advertisement in her book , placed by the King 's Head Inn at Legburthwaite , claimed " A guide always in readiness at this inn . " 
 A further fatality on Striding Edge in 1858 is commemorated by the Dixon Memorial . Robert Dixon from Patterdale was killed while following <unk> on the ridge . 
 = = = Aeroplane landing = = = 
 In 1926 a small aeroplane landed on the summit plateau of Helvellyn and took off again . The plane was an Avro 585 Gosport , a two @-@ seater biplane flown by Bert Hinkler , a test pilot who worked for A V Roe , the plane 's manufacturers , at Woodford Aerodrome near Manchester . 
 A ground party had cleared and marked a landing strip . Attempts on 15 December and on 21 December were abandoned . 
 On 22 December Hinkler , accompanied by John F. Leeming , president of the Lancashire Aero Club , made another attempt . The landing was no problem . On the steep slope and with a strong headwind the plane stopped quickly . Professor E. R. Dodds witnessed the landing . The uphill take @-@ off was more difficult and the plane dived off the edge of the summit with insufficient airspeed , but picked up speed as it dived , narrowly missing Striding Edge , to return to Manchester . 
 A stone tablet on Helvellyn , 40 yards ( 37 m ) south of the shelter , commemorates this landing . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Mountain birds around Helvellyn include the raven ( Corvus corax ) , which has now become common . Peregrine falcons ( Falco peregrinus ) , buzzards ( Buteo buteo ) and ring <unk> ( Turdus torquatus ) have all bred in the immediate area . <unk> ( Alauda arvensis ) and wheatears ( Oenanthe oenanthe ) are frequently encountered . At one time eagles ( probably Aquila chrysaetos ) soared over the mountain and bred on the steep cliffs above Red Tarn , but even in Wordsworth ’ s day they had gone , having been persecuted to extinction . 
 The three coves to the east of Helvellyn are all important sites for remnant populations of arctic @-@ alpine plants . Species such as Downy Willow ( Salix <unk> ) , Mountain <unk> ( Dryas <unk> ) , Alpine Mouse @-@ ear ( Cerastium alpinum ) , Alpine <unk> ( Poa alpina ) and others have been able to survive in these coves since the last glaciation through a combination of rocks rich in basic minerals , a harsh micro @-@ climate , and inaccessibility to grazing sheep on cliff ledges . However , these populations are small and are not reproducing well . Natural England has introduced a recovery plan for them . 
 Red Tarn , a classic corrie tarn , is a high altitude tarn with low nutrient levels and poor in the number of species it supports . Characteristic vegetation zones include a water @-@ starwort ( <unk> ) in shallower areas and the alga <unk> flexilis in deeper water and around the inlet . Other species include a pondweed ( Potamogeton ) which grows in 2 – 3 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) of water and the rush Juncus <unk> . Brown trout and <unk> , a species of whitefish , are found in the tarn . 
 Grassland on the Helvellyn range has been heavily overgrazed for many years , yet it supports a diversity of acid grassland species including Sheep ’ s fescue ( Festuca <unk> ) on the summit ridge , <unk> ( Nardus stricta ) on the middle slopes , and fescue @-@ bent <unk> on the lower slopes . The Nardus grasslands are the haunt of the scarce Mountain <unk> butterfly ( <unk> <unk> ) , the only alpine species of butterfly found in Britain . Acidic flushes ( areas of water seepage ) with their carpets of sphagnum mosses are common . Less common are basic flushes , which support a greater diversity of species . 
 The summit and the eastern side of the mountain are part of the Helvellyn & Fairfield Site of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSI ) . This covers an area of 2 @,@ 418 @.@ 8 hectares ( 5 @,@ 977 acres ) and was designated in 1975 because of the area 's geological and biological features . Natural England , which is responsible for choosing SSSIs , tries to ensure that the management and use of the area is sustainable . 
 = = Geology = = 
 All the rocks of Helvellyn are part of the Borrowdale Volcanic Group , formed on the margin of an ancient continent during a period of intense volcanic activity during the Ordovician period , roughly 450 million years ago . 
 Helvellyn lies within a geological structure which is interpreted as evidence of a volcanic caldera . This is a semi @-@ circular series of faults which sweep eastwards to encompass Helvellyn , Patterdale , Deepdale and Fairfield , and which abut against a major north @-@ south fault to the west ( along the line of the A591 road ) . 
 This caldera was formed by an eruption of exceptional magnitude which produced a series of pyroclastic flows , fast moving currents of hot gas and rock , which buried the whole district of roughly 500 km2 ( 190 sq mi ) beneath at least 150 m ( 490 ft ) ( in places up to 800 m ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) of ignimbrite ) . This succession of ignimbrites is known as the <unk> <unk> Tuff Formation , the most widespread volcanic formation in the Lake District . The eruption of such a huge quantity of magma emptied the magma chamber beneath the volcano and led to the collapse of the overlying rocks to form the caldera . 
 The lowest and oldest rocks on Helvellyn are those of this <unk> <unk> Tuff Formation , which outcrop along the western side , up to roughly the 550 m ( 1 @,@ 800 ft ) contour on Whelp Side . The lowest part of the formation here is the densely welded lapilli @-@ tuff of the Thirlmere Member , in which the individual pieces of semi @-@ molten lava were flattened under the weight of deposits above them . Contemporaneous movement on the caldera 's boundary fault has produced a thick deposit of breccia above the Helvellyn Screes and on Browncove Crags . The Thirlmere Member is overlain by a deposit of volcaniclastic sandstone , the Raise Beck Member , deposited in water during a break in the volcanism , but succeeded by further thick ignimbrite deposits . 
 Above these ignimbrites are found sedimentary rocks of the Esk Pike Sandstone Formation . These were deposited in water , probably in a caldera lake , as the volcanic rocks weathered and were eroded . Structures in these rocks suggest the faults were still active and the caldera was still subsiding . Layers of tuff and lapilli @-@ tuff indicate some ongoing volcanism . 
 Higher still on Helvellyn , as well as in the coves to the east and covering Swirral Edge and Catstye Cam , are rocks of the Helvellyn Tuff Formation . This consists of up to 400 m ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) of ignimbrite , representing another series of pyroclastic flows . This Helvellyn Tuff is found only within the boundary faults of the caldera , and mainly in its western half . 
 The highest surviving rocks on Helvellyn , found on the summit plateaux of Helvellyn itself and of Nethermost Pike , and along the crest of Striding Edge , are the volcaniclastic sandstones of the Deepdale Sandstone Formation . Again , this formation is confined to the limits of the caldera , and represents another return to erosion and sedimentary deposition within a caldera lake , though with layers of pyroclastic rock showing that the volcanism had not entirely finished . 
 = = = Glaciation = = = 
 During the Late Devensian glaciation , which occurred 28 @,@ 000 to 14 @,@ 700 years Before Present ( BP ) , the whole of northern England was covered by an ice sheet . Helvellyn was one of a small number of nunataks which protruded above the ice . 
 A short period of glacial conditions returned between 12 @,@ 650 and 11 @,@ 550 years BP , known in Britain as the Loch Lomond <unk> ( and elsewhere as the Younger Dryas <unk> ) , when the Gulf Stream current ceased to flow past the British Isles . Small cirque and valley glaciers formed in north and east facing valleys , including Grisedale and the coves on the east side of Helvellyn . The results are seen in moraines of unsorted boulder gravel in the valleys , the spectacular coves with steep headwalls , and the sharp arêtes formed where the rock was eroded on both sides between adjacent glaciers . 
 Glacial conditions ended suddenly , 11 @,@ 550 years BP , when the Gulf Stream current was re @-@ established . <unk> processes in seasonal freeze @-@ thaw conditions , both present and past , have produced sorted stone stripes and solifluction lobes and sheets on the summit ridge of Helvellyn . These are one reason why the area was included in the Helvellyn & Fairfield SSSI . 
 = = Mining = = 
 Two unsuccessful attempts to find lead ore on Helvellyn have been made . 
 Brown Cove Mine was high up at the head of Brown Cove , where some disused spoil heaps remain , with a couple of levels , one of which ran about 70 m ( 80 yd ) into the mountainside . 
 Helvellyn Mine or Wythburn Mine opened in 1839 by the gill between Whelpside and Helvellyn Screes . It was operated by a succession of different owners , driving five levels through mostly barren rock to explore three mineral veins . It finally closed in 1880 when Manchester Corporation acquired the land for the Thirlmere reservoir . Only a few hundred tons of galena came out of the mine ; probably insufficient to cover its costs . 
 Little can be seen of the levels now for the entrances were destroyed when the mine closed , but several spoil heaps remain , one covering the gill , along with the old miners ’ path which zig @-@ zags up the hillside , a self @-@ acting incline to lower ore to the dressing floor , and the old winding drum house . The narrow leat which once diverted water from Brownrigg Well into the gill beside the mine may also be seen , much higher up the fellside . 
 = = Names = = 
 Helvellyn . The earliest known record of the name dates from 1577 , but early records are spelling variations of the modern name ( such as <unk> , <unk> or Hell <unk> ) rather than any help with the etymology . Various attempts to interpret the name have been made in the past . Some , misled by the present spelling , thought the final syllable was the Welsh word llyn , " lake " . Richard Coates in 1988 proposed a Celtic derivation from the deduced Cumbric word hal , " moorland " , and <unk> , the Cumbric equivalent of the Welsh word <unk> meaning " yellow . " 
 Recent place @-@ name studies have accepted the " yellow moorland " derivation , but have struggled to understand how Helvellyn can be regarded as a yellow mountain . Colour , in the Celtic languages , is perceived differently from the way it is seen and described in modern English . For example , in Scottish Gaelic the spectrum of colours was " pastel rather than primary , gentle rather than bold . " Colours were related to a landscape context in which blues , greens , greys and whites in particular were both more diverse and more differentiated than in English . People who relied on the system of transhumance for their livelihood gained the ability to assess the nutritional value of upland grasses from a distance before moving their stock to a summer <unk> , and used appropriate colour terms for grasses which would become progressively more green as the spring advanced . Yellow , at least in Gaelic hill names , is not a bright colour . It describes hills which are distinguished by grasses such as Nardus stricta and Deschampsia flexuosa , both of which appear pale and bleached in winter . These grasses are common on the Helvellyn range , in an area where transhumance also used to be practiced . Nardus stricta in particular is an unpalatable and unproductive grass , and the Flora of Cumbria specifically notes a possible connection between areas of late snow cover and Nardus grassland at high altitudes in the Helvellyn range . A name describing the mountain as " pale yellow moorland " is therefore meaningful in a Celtic context . 
 Lower Man . The mountain has two tops , which used to be distinguished as Helvellyn Low Man ( or Lower Man ) and Helvellyn High Man ( or Higher Man ) . Both are drawn and labelled on a panoramic view of the range found in Jonathan Otley 's guidebook of 1823 . 
 Striding Edge . An edge in mountain place @-@ names is a steep escarpment , on either one side or ( as here ) on both sides . The first reference to Striding Edge was by Walter Scott in 1805 as <unk> @-@ edge . A map of 1823 called it <unk> Edge . It is possible that " Striding Edge " has replaced an earlier name , now lost . 
 Swirral Edge may be either " The precipitous ridge that causes giddiness " or " The precipitous ridge where the wind or snow swirls around . " An edge is a steep escarpment , as above . <unk> , a dialect variation of " swirl " has two possible explanations . It can be used to mean " giddiness , vertigo " , but it can also be used of a place in the mountains where wind or snow swirls around . 
 = Toni Preckwinkle = 
 Toni Preckwinkle ( née Reed ; March 17 , 1947 ) is the current Cook County Board President and a former alderman in the Chicago City Council representing Chicago 's 4th ward in Cook County , Illinois , United States . She was elected on November 2 , 2010 , as President of the Cook County Board , the Executive Branch of Cook County government . Preckwinkle first sought office in 1983 and was defeated twice before securing election in 1991 and subsequently being re @-@ elected as alderman four times . 
 Preckwinkle had been an occasional critic of Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley . In her first four terms in office she emerged as the council 's prominent defender of affordable housing . Among other issues , she is known for her sponsorship of living wage ordinances , her expressed concerns regarding the costs and benefits of the city 's Olympic bid , and her strong stance against police brutality and excessive force . 
 = = Early life , family , and career = = 
 Preckwinkle was born in St. Paul , Minnesota , moving to Chicago to study at the University of Chicago in the Hyde Park community area , where she earned her bachelor 's and master 's degrees . From 1969 to 2013 , she was married to Zeus Preckwinkle , a retired seventh- and eighth @-@ grade teacher at Ancona Montessori School . They have two children . Her former husband is Caucasian , which at times was a campaign issue . 
 After college , Preckwinkle spent ten years teaching history in several high schools in the Chicago metropolitan area , including Calumet High School , the Visitation School , and Aquinas . In 1985 and 1986 Preckwinkle was President of the Disabled Adult Residential Enterprises ( DARE ) . Preckwinkle has been a member of the Board of Directors of the Illinois Council Against Handgun Violence , Political Action Director of the Near South Chapter of the Independent Voters of Illinois ( <unk> @-@ IPO ) . During and after her 1987 aldermanic election campaign , she worked as a planner for the Chicago Department of Economic Development . By 1990 , she had become executive director of the Chicago Jobs Council , and become allied with civil rights attorney R. Eugene Pincham . 
 = = The 4th Ward = = 
 Chicago 's fourth ward is on the South Side of Chicago , adjacent to the Lake Michigan lakefront . It includes all of the Kenwood and Oakland community areas , the northern portion of Hyde Park and the eastern portions of the Washington Park , Grand Boulevard and Douglas community areas . The northern part of the ward ( North of 45th Street ) is predominantly poor and African American , while the more racially diverse southern half is predominantly middle and upper middle @-@ class . 
 = = Unsuccessful campaigns for alderman = = 
 In her first two aldermanic election attempts for the 4th ward , in 1983 and 1987 , Preckwinkle lost to the incumbent , Timothy C. Evans . Evans was Chicago Mayor Harold Washington 's City Council floor leader and lieutenant . In 1983 , she gained enough support to force a runoff election . ( Chicago Aldermen are elected without regard to political party affiliation , but must earn a majority of votes or the top two candidates have a runoff election . ) In the runoff , Preckwinkle carried traditionally " independent " precincts in Hyde @-@ Park , but Evans was able to win by carrying the precincts in the north of the Ward . 
 In the 1987 elections , Evans defeated Preckwinkle by a 77 % to 21 % margin . In 1987 , although both the Chicago Tribune and Chicago Sun @-@ Times endorsed Evans , they praised Preckwinkle for her numerous qualities , including intelligence and independence , and expressed hopes she would continue in politics . Preckwinkle was endorsed by state Rep. Carol Moseley Braun and also by the Independent Voters of Illinois @-@ Independent Precinct Organization , but not by Harold Washington , who endorsed Evans . 
 = = Third campaign for alderman = = 
 In 1991 Preckwinkle and four others challenged Evans for the 4th ward alderman 's position . In the first round of voting on February 26 , 1991 , she won nearly one @-@ third popular vote in the ward by winning 20 of 58 precincts ( all in the Hyde Park @-@ Kenwood community ) . Evans and Preckwinkle again advanced to a runoff election , as they had in 1983 , but this time the majority of the eliminated candidates endorsed Preckwinkle . On April 2 , 1991 , Preckwinkle performed better in the northern part of the ward and was elected by a 109 @-@ vote margin , defeating the 17 @-@ year incumbent alderman Evans . 
 = = Alderman = = 
 On February 27 , 2007 , Preckwinkle was elected to her fifth four @-@ year term . 
 Preckwinkle has developed a reputation for progressiveness . On the City Council Preckwinkle was known as a progressive member , independent of then @-@ Mayor Richard M. Daley , with whom she dissented more often than any other alderman . Preckwinkle was one of the few aldermen on the City Council occasionally critical of the policies of former Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley . In 2004 , she and Dorothy Tillman were the only aldermen to vote against the Mayor 's city budget , and in 2005 , Preckwinkle was the lone dissenter . Preckwinkle has supported the majority of legislation advanced by the mayor and his allies , including most of Daley ’ s annual budget proposals ; his controversial use of tax increment financing , an economic development program in which tax revenues are funneled into accounts controlled almost exclusively by the mayor ; and , ultimately , his quest to host the 2016 Summer Olympics . 
 Preckwinkle has championed set @-@ asides for affordable housing as her signature issue , and the municipal ordinances she sponsored in 1993 and 1999 for affordable housing increased city expenditures on low and moderate income housing by 50 percent . In 2007 , she pushed for increases in the existing Affordable Requirements Ordinance . This mandates housing developers using land bought at a discount from the city to make at least 10 percent of their housing units " affordable " , or to contribute money to an affordable @-@ housing fund by increasing the percentage to 15 percent . The issue is considered a key element in the debate about ending homelessness in Chicago . Her detailed knowledge of public housing has been recognised in the national press , which has cited her defense of the maligned Vince Lane when the federal government took over Chicago 's public housing projects . 
 Preckwinkle was a co @-@ sponsor of the living wage ordinances that passed the city council in 1998 and 2002 . On July 26 , 2006 , Preckwinkle was one of 35 aldermen who voted to approve the 2006 Chicago Big Box Ordinance sponsored by Alderman Joe Moore ( 49th ) which for 7 weeks made Chicago the largest United States city that required big @-@ box retailers to pay a " living wage . " 
 In October 2007 Preckwinkle opposed naming a landmark in the 4th ward for 1976 Nobel literature laureate Saul Bellow , reportedly on the grounds that Bellow had made remarks that Preckwinkle considered racist . She also opposed the renaming of a stretch of street near the original Playboy Club " Hugh Hefner Way . " 
 In 2006 , Preckwinkle decided to paint over two 36 @-@ year @-@ old , unmaintained and severely damaged public murals in the 47th Street Metra underpass . The murals had been created by graffiti artists , working with permission from the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs , and had represented themes that included Latin @-@ American , African , Mayan , Indian , and Native American spiritual practices . The walls were later covered with newly commissioned murals : one is made up of a series of ceramic tiles and the other is a traditional painted mural featuring the city and important historical South Side figures , including former Alderman Dorothy Tillman . 
 Preckwinkle has been outspoken in support of the city settling the Jon Burge torture case , rather than continuing to spend money in the litigation process . Preckwinkle has also been proactive in the effort to pursue compensation for victims of police brutality in the Jon Burge cases and sought hearings on the initial special prosecutor 's report . She has been a critic of the decades @-@ long delay in settling the case , and she was a proponent of the settlement . 
 In 2007 , Preckwinkle pursued disclosure of Chicago Police Department officers who used excessive force . The United States District Court had ruled that the records be unsealed and made available to the public . However , on July 13 , 2007 , the city filed an emergency motion to stay the judge 's order . When the city argued in the 7th Circuit Court of Appeals to against disclosure , it made the point that aldermen would have access to the information . Preckwinkle 's August 23 , 2007 , request for disclosure was denied . 
 The unsuccessful Chicago 2016 Olympic bid placed the main site of the $ 1 @.@ 1 billion residential complex , which would have accommodated athletes in an Olympic Village in the 4th Ward . Preckwinkle expressed her reservations about the initial plan , and was involved in plan revisions . Since the planned construction was almost entirely in her ward , she expressed concern that her constituents were not offered a chance to voice their concerns with the plan . She was an early advocate of moving what would have been the Olympic Village from the McCormick Place truck yard to the Michael Reese Hospital site . On March 14 , 2007 , Preckwinkle joined four other South Side aldermen in voting against a $ 500 million public @-@ funded guarantee to back up Chicago 's Olympics bid . On September 9 , 2009 , Preckwinkle voted to authorize Mayor Richard Daley to sign the International Olympic Committee 's host city contract that included financial guarantees putting full responsibility for the Olympics and its proposed $ 4 @.@ 8 billion operating budget on taxpayers . 
 = = Democratic Party Committeeman = = 
 Preckwinkle is also the Democratic Committeeman for the 4th Ward , a position within the Cook County Democratic Party . Each of the 50 wards of the city and the 30 townships of Cook County elect a Democratic Committeeman to the Cook County Central Committee . These committeemen form the official governing body of the Cook County Democratic Party which , among other purposes , endeavors to attract , endorse , and support qualified Democratic candidates for office . 
 Preckwinkle succeeded Evans as 4th Ward Democratic committeeman in 1992 , defeating former Evans administrative assistant Johnnie E. Hill by 6 @,@ 227 to 2 @,@ 327 votes in the March 17 , 1992 primary election ; Evans had filed nominating petitions to run for re @-@ election as committeeman and run for judge , but withdrew his name from the ballot for committeeman so his name would only appear once on the ballot , for the judgeship ( to which he was elected ) . Preckwinkle was re @-@ elected as 4th Ward Democratic committeeman on March 19 , 1996 , running unopposed on the ballot after her successful challenges to the nominating petitions of Charles S. Williams and her 1995 and 1999 aldermanic challenger Kwame Raoul , who were both just a few dozen signatures short of the number required to earn a place on the ballot . Preckwinkle was re @-@ elected , again running unopposed on the ballot , as 4th Ward Democratic committeeman in March 2000 , March 2004 and February 2008 . 
 On November 6 , 2004 , the 10 Democratic ward committeemen whose wards make up parts of the 13th Illinois legislative district voted to appoint Kwame Raoul to the state senate seat vacated two days earlier by then U.S. Senator @-@ elect Barack Obama ; 4th Ward Democratic committeeman Preckwinkle and 5th Ward Democratic committeeman Leslie Hairston had the largest says in the appointment with 29 % and 27 % , respectively , of the weighted @-@ vote based on the percentage of votes cast in each ward in the 13th legislative district for Obama in the November 5 , 2002 general election . 
 Preckwinkle chairs the ward organization , the Fourth Ward Democratic Organization , which was one of sixteen Chicago Democratic ward organizations named in a complaint filed on August 31 , 2005 with the Illinois State Board of Elections by the Cook County Republican Party charging that Democratic Party ward organizations are illegally housed in City @-@ funded neighborhood ward offices . Taxpayers fund aldermanic service centers , which are open to the public . State law prohibits the use of public funds by any candidate for political or campaign purposes . The complaint against Preckwinkle 's ward organization was one of nine that a Hearing Officer appointed by the Board recommended proceed to the next step of the hearing process , an Open Preliminary Hearing . On October 17 , 2005 , at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Elections , the Board entered an executive session and voted , in a 4 – 4 tie , along strict party lines , failing to adopt the recommendation of the Hearing Officer , and ordered the complaints dismissed . The complaint against Preckwinkle 's ward organization was one of eight that the Cook County Republican Party appealed all the way to the Supreme Court of Illinois . On January 23 , 2009 , the Illinois Supreme Court unanimously ordered the Illinois appellate court to conduct a judicial review of the Board 's dismissals of the complaints . 
 Preckwinkle nominated Joseph Berrios for re @-@ election as Chairman of the Democratic Party of Cook County at a meeting of the Cook County Democratic Central Committee on March 3 , 2010 . At the time Berrios was the incumbent chairman as well as a commissioner with the Cook County Board of Review and the Democratic candidate for Cook County Assessor . Berrios was re @-@ elected . 
 = = Relationship with Barack Obama = = 
 Preckwinkle 's views on Obama were prominently featured in a July 2008 New Yorker cover story on Barack Obama 's political origins . The article begins by recounting a 1995 meeting between Preckwinkle and Obama in which he discussed a possible run for the Illinois Senate seat then held by Alice Palmer . According to the New Yorker 's account , Preckwinkle " soon became an Obama loyalist , and she stuck with him in a State Senate campaign that strained or ruptured many friendships but was ultimately successful . " In 1995 , she successfully challenged the signatures of Obama 's opponents in the Democratic Primary for the Illinois Senate , allowing Obama to run unopposed . 
 Preckwinkle supported Barack Obama early in his political career , endorsing him in his campaigns for Illinois Senate in 1995 – 6 , U.S. House in 1999 – 2000 , and U.S. Senate in 2003 – 4 . She was among those who encouraged Barack Obama to make his first run for the United States Congress in 2000 , and she was an early supporter when he ran in 2004 . When Obama later became a United States Senator following the 2004 United States Senate election in Illinois , Preckwinkle had a large say in his Illinois State Senate replacement . She became Obama 's Alderman when he moved from Hyde Park to South Kenwood in June , 2005 . 
 According to the New Yorker article , Preckwinkle had since become " disenchanted " with Obama . The article ’ s author suggested that Preckwinkle 's " grievances " against Obama were motivated by Preckwinkle 's perception that Obama was disloyal . Notwithstanding any such concerns , Preckwinkle was an Obama delegate at the 2008 Democratic National Convention . 
 = = Cook County Board President = = 
 Preckwinkle announced that she would run for President of the Cook County Board in January 2009 . She launched her campaign website on June 18 , 2009 . On February 2 , 2010 she won the Democratic Primary , defeating the incumbent Board President Todd Stroger , among others . Preckwinkle faced Roger Keats , the Republican nominee , in the November general election . On November 2 , Preckwinkle became the first woman elected as Cook County President by capturing over two @-@ thirds of the vote . Her Republican opponent received only 26 % of the vote , and then moved out of Illinois . She recommended that Chicago Mayor Richard M. Daley appoint Will Burns to succeed her as Fourth Ward Alderman , but Burns preferred to run in an open primary . Mayor Daley appointed Shirley Newsome as a " caretaker " alderman on January 12 , 2011 . Burns handily won the special election for the seat a month later . 
 In August 2012 , Dr. Nancy Jones , former head of the Cook County Morgue , declared " This woman is evil " regarding Preckwinkle 's handling of the management and budgeting of the Morgue , which had led to alleged bodies piling up and filthy conditions . Also in August 2012 , Preckwinkle stated at a conference hosted by former Governor Jim Edgar that former President Ronald Reagan deserved a " special place in hell " for his involvement in " making drug use political " . Preckwinkle was defending Chicago 's move to decriminalize possession of small amounts of cannabis by allowing police to write tickets , asserting that drug laws unfairly lead to more minorities behind bars . She later stated her regret for her " inflammatory " remark . 
 On March 22 , 2016 , Preckwinkle announced that Brian Hamer , who served as the state 's revenue director under Gov. Rod Blagojevich and then Quinn , would replace Tasha Green <unk> as chief of staff . 
 Some political observers considered Preckwinkle a potentially viable candidate in the 2015 Chicago mayoral election . 
 = Kill the Alligator and Run = 
 " Kill the Alligator and Run " is the nineteenth episode of the eleventh season of the American animated television sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 30 , 2000 . In the episode , Homer suffers from a nervous breakdown after taking a quiz that reveals he only has three years left to live . To calm himself down , he and the rest of the Simpson family go to Florida for vacation . There , they end up in the middle of a raucous spring break . Homer joins in on the party and ends up getting himself and his family in trouble for killing the state 's beloved mascot – an alligator named Captain Jack . The Simpsons run from the law and take jobs at a small restaurant while hiding from the police . 
 Diedrich Bader guest starred in " Kill the Alligator and Run " as a sheriff that tries to arrest the Simpson family , while Robert Evans and Charlie Rose guest starred in a scene in which Homer watches the two in an interview on television . Kid Rock and Joe C. also made guest appearances as themselves in the episode , performing at a concert in Florida that Homer attends . The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jen Kamerman . According to The Simpsons showrunner Mike Scully , it is despised by many fans of the show particularly for having an outlandish plotline . The reception of " Kill the Alligator and Run " by critics has been negative . Around 7 @.@ 46 million American homes tuned in to watch the episode during its original airing . In 2008 , it was released on DVD along with the rest of the episodes of the eleventh season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer gets a magazine loaded with personality tests and quizzes his friends and family with them . Later on , he takes his own test which reveals that has only three years left to live . Terrified of his supposedly impending death , he develops insomnia and goes insane . Homer visits the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant 's psychiatrist , who suggests that he take a long vacation . The Simpsons go on a trip to Florida and find themselves in the middle of a raucous spring break when they get there . Marge wants Homer to stay in his hotel room , but he escapes to party and attends a concert featuring Joe C. and Kid Rock . Homer becomes the life of spring break until it ends and the wild college students return to their studies . 
 Homer , who still wants to party , rents an <unk> and forces his family to come with him . He races through a swamp , accidentally killing the state 's most famous resident and reptile – an alligator named Captain Jack , whom Marge , Maggie , Lisa , and Bart saw on a tour earlier while Homer made a fool of himself at the concert . A sheriff quickly arrives on the scene and despite the fact that Homer is the sole guilty culprit , the entire family is charged for killing the alligator . The family members flee from the sheriff and during a car chase they are hit by a train that pushes their car on the rail for several miles . When the Simpsons get off of the rail , they escape to a restaurant where they are given employment . They live in a nearby trailer and progressively turn into hillbillies . The sheriff eventually tracks them down and kidnaps them while they are sleeping . For their crimes ( and Homer 's foolish attempt at defending himself in court ) , the family is put into forced labor . One night when they are working at a party held by a judge in front of the capitol , tending to the guests ( and failing to escape ) , Captain Jack strolls out of the capitol 's doors . It turns out that he was never dead but rather knocked out . The family is acquitted , though they are banned from entering the state of Florida again ( and several other states , excluding Arizona and North Dakota ) . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Kill the Alligator and Run " was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jen Kamerman as part of the eleventh season of The Simpsons ( 1999 – 2000 ) . When the animation department finished its work on the episode , it had ended up being about four minutes too long and the staff of the show was forced to make some difficult cuts . One scene that was cut saw Captain Jack lying in state at the capitol in Florida , with Kid Rock being one of the people present to pay their respects to the alligator . The Simpsons showrunner Mike Scully has expressed regret for cutting this scene out because it " hurts the logic " later in the episode when Captain Jack crawls out of the capitol and reveals himself to everyone , without any explanation to how he got there . 
 Actor Diedrich Bader guest starred in the episode as the sheriff . The Simpsons producer Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham directed Bader during his recording session , telling the guest star to do a Southern accent . The episode also features guest appearances from talk show host Charlie Rose and film producer Robert Evans as themselves . Evans and Rose appear in a scene at the beginning of the episode , when Homer stays up late and watches television because of his fear that he might die in his sleep . Rose is seen interviewing Evans on the television , and as they are talking about Evan 's film Love Story , Rose says : " And the critics loved it , too . I remember Vincent Canby said , [ turns to the camera ] ' I 'm going to kill you , Homer . You are so dead . ' " The last part is imagined by Homer , who has become incredibly sleepy . Later in the interview , when talking about his unsuccessful film The Two Jakes , Evans says : " I said to myself , ' Evans , you forgot Hollywood Rule No. 1 : [ turns to the camera ] Kill Homer Simpson . ' " 
 Musicians Kid Rock and Joe C. guest starred in the episode as themselves , performing at the annual spring break concert that Homer sneaks out to attend . When Joe C. makes his first appearance on stage in the episode , Homer mistakes him for a child that has lost his parents . After performing his song " <unk> " , Kid Rock tells the audience that he is going to pour out forty gallons of malt liquor on the curb as a way of showing respect to his homies that could not make it to the concert . When Homer hears this he starts to drink the malt liquor . Just as Kid Rock and Joe C. are about to stop him by hurling Joe C. ( now wearing a spiked helmet ) at him with a slingshot , the sheriff arrives and settles the situation . Scully said in an interview with the Detroit Free Press that the staff of the show chose Kid Rock and Joe C. for the episode because the two " have a lot of stage presence " and visually are " a funny combination , " and because the staff thought " they would be funny playing off Homer . " According to Scully , the two musicians " had a great sense of humor [ ... ] about themselves , " with Kid Rock asking if " he could add a couple of his own lines . He wanted to introduce himself as ' the pimp of the nation . ' We kept that in the show . It 's quite a title . " Kid Rock recorded some of his dialog over the phone , but also paid a 45 @-@ minute visit to the Simpsons studio in Los Angeles to record lines . Scully thought it looked like the singer enjoyed the experience and was surprised to see that he arrived on time . " My first reaction to that was , ' What kind of rock star is this ? ' , " Scully jokingly told the Detroit Free Press . All of Joe C. ' s lines were recorded over the phone . 
 = = Release = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on April 30 , 2000 . It was viewed in approximately 7 @.@ 46 million households that night . With a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 4 , the episode finished 46th in the ratings for the week of April 23 – 30 , 2000 . It was the third highest @-@ rated broadcast on Fox that week , following an episode of Malcolm in the Middle ( which received an 8 @.@ 2 rating ) and an episode of The X @-@ Files ( which received a 7 @.@ 7 rating ) . On October 7 , 2008 , " Kill the Alligator and Run " was released on DVD as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season . Staff members Mike Scully , Ian Maxtone @-@ Graham , George Meyer , Matt Selman , Julie Thacker , and Steven Dean Moore , as well as cast member Dan Castellaneta and guest star Diedrich Bader , participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . Deleted scenes from the episode were also included in the box set . 
 According to Scully , " Kill the Alligator and Run " is often cited by fans of The Simpsons as one of the worst episodes ever because of its structure and outlandish nature . Scully has said that the episode is " kind of three stories in one . " Meyer , a writer and producer on the show , said in the DVD audio commentary that the fans thought it was " kind of a frenetic and crazy , chaotic episode , " adding : " I can 't disagree . But we had a lot of fun writing it , and we stand by it . " While reviewing the eleventh season of The Simpsons , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented on the episode , writing : " Wow – this may be the most jumbled Simpsons to date ! The episode seems to suffer from ADD as it can ’ t focus on any topic for very long . It flits from one gag to another with abandon and rarely makes much sense – or produces many laughs . Yeah , it has a few amusing moments , but it ’ s too scattershot to succeed . " Annie Alleman of The Herald News , on the other hand , named " Kill the Alligator and Run " her eighth favorite Simpsons episode . Nancy Basile of About.com thought the best scene of the episode is the one where the Simpsons have become hillbillies and are sitting on their porch , and Bart says " I 'm getting used to this country life . Teacher says I 'm whittling at a tenth @-@ grade level . " Corey Deiterman of the Houston Press listed Kid Rock at number one in his list of the top five worst musical guests in Simpsons history . 
 = Noel Gallagher = 
 Noel Thomas David Gallagher ( born 29 May 1967 ) is an English musician , singer , guitarist , and songwriter . He served as the lead guitarist , co @-@ lead vocalist and principal songwriter of the rock band Oasis . Raised in Burnage , Manchester , Gallagher began learning guitar at the age of thirteen . After a series of odd jobs in construction , he worked for local Manchester band Inspiral Carpets as a roadie and technician in 1988 . Whilst touring with them , he learned that his brother Liam Gallagher had formed a band of his own , known as The Rain , which eventually took on the name Oasis . After Gallagher returned to England , he was invited by his brother to join Oasis as songwriter and guitarist . 
 Oasis ' debut album , Definitely Maybe ( 1994 ) , marked the beginning of the band 's rise to fame as part of the Britpop movement . Oasis ' second album , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? ( 1995 ) , reached the top of the album charts in many countries and their third studio album , Be Here Now ( 1997 ) , became the fastest @-@ selling album in UK chart history . Britpop eventually declined in popularity and Oasis ' next two albums failed to revive it . However , the band 's final two albums , Don 't Believe the Truth ( 2005 ) and Dig Out Your Soul ( 2008 ) , were hailed as its best efforts in over a decade and found renewed success . On 28 August 2009 , following an altercation with Liam prior to a gig in Paris , Noel Gallagher announced his departure from Oasis and on 23 October 2009 , he confirmed he would embark on a solo career . Gallagher would go on to form Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds . 
 Gallagher 's run with Oasis was marked by turbulence , especially during the peak of Britpop , during which he was involved in several disputes with Liam , and the brothers ' fights and wild lifestyles regularly made headlines in British tabloid newspapers . Gallagher ( along with Oasis ) also shared a personal rivalry with fellow Britpop band Blur . However , he was often regarded as the spear @-@ head of the Britpop movement , and at one point of time , NME termed a number of Britpop bands ( including Kula Shaker , Ocean Colour Scene and Cast ) as " <unk> " , citing Gallagher 's influence on their success . Many have praised Gallagher 's songwriting , with George Martin claiming him to be ' the finest songwriter of his generation ' . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gallagher was born in Longsight , Manchester , the son of Irish parents Peggy and Thomas Gallagher . He was the couple 's second child , after the birth of Paul Anthony Gallagher . Soon after the birth of younger brother Liam in 1972 , the Gallaghers moved to Ashburn Avenue in the Manchester suburb of Burnage . Gallagher had an unhappy childhood . He and his brothers were often beaten by their father , who was an alcoholic , and he was often reclusive . Liam described him as " the weirdo in the family " . Due to their unease around their father , he and Paul both developed stammers . As the oldest child , Paul was given a room to himself , and Noel was forced to share with Liam . 
 Peggy Gallagher acquired a legal notice of separation from her husband in 1976 . Six years later , she finally left him , taking the three boys with her . As teenagers , the Gallagher brothers ( especially Noel ) were regular truants , often getting into trouble with the police . When his mother took a job working in the school canteen , Gallagher ensured that he stopped by to visit her during lunch before skipping the rest of the day . He was expelled from school at the age of 15 for throwing a bag of flour over a teacher . He used to hang around with the football hooligan firms Maine Line Crew , Under @-@ 5s , and Young <unk> in the 1980s , and at the age of 13 , he received six months ' probation for robbing a corner shop . It was during this period of probation , with little else to do , that he first began to teach himself to play a guitar his father had left him , imitating his favourite songs from the radio . Gallagher was particularly inspired by the debut of The Smiths on Top of the Pops in 1983 , performing their single " This Charming Man " . He later reflected that " from that day on ... [ he ] wanted to be Johnny Marr " . He also appeared ( and scored ) for Manchester Gaelic football outfit CLG <unk> at Croke Park , Dublin in 1983 . 
 As teenagers , the Gallagher brothers maintained limited contact with their father in order to secure jobs in construction . However , the relationship between father and sons continued to be tempestuous ; Gallagher said that " because we were always arguing we 'd still be working at nine o 'clock every night " . Having left his father 's building company , he took a job at another building firm sub @-@ contracted to British Gas . There he sustained an injury when a heavy cap from a steel gas pipe landed on his right foot . Following a period of recuperation , Gallagher was offered a less physically demanding role in the company 's storehouse , freeing up time for him to practise guitar and write songs . He claimed to have written at least three of the songs on Definitely Maybe in this storehouse ( including " Live Forever " and " Columbia " ) . He later called the storehouse " The Hit Hut " and claimed the walls were painted gold . Much of the late 1980s found Gallagher unemployed and living in a bedsit , occupying his time with recreational drug use , songwriting , and guitar playing . He is left @-@ handed , but plays right @-@ handed . 
 In May 1988 , Gallagher met guitarist Graham Lambert of Inspiral Carpets during a Stone Roses show . The two struck up an acquaintanceship and he became a regular at Inspiral Carpets shows . When he heard singer Steve Holt was leaving the band , Gallagher auditioned to be the new vocalist . He was rejected , but became part of their road crew for two years . Singer Tom Hingley said Gallagher owes his own career to the band , since " his business sense , work ethic , message , and humour are Inspiral down to the core " . He struck up a friendship with monitor engineer Mark Coyle over their love of The Beatles , and the pair spent soundchecks dissecting the group 's songs . 
 = = Career with Oasis = = 
 = = = Joining the band = = = 
 In 1991 , Gallagher returned from an American tour with the Inspiral Carpets to find that his brother Liam had become a singer with a local band called The Rain . He attended one of their concerts at Manchester 's Boardwalk , but was unimpressed by the group 's act . After rejecting an offer from Liam to be the band 's manager , Gallagher agreed to join the band , on the condition that he take creative control of the group and become its sole songwriter . According to another source , Gallagher told Liam and the rest of the group after having heard them play for the first time : " Let me write your songs and I 'll take you to superstardom , or else you 'll rot here in Manchester " . His control over the band in its early years earned him the nickname " The Chief " . 
 In May 1993 , the band heard that a record executive from Creation Records would be scouting for talent at King Tut 's in Glasgow . Together , they found the money to hire a van and make the six @-@ hour journey . When they arrived , they were refused entry to the club because no one notified the venue that Oasis had been added to the bill . The band eventually secured the opening slot and played a four @-@ song set that impressed Creation founder Alan McGee . 
 McGee then took the Live Demonstration tape to Sony America and invited Oasis to meet with him a week later in London , at which point they were signed to a six @-@ album contract . Gallagher has since claimed that he only had six songs written at the time , and has put his success in the interview down to " <unk> " . However , McGee believes that when they met , Gallagher had fifty or so songs written , and merely lied about how prolific he had been following the contract . Richard Ashcroft was so impressed with Oasis during the time , that he invited them to tour with his band The Verve as an opening act . 
 Gallagher claimed to have written Oasis ' first single , " Supersonic " , in " the time it takes to play the song . " " Supersonic " was released in early 1994 and peaked at No.31 on the official UK charts . The single was later followed by Oasis ' debut album Definitely Maybe , which was released in August 1994 and was a critical and commercial success . 
 It became the fastest @-@ selling debut album in British history at the time , and entered the UK charts at number one . Despite their rapidly growing popularity , Gallagher briefly left Oasis in 1994 during their first American tour . The conditions were poor , and he felt the American audience — still preoccupied with grunge and metal — did not understand the band . Gallagher stated that his early songs , especially " Live Forever " , were written to refute grunge 's pessimism . Tensions mounted between him and Liam , culminating in a fight after a disastrous L.A. gig . Having effectively decided to quit the music industry , he flew to San Francisco without telling the band , management or the crew . It was during this time that Gallagher wrote " Talk Tonight " as a " thank you " for the girl he stayed with , who " talked him from off the ledge " . He was tracked down by Creation 's Tim Abbot and during a trip by the pair to Las Vegas , Gallagher decided to continue with the band . He reconciled with his brother and the tour resumed in Minneapolis . 
 = = = Britpop and the height of fame = = = 
 Gallagher followed up the debut in 1995 with Oasis ' first UK number one single in " Some Might Say " . This preceded their second album , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? , released later that year . Though it suffered initial critical apathy , the album became the second fastest @-@ selling album ever in the UK , entering the UK album charts at number one and peaking at number four on the US Billboard 200 chart . 
 The success of Oasis and his newfound fame and fortune were not lost on Gallagher , and both he and his brother became famous for their " rock and roll lifestyle " . They drank heavily , abused drugs , fought fans , critics , peers , and each other , and made celebrity friends such as Ian Brown , Paul Weller , Mani , Mick Jagger , Craig Cash , Kate Moss and Johnny Depp . Gallagher spent extravagantly , buying various cars and a swimming pool , despite the fact he can neither drive , nor swim . He named his house in Belsize Park in London " Supernova Heights " ( after the song " Champagne Supernova " ) , and his two cats " Benson " and " Hedges " after his favourite brand of cigarettes . 
 Oasis went on to have greater success with their next two singles , " Wonderwall " and " Don 't Look Back in Anger " charting at number two and number one respectively ; the former becoming their sole top 10 hit in the US . Originally , Noel had wanted to take lead vocals on " Wonderwall " , but Liam insisted on singing it . As compensation , he decided he would sing lead vocals on " Don 't Look Back in Anger " . 1995 also saw Gallagher play two songs for the charity album Help ! : " Fade Away " , accompanied by friend and Oasis fan Johnny Depp and Depp 's then @-@ girlfriend Kate Moss ; and the Beatles ' 1969 hit " Come Together " , along with Paul Weller , Paul McCartney and others in a supergroup called Smokin ' Mojo Filters . He began collaborating with the Chemical Brothers , Ian Brown , the Stands , the Prodigy and Weller , amongst others . Gallagher became so influential that a June 1996 NME article argued that " If Noel Gallagher , the most successful songwriter of his generation , champions a group , then said group are guaranteed more mainstream kudos and , quite possibly , more sales . And since Noel has taken to championing only five or six groups , then it 's a powerful cabal he 's promoting . " The NME article grouped the bands Gallagher praised , including The Boo Radleys , Ocean Colour Scene , and Cast , under the banner of " <unk> " . John Harris typified these bands , and Gallagher , of sharing " a dewy @-@ eyed love of the 1960s , a spurning of much beyond rock 's most basic ingredients , and a belief in the supremacy of ' real music ' " . 
 In March 1996 , Gallagher and his brother Liam met their father again when the News of the World paid him to go to their hotel during a tour . He left for his room , later commenting " as far as I 'm concerned , I haven 't got a father . He 's not a father to me , y 'know ? I don 't respect him in any way whatsoever " . In August 1996 , Oasis sold out two nights at Knebworth , playing to over 250 @,@ 000 fans . Following the worldwide success of Morning Glory ? , Be Here Now ( 1997 ) became Oasis ' most eagerly anticipated album to date . As with the previous two albums , all the tracks were written by Gallagher . After an initial blaze of publicity , positive critical reviews , and commercial success , the album failed to live up to long @-@ term expectations , and public goodwill towards Be Here Now was short @-@ lived . The album was ultimately regarded by many as a bloated , over @-@ indulgent version of Oasis , which Gallagher has since blamed on the drug @-@ addicted state and indifference of the band at the time . 
 Gallagher began to suffer drug @-@ induced panic attacks during this period . His depression and paranoid well @-@ being inspired the song " Gas Panic ! " , subsequently included on the 2000 album Standing on the Shoulder of Giants . He claimed to have quit using illicit drugs on 5 June 1998 . Gallagher stated in 2001 , " I liked drugs , I was good at them . But I 'd had panic attacks for about a year and I stopped because I wanted to . After you make the decision , it is quite easy . " Between 1993 and 1998 , Gallagher claims , " I can hardly remember a thing . " 
 = = = Post @-@ Britpop years = = = 
 After the hype surrounding the release of Be Here Now had started to wane , critical response to the band became calmer and more considered , leading to a media backlash . In 1997 , Gallagher was criticised for attending a high @-@ profile and well @-@ publicised media party at 10 Downing Street , hosted by the newly appointed Prime Minister , Tony Blair , along with other celebrities and industry figures who had supported New Labour in the run @-@ up to the general election . Both brother Liam and Blur 's Damon Albarn declined their invitations , with Albarn commenting " Enjoy the <unk> , comrade . " The perception of Gallagher as someone now mixing with politicians — or , in particular , a famous photograph of him sipping champagne with Blair — conflicted with the " working class hero " status championed through songs such as " Up in the Sky " . 
 In 1999 , rhythm guitarist Paul " Bonehead " Arthurs quit the band , with bassist Paul McGuigan following soon afterwards . As a result , the fourth studio album , Standing on the Shoulder of Giants , was recorded by just the Gallaghers and drummer Alan White , with Gallagher playing all guitar parts . He later commented on Bonehead 's departure , " It 's hardly Paul McCartney leaving the Beatles , is it ? " . After the recording sessions were completed , Gallagher selected Gem Archer to join in place of Bonehead . 
 Later that year Alan McGee decided to leave Creation and sold the rest of his 51 % stake in the label to Sony . Gallagher took this opportunity to set up Big Brother Recordings , which took over Oasis ' distribution in the UK , but Sony imprint Epic Records continued to handle the band 's international distribution . Around the time of the album 's release , Andy Bell , formerly of Ride , joined the band as bassist . In 2001 , Gallagher formed his own label , Sour Mash Records , which released records by the likes of Shack and Proud Mary . The incorporation of the label followed Gallagher 's debut as a producer , working with Proud Mary on their debut , The Same Old Blues . 
 In late 2006 , Gallagher toured the UK , Europe , Japan , America and Australia in a series of acclaimed intimate semi @-@ acoustic gigs accompanied by Gem Archer and Terry Kirkbride on percussion . The show proved successful and a further series of sets took place in 2007 . March 2007 saw Gallagher perform in Moscow — the first time an Oasis member has performed in Russia . Yet Gallagher dismissed claims that he was planning to embark on a solo career . In early 2007 , Gallagher joined the rest of Oasis to collect the " Outstanding Contribution to Music " Award at the Brit Awards 2007 . 
 Gallagher , along with the band recorded their seventh studio album between 2007 and the next year at Abbey Road Studios and in Los Angeles , and started at the end of the summer of 2008 a tour that will last at least 12 months . 
 In March 2009 , The Times in conjunction with iTunes released a selection of live recordings by Noel Gallagher taken from his semi @-@ acoustic performance at the Royal Albert Hall on 27 March 2007 in aid of Teenage Cancer Trust . The Dreams We Have as Children features classic and rare tracks from the Oasis canon along with several cover versions of some of Gallagher 's favourite artists . 
 = = = Departure from the band = = = 
 On 28 August 2009 , he quit Oasis after a fight with his brother , Liam . A little before midnight on Friday Gallagher posted a statement on his message board called " Tales from the Middle of Nowhere " on the band 's website announcing his departure . 
 = = Post @-@ Oasis = = 
 = = = Solo performances = = = 
 Gallagher 's first concerts without Oasis were announced on 1 February 2010 to be at London 's Royal Albert Hall on 25 and 26 March 2010 for Teenage Cancer Trust . He was supported by the Courteeners and Plan B respectively . Terry Kirkbride and Gem Archer joined him on @-@ stage , as did Jay Darlington , all of whom Gallagher had previously worked with while he was still a member of Oasis . He played a mostly acoustic set , and played a variety of Oasis album tracks and B @-@ sides . It was almost the same set he played at the Royal Albert Hall in 2007 . Gallagher also joined friend Paul Weller onstage in London on 21 April 2010 , and played the Oasis song " Mucky Fingers " and a song he co @-@ wrote with Weller , " Echoes Round the Sun " . 
 = = = Returning to the studio = = = 
 Gallagher confirmed that he would be returning to the studio in August 2010 to record drums for an unnamed artist , later confirmed to be Paul Weller . He also denied rumours that he would be the Best Man for Russell Brand 's marriage to Katy Perry . In August , it was mentioned on a UK Music blog , <unk> Music , that Gallagher had been working with Liverpool group the Sand Band . Lead singer David McDonnell has been co @-@ writing with Gallagher and are looking to collaborate on future solo projects together . 
 On 24 November 2010 , Miles Kane revealed that Gallagher sang on a track from his debut solo album entitled My Fantasy . Kane also revealed that he will appear on Gallagher 's forthcoming album , playing guitar . 
 On 10 February 2011 , Gallagher stated he has " not even started " his first solo record , despite Liam <unk> that he ' swiped ' material from the Dig Out Your Soul sessions . " I am not recording new stuff , not just yet , " he said to Talksport . " It 'll be out when it 's finished I guess . Well I 've not even started it , so I don 't know . " 
 = = = Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds = = = 
 Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds released a self @-@ titled album on 17 October 2011 ; a collaboration album with Amorphous Androgynous was to be released in 2012 but has now been shelved indefinitely . He began touring in Dublin on 23 October 2011 . The touring band announced for Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds included David McDonnell ( guitar ) , Russell Pritchard ( bass ) , Mikey Rowe ( keyboards ) and Jeremy Stacey ( drums ) ; McDonnell left during rehearsals and was replaced before the tour with Tim Smith who had played with Rowe and Stacey previously . On 20 July 2011 , Gallagher released a 47 @-@ second trailer of his first single " The Death of You and Me " . The video for the debut single was released on 25 July at 8 : 21 am ( GMT ) . 
 Following the self @-@ titled debut , Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds released their second album Chasing Yesterday March 2 , 2015 . 
 Noel Gallagher has confirmed he is working on High Flying Birds ' third album . 
 = = = Future projects = = = 
 When promoting his debut album Everyday Robots , in an interview with NME , Damon Albarn hinted at a collaborative project with Gallagher . Despite the years of animosity during Blur and Oasis ' respective heyday , Albarn said : " We ’ re talking . It ’ s not anything to get excited about yet . I mean , he ’ s doing his thing . He ’ s finishing a new record . I ’ ve got my record coming out , but the principle of us making music together is something , you know . It would be fair to say , we have discussed it at least once . " 
 In March 2015 , Gallagher revealed that he was considering retirement from live shows within the following 10 years . He stated : " It 's not fun being on a bus for six weeks in America . It 's fine when you 're young , but I 'm almost 50 " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 At the age of 18 , Gallagher became engaged to his then @-@ girlfriend Diane , but they never married and eventually separated . In 1988 , he moved out of his family home to live with Louise Jones , whom he described as his " soulmate " and for whom he wrote " Slide Away " . They had an on @-@ again , off @-@ again relationship before finally separating in June 1994 , with Gallagher stating , " I don 't think I 'll ever get over it . " 
 In June 1997 , Gallagher married Meg Mathews in Las Vegas , Nevada . He had met her in 1994 through her roommate , MTV presenter Rebecca de <unk> , whom he was dating at the time and whom he left for Mathews . Mathews gave birth to a daughter , Anaïs Gallagher , on 27 January 2000 . Gallagher and Mathews divorced in January 2001 on grounds of his adultery with Scottish publicist Sara MacDonald . After the divorce was finalised , Gallagher admitted he had only claimed to have cheated in order to speed up the divorce process and that he had never actually been unfaithful . 
 Since his separation from Mathews , Gallagher has been in a relationship with MacDonald , whom he met at club Space on Ibiza in June 2000 . He wrote " Waiting for the Rapture " about their meeting . They have two sons , Donovan Rory MacDonald Gallagher ( born 22 September 2007 ) and Sonny Patrick MacDonald Gallagher ( born 1 October 2010 ) . Gallagher and MacDonald were married on 18 June 2011 in a private ceremony at the Lime Wood Hotel in the New Forest National Park . Gallagher 's best friend Russell Brand was best man at the wedding . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 He was a frequent guest on The Russell Brand Show on BBC Radio 2 , appearing on almost every show , leading Brand to dub him an unofficial " Co presenter " . He is also a regular on the digital radio sports show , " <unk> " Other notable friends of his are , Mani of the Stone Roses , Richard Ashcroft of the Verve – for whom he dedicated a song , " Cast No Shadow " , the band members of the Chemical Brothers , - Sex Pistols members John Lydon and Steve Jones the members of the rock band Kasabian , Andy Nicholson , boxer Ricky Hatton , Paul McCartney , former Liverpool F.C. footballer Jamie Carragher , Chris Martin and Jonny Buckland of Coldplay , Johnny Marr , Morrissey , Bono , Paul Weller , Ian Brown , John Squire , Lee <unk> , Craig Cash , Kelly Jones and Johnny Depp ( who played slide guitar on the Oasis song Fade In @-@ Out ) . He was also good friends with Kate Moss who used to stay with him when she was visiting London . In 2001 he was reported to have an estimated personal fortune of £ 25 million . In 2009 , The Sunday Times Rich List estimated he and Liam 's combined personal fortune at £ 52 million . 
 Gallagher is a fan of football , being a lifelong Manchester City F.C. supporter ( Gallagher admitting he " cried like a baby " when City won the Premier League title ) . He is a friend of former City midfielder Joey Barton , as well as Italian striker Alessandro Del Piero , who described Gallagher as Italy 's " lucky mascot " during the 2006 FIFA World Cup , and appears in the Oasis video " Lord Don 't Slow Me Down " . Gallagher along with Kasabian lead guitarist Sergio Pizzorno took part in drawing teams for the FA Cup third round in 2011 . Coincidentally Pizzorno drew his hometown team Leicester City with Gallagher 's Manchester City for the Third round tie in which both teams drew 2 @-@ 2 and Manchester City preceded to win 4 @-@ 2 in the replay . He participated in the unveiling of Umbro sponsored football kits with captain Vincent Kompany . In the advertising campaign , the two men are pictured wearing the new Manchester City home and away shirts for the 2012 – 13 season . Formerly , the footballer introduced Gallagher to 80 @,@ 000 fans during Rock Werchter music festival in Belgium . Gallagher also supports the Republic of Ireland national football team and has said " I don ’ t consider myself to be English at all " . Nevertheless , he did serve as an official ambassador for England 's bid to host the 2018 FIFA World Cup . 
 Gallagher stated in a 2006 radio interview with Russell Brand that he does not believe in God or " an all @-@ guiding force " . Despite this assertion , throughout his career , many of his songs have mentioned God ( " Carry Us All " , " Gas Panic ! , " " The Hindu Times " and " Little by Little " ) , and all the tracks he had contributed to Dig Out Your Soul , as well as the other bandmates ' songs , have lyrics and references to God and other biblical terms . Dig Out Your Soul has been described by Gallagher as a " religious Armageddon " . But in recent interviews for Dig Out Your Soul regarding religion , he stated " See , I don 't know what I am . If I was an atheist I 'd just write songs about not believing in God – but I don 't know what I am . " 
 In 2008 , it was announced that Gallagher would sell his home in Ibiza located near fellow musician James Blunt 's , saying while in Los Angeles on the Russell Brand BBC Radio 2 show that he " can 't stand living there in the knowledge that Blunt is nearby making terrible music " . 
 He was reportedly asked by Simon Cowell to be a judge on The X Factor after Dannii Minogue , Cheryl Cole and Cowell himself declined to participate in series 8 , which Gallagher subsequently declined as well . 
 = = Songwriting and musicianship = = 
 Gallagher was the primary songwriter in Oasis , and on the group 's first few albums he was the sole songwriting contributor . He is often criticised for the praise he gives to his own songs . He points out " If you 'd written ' Live Forever ' , you 'd be walking to a different tune the next day too . " Gallagher has often been accused by critics of plagiarising the music of his heroes , but he has maintained outright homages in his music are his intention . In a 1996 Guitar World interview , he described himself as " a fan who writes songs " and stated , " I 'm not saying , ' I 'm the greatest songwriter in the world . Listen to me . ' Usually , I 'm saying , ' These are the greatest songwriters in the world . And I 'm gonna put them all in this song " ' . His response to critics about the topic of " blatantly pinching riffs " was , " No , I don 't feel guilty . But you feel pissed off because you didn 't do it first . " 
 Though naturally left @-@ handed , Gallagher plays guitar right @-@ handed , which he claims is the only thing he can do with his non @-@ dominant hand . Gallagher has said he sometimes does not understand his own lyrics , commenting in 2005 that " when I 'm halfway through ' Don 't Look Back in Anger ' I say to myself . ' I still don 't know what these words mean ! ' " Gallagher has declared to be dyslexic , which slows down the process of his songwriting , nor can he read or write music . 
 = = = Changing band dynamic = = = 
 Gallagher 's role as chief songwriter for Oasis changed over time as he allowed a greater level of lyrical input from the other band members . Standing on the Shoulder of Giants included Oasis ' first ever album track written by his brother Liam . Heathen Chemistry included a further three tracks by Liam ( including the single " Songbird " ) , one by Archer and one by Andy Bell . Don 't Believe the Truth featured another three tracks by Liam ( though one of them , " Love Like a Bomb " was co @-@ written with Archer ) , one from Archer , and two from Bell . The latter two albums have been greeted with increasing critical and commercial success in the UK , particularly Don 't Believe the Truth . Yet the second single from Don 't Believe the Truth , " The Importance of Being Idle " became the second Oasis track sung by Gallagher to top the UK charts and was named 2005 's finest track by Q magazine , as well as being nominated for the NME 's " Best Song of 2005 " award . 
 However , on the last Oasis albums , his increasing role as lead singer , apparently to compensate for his diminished role as songwriter , caused some tension with Liam . 
 Zak Starkey , son of former Beatles drummer Ringo Starr and previous drummer for Gallagher 's heroes The Who and Johnny Marr , replaced long @-@ time drummer Alan White during the recording sessions for Don 't Believe the Truth . The loss of White prompted Gallagher to comment in a 2005 interview , that he puts Oasis ' trouble with drummers , in part , to the fact that he is himself a talented drummer , saying " I get a lot of stick for it , but I 'm the best drummer in the group . " 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Gallagher is well known for his controversial , outspoken statements in the press ; he acknowledged his tendency for faux pas in the song " My Big Mouth " on the album Be Here Now . Yet Gallagher has defended himself , saying " people think [ I 'm ] controversial for the answers [ I ] give to silly questions in interviews , but ... I 'm not thinking about insulting ... people ; I say what I genuinely feel is in my heart . My conscience is clean , d 'you know what I mean ? Y 'know , I 'm true to myself — fuck everybody else . " 
 = = = Damon Albarn and Blur = = = 
 The most infamous of Gallagher 's controversial statements was in a 1995 interview with The Observer , where he expressed a wish for Damon Albarn and Alex James of rivals Blur to " catch AIDS and die " , a comment which he quickly apologised publicly for , and stated that " AIDS is no laughing matter " . This statement was preceded by the success of ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? , which led to a well @-@ documented feud with fellow Britpop band Blur . The differing styles of the bands , coupled with their prominence within the Britpop movement , led the British media to seize upon the rivalry between the bands . Both factions played along , with the Gallaghers taunting Blur at the 1996 BRIT Awards by singing a rendition of " Parklife " when they collected their " Best British Band " award ( with Liam changing the lyrics to " Shite @-@ life " ) . 
 Gallagher maintains that the rivalry was conceived by the magazine NME and members of Blur 's entourage as a ploy to raise their respective profiles , and that since this point he has had no respect for either party . However , Albarn has suggested the roots of the feud were much more personal . By 2007 , the tension between the two had cooled , and in an NME interview , Gallagher said " I 've got a lot of respect for Damon , I really do mean it . Because I 'm indifferent to Damon he thinks that I think he 's a cunt . Our Liam will talk to him , I won 't because he 's just another singer in a band to me , but I don 't think he 's a cunt . Good luck to him ! " On 23 March 2013 , Gallagher , Damon , Graham Coxon and Paul Weller performed the Blur hit " Tender " at the Teenage Cancer Trust . 
 = = = Liam Gallagher = = = 
 The Gallagher brothers famously share a turbulent relationship ; one of their arguments was even released on a 1995 bootleg single entitled <unk> Rivalry . Although in recent years their relationship had stabilised , during the band 's early career there were a handful of incidents where the two have actually come to blows . In an L.A. show during their first American tour in 1994 , Liam took to changing the words of the songs so that they were offensive to both Americans and Gallagher . A confrontation after the show which led to a chair being thrown and a brawl caused him to leave the tour and head for Las Vegas ; Gallagher later claimed he had " visions of Fear and Loathing flashing in [ his ] eyes " . During recording sessions for the second Oasis album , ( What 's the Story ) Morning Glory ? , the brothers had a violent fight involving a cricket bat , when Liam invited everyone from a local pub back into the studio while he was trying to work . In 1995 , Noel was obliged to sing " Wonderwall " on Later ... with Jools Holland when Liam failed to turn up . 
 In 1996 , he provided lead vocals at a performance for MTV Unplugged when Liam backed out minutes before the set was due to start . Liam claimed to have been struck down with a " sore throat " ; the band later found out that Liam did not like performing acoustically . Gallagher was further angered when Liam proceeded to heckle him from the balcony and nurse his " sore throat " with beer and cigarettes while the band performed . Just before the band were about to board a plane to the United States for their important make @-@ or @-@ break US tour , Liam left the airport , claiming he had to find a house for his then @-@ wife Patsy Kensit . He later joined the band for their last few gigs and the infamous MTV Awards performance ; the remaining dates were scrapped . The band 's future was daily tabloid news . 
 While on tour in Barcelona in 2000 , Oasis were forced to cancel a gig when Alan White 's arm seized up , and the band spent the night drinking instead . Liam made a derogatory comment about Gallagher 's then @-@ wife Meg Mathews , and attempted to cast doubt over the legitimacy of his daughter Anais , causing Gallagher to head @-@ butt Liam . Following this , he declared he was quitting overseas touring , but returned for an Oasis gig in Dublin on 8 July 2000 . During the performance , the two brothers shook hands at the end of " <unk> " . 
 However , the relationship between the two brothers had become strained throughout 2009 , leading eventually to a last @-@ minute cancellation of an Oasis concert scheduled to take place on 28 August 2009 in Paris , due to an " altercation within the group . " Later that evening , Gallagher confirmed he had left Oasis as he " simply could not go on working with Liam a day longer . " Through the Oasis website , he said " It 's with some sadness and great relief to tell you that I quit Oasis tonight " . On 29 August , Gallagher expanded further on his blog , stating " the level of verbal and violent intimidation towards me , my family , friends and comrades has become intolerable . And the lack of support and understanding from my management and band mates has left me with no other option than to get me cape and seek pastures new . " 
 When asked in 2012 about his brother and an Oasis reunion Gallagher said " I last texted Liam at Christmas after the City match . I don 't think it 's gonna happen . It would be great for everyone else except me . It 'd be mega for the millions and millions and everybody else it would be brilliant but I wouldn 't be very happy about it . I guess you don 't know what you 're gonna feel like in 20 @-@ odd years but right now , I mean I was in Oasis for nearly 20 years . I 've been doing this what I 'm doing now for one year and I 'd like to see what it 's like to do it for longer . I don 't think anyone is pushing for a reunion either . Nobody ever brings it up in any seriousness – I mean Liam does publicly but he says a lot of things publicly . I wouldn 't take anything he says seriously " . After their performance of Wonderwall at the London Olympics Closing Ceremony ( which Gallagher had originally turned down ) , he referred to Liam 's band Beady Eye as ' Stratford 's finest Oasis tribute band ' . 
 = = = Jay @-@ Z and Glastonbury = = = 
 Gallagher reportedly blasted the organisers of the 2008 Glastonbury Festival for scheduling US hip @-@ hop artist Jay @-@ Z as a headliner for the traditionally guitar @-@ driven festival : " If it ain 't broke don 't fix it . If you start to break it then people aren 't going to go . I 'm sorry , but Jay @-@ Z ? No chance . Glastonbury has a tradition of guitar music and even when they throw the odd curve ball in on a Sunday night you go ' Kylie Minogue ? ' I don 't know about it . But I 'm not having hip @-@ hop at Glastonbury . It 's wrong . " 
 Emily Eavis , the organiser of the festival , said she was honoured Jay @-@ Z was headlining the event saying : " He is absolutely the right act for our festival , " she said . " There is no reason why we should not have the greatest living hip @-@ hop artist on at Glastonbury . " Eavis also cited that Jay @-@ Z was far from the first hip @-@ hop artist to appear at <unk> the Roots , Cypress Hill , and De La Soul had all previously performed at the Glastonbury Festival . 
 In response , Jay @-@ Z said , " We don 't play guitars , Noel , but hip @-@ hop has put in its work like any other form of music . This headline show is just a natural progression . Rap music is still evolving . From Afrika Bambaataa DJ @-@ ing in the Bronx and Run DMC going platinum , to Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh Prince winning the first rap Grammy , I 'm just next in the line . We have to respect each other 's genre of music and move forward . " 
 Jay @-@ Z opened his set at Glastonbury 2008 with a cover of Oasis ' song " Wonderwall " . When Gallagher was asked about the incident he replied , " The way it 's played itself out is that I said Jay @-@ Z had no right to play Glastonbury , which is a crock of <unk> . I got off a plane and someone asked me about the fact that Glastonbury hadn 't sold out for the first time in years , and if it was because of Jay @-@ Z. From there it grew into this crap that I was standing on an orange crate at Speakers ' Corner saying , ' Gather round , brothers and sisters . Have you heard what 's happening at Glastonbury this year ? ' I have a certain turn of phrase . So if I say , " Chicken sandwiches in McDonald 's are just plain fucking wrong , " it doesn 't mean I 'm attacking all chickens or all sandwiches . I 've hung out with Jay @-@ Z in Tokyo . I 've seen his show . It 's not my bag , but it 's all right . We have a mutual friend in Chris Martin . So I am a guy who doesn 't like hip @-@ hop — shock , horror . I don 't dislike rappers or hip @-@ hop or people who like it . I went to the Def Jam tour in Manchester in the ' 80s when rap was inspirational . Public Enemy were awesome . But it 's all about status and bling now , and it doesn 't say anything to me . " When Jay @-@ Z was asked about Gallagher 's comments he said " I haven 't spoken to him [ Gallagher ] , I heard he was reaching out . I don 't bear any grudge , it 's all good . I just believe in good music and bad music , I 've always said that . You look at any interview from the beginning of time , I 've always stated that I don 't believe in the lines and classifications that people put music in so they can easily define it " . When asked who he would be interested in collaborating with in the future , the rapper said , " Anyone . Oasis as well – it doesn 't matter to me . " 
 = = = Political views = = = 
 Gallagher has spoken about his political views on several occasions , most notably when he visited Tony Blair at No. 10 Downing Street in 1997 . In an interview in 1997 when he was asked about why he visited Blair he replied , " I 've taken a lot of flack for going to No. 10 Downing Street but the thing about that is , I never considered myself a rebel anyway . I wasn 't going there representing the ' Indie community ' . I wasn 't representing anyone . I was going there for me . You have to understand that from when I went to school and from when I was born all we ever knew was conservative , Tory , right @-@ wing government . What people don 't mention is , they say ' He went to meet Tony Blair . ' No . I went to meet the Labour prime minister . Our parents always drummed into us that the Labour Party was for the people and the Tory Party was not . I went to meet the Labour prime minister . " 
 Gallagher has been quoted : " Politics is like football for me . Labour is my team and even if you don ’ t like a striker you don ’ t give up supporting the team . " Prior to the 2005 general election , Gallagher stated that he was still supporting the Labour government partly because of his concern that " Phil Collins is threatening to come back and live here . And let 's face it , none of us want that " . 
 In an interview in 2007 when asked about politics he said , " I 'd been unemployed all my life . It was a big deal for me when they ( Labour ) got in . Now David Cameron is no different from Tony Blair and Gordon Brown is no different from David Cameron . They 're all cut from the same cloth and it annoys me that the biggest political icon in the last 30 years has been Margaret Thatcher . Someone who tried to destroy the working class . It freaks me out . So I don 't really think there 's anything left to vote for . I believe that I , as a person , can only change things once every 5 years and that 's by voting , and my point is that even casting that vote means that the same guy gets in , the only difference is one has a red tie and the other has a blue one . " 
 Gallagher was passionate in his support for Barack Obama 's successful bid for US President , calling his acceptance speech to the 2008 Democratic National Convention " spellbinding " . 
 In 1997 , he played a 5 song set at the Tibetan Freedom Concert in New York City . As a result , Oasis were deemed " unsuitable " by the Chinese government , forcing a planned tour of the country in 2009 to be cancelled . 
 Gallagher has also been very vocal about knife crime . In 2008 he was quoted : " The scumbags are taking over the streets . I don 't know what David Cameron and Gordon Brown are going to do about it . It all goes back to the Thatcher years . It sounds like a cliché but that 's when the rot set in . " When the interviewer suggested it was for status he replied , " In my day status was about trying to be somebody , not trying to kill somebody , so how 's that all changed ? " 
 In October 2011 , Gallagher told Newsnight he believed the then Labour leader Ed Miliband was " utterly uninspiring and dull " , and said he had no idea what he stood for . 
 Speaking out about the August 2011 riots that took place in England , Gallagher stated , " Last August I was on tour in Europe and people were asking me about the riots . All over the world , Syria and Egypt , people were rioting for freedom . And these kids in England are rioting for tracksuits . It 's embarrassing . " Gallagher claimed that violent video games and violent television shows which children were being exposed to were partially to blame for social problems . 
 In February 2012 , he implied that the UK under the Premiership of Margaret Thatcher was a more fertile ground for dissent in the arts : " Under Thatcher , who ruled us with an iron rod , great art was made . Amazing designers and musicians . Acid house was born . Very colourful and progressive . Now , no one 's got anything to say . ' Write a song ? No thanks , I 'll say it on Twitter ' . It 's a sad state when more people retweet than buy records . " 
 In a February 2015 interview with The Quietus , Gallagher elaborated on his disillusion with current politicians and how they 'll do anything to say they 're just regular people : 
 And now the Conservatives are just ... I mean [ ... ] David Cameron , he 's trying to be your mate . " Oh , I really like The Jam . " 
 Gallagher then went on to say that Thatcher was brutal but more direct , and " You can kind of respect that " 
 In 2016 , Gallagher stated that while he remained left @-@ wing , he opposed Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn , deeming him to be a communist . He said that " The Tories don 't care about the vulnerable , and the communists don 't care about the aspirational " . 
 = = Musical equipment = = 
 Throughout his career , Gallagher has used a wide range of different guitars , effect pedals and amplifiers from his large collection . Most of it emerged from the Standing on the Shoulder of Giants sessions , where he decided to drop the equipment used in the three previous albums and instead buy " loads of really weird pedals , old guitars , and small amps " , as the lack of deadline to deliver the album allowed Gallagher to " take quite a few days just messing around . " 
 = = = Guitars = = = 
 Electric guitars 
 Epiphone Les Paul – Gallagher played a cherry sunburst model in the early years of Oasis . 
 Gibson Les Paul 
 Fender Telecaster – Gallagher uses several , one of which , a ' 60s model , was given to Noel by Johnny Depp as a birthday present . 
 Epiphone Casino 
 Gibson ES @-@ 355 Vintage Model – Since 2001 , this has become Gallagher 's main stage guitar . 
 = = = Effect pedals = = = 
 In the early days of Oasis , Gallagher did not use pedals : " I used to just turn up the amps as full as I could get them " . Since then , he has begun using a large number of effects , but singled out the Ibanez Tube Screamer . 
 = = = Amplification = = = 
 Gallagher has said that he used only 100 @-@ watt Marshalls early in his career . After Definitely Maybe , he began using smaller amps , singling out Fenders ( Princeton and Bandmaster ) , and also a combo made by Clark Amplification , which builds amplifiers based on vintage Fender and Marshall amps . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Albums = = = 
 2009 : The Dreams We Have as Children – Live at the Royal Albert Hall 
 2011 : Noel Gallagher 's High Flying Birds 
 2015 : Chasing Yesterday 
 Also featured on : 
 1995 : Stanley Road by Paul Weller , acoustic guitar on " I Walk on Gilded Splinters " 
 1997 : Dig Your Own Hole by the Chemical Brothers , vocals on " Setting Sun " 
 1998 : <unk> Return by Goldie , guitar on " Temper Temper " 
 1998 : The X @-@ Files : The Album , the track " Teotihuacan " 
 1998 : More Than Us E.P. by Travis , the track " All I Want To Do Is Rock ( Live Version ) " 
 1999 : Surrender by the Chemical Brothers , vocals on " Let Forever Be " 
 2000 : <unk> by <unk> , drums 
 2000 : The Same Old Blues by Proud Mary , production , plus additional vocals , guitars , bass and percussion 
 2002 : Illumination by Paul Weller , drums , percussion & bass on " One X One " 
 2003 : Live at the Royal Albert Hall by the Who , guitar , backing vocals on " Won 't Get Fooled Again " 
 2004 : <unk> by Ian Brown : collaboration on the song " Keep What Ya Got " . 
 2004 : All Years Leaving by the Stands , guitar on " Some Weekend Night " 
 2008 : 22 Dreams by Paul Weller , bass , piano , mellotron and <unk> on " Echoes Round The Sun " 
 2011 : Colour of the Trap by Miles Kane , backing vocals on " My Fantasy " 
 2015 : A Head Full Of Dreams by Coldplay , guitar on " Up & Up " 
 = = = High Flying Birds = = = 
 = = = Other charted songs = = = 
 = = = As featured artist = = = 
 = = = Other = = = 
 2004 : " Free Love , Freeway " – Ricky Gervais ft . Noel Gallagher ; credited as ' a special guest ' on backing vocals for the ' Office Christmas Special DVD ' , on which the video of the recording session featuring Noel & Ricky is available 
 2011 : Well ... All Right ! – compilation album compiled by Gallagher , released <unk> into Mojo magazine 
 = Michael Novogratz = 
 Michael Edward " Mike " Novogratz ( sometimes Novo , born November 26 , 1964 ) is an ex @-@ hedge fund manager , formerly of the investment firm Fortress Investment Group . He was ranked a billionaire by Forbes in 2007 and 2008 . 
 Prior to joining Fortress , he was a partner at Goldman Sachs where he spent lots of time working abroad including leadership roles in Asia and Latin America . Novogratz is a 1987 graduate of Princeton University , where he was a member of the wrestling team . He was a Virginia state runner @-@ up in high school wrestling . He served in the U.S. Army National Guard after college . His siblings include Jacqueline Novogratz and Robert Novogratz . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Raised in Alexandria , Virginia , Novogratz is the son of West Point football lineman and 1958 Knute Rockne Award ( best lineman ) winner Robert , Sr. He attended Fort Hunt High School . Novogratz was state of Virginia high school wrestling runner @-@ up before serving as Princeton Wrestling captain . Novogratz was first team All @-@ Ivy League in both 1986 ( 150 @-@ pound ( 68 @.@ 0 kg ) ) and 1987 ( 158 @-@ pound ( 71 @.@ 7 kg ) ) . He qualified for the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) wrestling championships in both 1986 and 1987 ( both at 150 @-@ pound ( 68 @.@ 0 kg ) ) . Novogratz earned his A.B. in economics . At the NCAA wrestling championships , he made it to the round of 12 . 
 His sister Jacqueline Novogratz is founder and CEO of Acumen Fund , while his brother Robert Novogratz is a designer who has been profiled in the Bravo television series 9 by Design . Another brother John Novogratz is a senior managing partner at Millenium Partners . 
 = = Career = = 
 After a stint in the New Jersey National Guard that included service as a helicopter pilot , Novogratz began his career with Goldman Sachs in 1989 . On April 1 , 1989 , he joined the firm as a short @-@ term bond ( money market ) salesman . Novogratz lived in Asia from 1992 to 1999 . He took a salesman position for Goldman in Tokyo in 1992 , and eventually Jon Corzine sent him to Hong Kong to run a trading desk for the firm . He was elected partner at Goldman in 1998 . Among the positions that he held at Goldman were president of Goldman Sachs Latin America and the head of fixed income , currencies and commodities risk in Asia . 
 In March 2002 , Novogratz joined Fortress Investments in time to join Wesley Edens , Robert Kauffman , Randal Nardone and Peter Briger , Jr. in taking the company public through its February 9 , 2007 , initial public offering . During the IPO , the company sold an 8 % share to the public for $ 600 million . Before assuming his current roles at Fortress as principal and director of Fortress Credit Corporation in 2006 , he served as Co @-@ Chief Information Officer of Macro Funds at Fortress Investment Group LLC . Although Fortress ' domain includes both hedge funds and makes private @-@ equity investments , Novogratz and his fellow Princetonian Briger run the hedge funds . Although the stock price had escalated to $ 35 at its IPO , by December 3 , 2008 , it dipped to as low as $ 1 @.@ 87 after withdrawals from Novogratz ' Drawbridge Global Macro fund were shut off . 
 New York Governor David Paterson appointed Novogratz to sit on the Hudson River Park Trust 's board of directors in 2010 . He serves as a member of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 's Investment Advisory Committee on Financial Markets . Novogratz is the chairman and founder of Beat the Streets , a non @-@ profit organization which fosters the sport of wrestling in New York City public schools . He also serves on the board of the Acumen Fund , NYU Langone Medical Center , Princeton Varsity Club , Boards of Creative Alternatives of New York , PAX , the School for Strings , and The Jazz Foundation of America . He founded and serves as the chairman of the board of the School for Strings . He is also the honorary chairman of USA Wrestling Foundation and the chairman of The Friends of the Hudson River Park . In October 2015 , Novogratz retired from Fortress Investments . 
 = = Personal = = 
 In 2006 , he bought Robert De Niro 's $ 12 @.@ 25 million duplex in Manhattan 's Tribeca neighborhood . When he moved into De Niro 's former residence , Mickey Rourke moved into Novogratz ' former Meatpacking district residence . He was college roommates with Richard <unk> , head of global arbitrage and trading at RBC Capital Markets . He and his wife Dora " <unk> " Caceres have four children . They also own a home in <unk> . 
 He has been a booster for the U.S. National Wrestling Team and an official spokesman for USA Wrestling . He was named the 2010 USA Wrestling Man of the Year and an Outstanding American by the National Wrestling Hall of Fame in 2007 . When the International Olympic Committee cut Olympic Wrestling from the 2020 Summer Games , he campaigned for the sport 's return . 
 Following the February IPO , which also brought Edens , Kauffman , Nardone and Briger billionaire status , Novogratz ranked # 407 in the March 2007 Forbes list of world billionaires with a net worth of $ 2 @.@ 3 billion , including his 66 @.@ 6 million shares of Fortress Investments . In September 2007 , Novogratz was listed at # 317 on the Forbes 400 with a net worth of 1 @.@ 5 billion dollars . He was ranked 962 on the March 2008 Forbes list of world billionaires with a net worth of $ 1 @.@ 2 billion . The same year , he became a member of Kappa Beta Phi . By 2012 , after the decline of Fortress ' stock price , his net worth had shrunk to $ 500 million . He supports Democratic political interests . 
 = Louis Nolan = 
 Louis Edward Nolan ( 4 January 1818 – 25 October 1854 ) was a British Army officer and cavalry tactician best known for his role and death in the Charge of the Light Brigade during the Crimean War . Born to a minor diplomatic official and his wife , Nolan was educated at the Austrian Inhaber Pioneer School at Tulln , where he was noted as an enthusiastic horseman and military theorist . After early graduation he was commissioned as a subaltern in the 10th Austrian Hussar regiment , serving in Austria , Hungary and on the Polish frontier , where he again became known for his horsemanship and was promoted to senior lieutenant . Due to the nepotism inherent in the Austro @-@ Hungarian armed forces , Nolan succeeded in transferring to the British Army as a Cornet in the 15th Light Dragoons . 
 Deployed in India , Nolan was eventually made the regimental riding master and an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General George Berkeley , commander @-@ in @-@ chief in Madras , accompanying him on horse trials to evaluate the use of geldings as cavalry mounts rather than stallions , and was made a Captain in 1850 . Returning to Great Britain in 1851 , he toured continental Europe and wrote two books on horsemanship and cavalry theory , the second of which , Cavalry : Its History and Tactics , was universally acclaimed and led to the adoption of a Nolan @-@ designed saddle by the British Army . A trusted voice on cavalry matters , Nolan was dispatched to the Middle East in the early days of the Crimean War to hunt for appropriate mounts . After returning he was attached to the staff of General Richard Airey , and in this role delivered the order that led to the Charge of the Light Brigade . 
 40 percent of the Light Brigade 's soldiers were killed , wounded , captured or rendered unfit for service , including Nolan , who was the first casualty of the Charge . Contemporary accounts blamed Nolan for failing to properly communicate the order , either accidentally or deliberately , while some modern historians apportion the blame to not only Nolan but also Lord Raglan , commander of the British forces in the Crimea , and the cavalry commander Lord Lucan . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Nolan was born on 4 January 1818 to Babington and Elizabeth Nolan , in York County , Upper Canada . Following his father 's dismissal from his minor diplomatic post at the British consulate in Milan , Nolan was accepted into the Austrian Inhaber Pioneer School at Tulln , where he was known as Ludwig by his fellow cadets . His father 's desire to see him given a chance to enter a prestigious branch of the armed forces meant that Nolan was regularly transferred to other cadet schools to learn more about the military . Enthusiastic about the cavalry , he was noted as an excellent horseman and student of military theory , as well as history . With the multi @-@ lingual nature of Austro @-@ Hungary , he also studied languages , including Hungarian . Other subjects studied there included fortification , water engineering , mathematics , fencing , swimming and bridge @-@ building . Nolan graduated from the Pioneer School a year early in May 1835 , probably following a recommendation from Prince Liechtenstein , and was made a subaltern in the 10th Austrian Hussar regiment . 
 Nolan served in Austria , Hungary and on the Polish frontier , and was again noted for his horsemanship and language skills . His confidential report from 1838 commended his " great zeal and application " , and he was highly popular within the regiment , rising to become the senior lieutenant . Despite this , his status as a foreigner and a commoner limited his opportunities for promotion . Although promotions in the Austrian Army theoretically were merit @-@ based , in practise the gentry exchanged favours and money unofficially to secure them . Nolan 's father attempted to get him a commission with the British Army , with little success until Nolan 's return to the United Kingdom for the coronation of Queen Victoria in July 1838 . While there , he secured an interview with Lord Fitzroy Somerset while his father negotiated with the Austrian General Clam @-@ Gallas to permit Nolan to leave the Austrian armed forces . Eventually , following the payment of £ 450 , Nolan was granted a commission as a Cornet in the 15th Light Dragoons of the British Army on 23 April 1839 . His resignation from the Austrian army was never formally accepted , and he was struck off the rolls on 31 October 1899 , 45 years after his death . 
 = = 15th Light Dragoons = = 
 = = = India = = = 
 Despite the negative associations with service there , Nolan had deliberately transferred to a regiment operating in India . He initially travelled to Maidstone , where the 15th maintained a troop to train new recruits , under the command of Captain George Key . He then caught a troopship to Bombay , the Malabar , which arrived on 9 November . Soon after arrival he fell ill and was granted two years of sick leave , starting from 26 March 1840 , and returned to Britain . He returned to active service in June 1841 , again to the Maidstone depot , and became a Lieutenant on the 19th . He went on leave again in August to take the riding master 's course and exam , and returned on 8 March 1842 , newly qualified . 
 His attachment to the Maidstone depot gave Nolan the opportunity to further study and practice cavalry theory ; he met several other officers with a similar interest , including Captain Key , with whom he became close friends . By 1842 his time at Maidstone had ended , and he departed for India in October , arriving at Madras on 9 May 1843 . The 15th Light Dragoons were stationed in Bangalore , a relatively peaceful area , and Nolan did not see action during his time there . He was appointed regimental riding master on 13 August 1844 , in recognition of his expertise at horsemanship . In his spare time , Nolan raced his horse Arab Beauty . At the Bangalore Cantonment Races in October 1846 , he placed second in two races , and won both the Galloway Stakes and Ladies ' Purse . A year later he entered <unk> , without success . 
 As regimental riding master he introduced substantial changes to the cavalry training programme , reintroducing the use of leaping bars , training individual soldiers before teaching formation riding to entire squads , and appointing a dedicated soldier in each troop who was trained to break in new horses . Over the next few years the regiment 's standard of horsemanship rose , increasing Nolan 's reputation . When the regiment was inspected by Major General John Aitchison , a man known for his high standards , he wrote that : 
 Nolan 's system of training horses and teaching riding is worthy of being more generally known . The seat of the men is more uniform and the hand light and firm , and as the hand and heel work together the horses in the ranks are steady to a degree I did not expect to see on a regiment mounted on entire horses . 
 Nolan then became a staff officer , joining the staff of General George Berkeley , commander @-@ in @-@ chief in Madras , as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp in January 1849 . He quickly became close friends with Berkeley 's two sons , Charles and George , who were also enthusiastic about horse @-@ racing . In 1850 Nolan accompanied Berkeley on a tour of the region , conducting horse trials to evaluate the use of geldings as cavalry mounts rather than stallions , and was also promoted , purchasing a Captaincy on 8 March . Despite these successes , Nolan recognised that his prospects were far more limited in India than in England , and he could not afford the increased costs of serving in the colonies . At the same time , service in India was not taken seriously by many of the officers in high command , and would not be sufficient on its own to advance him . Accordingly , he obtained two years sick leave on 16 January 1851 and returned to England , intending to tour Europe and write a book on cavalry theory . 
 = = = Grand tour and cavalry theory = = = 
 After a brief period in England , Nolan and Colonel George Key toured the continent , visiting countries including France , Russia , Sweden and the German states . The Swedish Horse Guards under Curt von <unk> left a particular impression , with Nolan later writing that they were " one of the best regiments of foreign cavalry I have ever seen " , and he was also impressed by François <unk> , initially considering simply translating <unk> 's <unk> d 'équitation into English . In Russia , he attended a military review of Cossack and Circassian cavalry , and passing through Germany , observed the Saxon dragoons . Eventually , following his return to Maidstone in October 1852 ( and promotion to commander of the regiment 's troop there ) , he published his first book , The Training of Cavalry Remount Horses : A New System , through Parker , Furnivall & Parker . Dedicated to Berkeley , the book was highly specialised and intended for practical use , aimed specifically at cavalry officers rather than equestrians generally . 
 The reaction to the book was limited , at least in part due to the specialised nature of the work . His second book , Cavalry : Its History and Tactics , covered cavalry theory more widely and made a series of recommendations , including the use of carbines on foot rather than from the saddle , and substantial improvements to the cavalry saddle itself . The existing saddle , in use since 1796 , was considered too high , restricting the use of a rider 's lower legs , leading to instability . Accordingly , he designed a new saddle , with the assistance of the saddler sergeant at Maidstone depot , which focused on reducing rubbing against the horse , improved comfort and weighed less than the existing design . The resulting saddle was tested in April 1853 , with attendance by the Duke of Cambridge , inspector general of cavalry . The reaction was positive , and the army commissioned it as a new model for the cavalry , known as the Universal Wood Arch Pattern design , but informally referred to as " Nolan 's saddle " . 
 Cavalry : Its History and Tactics received a much warmer reception than Training , with the Illustrated London News praising his knowledge and enthusiasm while recommending it for civilians as well as the military . Another review in The Times was also approving . Over the next few decades it continued to be well received , and was seen as " an important , even ground @-@ breaking , work " . The book gave him substantial prominence , both in Britain and the United States . It was also discussed in India , where it was praised as " the manual for a cavalry officer who would understand his profession and reflect honour upon it " . A copy was sent to Bonneau du <unk> of the French Imperial Staff by Major @-@ General Wetherall of the British staff ; Du <unk> , having read the book , translated the entire work as Histoire et Tactique de la Cavalerie . 
 = = Crimean War = = 
 = = = Remount mission = = = 
 With the Crimean War fast approaching , the British Army needed some way of obtaining cavalry horses in Turkey . One method was simply to ship horses from Britain , but this was time @-@ consuming and expensive , and would result in a large number dying . Alternately , horses could be bought in the Middle East , if suitable ones could be identified . The Duke of Newcastle , Secretary of State for War , needed an experienced cavalry officer to undertake such a search . With Nolan 's new @-@ found reputation he was a logical choice , and Newcastle had him struck off from the 15th Hussars and made aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General Richard Airey , backdated to 17 March 1854 . Issued with a " special service " passport , he departed to Constantinople , meeting the steamship <unk> at Marseilles . 
 After arriving in Turkey he met with Skene , the British Vice @-@ Consul , who had him introduced to Omar Pasha and invited to view the Turkish regiments . Nolan was not particularly impressed by them , judging the irregulars incapable of withstanding a Russian cavalry charge and finding the horses too small . He ordered 250 of them anyway , finding them appropriate for the British artillery if not for the cavalry . His report to Somerset ( now Baron Raglan , and commander of the British forces in Turkey ) included a proposal for a trip to Syria , where he claimed the horses were more appropriate . This proposal was eventually agreed to , and he went to İskenderun on 9 May . When they arrived they discovered that Turkish officials had already bought most of the army horses in northern Syria , and so they continued on to Beirut and then Damascus . Even there , they failed to find horses of sufficient quality , and so they left the city on 21 May in hopes of making contact with the Bedouin . They left with a train of 292 horses , mostly bought from the ' Anizzah , and were met at Beirut by the steamship Trent and transported back to Turkey . 
 = = = Staff officer = = = 
 Nolan returned to the British forces to join the Light Division at <unk> as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Airey . The Royal Navy had control over the Black Sea , and with a Russian treaty with Turkey and Austria , the enemy forces were withdrawing from Eastern Europe . Despite this favourable outcome , the British government wished to negotiate with the Russians from a strong position . The decision was taken to invade the Crimea itself , with the objective of destroying or capturing the Russian naval base at Sevastopol . Raglan personally considered this unrealistic - British forces knew little about the region , the port 's defences , or the strength of the Russian military , with estimates of troop numbers varying between 45 @,@ 000 and 140 @,@ 000 . It was also quite a distance away , causing logistical difficulties . 
 With the Crimea identified as the target , Nolan and his fellow staff officers had to plan the assault , which eventually included 30 @,@ 000 infantry , 1 @,@ 240 cavalry and 54 guns , along with 24 @,@ 000 French soldiers and 70 of their guns . The cavalry alone required 3 @,@ 379 horses , and with such a small number of ships available the Heavy Brigade would be part of a second wave - until it arrived , the Light Brigade would be relied on as the sole unit of cavalry . The force departed for the Crimea on 2 September 1854 , and began landing at <unk> Bay , 35 miles north of Sevastopol itself . Airey had the light cavalry engage in reconnaissance and screening while the rest of the force moved off the transports , and they were fully ashore by the 18th . On the 19th , they began marching to Sevastopol - still without the Heavy Brigade . 
 The force reached the <unk> River that day , where skirmishers found a force of Cossacks and Russian infantry , with a light battery of artillery . The infantry and artillery had been hidden in a dip in the terrain while the British formed up , and their placement put the British cavalry in heavy danger . Raglan decided to withdraw , and sent a troop forward to cover the retreat ; this body 's confidence deceived the Russians into thinking that there was a larger British force than there was , and they failed to pursue the retreating cavalry . A day later , the British force , together with the French under General St Arnaud , defeated the Russians at the Battle of Alma . Nolan spent the battle as a liaison due to his fluent French , and was often galloping between the two allied armies . They resumed marching on 26 September and entered the plains of Balaclava , near Sevastopol . 
 = = = Balaclava = = = 
 The British camp in Balaclava was on a plateau , with two approaches - the South and North valleys - and a small hill , known as the Causeway Heights , between them . At Balaclava , the force waited for supplies while the allied ships bombarded the forts surrounding Sevastopol , starting on 17 October . The forts proved to be particularly strong , but some damage was caused and Admiral Kornilov killed . From then on , time and time again , the allied navy would bombard the forts , causing damage , which the Russians would then repair each night . While the allied armies waited to strengthen their positions and increase their resources , Prince Menshikov , commander of the Russian forces , had a desire to provide a victory to the Tsar following his defeat at Alma . He formed a plan to cut the British army off from the harbour at Balaclava , with a secondary objective of capturing the harbour itself . The Russian forces assembled on 24 October , and attacked at around 7am on the 25th . General <unk> covered the Russian left flank , with <unk> , <unk> and <unk> on his right : General <unk> waited behind them , prepared to support any individual force that came under trouble . The Turkish forces in the first redoubts were quickly overwhelmed and forced to flee . 
 At 8am Raglan ordered the Heavy and Light cavalry brigades , under Lord Lucan , to move into line with the second set of Turkish @-@ occupied redoubts . The order confused and infuriated Lucan - there was only one set of redoubts that had been occupied by the Turks , and it was now abandoned . Doing so also meant leaving the Turks and 550 British infantry to meet the Russian charge alone , without any cavalry support . Despite Raglan 's " lackadaisical wording " , Lucan interpreted the order ( correctly ) to require him to place the Light Brigade at the mouth of the North Valley to Balaclava , a position that left the cavalry dangerously exposed : because of the terrain , they would not be able to see advancing Russian troops until they were less than 50 feet away . As Raglan watched the cavalry form up at the mouth of the North Valley , 30 minutes after giving the order , he changed his mind and had them returned to their original position . 
 At the same time , Raglan wished to reinforce the Turks and British infantry , and ordered Lucan to detach four of the five Heavy Brigade cavalry regiments and send them to the defensive line . This further angered Lucan , since splitting the force in half merely reduced the cavalry 's overall effectiveness , but he again complied . The result was that the first fork of the Russian cavalry attack encountered The Thin Red Line and were driven off , while the second fork , crossing the heights above the plain , encountered four regiments of the Heavy Brigade . The Russians - with between 1 @,@ 500 and 2 @,@ 000 men - were initially surprised to see the 800 British cavalry approaching , allowing Scarlett , the commander of the Heavy Brigades , to charge the Russians uphill . By this point Lucan had left Lord Cardigan in charge of the Light Brigade and raced over to the Heavies , later claiming that his duty trumpeter had ordered the British charge , which eventually forced the Russians to flee . 
 = = = Charge of the Light Brigade = = = 
 When Lucan left the Light Brigade idling on the plateau , he instructed Cardigan to defend the position against attack . Cardigan interpreted this to mean that he should not leave the plateau , and the Brigade remained mostly immobile while the Heavy Brigade engaged the Russian cavalry ( over the objection of some of the Light Brigade 's officers ) . This prevented the British cavalry from adequately pursuing the Russians , and no attacks were mounted down the North Valley through which they had retreated . Due to the failure of their attack , the Russians chose not to advance further , leading to Raglan deciding to attempt to retake the captured Turkish fortifications using the Light and Heavy brigades with two divisions of infantry . Although the 1st Division advanced swiftly , the 4th Division was deliberately tardy , making Raglan increasingly impatient . He dispatched an aide to Lucan ordering that " Cavalry to advance and take advantage of any opportunity to recover the heights . They will be supported by the infantry which have been ordered to advance on two fronts " . Lucan interpreted this to mean he should await the infantry support before attacking . 
 About 40 minutes later , with the infantry still having not arrived , Raglan 's staff officers spotted Russian artillery teams approaching the fortifications with equipment to remove captured guns . To avoid the guns being taken , Raglan dispatched Nolan to carry a message to Lucan that read : 
 Lord Raglan wishes the cavalry to advance rapidly to the front , and try to prevent the enemy carrying away the guns . Troop of horse @-@ artillery may accompany . French cavalry is on your left . Immediate . 
 As Nolan rode towards Lucan 's position , Raglan shouted that he should " Tell Lord Lucan the cavalry is to attack immediately " ; his fourth order . The Russian forces included the Don Cossack field artillery battery , containing between eight and twelve guns , drawn up at the bottom of the North Valley , with regiments of cavalry waiting behind it . Nolan carried the message to Lucan ; when Lucan asked what guns were referred to , Nolan is said to have indicated , by a wide sweep of his arm , not the Causeway redoubts but the Don Cossack battery in the North Valley , around a mile away . After a brief debate , Lucan ordered the Light Brigade forward . Cardigan claimed that Lucan had ordered him to attack without quarter given , despite him pointing out the Russian artillery ; Lucan , on the other hand , claimed he told Cardigan to retire from battle " if no opportunity to take his objective presented itself " . Regardless , the Brigade drew swords and was ordered by Cardigan to advance down the valley . Nolan had explicitly asked to join the Brigade for the fight , and was allowed to . As the Light Brigade advanced , the Russian guns opened fire , and a shell splinter hit Nolan in the chest . His horse carried him almost back to the Brigade 's starting point before Nolan fell from the saddle , dead . 
 Russian artillery continued to fire on the Light Brigade . As Lucan advanced after them with the Heavy Brigade , he saw the Light Brigade being overwhelmed by the Russian artillery and ordered the Heavies back , saying that " They have sacrificed the Light Brigade ; they shall not the Heavy , if I can help it " . The remainder of the Light Brigade eventually reached the Russian artillery , wreaking havoc on the fleeing gunners , before pursuing the Russian cavalry behind the artillery down the remainder of the valley . Despite being outnumbered five to one , the British cavalry who pursued the Russians managed to disrupt the enemy for some time before being killed or captured . Of the cavalry who had stayed with the abandoned artillery guns , 60 or 70 were collected by George Paget , who retired back to the British lines despite Russian cavalry harrying them . The result was 110 dead , 130 wounded , and 58 missing or captured - 40 percent losses in an action that lasted 20 minutes . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 At the time of his death , Nolan was the last male member of his family , and the line died with him . Some friends had a plaque erected in his memory at Holy Trinity Church in Maidstone , although his body remained in the Crimea . Most of his possessions were given to Colonel Key , including the copyright on Cavalry : Its History and Tactics , his house in London and his interests in the Adelphi Estate in Tobago . 
 The Charge itself and the tragedy that resulted was blamed on both Lucan and Nolan by William Howard Russell — Nolan , for misunderstanding the order and issuing a confusing message , and Lucan , for not properly keeping an eye on the terrain . Raglan himself primarily blamed Lucan , who was infuriated by this and wrote a letter to Horse Guards Parade disputing Raglan 's claim . This was too much for Viscount Hardinge , the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief of the Forces , who had Lucan resign his command and return to Britain . With Hardinge unwilling to give him a court martial , Lucan wrote a pamphlet titled A Vindication of the Earl of Lucan from Lord Raglan 's Reflections and a series of letters to The Times that revealed Raglan 's order to have been highly ambiguous and " not the kind of dispatch required by an officer on the battlefield " . At the same time , Nolan 's method of delivery had been imperious , and he had insisted the urgency of the attack - something clear in Raglan 's verbal order to him , but not in the written order . Public opinion became divided ; people both attacked Nolan and rallied to his defence . The major newspapers , at least , maintained that with Nolan 's status as a mere messenger it was inconceivable that he alone could have destroyed the Light Brigade without failings by Lucan . Lord Cardigan defended Nolan by saying the Captain " did not have the least idea of the mistake which was about to be perpetrated . " Within the Crimea , however , the majority " roundly damned " Nolan . The Charge was soon overshadowed by other scandalous and bloody military failures such as the continued failure of the Siege of Sevastopol . 
 Terry Brighton writes in Hell Riders that " in the 150 years since the charge historians have generally agreed that the blunder was indeed Nolan 's . Most argue that he misunderstood the order , and when asked by Lord Lucan what Raglan intended by it pointed towards the wrong enemy guns and sent the Light Brigade to its destruction . In recent years it has even been suggested that he deliberately misled Lucan about which guns were to be attacked " . Brighton himself distributes the blame more widely , holding that Raglan , Lucan and Nolan were at fault , but that the vast majority of the blame lies with Lucan . David Buttery , in Messenger of Death , agrees that the blame was at least partially Lucan 's for failing to conduct adequate reconnaissance . 
 Nolan was played by David Hemmings in the 1968 film The Charge of the Light Brigade . In the film Nolan is portrayed as a haughty , glory @-@ hungry officer , but also a " symbol of youth , energy and professionalism ... desperate ... to reform the army " . 
 = 2010 New Year 's Eve tornado outbreak = 
 The 2010 New Year 's Eve tornado outbreak was a three @-@ day @-@ long tornado outbreak that impacted the central and lower Mississippi Valley from December 30 , 2010 to January 1 , 2011 . Associated with a low pressure system and a strong cold front , 37 tornadoes tracked across five states over the length of the severe event , killing nine and injuring several others . Activity was centered in the states of Missouri and later Mississippi on December 31 . Seven tornadoes were rated EF3 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale ; these were the strongest during the outbreak . Non @-@ tornadic winds were recorded to have reached as high as 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) at eight locations on December 31 , while hail as large as 2 @.@ 75 in ( 7 @.@ 0 cm ) was documented north @-@ northeast of Mansfield , Missouri . Overall , damage from the outbreak totaled US $ 123 @.@ 3 million , most of which was related to tornadoes . 
 The United States Storm Prediction Center first noted a possible New Year 's Eve severe weather event as early as December 25 , 2010 . These forecasts gained confidence as the event approached , with a focus on the Ozarks and adjacent areas . Supercells developed in this area during the night of December 30 and tracked across central Missouri , producing several tornadoes and large hail . However , the bulk of activity during the outbreak was a result of a long line of supercells that tracked from Oklahoma to Illinois , producing five EF3 tornadoes . One of these tracked through northwestern Arkansas , killing four . Another tore through eastern sections of Fort Leonard Wood in Missouri , destroying 159 homes and causing US $ 90 million in damage , making it the costliest tornado of the outbreak . A separate cluster of storms later developed in Louisiana before tracking into Mississippi , producing several tornadoes across southern and central regions of the state on January 1 . 
 = = Meteorological synopsis = = 
 The Storm Prediction Center ( SPC ) began to note the possibility that a severe weather event could develop on December 30 as early as December 25 , 2010 . Nonetheless , the predictability of the event was too low as the event was several days out . As the anticipated event grew closer , confidence in the forecast slowly increased , though uncertainties in the timing and extent of the tornado outbreak still existed . These uncertainties remained through December 29 with forecasts calling for only marginal hail and possibly damaging gusts . However , the SPC indicated that supercells and more severe weather could result from atmospheric conditions deviating slightly from the forecast . In contrast , forecasts were more confident in a widespread outbreak of severe weather for New Year 's Eve ; the SPC issued a slight risk outlook for much of the Lower Mississippi Valley and the Ozarks as a result . 
 Atmospheric conditions remained only marginally conducive for the development of thunderstorms on the morning of December 30 . Throughout the day , moisture was drawn from the Gulf of Mexico northward into the Ozarks region . However , the presence of a capping inversion prevented thunderstorms from developing . During the evening of December 30 , an area of strong wind shear developed near the Ark @-@ La @-@ Tex and southeastern Oklahoma area well ahead of a nearing cold front , providing a focal point for potential storm development . Late that day , scattered thunderstorms developed over eastern Oklahoma and northern Arkansas , producing significant hail . Over the next few hours and into December 31 , these storms would intensify as they moved into southwestern Missouri , producing four tornadoes . The first tornado watch issued in association with the severe event was issued at 07 : 06 UTC on December 31 as these storms tracked across the Ozarks . After a few hours , these supercell thunderstorms lessened in strength as they neared the Greater St. Louis metropolitan area . 
 While the cluster of thunderstorms was tracking through Missouri , a new line of thunderstorms with embedded supercells developed across eastern Oklahoma and Kansas , demarcating a dry line boundary . Although linear storm systems tend to indicate strong wind events and not tornadoes , these storms tracked eastward into southwestern Missouri . A long @-@ tracked EF3 developed from one of these supercells and struck Cincinnati , Arkansas . At 13 : 31 UTC on December 31 , a tornado watch was issued for much of Missouri and portions of Arkansas and Illinois . Most of the tornadoes during the outbreak stemmed from this line of storms as they moved through Missouri and Illinois throughout the day . At around noon , a new cluster of disorganized showers formed over eastern Louisiana and southern Mississippi . Although these storms were initially weak , they gradually intensified into supercells as the day went on . Additional supercells quickly developed over Louisiana and eventually spread in coverage over Mississippi , resulting in the development of several tornadoes . Reaching their peak strength over Mississippi , the storms gradually lost their intensity as they tracked eastward late on December 31 and into January 1 , 2011 . By the morning hours of January 1 , severe activity had become restricted to the Florida Panhandle and southern Alabama ; the last tornado watch issued in association with the 2010 New Year 's Eve tornado outbreak was issued for those regions at 15 : 56 UTC that day . 
 = = Tornadoes = = 
 = = = December 30 event = = = 
 = = = December 31 event = = = 
 = = = January 1 event = = = 
 = = Notable tornadoes = = 
 = = = Cincinnati , Arkansas = = = 
 The deadliest tornado of the 2010 New Year 's Eve tornado outbreak moved across extreme eastern Oklahoma and northwestern Arkansas , tracking 21 @.@ 1 mi ( 34 @.@ 0 km ) and damaging the unincorporated community of Cincinnati , Arkansas . The first tornado warning associated was issued at 12 : 00 UTC for portions of Adair County in Oklahoma and Benton and Washington counties in Arkansas by the National Weather Service Tulsa , Oklahoma . At around the same time , damaging winds estimated at around 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) tore the roof off of a barn southwest of Westville , Oklahoma ; these winds were likely a result of inflow caused by the developing tornado . Post @-@ tornado survey teams concluded that the tornado touched down five minutes later northeast of Westville . Quickly tracking northeast , the tornado snapped 13 large wooden utility poles . Four cars were displaced by 20 – 50 yd ( 18 – 46 m ) and a nearby home sustained significant roof damage and broken windows ; this resulted in an EF2 rating for the tornado within Adair County . Damage in Adair County totaled $ 60 @,@ 000 . At 12 : 08 UTC , the tornado crossed the Oklahoma @-@ Arkansas border and moved into Benton County , Arkansas . 
 At 12 : 10 UTC , the tornado tracked into Cincinnati , Arkansas , where it reached its peak intensity . Winds were estimated as high as 142 mph ( 229 km / h ) and the tornado widened to a width of 300 yd ( 270 m ) , making the tornado an EF3 at this location . Several homes were destroyed or heavily damaged in the southwestern areas of the town . Numerous trees and power poles were knocked down or uprooted . Two people were killed when a mobile home was destroyed , while another person died as he was tending cattle when the barn he occupied collapsed . Seven others were injured in Cincinnati . The tornado continued to widen as it trekked northeastward , reaching a maximum width of 500 yd ( 460 m ) . Several permanent homes were heavily damaged northeast of Cincinnati , and a number of chicken houses , mobile homes , outbuildings , and power poles were destroyed . One woman was critically injured after her mobile home was destroyed ; she died of her injuries at a hospital four days later . Damage in Cincinnati and surrounding areas within Benton County reached $ 1 @.@ 5 million . 
 After 12 : 17 UTC , the tornado 's position fluctuated between Benton and Washington counties in northwestern Arkansas . Permanent houses were damaged and mobile homes were destroyed . Numerous trees were uprooted or snapped while many other power poles were snapped . Two people were injured following the destruction of a mobile home within the Ozark National Forest in Benton County , while another person was injured west of <unk> , Arkansas in Washington County . The tornado finally dissipated northwest of <unk> at 12 : 27 UTC after causing four deaths and ten injuries . Overall , the tornado caused $ 1 @.@ 835 million in damage , which was the sixth costliest total during the tornado outbreak . 
 = = = Fenton – Sunset Hills , Missouri tornado = = = 
 At 17 : 22 UTC on December 31 , the National Weather Service St. Louis , Missouri issued a tornado warning for a severe squall line capable of producing rain @-@ wrapped tornadoes and wind damage . The warning covered ten counties in Missouri and Illinois straddling the Mississippi River and included St. Louis . Shortly after the warning 's issuance , two EF1 tornadoes tracked across Jefferson and St. Louis counties , causing extensive tree damage and minor property damage . However , the most destructive tornado from the passing squall line touched down at 17 : 48 UTC east @-@ northeast of Murphy , Missouri in northern Jefferson County . Initially , the tornado was an EF0 with a path width of 40 yd ( 37 m ) and lifted before touching down again just north of Missouri Route 30 near the Jefferson @-@ St. Louis county line . Small trees and minor roof damage occurred at the point of this second touch down before the tornado moved northeastward into St. Louis County , where the tornado caused a bulk of its damage and was at its strongest . 
 A large subdivision near Route 30 sustained minor roof and tree damage , which was rated as EF0 intensity . However , as the tornado was intensifying through the neighborhood , three homes to the subdivision 's east suffered more considerable roof and siding damage and was assigned an EF1 damage intensity rating . The tornado then crossed Missouri Route 141 , where it blew a Honda CR @-@ V into a highway barrier ; the driver of the vehicle suffered critical injuries and died eleven days later from those injuries . After crossing the highway , a number of buildings were damaged including a church , elementary school , and parsonage . Damage in this area was rated as EF2 due to the partial debarking of a nearby tree . Minor tree damage occurred as the tornado moved through Fenton Park and tracked over the Meramec River . 
 After crossing the river , the tornado weakened to EF1 strength , damaging several homes while also leaving behind an interrupted damage path . The tornado crossed Interstate 270 before rapidly intensifying at around 17 : 56 UTC . Numerous trees were uprooted while many homes sustained considerable damage . Six homes were unroofed and one was destroyed and shifted from its foundation ; this damage was rated high @-@ end EF3 . At the time , the tornado was 0 @.@ 25 mi ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) wide . The tornado weakened to EF1 intensity afterwards , causing more minor damage to a strip mall and several homes . Six power poles were knocked down shortly before the tornado lifted at 18 : 00 UTC in western Crestwood , Missouri . 
 = = Non @-@ tornadic impacts = = 
 Beginning on December 29 and continuing for three days , the storm system associated with the tornado outbreak caused strong winds across the Texas Panhandle and eastern New Mexico . The winds were further enhanced by isolated showers , and gusts peaked at 79 mph ( 127 km / h ) in Tatum , New Mexico . Approximately 7 mi ( 11 km ) west of Levelland , Texas , the winds downed four power poles , sparking a fire that burned nearly 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 800 hectares ) of grassland before it was finally contained ; the fire caused US $ 20 @,@ 000 in damage . In Allen , Oklahoma , strong winds associated with one supercell caused an estimated US $ 20 @,@ 000 in damage after damaging the carport , chimney , and roof of a house . Hail and strong winds were also reported elsewhere in eastern Oklahoma and southeastern Kansas . Widespread and damaging wind gusts and hail later crossed into northwestern Arkansas , causing US $ 175 @,@ 000 in damage . Several buildings and homes were destroyed by the strong winds ; similar impacts were seen in Missouri and Illinois . 
 In Mississippi , rainfall totals between 1 – 4 in ( 25 – 102 mm ) were widespread . The highest precipitation total was 5 @.@ 58 in ( 142 mm ) south of Grace , Mississippi . In Scott County , residents were forced to evacuate out of Forest and Morton due to flash floods that caused $ 470 @,@ 000 in damage . Similarly , the inundation washed out roads and flooded cars in Winona . Overall , flood damage in Mississippi amounted to US $ 1 @.@ 135 million . 
 = Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds ( Japanese : マーヴル VS . カプコン 3 <unk> オブ <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Māvuru bāsasu Kapukon Surī : <unk> obu <unk> Wārudo ) is a crossover fighting game developed by Capcom in collaboration with Eighting . The game features characters from both Capcom 's video game franchises and comic book series published by Marvel Comics . It was released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 consoles in February 2011 . It is the fifth installment of the Marvel vs. Capcom franchise and the first to use three @-@ dimensional character models instead of sprites . 
 In Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , players select a team of three characters to engage in combat and attempt to knock out their opponents . It features similar tag team game mechanics to earlier games in the series , along with new methods of play designed to make the game more accessible to new players . The game was produced by Ryota Niitsuma , who had previously worked on Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars , which utilizes the same simplified three @-@ button attack system . 
 The game received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised its gameplay and character roster , while criticizing its online component and lack of features and game modes . More than 2 million units were shipped worldwide a month after its debut , rendering it a commercial success . Less than a year after its release , Capcom announced an updated version of the game , titled Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 . The standalone update was released in November 2011 , and featured additional characters , stages , and gameplay tweaks . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds is a fighting game in which players compete in battle using characters with different fighting styles and special attacks . The game features tag team @-@ based gameplay similar to previous installments of the series . Players select teams of three characters to engage in one @-@ on @-@ one combat , and can choose to switch between them at any point during the match . During combat , players can call in one of their off @-@ screen characters to perform a single special move , known as an " assist " . As characters deal or receive damage , their team 's " Hyper Combo Gauge " will gradually fill with energy , which can be expended by players to execute certain techniques , such as hyper combos , which are stronger versions of special moves ; " snapbacks " , which force the current opponent off the screen and replaces them with one of their other teammates ; and " crossover combinations " , which summon the player 's entire team to use their hyper combos all at once . Players must use the various attacks in their arsenal to exhaust their opponent 's life gauge and defeat the entire enemy team , or have the most cumulative health when time runs out . Marvel vs. Capcom 3 is the first entry in the franchise to feature three @-@ dimensional character models as opposed to two @-@ dimensional sprites . However , gameplay remains restricted to two dimensions , resulting in a 2.5D graphical design . 
 Unlike Marvel vs. Capcom 2 : New Age of Heroes , which featured four attack buttons separated as two pairs of low and high @-@ strength punches and kicks , Marvel vs. Capcom 3 uses a simplified , three @-@ button control scheme of undefined light , medium , and hard attacks modeled after Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars , which aims to " knock down the wall of complicated controls and open up the field of strategic fighting to all comers " . The game includes a new " exchange button " , which is used to launch opponents into the air , swap characters while performing combos , and slam the opponent into the ground . Players can use each button to string together attacks and form combos , as well as perform special moves using a combination of button presses and joystick movements . Marvel vs. Capcom 3 also features an alternate control scheme designed for players unfamiliar to fighting games called " Simple Mode " . Simple Mode allows players to perform special moves and hyper combos with single button presses at the expense of limiting a character 's available moveset . 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 introduces a new game mechanic known as " X @-@ Factor " , which offers increased damage , speed , and health regeneration for a short period of time . It can be activated by players once per match , and can also be used to extend combos . The duration and intensity of X @-@ Factor is dependent on the number of active characters in the player 's team ; as a player loses fighters , X @-@ Factor lasts longer and grants higher damage boosts . 
 = = = Modes = = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 features various offline game modes , such as Arcade Mode , where the player fights against AI @-@ controlled opponents to reach the final boss character , Galactus , a supervillain from Marvel Comics ' Fantastic Four series . Each character has their own unique ending sequence , which is earned upon completion of Arcade Mode . Other offline modes include Versus Mode , where two players can fight against each other locally ; Training Mode , which features several customization options for training purposes , such as the ability to adjust the Hyper Combo gauge , set AI difficulty , record and playback moves , and even simulate input lag ; and Mission Mode , which features character @-@ specific challenges designed to test players on their ability to execute complex combos . 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 includes online play using Microsoft 's Xbox Live and Sony 's PlayStation Network services . Online multiplayer includes ranked matches , where players battle to increase their rank and ascend the game 's leaderboards ; player matches , which do not bestow rank and offer options for quick rematches ; and player lobbies , which allow up to eight players in a single room to compete in a king of the hill @-@ style format . When an online match begins , both players can view their opponent 's License Card . License Cards keep track of players ' tendencies based on fighting style , record player points and total number of wins and losses , and allow players to see the positive and negative points of their play styles . Included among the online features is Shadow Battle , a series of downloadable content packs that allow the player to fight against a team of AI @-@ controlled opponents programmed after the techniques and preferences of Capcom 's development staff and famous players from the fighting game community . 
 = = = Playable characters = = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds contains a base roster of 36 characters , featuring both new and returning characters to the Marvel vs. Capcom franchise . Two additional characters , Jill Valentine and Shuma @-@ Gorath , are also available as downloadable content . According to producer Niitsuma , character selection was a collaborative process between Capcom and Marvel Comics . Marvel gave Niitsuma and his team precise directions regarding the Marvel characters ' designs , but was willing to leave game balancing to Capcom . In regards to characters who did not originate from fighting games , such as Deadpool and Arthur , Niitsuma 's team tried to " preserve their essence " from their source material and see how they could siphon it into an interesting fighting game character . 
 Marvel worked closely with Capcom to include dialogue quips and mid @-@ match events between the companies ' characters . Comic book writer Frank Tieri was assigned to write the character dialogue and endings for the game . Marvel also gave Tieri full use of their library of characters for storyline purposes . As a result , several unplayable characters from the Marvel and Capcom universes , such as the Fantastic Four , Ghost Rider , Daredevil , MegaMan <unk> , Nemesis , and Phoenix Wright , make cameo appearances in the campaign stages and Arcade Mode endings . 
 ^ § : Available as downloadable content . 
 = = Development = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds is the fifth installment in the Marvel vs. Capcom series . The game was first publicly announced at Capcom 's Captivate press show in Hawaii on April 20 , 2010 . It was revealed to have been in development since 2008 , when Capcom reacquired the Marvel license after a period of legal issues placed the series on hiatus for nearly a decade . Ryota Niitsuma , who had previously headed production on Tatsunoko vs. Capcom : Ultimate All @-@ Stars , signed on as the producer for the new project , which was green @-@ lit after " years and years of unrelenting fan demand " . Niitsuma stated that the game was built using the same MT Framework game engine seen in Resident Evil 5 and Lost Planet 2 . 
 Capcom 's design philosophy for Marvel vs. Capcom 3 was to maximize gameplay depth and minimize complexity . According to Niitsuma , the development team sought to create a game that would reach out to longtime fans of the series , while simultaneously expanding their user base to those familiar with the characters , but perhaps not with fighting games in general . The urge to reach out to new players also stemmed from Marvel 's recent success in the Hollywood film industry . Capcom 's global head of production , Keiji Inafune , expressed interest in appealing to a worldwide audience . These ideas drove the decision to retool the fighting system , which was criticized in past iterations for being too complicated for casual players . These changes include the implementation of the three @-@ button attack system from Tatsunoko vs. Capcom and the addition of Simple Mode . Unlike previous titles in the series , Capcom had no plans for an arcade release , and focused only on console versions for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . When asked if Capcom was planning to release the game on other consoles , Niitsuma did not dismiss the possibility for a Nintendo Wii version ; however , this ultimately did not come to fruition . 
 Employees from Marvel Comics worked closely with Capcom 's art design team to ensure that each character from their company was properly represented . As a result , several Marvel characters were modeled after their more recent comic book appearances . For example , Iron Man sports his Extremis Armor , while Wolverine wears his costume from Astonishing X @-@ Men . The development team originally planned to have English and Japanese voice actors for all characters . Niitsuma eventually decided against it , stating that having the Marvel roster speaking Japanese did not mesh well with the characters ' image . 
 = = Release = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds was released on February 15 , 2011 in North America , February 17 in Japan , and February 18 in Europe for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . A special edition of the game included a steelbook case , a twelve @-@ page prologue comic written by Frank Tieri , a one @-@ month subscription to Marvel Digital Comics , and codes redeemable for free downloads of the Jill Valentine and Shuma @-@ Gorath downloadable content . 
 DLC costumes for characters were later announced by Capcom and Marvel , which were released on the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Marketplace on March 1 , 2011 . The costume pack contained new outfits for Ryu , Thor , Dante , Iron Man , Chris Redfield , and Captain America . The release of the pack coincided with the release of the Shadow Battle DLC . 
 Following the game 's launch , a Marvel vs. Capcom merchandise program was launched in April 2011 . Apparel wholesalers Mad Engine and <unk> sold T @-@ shirts and sweatshirts bearing Marvel vs. Capcom 3 promotional artwork . Diamond Select Toys created a line of <unk> based on various characters from the game . Hollywood Collectibles debuted collectible statue sets featuring Akuma , Dante , Deadpool , Doctor Doom , Ryu , and Wolverine . In 2012 , after the release of Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 , UDON Entertainment unveiled a 200 @-@ page artbook , titled Marvel vs. Capcom : Official Complete Works , containing compilations of existing Marvel vs. Capcom imagery alongside new commissioned pieces by comic book artists . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds received positive reviews from critics , garnering aggregate scores of 85 / 100 and 84 / 100 from Metacritic for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 versions , respectively , and 86 % from GameRankings for both systems . 
 Reviewers praised Marvel vs. Capcom 3 for its simplified , yet deep gameplay and diverse cast of characters . According to GameSpot 's Maxwell McGee , the game 's simplified core combat mechanics worked harmoniously to drive the action forward . McGee also praised the addition of Simple Mode , saying that its simplicity was ideal for series newcomers . Richard George of IGN stated that the alterations to the control scheme helped to mature the franchise by removing needless complexities . Neidel Crisan of 1UP.com complimented the uniqueness of the characters ' play styles , stating that he enjoyed exploring the roster and possible team combinations . Brian Leahy of G4 also praised the variety and balance of characters , claiming that , unlike Marvel vs. Capcom 2 , in which a large majority of the cast was " severely underpowered " compared to its top fighters , almost every character in Marvel vs. Capcom 3 seemed to be a viable option . 
 In contrast to its character roster , the game was criticized for its lack of diversity in game modes and online features . George expressed his disappointment that the development team did not supplement Marvel vs. Capcom 3 's core experience with extras to add variety to the total package and extend its lifespan . GameTrailers criticized the Arcade Mode , stating that its " underwhelming <unk> @-@ style " endings left much to be desired , especially in comparison to the intro , outro , and rival battle sequences seen in Street Fighter IV . Tim Turi of Game Informer stated that fans expecting to see extensive online functionality similar to Street Fighter IV should " regulate their excitement " . Eurogamer 's Simon Parkin pointed specifically to the absence of a spectator mode , noting that the exclusion of viewable matches also presented a serious shortcoming . 
 At the Electronic Entertainment Expo 2010 , Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds received the award for " Best Fighting Game " from the Game Critics Awards . It also earned " Best Fighting Game of E3 " awards from IGN , 1UP.com , and X @-@ Play / G4 . Prior to its release , Capcom expected to sell 2 millions units of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 worldwide across both platforms . On March 30 , 2011 , the company announced that it had shipped more than 2 million copies of the game a month and a half after its debut . In response to reaching the milestone , Capcom dubbed Marvel vs. Capcom 3 a commercial success . 
 = = Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 = = 
 Ultimate Marvel vs. Capcom 3 is a standalone updated version of Marvel vs. Capcom 3 : Fate of Two Worlds , released in November 2011 for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . The game was later ported to the PlayStation Vita . While the update features largely identical gameplay mechanics to the original , changes were made to both the aerial combat and X @-@ Factor systems . It features the entire roster from Fate of Two Worlds , including the two DLC characters , and introduces 12 new playable fighters . Among the added fighters , only one is a returning character from previous games in the Marvel vs. Capcom series : Strider Hiryu . The other eleven characters , all new to the franchise , are Doctor Strange , Firebrand , Frank West , Ghost Rider , Hawkeye , Iron Fist , Nemesis T @-@ Type , Nova , Phoenix Wright , Rocket Raccoon , and Vergil . 
 = 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné = 
 The 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné was the sixty @-@ fourth running of the Critérium du Dauphiné cycling stage race ; a race rated as a World Tour event on the UCI calendar , the highest classification such an event can have . The race consisted of eight stages , beginning with a prologue in Grenoble on 3 June , and concluded in Châtel on 10 June . The race was organised by the Amaury Sport Organisation , the same group that organises the Tour de France . It was viewed as a great preparation for July 's Tour de France , hence why a majority of the contenders for the general classification of the major tour participated in the Dauphiné . It featured mountainous stages as well as an individual time trial quite similar in length to those that awaited the riders in the Tour . 
 The race was won for the second successive year by Team Sky rider Bradley Wiggins , who claimed the leader 's yellow and blue jersey after the first stage , extending his race @-@ leading advantage after winning the fourth stage individual time trial , and ultimately maintained that advantage . Wiggins became only the third rider to win the Dauphiné and Paris – Nice – a race that Wiggins had won in March – in the same year after Jacques Anquetil ( 1963 and 1965 ) and Eddy Merckx ( 1971 ) had previously done so . 
 Wiggins ' winning margin over his team @-@ mate and runner @-@ up Michael Rogers was one minute and seventeen seconds , and BMC Racing Team 's Cadel Evans completed the podium , nine seconds down on Rogers . In the race 's other classifications , Liquigas – Cannondale rider Cayetano Sarmiento won the King of the Mountains classification , Evans won the green jersey for the points classification , Rabobank 's Wilco Kelderman won the young rider classification , with Team Sky finishing at the head of the teams classification by over thirteen minutes , after placing four riders inside the final overall top ten placings . 
 = = Participating teams = = 
 As the Critérium du Dauphiné was a UCI World Tour event , all eighteen UCI ProTeams were invited automatically and obligated to send a squad . Four other squads were given wildcard places into the race , and as such , formed the event 's 22 @-@ team peloton . All twenty @-@ two squads that competed in the Dauphiné contested the Tour de France later in the year . 
 The twenty @-@ two teams that competed in the race were : 
 = = Schedule = = 
 The route for the race was announced on 27 March 2012 . 
 = = Stages = = 
 = = = Prologue = = = 
 3 June 2012 — Grenoble , 5 @.@ 7 km ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) , individual time trial ( ITT ) 
 The Dauphiné began with its traditional short individual time trial stage , with a near @-@ flat course around the streets of Grenoble ; the city was hosting the prologue of the race for the fourth time in fifteen years following prior starts in 1997 , 2000 and 2007 , the last of which was won by the 2011 race winner Bradley Wiggins , then riding for the Cofidis team . With rain expected to disrupt the stage , as it had done so in the 2011 prologue , teams decided to spread their time trial specialists across the field in order to maximise their potential of winning the stage . For the first rider to depart the start in Grenoble , Vacansoleil – DCM 's Lieuwe Westra , weather conditions were dry . Westra ultimately recorded a time of 6 ' 46 " for the stage , which was good enough for a top @-@ 12 stage placing after all 175 riders had taken to the course . Westra 's time was beaten shortly afterwards by Rabobank rider Carlos Barredo , who went four seconds quicker around the course , 5 @.@ 7 km ( 3 @.@ 5 mi ) in length . 
 Barredo held the top spot for around quarter of an hour , as his time was marginally beaten by Andriy Hryvko , a four @-@ time Ukrainian champion in the discipline , riding for the Astana team . Soon after , the eventual stage @-@ winning performance was recorded by the Australian national champion Luke Durbridge , for Orica – GreenEDGE . Durbridge set a time of 6 ' 38 " , in the favourable conditions ; he held on to his spot throughout the expected changeable weather that was a factor in the remainder of the running order . Following a rain shower that effected the racing during the middle portion of the stage , the later riders to take to the course did have dry roads to contend with but the wind had picked up and made conditions more difficult than what the earlier riders had for their passages through the parcours . Durbridge 's time remained untroubled to the end , despite the best attempts of defending champion Wiggins , who finished just 1 @.@ 35 seconds in arrears in second place , having started last of the 175 competitors . Thus , Durbridge took his first stage victory at World Tour level , which gave him a clean sweep of the jerseys post @-@ stage , for holding the lead of the overall , points and young rider classifications . Other overall contenders Tejay van Garderen ( BMC Racing Team ) , Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step 's Tony Martin , Jérôme Coppel ( Saur – Sojasun ) , as well as van Garderen 's team @-@ mate Cadel Evans and 2010 winner Janez Brajkovič ( Astana ) all lost time in comparison to Wiggins ; Martin placed best in fifth position , although Evans also made the top ten , in ninth place . 
 = = = Stage 1 = = = 
 4 June 2012 — <unk> to Saint @-@ Vallier , 187 km ( 116 @.@ 2 mi ) 
 With no fewer than six categorised climbs during the 187 km ( 116 @.@ 2 mi ) parcours , the first mass @-@ start stage was not ideally suited towards the sprinters , but was favourable towards puncheurs , as the final of the six climbs – the third @-@ category Côte de la Sizeranne – came just 9 km ( 5 @.@ 6 mi ) from the stage 's finish in Saint @-@ Vallier . Six riders – Giovanni Bernaudeau ( Team Europcar ) , RadioShack – Nissan rider Markel Irizar , Rabobank 's Maarten Tjallingii , Nicolas Edet of Cofidis , Sep Vanmarcke ( Garmin – Barracuda ) and Argos – Shimano rider Yukihiro Doi – advanced clear of the main field in the early running of the stage ; the sextet managed to extend their advantage to a maximum of over thirteen minutes around a quarter of the way through the stage . Around the same point , a crash involving Pierrick Fédrigo ( FDJ – BigMat ) and Samuel Sánchez ( Euskaltel – Euskadi ) brought both riders down . Neither rider returned to the main group , as Fédrigo lost over six minutes and Sánchez almost four times that ; losing almost 24 minutes , after reports that he had been suffering with broken ribs . He was taken to hospital after the stage , where he was diagnosed with bruised ribs . 
 The teams of several of the general classification contenders were prevalent on the front of the peloton as they set about reducing the advantage that the breakaway group of six riders were holding over them . The gap had been reduced to around the three @-@ minute mark with 50 km ( 31 @.@ 1 mi ) left of the stage to cover . Another big crash happened some 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) later with Orica – GreenEDGE 's Simon Gerrans , Vacansoleil – DCM rider Pim <unk> and Dan Martin of Garmin – Barracuda among those to hit the tarmac . Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step moved forward , and pulled the gap under two minutes and caused the breakaway to splinter through pressure . Bernaudeau – who had figured at each of the mountain passes to the point – and Doi failed to stay with their companions as they approached the day 's final climb , the Côte de la Sizeranne . Tjallingii was also dropped by the remaining members of the breakaway , while in the main field , Alexander Vinokourov ( Astana ) and Andy Schleck of RadioShack – Nissan – who had been criticised by team manager Johan Bruyneel for his poor opening half to the season – were both struggling off the back of the group . Both riders lost over three minutes by the stage end . 
 As the lead group approached the top of the Côte de la Sizeranne , Irizar attacked from the group of the remaining three breakaway riders , while Vanmarcke and Edet were joined by Team Europcar rider Pierre Rolland , who had escaped the confines of the main group itself . Another three @-@ rider move went forwards from the peloton as Rolland 's team @-@ mate Cyril Gautier , Rabobank 's Luis León Sánchez and BMC Racing Team rider Philippe Gilbert got clear by several seconds . Irizar held a slim advantage , but overshot a corner and was eventually caught with around 5 km ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) to go . As Irizar was caught , Jérôme Coppel of Saur – Sojasun counter @-@ attacked , and was eventually joined by Cadel Evans – a team @-@ mate of Gilbert at BMC Racing Team – and Astana 's Andrey Kashechkin , who finished third in the race in 2007 . The trio managed to hold off the closing peloton into the finish , where Evans managed to fend off the advances of Coppel and Kashechkin to take the stage win . FDJ – BigMat rider Nacer Bouhanni led home the peloton just four seconds in arrears , and with race leader Luke Durbridge ( Orica – GreenEDGE ) not featuring in the split peloton , Bradley Wiggins assumed the race lead for Team Sky ; Evans moved up to second , one second behind Wiggins . 
 = = = Stage 2 = = = 
 5 June 2012 — <unk> to Saint @-@ Félicien , 160 km ( 99 @.@ 4 mi ) 
 Just like the previous day 's stage , the second stage of the race also comprised six categorised climbs , packed into the 160 km ( 99 @.@ 4 mi ) route through the Ardèche region , with the highest point coming at the summit of the second @-@ category Col de <unk> . The finish in Saint @-@ Félicien came at the end of a 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) climb , which would more or less rule out the sprinters more obviously than the first stage parcours . FDJ – BigMat rider Rémi <unk> and Saur – Sojasun 's Maxime <unk> broke clear of the peloton in the opening stages , and they were subsequently joined by a group which contained a number of overall race contenders including maillot jaune et bleu wearer Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) , Vincenzo Nibali of Liquigas – Cannondale and Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step rider Sylvain Chavanel . The group was eventually reabsorbed back into the main group after around 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) of racing . 
 After a period of stability within the main group , a four @-@ rider move consisting of three French riders – David Moncoutié representing Cofidis , Blel Kadri of Ag2r – La Mondiale and Team Europcar 's Christophe Kern , who won a stage during the 2011 race – as well as Colombia 's Cayetano Sarmiento , riding for the Liquigas – Cannondale team , advanced clear of the field and quickly established an advantage over them ; of those , Kadri was best @-@ placed at just eleven seconds behind Wiggins prior to the stage . Team Sky marshalled the front of the peloton as a result , not letting the gap over four minutes at any point . Behind , there were several moves in order for riders to bridge a gap between the main field and the leaders ; at the Col de Lalouvesc with 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) to go , the leaders only held a gap of around half a minute over their chasers . Five riders tried to do so , but only one was able to stay in between the breakaway and the peloton . 
 FDJ – BigMat 's Anthony Roux was the rider in question , and he set off after the quartet up front , and was able to reach them with around 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining of the stage . However , the peloton was not far behind , and the breakaway did not last much longer after that . With the field back together , several riders attempted solo moves off the front of the peloton , including Kadri 's team @-@ mate Mickaël Cherel , but all were unsuccessful . The group remained together into the climb towards the finish ; Liquigas – Cannondale and BMC Racing Team headed the group , protecting their main riders Nibali and Cadel Evans from any potential trouble . World time trial champion Tony Martin tried to get clear within the final kilometre for Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step but could not sustain a gap over everyone else , and Team Katusha rider Daniel Moreno timed his sprint perfectly , to take his third win of the season , ahead of French pair Julien Simon ( Saur – Sojasun ) and RadioShack – Nissan 's Tony Gallopin . Wiggins finished ninth to maintain his one @-@ second overall lead over Evans , who was seventh . 
 = = = Stage 3 = = = 
 6 June 2012 — Givors to La <unk> , 167 km ( 103 @.@ 8 mi ) 
 With a lengthy individual time trial and three mountainous stages left during the itinerary , the third stage was billed as the sprinters ' one remaining chance at a stage victory at the Dauphiné . As such , the parcours of the stage suited them ; although there were three categorised climbs during the stage – a third @-@ category climb and two fourth @-@ category passes – they were all within the first half of the stage . Two riders – Spanish pairing Luis Ángel Maté of Cofidis and Euskaltel – Euskadi rider Egoi Martínez – went clear almost immediately after the start of the stage , making the early breakaway from the field , and the duo managed to extend their advantage over the main field to around five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes , within the first 20 km ( 12 @.@ 4 mi ) of the stage . Behind the lead pair , Team Europcar 's Giovanni Bernaudeau was the first rider from the peloton to cross the fourth @-@ category climbs , and regained the lead of the mountains classification from Ag2r – La Mondiale rider Blel Kadri . 
 Argos – Shimano and FDJ – BigMat looked to set the tempo on the front of the peloton , in the hopes of getting their respective sprinters John Degenkolb and Nacer Bouhanni towards the front if a sprint finish materialised . It was those two teams who gradually brought back Maté and Martínez for the majority of the parcours , but as the race drew nearer La <unk> , more teams put men into the relay and the breakaway was ended inside the final 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) . Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step held their riders on the front of the peloton in the closing stages , with Sylvain Chavanel , seventh overall , being protected by his team @-@ mates before setting the pace at times . Degenkolb 's chances for the stage ended with around 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining due to a puncture . Philippe Gilbert attacked for BMC Racing Team with 1 @.@ 5 km ( 0 @.@ 9 mi ) to go , gaining an advantage of a few seconds but was caught with around 300 m ( 980 ft ) left . 
 RadioShack – Nissan looked to get Tony Gallopin in position for the sprint , while behind , Ricardo Garcia ( Euskaltel – Euskadi ) clipped the barriers , and fell back into the path of the sprint causing the majority of the field to be hampered ; all riders that were impacted by the crash were eventually given the same time . Up front , Edvald Boasson Hagen ( Team Sky ) launched his sprint off the wheel of Gerald Ciolek ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) , and won the stage by a bike length from Ciolek with Astana 's Borut Božič completing the podium . Due to the crash in the closing metres and the resultant nullification of any time gaps , Boasson Hagen 's team @-@ mate Bradley Wiggins maintained his one @-@ second lead in the general classification over Cadel Evans ( BMC Racing Team ) , despite his earlier reservations of holding the lead into the time trial due to the <unk> type provided by the race organisation compared to that of his team . Evans also lost the lead of the points classification to Gallopin , who achieved his third consecutive top @-@ ten finish at the line ; adding the points jersey to the young rider jersey that he had already achieved , after Boasson Hagen was dropped the previous day . 
 = = = Stage 4 = = = 
 7 June 2012 — <unk> @-@ <unk> to Bourg @-@ en @-@ Bresse , 53 @.@ 5 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) , individual time trial ( ITT ) 
 Unlike the third stage time trial in 2011 , in which the course used in Grenoble largely set the route for the penultimate @-@ day time trial in the Tour de France a month later , the time trial in the 2012 event was held on an independent course , running from west @-@ to @-@ east between <unk> @-@ <unk> and Bourg @-@ en @-@ Bresse , with an undulating parcours that only amounted to a 61 m ( 200 ft ) difference in altitude from start to finish . As was customary of time trial stages , the riders set off in reverse order from where they were ranked in the general classification at the end of the previous stage . Thus , Arnaud Gérard of FDJ – BigMat , who , in 172nd place – of the 175 starters – trailed overall leader Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) by thirty minutes and forty @-@ nine seconds , was the first rider to set off on the stage . However , he was not the first to finish as he was passed by the two riders directly behind him on the start order , that started at one @-@ minute intervals , Dan Martin of Garmin – Barracuda and Orica – GreenEDGE 's Travis Meyer . 
 Meyer recorded a time of one hour , seven minutes and fifty seconds as he was first to reach the line ; his time held for around a quarter of an hour , as no rider could get within twenty seconds of his time , until his team @-@ mate Luke Durbridge , the prologue winner and incumbent under @-@ 23 world time trial champion crossed the finish line in a time of one hour , four minutes and forty @-@ nine seconds , just over three minutes quicker than Meyer . Durbridge 's time held top spot for over two hours , as the majority of the field failed to match his time for the 53 @.@ 5 km ( 33 @.@ 2 mi ) course . It was not until Wilco Kelderman of the Rabobank team – starting 143rd as opposed to Durbridge starting 19th – had set quicker times at each of the intermediate timing points that Durbridge 's time came under threat from another rider , and Kelderman ultimately beat Durbridge 's time by twelve seconds , despite almost overshooting the final corner , narrowly avoiding the barriers on the outside of the corner . At the end of the stage , Kelderman stated that his performance came as " a surprise " , taking the lead of the young rider classification from Tony Gallopin ( RadioShack – Nissan ) in the process . 
 The first of four Team Sky riders to start within the final twenty @-@ five riders , Chris Froome got within eight seconds of Kelderman 's time , but it was not until another of the team 's riders , Michael Rogers , that the lead changed hands . Although he trailed at the first intermediate point , Rogers overhauled the time of Kelderman at the finish by fourteen seconds ; he held the lead into the final five starters , where it was then taken by the world time trial champion Tony Martin , riding for the Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step team . Martin bettered the time of Rogers by 37 seconds , but it was not to last as Wiggins was cementing his overall lead . Wiggins made up a deficit of seven seconds to Martin at the first intermediate point , and turned it into a 36 @-@ second lead in the space of 22 km ( 13 @.@ 7 mi ) , eventually taking the stage victory by 34 seconds over Martin . Such was Wiggins ' performance , which he later deemed " satisfying " , that he was almost catching Cadel Evans ( BMC Racing Team ) on the road , despite Evans starting two minutes before Wiggins ; Evans ultimately finished the stage in eighth position , 1 ' 43 " down on Wiggins ' time . RadioShack – Nissan rider Andy Schleck , another of the overall contenders for the Tour de France along with Evans and Wiggins , lost over ten minutes to Wiggins on the stage after a crash and a puncture . 
 = = = Stage 5 = = = 
 8 June 2012 — Saint @-@ <unk> @-@ sur @-@ <unk> to <unk> , 186 @.@ 5 km ( 115 @.@ 9 mi ) 
 The first of three mountainous stages to conclude the Dauphiné , the fifth stage of the race was seen as a precursor to the tenth stage of July 's Tour de France , with the majority of the day 's route making up the parcours of that stage to be held on 11 July . Three categorised climbs were part of the 186 @.@ 5 km ( 115 @.@ 9 mi ) parcours of the day , notably the hors catégorie Le Grand Colombier – making its début in the race – with an average gradient of 6 @.@ 9 % , reaching up to an altitude of 1 @,@ 501 m ( 4 @,@ 925 ft ) , but the summit of the final climb – the Col de Richemond – came with 45 @.@ 5 km ( 28 @.@ 3 mi ) remaining of the stage . Mini @-@ attacks set the course of the early running of the stage , which was carried out a quick pace , with the peloton covering 48 @.@ 3 km ( 30 @.@ 0 mi ) in the first hour of racing . After Ag2r – La Mondiale rider Blel Kadri escaped out of the peloton to take the honours at the first summit of the day , the Côte de <unk> , it was not until the uncategorised Col de la <unk> several kilometres later that a group of riders managed to get clear . 
 A total of ten riders went clear , and quickly gathered a five @-@ minute lead over the rest of the field . At the foot of Le Grand Colombier , another seven riders formed a chase group on the road ahead of the peloton , which was later reduced to just Christophe Kern ( Team Europcar ) and Brice Feillu ( Saur – Sojasun ) , after Kern had upped the pace in the group . At this point , Kern 's team @-@ mate Kévin Reza was dropped from the lead group , and the peloton itself had been slimmed to around fifty riders , with Sylvain Chavanel ( Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step ) and David Millar ( Garmin – Barracuda ) – both in the top ten of the general classification overnight – along with Astana 's Alexander Vinokourov among those that did not feature within the peloton . On the descent from the climb , a group of BMC Racing Team riders including Cadel Evans , George Hincapie and Tejay van Garderen broke out from the peloton , in the hope of pulling Evans nearer the overall lead of Team Sky 's Bradley Wiggins , following his time loss the previous day in the individual time trial . 
 Having caught Kern and Feillu on the road , the group lost ground to the peloton and with Wiggins later joining up with the group , Evans ' efforts were in vain ; with the group now back together as a whole , their efforts went back to the original break . Kern was part of another six @-@ rider wave that went clear on the descent from the Col de Richemond , with the highest @-@ placed rider being ninth @-@ placed Luis León Sánchez of Rabobank . Team Sky took up station on the front of the main field , not allowing Sánchez to gain too much ground . The gap peaked out at around the 30 @-@ second mark and with nobody looking to help Sánchez with the pace @-@ making in the group , they sat up and allowed to be reabsorbed into the peloton . FDJ – BigMat 's Arthur <unk> attacked out of the lead group with around 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) to go , and soloed away from his breakaway companions to take the victory by 26 seconds from the rest of the group . The peloton crossed the line around one minute down on <unk> , with Wiggins maintaining his 38 @-@ second overall lead as he was part of that group . 
 = = = Stage 6 = = = 
 9 June 2012 — Saint @-@ Alban @-@ <unk> to Morzine , 167 @.@ 5 km ( 104 @.@ 1 mi ) 
 The queen stage of the 2012 Dauphiné , the penultimate stage consisted of six categorised climbs during its 167 @.@ 5 km ( 104 @.@ 1 mi ) parcours , the first of which coming after only 11 km ( 6 @.@ 8 mi ) with the first @-@ category Col de <unk> . After a pair of third @-@ category passes , the field tackled another first @-@ category climb , the Col de la <unk> coming with 65 km ( 40 @.@ 4 mi ) remaining of the stage . Inside the final 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) , the day 's two remaining climbs were <unk> ; the third @-@ category Côte de Châtillon , and the race 's second and final hors catégorie climb , with the Col de <unk> Plane – reaching an altitude of 1 @,@ 691 m ( 5 @,@ 548 ft ) – being the start of the run @-@ in towards Morzine , with the summit of the climb coming with 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) to go of the stage . 
 Nineteen riders went clear of the peloton almost immediately after the start of the stage ; among those riders were the two combatants for the mountains classification , Blel Kadri of Ag2r – La Mondiale and Liquigas – Cannondale 's Cayetano Sarmiento . Sarmiento took out maximum points at each of the first two climbs , and thus extended his points advantage that he held over Kadri . With RadioShack – Nissan 's Tiago Machado being the best @-@ placed rider of the group at almost six minutes down on overall leader Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) , Wiggins ' team @-@ mates were leading the peloton around four minutes down on the lead group . Astana rider Andriy Hryvko , who had been in the top three earlier in the race , then joined the group after attacking out the front of the peloton . Saur – Sojasun 's Brice Feillu accelerated out of the lead group on the Côte de Châtillon , and soon picked up a gap of over a minute ahead of his former breakaway companions , while the peloton had fallen a little further away from Feillu , as they were almost four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes behind on the climb . 
 FDJ – BigMat rider Anthony Roux attacked out of the peloton , holding station off the front for a period of time but was soon brought back by the peloton , still led by Team Sky with assistance from Jurgen Van den Broeck 's Lotto – Belisol outfit . The group was brought back on the Col de <unk> Plane , with only Feillu remaining off the front , almost 90 seconds clear . Nairo Quintana of the Movistar Team then attacked out of a diminishing favourites group , later followed by BMC Racing Team 's Cadel Evans . Quintana was too far ahead for Evans to catch him back , and eventually achieved his first World Tour victory by sixteen seconds ahead of Evans , with Team Katusha 's Daniel Moreno leading a group of eight riders , including Wiggins – and team @-@ mates Michael Rogers and Chris Froome – as well as Van Den Broeck , across the line eight seconds later . With Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step 's Tony Martin being dropped on the stage , Wiggins opened up his lead to 1 ' 20 " over Rogers , with Evans moving into third – taking the points classification lead in the process – ahead of Froome . RadioShack – Nissan 's Andy Schleck , one of the favourites for July 's Tour de France , abandoned during the stage citing a knee injury from his time trial crash . 
 = = = Stage 7 = = = 
 10 June 2012 — Morzine to Châtel , 124 @.@ 5 km ( 77 @.@ 4 mi ) 
 Although the stage was relatively short at 124 @.@ 5 km ( 77 @.@ 4 mi ) in length , the parcours still featured five categorised climbs – of which one was to the finish in Châtel – reaching its highest point with the first @-@ category Col du Corbier . Mini @-@ attacks set the course of the early running of the stage , with the field remaining as a whole for the first hour of racing after the attacks were closed down within minutes . It was not until a third of the way through the stage – some 40 km ( 24 @.@ 9 mi ) in – that a move was allowed to be established on the road , as Team Europcar rider Pierre Rolland , Saur – Sojasun 's Jérôme Coppel and Lieuwe Westra of Vacansoleil – DCM accelerated out of the peloton . They were later joined by five more riders as Omega Pharma – Quick @-@ Step pairing Sylvain Chavanel and Stijn Vandenbergh , Astana 's Dmitry Fofonov , Yaroslav Popovych of RadioShack – Nissan and Christophe Le Mével representing the Garmin – Barracuda team provided some assistance to the breakaway move . 
 Coppel was the best @-@ placed rider of the octet , as he was in fifteenth place overall overnight around four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes down on race leader Bradley Wiggins ( Team Sky ) ; as such , the breakaway 's advantage was not allowed to gather momentum and the gap remained between two and two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minutes for the majority of the stage . Team Sky allowed BMC Racing Team to carry out most of the work in the peloton , with Wiggins keeping an eye on their rider Cadel Evans , who had made a late @-@ race attack the previous day and gained time back to Wiggins . Coppel , Westra and Rolland , the break initiators , then went clear again on the second @-@ category Côte de la <unk> , but the peloton were still closing in on them , after chasing down a group that had got clear on the climb . Vincenzo Nibali ( Liquigas – Cannondale ) remained off the front , and tried to close down the leaders . Rolland and Coppel dropped Westra on the descent from the following Col du Corbier climb , where he was eventually joined by Nibali , but the solo move that he had put in was starting to show as he could not stay with Westra , and was eventually caught by the BMC Racing Team @-@ led peloton with around 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) remaining . 
 Westra was caught not long after that as the lead duo 's advantage was diminishing by the kilometre , as they held a half @-@ minute lead into the final 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) . Argos – Shimano 's Alexandre Geniez attacked out of the main group , and caught his two countrymen up the road but the breakaway was not to succeed as they were caught with 2 @.@ 3 km ( 1 @.@ 4 mi ) to go . Team Katusha took the front in the hope of a second stage win for Daniel Moreno , but Fabrice <unk> attacked in the final kilometre for Saur – Sojasun but was closed down by Richie Porte , protecting his team leader Wiggins . Moreno and Rabobank 's Luis León Sánchez battled it out for the stage honours , with Moreno edging out his compatriot for the victory . Wiggins crossed the line ten seconds behind the nine @-@ man lead group , but was sufficient enough for a second consecutive Dauphiné title by 1 ' 17 " over team @-@ mate Michael Rogers . Evans later stated that he was beaten by " the better rider " , but remained pleased with his performance of third place , a stage victory and the points classification title . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 In the 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné , four different jerseys were awarded . For the general classification , calculated by adding each cyclist 's finishing times on each stage , the leader received a yellow jersey with a blue bar . This classification was considered the most important of the 2012 Critérium du Dauphiné , and the winner of the classification was considered the winner of the race . 
 Additionally , there was a points classification , which awarded a green jersey . In the points classification , cyclists got points for finishing highly in a stage . For the first three mass @-@ start stages – stages 1 , 2 and 3 – the win earned 25 points , second place earned 22 points , third 20 , fourth 18 , fifth 16 , and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 20th . For the prologue , individual time trial and final three stages , the win earned 15 points , second place earned 12 points , third 10 , fourth 8 , fifth 6 , and one point fewer per place down to a single point for 10th . 
 There was also a mountains classification , the leadership of which was marked by a red and white polka @-@ dot jersey . In the mountains classification , points were won by reaching the top of a climb before other cyclists . Each climb was categorised as either hors , first , second , third , or fourth @-@ category , with more points available for the higher @-@ categorised climbs . Hors catégorie climbs awarded the most points , with 20 points on offer for the first rider across the summit ; the first ten riders were able to accrue points towards the mountains classification , compared with the first eight on first @-@ category passes and the first six riders on second @-@ category climbs . Fewer points were on offer for the smaller hills , marked as third @-@ category or fourth @-@ category . 
 The fourth jersey represented the young rider classification , marked by a white jersey . This was decided the same way as the general classification , but only riders born after 1 January 1987 were eligible to be ranked in the classification . There was also a classification for teams , in which the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added together ; the leading team at the end of the race was the team with the lowest total time . 
 = McKinsey & Company = 
 McKinsey & Company is a worldwide management consulting firm . It conducts qualitative and quantitative analysis in order to evaluate management decisions across the public and private sectors . Widely considered the most prestigious management consultancy , McKinsey 's clientele includes 80 % of the world 's largest corporations , and an extensive list of governments and non @-@ profit organisations . More current and former Fortune 500 <unk> are alumni of McKinsey than of any other company , a list including Google C.E.O. Sundar <unk> , Facebook <unk> Sheryl Sandberg , Morgan Stanley C.E.O. James P. Gorman , and many more . McKinsey publishes the McKinsey Quarterly , funds the McKinsey Global Institute research organization , publishes reports on management topics , and has authored many influential books on management . Its practices of confidentiality , influence on business practices , and corporate culture have experienced a polarizing reception . 
 McKinsey was founded in 1926 by James McKinsey in order to apply accounting principles to management . McKinsey died in 1937 , and the firm was restructured several times , with the modern @-@ day McKinsey & Company emerging in 1939 . Marvin Bower is credited with establishing McKinsey 's culture and practices in the 1930s based on the principles he experienced as a lawyer . The firm developed an " up or out " policy , where consultants who are not promoted are asked to leave . McKinsey was the first management consultancy to hire recent college graduates , rather than experienced managers . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , the firm expanded internationally and established new practice areas . It had 88 staff in 1951 and 7 @,@ 700 by the early 2000s . McKinsey 's consulting has helped to establish many of the norms in business and contributed to many of the major successes and failures in business in the modern era . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 McKinsey & Company was founded under the name James O. McKinsey & Company in 1926 by James McKinsey , a professor of accounting at the University of Chicago . He conceived the idea after witnessing inefficiencies in military suppliers while working for the U.S. Army Ordnance Department . The firm called itself an " accounting and management firm " and started out giving consulting on using accounting principles as a management tool . Mr. McKinsey 's first partners were Tom Kearney , hired in 1929 , and Marvin Bower , hired in 1933 . In its first few years , the firm grew quickly and began developing rapport among corporations ; its second office was opened in New York City in 1932 . In 1935 , Mr. McKinsey left the firm temporarily to serve as the Chairman and CEO of client Marshall Field 's as it implemented the restructuring plan created by his firm . 
 McKinsey was merged with accounting firm Scovell , Wellington & Company that same year , creating the New York @-@ based McKinsey , Wellington & Co. and splitting off the accounting practice into Chicago @-@ based Wellington & Company . A Wellington project that accounted for 55 percent of McKinsey , Wellington & Company 's billings was about to expire and Kearney and Bower had disagreements about how to run the firm . Bower wanted to expand nationally and hire young business school graduates , whereas Kearney wanted to stay in Chicago and hire experienced accountants . Additionally , in 1937 James O. McKinsey died after catching pneumonia . 
 This led to the division of McKinsey , Wellington & Company in 1939 . The accounting practice returned to Scovell , Wellington & Company , while the management engineering practice was split into McKinsey & Company and McKinsey , Kearney & Company . Bower had partnered with Guy Crockett from Scovell Wellington , who invested in the new McKinsey & Company and became managing partner , while Marvin Bower is credited with founding the firm 's principles and strategy as his deputy . The New York office purchased exclusive rights to the McKinsey name in 1946 . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 McKinsey & Company grew quickly in the 1940s and 50s , especially in Europe . It had 88 staff in 1951 and more than 200 by the 1960s , including 37 in London by 1966 . In the same year , McKinsey had six offices in major US cities like San Francisco , Los Angeles and Washington D.C. , as well as six abroad . These foreign offices were primarily in Europe , such as in London , Paris , Amsterdam , as well as in Melbourne . By this time , one third of the company 's revenues originated from its European offices . Guy Crockett stepped down as managing director in 1950 , and Marvin Bower was elected in his place . McKinsey 's profit @-@ sharing , executive and planning committees were formed in 1951 . The organization 's client base expanded especially among governments , defense contractors , <unk> companies and military organizations in the post @-@ World War II era . After seven years of consideration , McKinsey became a private corporation with shares owned exclusively by McKinsey employees in 1956 . 
 After Bower stepped down in 1967 , the firm 's revenues declined . New competitors like the Boston Consulting Group and Bain & Company created increased competition for McKinsey by marketing specific branded products , such as the Growth @-@ Share Matrix , and by selling their industry expertise . In 1971 , McKinsey created the Commission on Firm Aims and Goals , which found that McKinsey had become too focused on geographic expansion and lacked adequate industry knowledge . The commission advised that McKinsey slow its growth and develop industry specialties . In 1976 , Ron Daniel was elected managing director , serving until 1988 . Daniel and Fred Gluck helped shift the firm away from its generalist approach by developing 15 specialized working groups within McKinsey called Centers of Competence and by developing practice areas called Strategy , Operations and Organization . Daniel also began McKinsey 's knowledge management efforts in 1987 . This led to the creation of an IT system that tracked McKinsey engagements , a process to centralize knowledge from each practice area and a resource directory of internal experts . " By the end of his tenure in 1988 the firm was growing again and had opened new offices in Rome , Helsinki , São Paulo and Minneapolis . 
 Fred Gluck served as McKinsey ’ s managing director from 1988 to 1994 . The firm 's revenues doubled during his tenure . He organized McKinsey into 72 " islands of activity " that were organized under 7 sectors and 7 functional areas . By 1997 , McKinsey had grown eightfold over its size in 1977 . In 1989 the firm attempted to make a talent acquisition in IT services through a $ 10 million purchase of the Information Consulting Group ( ICG ) , but a culture clash caused 151 out of the 254 ICG staff members to leave by 1993 . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 = = = = Further expansion = = = = 
 In 1994 , Rajat Gupta became the first non @-@ American @-@ born partner to be elected as the firm ’ s managing director . By the end of his tenure , McKinsey had grown from 2 @,@ 900 to 7 @,@ 700 staff and 58 to 84 locations . He opened new international offices in cities such as Moscow , Beijing and Bangkok . Continuing the structure developed by prior directors , Gupta also created 16 industry groups charged with understanding specific markets and instituted a three @-@ term limit for the managing director . McKinsey created practice areas for manufacturing and business technology in the late 1990s . 
 McKinsey set up " accelerators " in the 1990s , where the firm accepted stock @-@ based reimbursement to help internet startups ; the company performed more than 1 @,@ 000 e @-@ commerce projects from 1998 @-@ 2000 alone . The burst of the dot @-@ com bubble led to a reduction in utilization rates of McKinsey 's consultants from 64 to 52 percent . Though McKinsey avoided dismissing any personnel following the decline , the decline in revenues and losses from equity @-@ based payments as stock interests lost their value , together with a recession in 2001 , meant the company had to reduce its prices , cut expenses and reduce hiring . 
 In 2001 , McKinsey launched several practices that focused on the public and social sector . It took on many public sector or non profit clients on a pro bono basis . By 2002 McKinsey had invested a $ 35 @.@ 8 million budget on knowledge management , up from $ 8 @.@ 3 million in 1999 . Its revenues were 50 , 20 and 30 percent from strategy , operations and technology consulting respectively . 
 In 2003 Ian Davis , the head of the London , UK office , was elected to the position of managing director . Davis promised a return to the company ’ s core values , after a period in which the firm had expanded rapidly , which some McKinsey consultants felt was a departure from the company 's heritage . Also in 2003 , the firm established a headquarters for the Asia @-@ Pacific region in Shanghai , China . By 2004 , more than 60 percent of McKinsey 's revenues were generated outside the U.S. The company started a Social Sector Office ( SSO ) in 2008 , which is divided into three practices : Global Public Health , Economic Development and Opportunity Creation ( <unk> ) and Philanthropy . McKinsey does much of its pro @-@ bono work through the SSO , whereas a Business Technology Office ( BTO ) , founded in 1997 , provides consulting on technology strategy . 
 By 2009 , the firm consisted of 400 directors ( senior partners ) , up from 151 in 1993 . Dominic Barton was elected as Managing Director , a role he was re @-@ elected for in 2012 and 2015 . 
 = = = = Galleon insider trading scandal = = = = 
 Former McKinsey senior executives , Rajat Gupta and Anil Kumar , were among those convicted in a government investigation into insider trading for sharing inside information with Galleon Group hedge fund owner Raj Rajaratnam . Though McKinsey was not accused of any wrongdoing , the convictions were embarrassing for the firm , since it prides itself for integrity and client confidentiality . Following the initial allegations McKinsey no longer maintains a relationship with either senior partner , though the manner in which it severed ties attracted controversy . 
 Senior partner Anil Kumar , described as Gupta 's protégé , left the firm after the allegations in 2009 and pleaded guilty in January 2010 . While he and other partners had been pitching McKinsey 's consulting services to the Galleon Group , Kumar and Rajaratnam reached a private consulting agreement , violating McKinsey 's policies on confidentiality . Gupta was convicted in June 2012 of four counts of conspiracy and securities fraud , and acquitted on two counts . In October 2011 , he was arrested by the FBI on criminal charges of sharing insider information from these confidential board meetings with Rajaratnam . At least twice , Gupta used a McKinsey phone to call Rajaratnam and retained other perks — an office , assistant , and $ 6 million retirement salary that year — as a senior partner emeritus . 
 After the scandal McKinsey instituted new policies and procedures to discourage future indiscretions from consultants , including investigating other partners ' ties to Gupta . 
 = = Organization = = 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 McKinsey & Company was originally organized as a partnership before being legally restructured as a private corporation with shares owned by its Partners in 1956 . It mimics the structure of a partnership and employees are called " partners " . The company has a flat hierarchy and each member is assigned a mentor . Since the 1960s , McKinsey 's Managing Director has been elected by a vote of senior directors to serve up to three , three @-@ year terms or until reaching the mandatory retirement age of 60 . The firm is also managed by a series of committees that each has its own area of responsibility . 
 McKinsey has a de @-@ centralized structure , whereby different offices operate similarly , but independently . Each office is expected to put the overall organization 's best interest before the office 's , which McKinsey refers to as the " one firm " principle . Consultants and engagements are often shared across offices . Revenues from all offices are pooled and an individual office 's revenue does not directly affect it financially . The company 's budgeting is centralized , but individual consultants are given a large degree of autonomy . 
 McKinsey consultants are either industry experts , functional experts , or generalists that cover specific geographic regions . The firm has 23 Industry Practices focused on individual industries , nine Functional Practices that work in areas like finance , marketing or risk , and five Capabilities and Solutions areas related to technology consulting . 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 Marvin Bower is credited with creating McKinsey 's values and principles in 1937 . He established a set of rules : that consultants should put the interests of clients before McKinsey 's revenues , not discuss client affairs , tell the truth even if it means challenging the client 's opinion and , only perform work that is both necessary and that McKinsey can do well . Bower created the firm 's principle of only working with CEOs , which was later expanded to CEOs of subsidiaries and divisions . He also created McKinsey 's principle of only working with clients the firm felt would follow its advice . 
 Bower also established the firm 's language . McKinsey calls itself " The Firm " and its employees " members " . McKinsey says its consultants are not motivated by money . McKinsey & Company tries to keep a " very low profile public image . " The firm has a policy against discussing specific client situations . The firm says it does not advertise , though it did advertise allegedly for recruitment purposes in TIME Magazine in 1966 . Members are not supposed to " sell " their services . McKinsey 's consultants are expected to become a part of the community and recruit clients from church , charitable foundations , board positions and other community involvements . 
 A 1993 profile story in Fortune Magazine said McKinsey & Company was " the most well @-@ known , most secretive , most high @-@ priced , most prestigious , most consistently successful , most envied , most trusted , most disliked management consulting firm on earth . " According to BusinessWeek the firm is " ridiculed , reviled , or revered depending on one 's perspective . " 
 McKinsey 's culture has often been compared to religion , because of the influence , loyalty and zeal of its members . Fortune Magazine said partners talk to each other with " a sense of personal affection and admiration . " An article in The News Observer said McKinsey 's internal culture was " collegiate and ruthlessly competitive " and has been described as arrogant . The Wall Street Journal said McKinsey is seen as " elite , loyal and secretive " . According to Reuters , it has a " button @-@ down culture " focused on " playing by the rules " . According to BusinessWeek , some consultants say the firm has strayed from its original values as it increased in size . The Guardian said at McKinsey " hours are long , expectations high and failure not acceptable . " 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Many of McKinsey 's alumni become CEOs of major corporations or hold important government positions . In doing so , they influence the other organization with McKinsey 's values and culture . McKinsey 's alumni have been appointed as CEOs or high @-@ level executives at Google , American Express , IBM , Westinghouse Electric , Sears , AT & T , PepsiCo , and Enron . McKinsey alumni have held positions with Tony Blair 's office . Citicorp and Merrill Lynch have also hired many McKinsey alumni . As of 2008 , McKinsey alumni held CEO positions with 16 corporations that have more than $ 2 billion in revenue . The firm was ranked by USA Today as the most likely company to work for and become a future CEO of a major corporation , with odds of 1 out of 690 . McKinsey 's consulting work has also been influential in establishing many of the norms of how governments and corporations are run . The company has been influential in the British Department of Health for many years and was heavily involved in the discussions around the Health and Social Care Act 2012 . 
 = = Consulting services = = 
 McKinsey & Company provides management consulting services , such as providing advice on an acquisition , developing a plan to restructure a sales force , creating a new business strategy or providing advice on downsizing . Its consultants design and implement studies to evaluate management decisions using data and interviews to test hypotheses . Conclusions of the study are presented to senior management , typically in a PowerPoint presentation and a booklet . 
 McKinsey is considered one of the most prestigious and most expensive management consulting firms . In Dangerous Company , journalists James O 'Shea and Charles Madigan said McKinsey is the most influential , most reputable management consulting firm in the industry and that it carries the most weight with corporate boards . The News Observer said McKinsey is the " creme de la creme " and the " Rolls Royce " of management consulting . Between 2002 and 2014 , McKinsey has been ranked in the number one position of the branche @-@ internal " The Best Consulting Firms : Prestige to work for " list by <unk> 
 McKinsey & Company has traditionally charged approximately 25 percent more than competing firms with an average project of one million dollars . Prices were reduced in the economic slump following the dot @-@ com bubble . According to The Globe and Mail , McKinsey clients estimate that the firm 's advice turns out to be poor in retrospect about 10 to 20 percent of the time . 
 A typical McKinsey engagement can last between two and twelve months and involves three to six McKinsey consultants . An engagement is usually managed by a generalist that covers the region the client 's headquarters are located in and specialists that have either an industry or functional expertise . Unlike some competing consulting firms , McKinsey does not hold a policy against working for multiple competing companies ( although individual consultants are barred from doing so ) . This has sometimes led to accusations of sharing confidential information or re @-@ packaging a competitor 's tactics as best practices . 
 = = = Environmental consulting = = = 
 Marginal abatement cost curves attempt to compare the financial costs of different options for reducing pollution in a region and are used in emissions trading , policy discussions and incentive programs . McKinsey & Company released its first marginal abatement cost ( MAC ) curve for greenhouse gas emissions in February 2007 , which was updated to version two in January 2009 . McKinsey & Company 's MAC curve has become the most widely used and is the basis for McKinsey ’ s consulting on climate change and sustainability . 
 McKinsey 's curve predicts negative cost abatement strategies , which has been controversial among economists . The International Association for Energy Economics said in The Energy Journal that McKinsey 's cost @-@ curve was popular among policymakers , because it suggests they can take " bold action towards improving energy efficiency without imposing costs on society . " 
 In a 2010 report , the Rainforest Foundation UK said McKinsey 's cost curve methodology was misleading for policy decisions regarding the Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation ( <unk> ) program . The report argued that McKinsey 's calculations exclude certain implementation and governance costs , which makes it favor industrial uses of forests while discouraging subsistence projects . Greenpeace said the curve has allowed Indonesia and Guyana to win financial incentives from the United Nations by creating inflated estimates of current deforestation so they could demonstrate reductions in comparison . McKinsey said they had made it clear in the cost @-@ curve publications that cost curves do not translate " mechanically " into policy implications and that policymakers should consider " many other factors " before introducing new laws . 
 = = Recruiting and compensation = = 
 McKinsey & Company was the first management consultancy to hire recent graduates instead of experienced business managers , when it started doing so in 1953 . Many of its recruits are Baker Scholars , Rhodes scholars , Marshall Scholars , Gates @-@ Cambridge scholars , or White House Fellows . Less than half of the firm 's recruits are from business majors , while others have advanced degrees in science , medicine , engineering or law . Prestigious business colleges may have McKinsey consultants assigned to cultivating relationships with upcoming graduates . 
 According to The Observer , McKinsey recruits recent graduates and " imbues them with a religious conviction " in the firm , then culls through them with its " up @-@ or @-@ out " policy . The " up or out " policy , which was established in 1951 , means that consultants that are not being promoted within the firm are asked to leave . About one @-@ fifth of McKinsey 's consultants depart under the up or out policy each year . McKinsey 's practice of hiring recent graduates and the " up @-@ or @-@ out " philosophy , were originally based on Marvin Bower 's experiences at the law firm Jones Day in the 1930s , as well as the " Cravath system " used at the law firm Cravath , Swaine and Moore . 
 According to Financial Times journalist Duff McDonald , as of September 2013 , the firm receives 225 @,@ 000 employment applications annually and about one percent — or 2 @,@ 200 — of the applicants are hired . There is an ongoing debate within the firm on how fast it should grow . According to a report by <unk> , McKinsey " offers some of the best experience , opportunity and professional development in the industry " and it is prestigious to have McKinsey on a resume . However , it said the work environment is demanding , involving extensive travel and long hours . Consulting Magazine 's 2007 list of " Best Consulting Firms to Work For " ranked McKinsey as number 3 . 
 New undergraduate McKinsey recruits are paid about $ 80 @,@ 000 a year , while senior partners are estimated to earn $ 1 – $ 3 million or more . According to Fortune Magazine , some McKinsey staff earn more than the CEOs they consult . 
 = = Research and publishing = = 
 McKinsey & Company consultants regularly publish books , research and articles about business and management . The firm spends $ 50 – $ 100 million a year on research . McKinsey was one of the first organizations to fund management research , when it founded the Foundation for Management Research in 1955 . The firm began publishing a business magazine , The McKinsey Quarterly , in 1964 . It funds the McKinsey Global Institute , which studies global economic trends and was founded in 1990 . Many consultants are contributors to the Harvard Business Review . McKinsey consultants published only two books from 1960 @-@ 1980 , then more than 50 from 1980 to 1996 . McKinsey 's publications and research give the firm a " quasi @-@ academic " image . 
 A McKinsey book , In Search of Excellence , was published in 1982 . It featured eight characteristics of successful businesses based on an analysis of 43 top performing companies . It became one of the most influential and highly read management books and marked the beginning of McKinsey 's shift from accounting to " softer " aspects of management , like skills and culture . In Search of Excellence 's distribution prompted others , including McKinsey consultants , to write more management books . According to David Guest from King 's College , In Search of Excellence became popular among business managers because it was easy to read , well @-@ marketed and some of its core messages were valid . However , it was disliked by academics because of flaws in its methodology . Additionally , a 1984 analysis by BusinessWeek found that many of those companies identified as " excellent " in the book no longer met the criteria only two years later . 
 A 1997 article and a book it published in 2001 on " The War for Talent " prompted academics and the business community to start focusing more on talent management . The authors found that the best @-@ performing companies were " obsessed " with acquiring and managing the best talent . They advocated that companies rank employees by their performance and promote " stars " , while targeting under @-@ performers for improvement or layoffs . After the book was published , Enron , a company which followed many of its principles , was involved in a scandal that led to its bankruptcy . In May 2001 , a Stanford professor wrote a paper critical of the " War on Talent " arguing that it prioritized individuals at the expense of the larger organization . 
 McKinsey consultants published Creative Destruction in 2001 . The book suggested that CEOs need to be willing to change or rebuild a company , rather than protect what they have created . It found that out of the first S & P 500 list from 1957 , only 74 were still in business by 1998 . The New York Times said it " makes a cogent argument that in times of rampant , uncertain change ... established companies are handcuffed by success . " In 2009 , McKinsey consultants published " The Alchemy of Growth " , which established three " horizons " for growth : core enhancements , new growth platforms and options . Its three horizons became adopted widely , because it gave executives a simple vocabulary about business growth . 
 In February 2011 , McKinsey surveyed 1 @,@ 300 US private @-@ sector employers on their expected response to the Affordable Care Act ( ACA ) . 30 percent of respondents said they anticipated they would probably or definitely stop offering employer sponsored health coverage after the ACA went into effect in 2014 . These results , published in June 2011 in the McKinsey e @-@ Quarterly , became " a useful tool for critics of the ACA and a deep annoyance for defenders of the law " according to an article in TIME Magazine . Supporters of healthcare reform argued the survey far surpassed estimates by the Congressional Budget Office and insisted that McKinsey disclose the survey 's methodology . Two weeks after publishing the survey results , McKinsey released the contents of the survey including the questionnaire and 206 @-@ pages of survey data . In its accompanying statement , McKinsey said it was intended to capture the attitude of employers at a certain point in time , not make a prediction . 
 Since 1990 , McKinsey has been publishing Valuation : Measuring and Managing the Value of Companies , a popular textbook on valuation . The book is now available in its sixth edition . 
 = = Consulting projects = = 
 According to The Firm , McKinsey has been influential in establishing the norms of business , such as working in large @-@ scale office settings . According to a 1993 profile in Fortune magazine , " while McKinsey has consulted for many of the current era 's great successes ... it has also been a fixture at many of the big losers . " In The Firm , author Duff McDonald said McKinsey helped restructure the White House , guided corporations through large @-@ scale re @-@ organizations in post @-@ war Europe and facilitated turn @-@ arounds , but in other cases advised companies to adopt strategies that led to their collapse or was unable to prevent an impending bankruptcy . It said 
 McKinsey was a major player in the efficiency boom in the 1920s , the postwar gigantism of the 1940s , the rationalization of government and rise of marketing in the 1950s , the age of corporate influence in the 1960s , the restructuring of America and rise of strategy in the 1970s , the massive growth in information technology in the 1980s , the globalization of the 1990s , and the boom @-@ bust @-@ and @-@ cleanup of the 2000s . 
 = = = History = = = 
 McKinsey & Company 's founder , James O. McKinsey , introduced the concept of budget planning as a management framework in his fifth book Budgetary Control in 1922 . The firm 's first client was the treasurer of Armour & Company , who , along with other early McKinsey clients , had read Budgetary Control . In 1931 McKinsey created a methodology for analyzing a company called the General Survey Outline ( GSO ) , which was established based on ideas introduced in the 1924 book Business Administration . It was also known as the Banker 's Survey , because McKinsey 's clients who used it in the 1930s were predominantly banks . After the Wagner Act gave certain rights to employees to organize into unions in 1935 , McKinsey started consulting corporations on employee relations . Later in the 1950s , the work of a McKinsey consultant on compensation was influential in " skyrocketing executive pay " . It also helped many companies such as Heinz , IBM and Hoover expand into Europe . 
 In the 1940s , McKinsey helped many corporations convert into wartime production for World War II . It also helped organize NASA into an organization that relies heavily on contractors in 1958 . McKinsey created a report in 1953 for Dwight Eisenhower that was used to guide government appointments . In 1973 , McKinsey & Company led a project for a consortium of grocery chains represented by the U.S. Supermarket Ad Hoc Committee on a Uniform Grocery Product Code to create the barcode . According to the book " Business Research Methods " , the barcode became commonplace after a study by McKinsey persuaded Krogers to adopt it . 
 In the 1970s and 1980s , McKinsey helped European companies change their organizational structure to M @-@ form ( <unk> Form ) , which organizes the company into semi @-@ autonomous divisions that function around a product , industry or customer , rather than a function or expertise . In the 1980s , AT & T reduced investments in cell towers due to McKinsey 's prediction that there would only be 900 @,@ 000 cell phone subscribers by 2000 . According to The Firm this was " laughably off the mark " from the 109 million cellular subscribers by 2000 . At the time cell phones were bulky and expensive . The firm helped the Dutch government facilitate a turnaround for <unk> , the world 's largest steel company as of 2013 , through a $ 1 billion bankruptcy bailout . It also implemented a turnaround for the city of Glasgow , which had problems with unemployment and crime . McKinsey created the corporate structure for <unk> , when it was still a small company known as North Carolina National Bank . McKinsey was hired by General Motors to do a large @-@ scale re @-@ organization to help it compete with Japanese auto @-@ makers . The book The Firm said it was an " unmitigated disaster " because McKinsey focused on corporate structure , whereas GM needed to compete with Japanese automakers through manufacturing process improvement . A McKinsey consultant said GM did not follow their advice . 
 A 2002 article in BusinessWeek said that a series of bankruptcies of McKinsey clients , such as Swissair , Kmart , and Global Crossing , in the 1990s raised questions as to whether McKinsey was responsible or had a lapse in judgement . McKinsey recommended that Swissair avoid high operating costs in its home country by developing partnerships with airlines based in other regions . In order to attract partners , Swissair acquired more than $ 1 billion in shares of other airlines , many of which were failing . This led to huge losses for Swissair . 
 Prior to the Enron scandal , McKinsey helped it shift from an oil and gas production company into an electric commodities trader , which led to significant growth in profits and revenues . According to The Independent , there was " no suggestion that McKinsey was complicit in the subsequent scandal , [ but ] critics say the arrogance of Enron 's leaders is emblematic of the McKinsey culture . " The government did not investigate McKinsey , who said they did not provide advice on Enron 's accounting , but some questioned whether McKinsey knew about Enron 's accounting problems or ignored warning signs . 
 Former Financial Times journalist Duff McDonald , said McKinsey 's confidentiality policy often prevents the public from becoming informed about the firm 's work , except after it is exposed through lawsuits or investigations . 13 @,@ 000 McKinsey documents were released as part of a lawsuit against Allstate , which showed that McKinsey recommended the company reduce payouts to insurance claimants by offering low settlements , delaying processing to wear out claimants through attrition , and fighting customers that protest in court . Allstate 's profits doubled over ten years after adopting McKinsey 's strategy , but it also led to lawsuits alleging they were cheating claimants out of legitimate insurance claims . 
 = Georgetown University = 
 Georgetown University is a private research university in Washington , D.C. Founded in 1789 , it is the oldest Catholic and Jesuit institution of higher education in the United States . Located in Washington 's historic Georgetown neighborhood , the university 's main campus is noted for Healy Hall , a National Historic Landmark . Georgetown 's law school is located on Capitol Hill , and the university has auxiliary campuses in Italy , Turkey , and Qatar . 
 Georgetown 's founding by John Carroll , America 's first Catholic bishop , realized efforts dating from the settlement of the province of Maryland in 1634 to establish a local Roman Catholic college in the face of religious persecution . The university expanded after the American Civil War under the leadership of Patrick Francis Healy , who came to be known as Georgetown 's " second founder " despite having been born into slavery . Jesuits have participated in the university 's administration since 1805 , a heritage Georgetown celebrates , but the university has always been governed independently of the Society of Jesus and of church authorities . 
 Comprising nine undergraduate and graduate schools , the university enrolls approximately 7 @,@ 000 undergraduate and 10 @,@ 000 post @-@ graduate students from a wide variety of religious , ethnic , and geographic backgrounds , including 130 foreign countries . The university 's most notable alumni are prominent in public life in the United States and abroad . Among them are former U.S. President Bill Clinton , U.S. Chief Justice Edward Douglass White , U.S. Supreme Court Associate Justice Antonin Scalia , dozens of U.S. governors and members of Congress , heads of state or government of more than a dozen countries , royalty and diplomats . 
 Campus organizations include the country 's largest student @-@ run business and largest student @-@ run financial institution . Georgetown 's athletic teams , nicknamed the Hoyas , include a men 's basketball team that has won a record @-@ tying seven Big East championships , appeared in five Final Fours , and won a national championship in 1984 , as well as a co @-@ ed sailing team that holds nine national championship and one world championship title . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 Jesuit settlers from England founded the Province of Maryland in 1634 . However , the 1646 defeat of the Royalists in the English Civil War led to stringent laws against Roman Catholic education and the extradition of known Jesuits from the colony , including missionary Andrew White , and the destruction of their school at Calverton Manor . During most of the remainder of Maryland 's colonial period , Jesuits conducted Catholic schools clandestinely . It was not until after the end of the American Revolution that plans to establish a permanent Catholic institution for education in the United States were realized . 
 Because of Benjamin Franklin 's recommendation , Pope Pius VI appointed former Jesuit John Carroll as the first head of the Roman Catholic Church in America , even though the papal suppression of the Jesuit order was still in effect . Carroll began meetings of local clergy in 1783 near Annapolis , Maryland , where they orchestrated the development of a new university . On January 23 , 1789 , Carroll finalized the purchase of the property in Georgetown on which Dahlgren Quadrangle was later built . Future Congressman William Gaston was enrolled as the school 's first student on November 22 , 1791 , and instruction began on January 2 , 1792 . 
 During its early years , Georgetown College suffered from considerable financial strain . The Maryland Society of Jesus began its restoration in 1805 , and Jesuit affiliation , in the form of teachers and administrators , bolstered confidence in the college . The school relied on private sources of funding and the limited profits from local lands which had been donated to the Jesuits . To raise money for Georgetown and other schools in 1838 , Maryland Jesuits conducted a mass sale of some 272 slaves to two Deep South plantations from their six in Maryland , ending their slaveholding . 
 The United States Congress issued Georgetown the first federal university charter in 1815 , which allowed it to confer degrees , and the first bachelor 's degrees were awarded two years later . In 1844 , the school received a corporate charter , under the name " The President and Directors of Georgetown College " , affording the growing school additional legal rights . In response to the demand for a local option for Roman Catholic students , the Medical School was founded in 1851 . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 The U.S. Civil War greatly affected Georgetown as 1 @,@ 141 students and alumni enlisted in one army or the other , and the Union Army commandeered university buildings . By the time of President Abraham Lincoln 's May 1861 visit to campus , 1 @,@ 400 troops were living in temporary quarters there . Due to the number of lives lost in the war , enrollment levels remained low until well after the war . Only seven students graduated in 1869 , down from over 300 in the previous decade . When the Georgetown College Boat Club was founded in 1876 , the school 's rowing team , it adopted blue , used for Union uniforms , and gray , used for Confederate uniforms , as its colors to signify the peaceful unity among students . Subsequently , the school adopted these as its official colors . 
 Enrollment did not recover until during the presidency of Patrick Francis Healy from 1873 to 1881 . Born in Georgia as a slave by law and mixed @-@ race by ancestry , Healy was the first head of a predominantly white American university of acknowledged African descent . He identified as Irish Catholic , like his father , and was educated in Catholic schools in the United States and France . He is credited with reforming the undergraduate curriculum , lengthening the medical and law programs , and creating the Alumni Association . One of his largest undertakings was the construction of a major new building , subsequently named Healy Hall in his honor . For his work , Healy is known as the school 's " second founder . " 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 After the founding of the Law Department in 1870 , Healy and his successors hoped to bind the professional schools into a university , and focus on higher education . The School of Medicine added a dental school in 1901 and the undergraduate School of Nursing in 1903 . Georgetown Preparatory School relocated from campus in 1919 and fully separated from the University in 1927 . The School of Foreign Service ( SFS ) was founded in 1919 by Edmund A. Walsh , to prepare students for leadership in diplomacy and foreign commerce . The School of Dentistry became independent of the School of Medicine in 1956 . The School of Business was separated from the SFS in 1957 . In 1998 it was renamed the McDonough School of Business in honor of alumnus Robert E. McDonough . 
 Besides expansion of the University , Georgetown also aimed to expand its resources and student body . The School of Nursing has admitted female students since its founding , and most of the university classes were made available to them on a limited basis by 1952 . With the College of Arts and Sciences welcoming its first female students in the 1969 – 1970 academic year , Georgetown became fully coeducational . 
 Georgetown ended its bicentennial year of 1989 by electing Leo J. O 'Donovan as president . He subsequently launched the Third Century Campaign to build the school 's endowment . In December 2003 , Georgetown completed the campaign after raising over $ 1 billion for financial aid , academic chair endowment , and new capital projects . John J. DeGioia , Georgetown 's first lay president , has led the school since 2001 , and has continued its financial modernization and sought to " expand opportunities for intercultural and interreligious dialogue . " He opened a campus in Qatar . 
 = = = Jesuit tradition = = = 
 Georgetown University was founded by former Jesuits in the tradition of Ignatius of Loyola ; it is a member of the Association of Jesuit Colleges and Universities . Georgetown is not a pontifical university , though seven Jesuits serve on the thirty @-@ six member Board of Directors , the school 's highest governance . Fifty @-@ two members of the Society of Jesus live on campus , and are employed by Georgetown mostly as professors or administrators . Jesuit Heritage Week has been held every year since 2001 to celebrate the contributions of Jesuits to the Georgetown tradition . 
 The role that Georgetown 's Catholic heritage has played in its policies has been controversial at times , even as its influence is relatively limited . Stores in University @-@ owned buildings are not allowed to sell or distribute birth control products . Georgetown University Medical Center and Georgetown University Hospital , operated by <unk> Health , are prohibited from performing abortions . As recently as 2004 , the hospital did perform research using embryonic stem cells . Georgetown has been criticized by religious groups such as the Cardinal Newman Society for hosting speakers such as John Kerry and Barack Obama , prominent pro @-@ choice politicians . Washington 's Archbishop , Donald <unk> , criticized the university for inviting Kathleen Sebelius to be a commencement speaker . The university hosts the Cardinal O 'Connor Conference on Life every January to discuss the pro @-@ life movement . 
 Between 1996 and 1999 , the administration added crucifixes to many classroom walls , a change that attracted national attention . Before 1996 , crucifixes had hung only in hospital rooms and historic classrooms . Some of these crucifixes are historic works of art , and are noted as such . According to Imam Yahya <unk> , the school 's on @-@ campus Muslim cleric , pressure to remove the crucifixes comes from within the Catholic community , while he and other campus faith leaders have defended their placement . The Intercultural Center is an exception to this controversy , rotating displays of various faith and culture symbols in the lobby . 
 = = Academics = = 
 As of 2014 , the University has 7 @,@ 636 undergraduate students , and 10 @,@ 213 graduate students . Bachelor 's programs are offered through Georgetown College , the School of Nursing and Health Studies , the Robert Emmett McDonough School of Business , the School of Continuing Studies , and the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service , which includes the Qatar campus . The now @-@ defunct School of Dentistry closed in 1990 after 89 years in operation . Some high school students from Georgetown Visitation are permitted to attend classes for Advanced Placement credit . 
 Georgetown University offers undergraduate degrees in forty @-@ eight majors in the four undergraduate schools , as well as the opportunity for students to design their own individualized courses of study . All majors in the College are open as minors to students in the College , the School of Nursing and Health Studies , and the School of Business . Students in the School of Foreign Service cannot receive minors , but can complete certificates instead . All courses are on a credit hour system . Georgetown offers many opportunities to study abroad , and about 50 % of the undergraduate student body spends time at an institution overseas . 
 Master 's and doctoral programs are offered through the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , the Law Center , the School of Medicine , the McCourt School of Public Policy , and the School of Continuing Studies . Masters students occasionally share some advanced seminars with undergraduates , and most undergraduate schools offer abbreviated bachelors and masters programs following completion of the undergraduate degree . The McDonough School of Business and the Edmund A. Walsh School of Foreign Service both offer masters programs . The School of Foreign Service is renowned for its academic programs in international affairs . Its graduate program was ranked first in the world by Foreign Policy and its undergraduate program was ranked fourth . The Center for Contemporary Arab Studies also offer a Master 's of Arab Studies , as well as certificates . 
 Each graduate school offers at least one double degree with another graduate school . Additionally , the Law Center offers a joint degree with the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health . The School of Continuing Studies includes the Center for Continuing and Professional Education , and operates four types of degree programs , over thirty professional certificates and non @-@ degree courses , undergraduate and graduate degrees in Liberal Studies , as well as summer courses for graduates , undergraduates , and high school students . 
 = = = Faculty = = = 
 As of 2012 , Georgetown University employed 1 @,@ 354 full @-@ time and 880 part @-@ time faculty members across its three Washington , D.C. campuses , with additional staff at SFS @-@ Qatar . The faculty comprises leading academics and notable political and business leaders , and are predominantly male by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin . Politically , Georgetown University 's faculty members give more support to liberal candidates , and while their donation patterns are generally consistent with those of other American university faculties , they gave more than average to Barack Obama 's presidential campaign . 
 The current faculty includes scholars such as the former President of the American Philological Association James J. O 'Donnell , theologian John Haught , social activists Sam <unk> and Chai Feldblum , Nobel laureate George Akerlof , and preeminent hip @-@ hop scholar Michael Eric Dyson . Many former politicians choose to teach at Georgetown , including the former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Jeane Kirkpatrick , U.S. Agency for International Development administrator Andrew <unk> , National Security Advisor Anthony Lake , and CIA director George Tenet . Internationally , the school attracts numerous former ambassadors and heads of state , such as Prime Minister of Spain José María Aznar , Saudi Ambassador Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud , and President of Colombia Álvaro Uribe . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Georgetown University is a self @-@ described " student @-@ centered research university " considered by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education to have " very high research activity . " As of 2014 , Georgetown 's libraries held over 3 @.@ 5 million printed items , including 1 @.@ 25 million e @-@ books , in seven buildings , with most in Lauinger Library . The <unk> Science Library , located in the Reiss Science Building on campus , houses most of the Science collection . Additionally , the Law School campus includes the nation 's fifth largest law library . Georgetown faculty conduct research in hundreds of subjects , but have priorities in the fields of religion , ethics , science , public policy , and cancer medicine . Cross @-@ institutional research is performed with Columbia University and Virginia Tech . 
 In 2014 , Georgetown received $ 172 million in external research grants , ranking # 113 amongst all universities in the United States , for research . In 2012 , Georgetown spent $ 180 million on research , ranking it 108th nationwide . In 2007 , it received about $ 14 @.@ 8 million in federal funds for research , with 64 % from the National Science Foundation , National Institutes of Health , the United States Department of Energy , and the Department of Defense . In 2010 , the school received $ 5 @.@ 6 million from the Department of Education to fund fellowships in several international studies fields . Georgetown 's Vincent Lombardi Cancer Center is one of 41 research @-@ intensive comprehensive cancer centers in the United States , and developed the breakthrough HPV vaccine for cervical cancer and <unk> <unk> Cells ( CRC ) technology . 
 Centers which conduct and sponsor research at Georgetown include the Berkley Center for Religion , Peace , and World Affairs , the Prince Alwaleed Center for Muslim – Christian Understanding and the Woodstock Theological Center . Regular publications include the Georgetown Journal on Poverty Law and Policy , the Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal , the Georgetown Law Journal , the Georgetown Journal of International Affairs , and the Georgetown Public Policy Review . 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 Admission to Georgetown has been deemed " most selective " by U.S. News & World Report , with the university receiving nearly 20 @,@ 000 applications and admitting 16 @.@ 4 % of those that applied during the 2014 – 2015 admissions cycle . The Fiske Guide to Colleges states that " only Stanford and a handful of Ivy League schools are tougher to get into than Georgetown . " As of 2011 , Georgetown 's graduate schools have acceptance rates of 3 @.@ 6 % to the School of Medicine , 19 % to the Law Center , 25 % to the <unk> , and 34 @.@ 9 % to the MBA program . In 2004 , a National Bureau of Economic Research study on revealed preference of U.S. colleges showed that Georgetown was the 16th most @-@ preferred choice . 
 The undergraduate schools maintain a restrictive Early Action admissions program , as students who have applied through an Early Decision process at another school are not permitted to apply early to Georgetown . 94 % of students accepted for the class of 2014 were in the top 10 % of their class and the interquartile range of SAT scores was 660 – 760 in Critical Reading and 670 – 770 in Math . Georgetown accepts both the SAT and ACT , though does not consider the writing portion of either . Over 55 % of undergraduates receive financial aid , and the university meets 100 % of demonstrated need , with an average financial aid package of $ 23 @,@ 500 and about 70 % of aid distributed in the forms of grants or scholarships . 
 = = Campuses = = 
 Georgetown University has four campuses in Washington , D.C. : the undergraduate campus , the Medical Center , the School of Continuing Studies ( in Chinatown ) and the Law Center . The undergraduate campus and Medical Center are together in the Georgetown neighborhood and form the main campus . Other centers are located around Washington , D.C. , including the Center for Continuing and Professional Education at Clarendon in Arlington , Virginia . Transit between these locations and the Washington Metro is supplied by a system of shuttles , known as <unk> buses . Georgetown also operates a facility in Doha , Qatar , and villas in Alanya , Turkey and Fiesole , Italy . In their campus layout , Georgetown 's administrators consistently used the traditional quadrangle design . 
 = = = Main campus = = = 
 Georgetown 's undergraduate and medical school campuses are situated on an elevated site above the Potomac River overlooking Northern Virginia . Because of this , Georgetown University is often referred to as " The Hilltop . " The main gates , known as the Healy Gates , are located at the intersection of 37th and O Streets NW , and lead directly to the heart of campus . The main campus is relatively compact , being 104 acres ( 0 @.@ 4 km2 ) in area , but includes fifty @-@ four buildings , student residences and apartments capable of accommodating 80 % of undergraduates , and various athletic facilities . Most buildings employ collegiate Gothic architecture and Georgian brick architecture . Campus green areas include fountains , a cemetery , large clusters of flowers , groves of trees , and open quadrangles . Georgetown received a B grade on the 2011 College Sustainability Report Card , and new buildings and major renovations are required to meet LEED Silver criteria . 
 Healy Hall , designed by Paul J. <unk> in Neo @-@ Medieval style and built from 1877 to 1879 , is the architectural gem of Georgetown 's campus , and is a National Historic Landmark . Within Healy Hall are a number of notable rooms including Gaston Hall , Riggs Library , and the Bioethics Library Hirst Reading Room . Both Healy Hall and the Georgetown University Astronomical Observatory , built in 1844 , are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . In front of the Healy and Copley Hall buildings is the large front lawn area , which is crossed by walkways and paths that center on the statue of John Carroll . In addition to the front lawn , the main campus has traditionally centered on Dahlgren Quadrangle behind Healy Hall , which is home to Dahlgren Chapel ; however , in recent decades , Red Square has replaced the Dahlgren Quadrangle as the focus of student life . North of Red Square is an extended pathway that is home to buildings such as the Intercultural Center ( ICC ) , the Reiss Science building , and the large Leavey Student Center . The northern terminus of the undergraduate campus is marked by St. Mary 's Hall adjacent to Reservoir Road , home to the School of Nursing and Health Sciences . Across Reservoir Road is the Burleith neighborhood , where some upperclassmen rent houses off @-@ campus . The medical school is located in the northwestern part of the main campus on Reservoir Road , and is integrated with Georgetown University Hospital . The Medical campus includes the historic Medical @-@ Dental Building , the Dahlgren Memorial Library , and other research and classroom facilities . 
 In the last decade , the West side of the Hilltop has emerged as a new developing area of the main campus . The university completed the Southwest Quadrangle Project in late 2003 , and brought a new 907 @-@ bed upperclassmen residence hall , the Leo J. O 'Donovan dining hall , a large underground parking facility , and a new Jesuit Residence to the campus . The school 's first performing arts center , named for Royden B. Davis , was completed in November 2005 . The new business school headquarters , named for Rafik Hariri , opened in Fall 2009 , and Regents Hall , the new science building , opened in the Fall of 2012 . These two large buildings , along with the adjacent Leavey Student Center , have become popular study spaces , and overlook a newly developed scenic lawn space . Additionally , in the fall of 2014 , the university opened a new student center , the Healey Family Student Center ( <unk> ) to complement the longstanding Leavey Center . The Healey Family Student Center is located on the 1st floor of New South Hall , a space which had functioned as the university 's main dining facility until the opening of the Leo J. O 'Donovan dining hall in 2003 . It features over 43 @,@ 000 square feet including a number of study spaces , conference rooms , dance and music studios , as well as a pub called " Bulldog Tavern " and a salad store " <unk> , " which is operated by The Corp. The university owns many of the buildings in the Georgetown neighborhood east of the main campus and west of 35th Street NW , including all buildings west of 36th Street . This area is known as " East Campus " and is used for upperclassmen housing , classroom space , along with specific institutions , offices , and alumni facilities . Additionally , the Walsh School of Foreign Service and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences both have classroom buildings in this area . Georgetown Visitation , a private Roman Catholic girls high school , is located on the northeast side of campus , on land adjoining the undergraduate campus . 
 As a location , Georgetown is ranked nationally as the second best college town by the Princeton Review . The Georgetown neighborhood west of Wisconsin Avenue NW , is dominated by the presence of university students . Students have easy access to the M Street commercial area , the Georgetown Waterfront , and numerous trails that lead to the National Mall and other parks . Despite this , " town and gown " relations between the university communities and other Georgetown residents are often strained by facilities construction , enlargement of the student body , as well as noise and alcohol violations . More recently , several groups of neighborhood residents have attempted to slow University growth in Georgetown , creating friction between students and the surrounding neighborhood . Despite the relative safety of the neighborhood , crime is nonetheless a persistent issue , with campus security responding to 257 crimes in 2008 . 
 = = = Law Center campus = = = 
 The Law Center campus is located in the Capitol Hill neighborhood on New Jersey Avenue , near Union Station and consists of five buildings . First @-@ year students at the Law Center can live in the single on @-@ campus dormitory , the <unk> Student Center . Most second- and third @-@ year students , as well as some first @-@ year students , live off @-@ campus . As there is little housing near the Law Center , most are spread throughout the Washington metropolitan area . The " Campus Completion Project " , finished in 2005 , saw the addition of the <unk> International Building and the Sport and Fitness Center . G Street and F Street are closed off between 1st and 2nd Streets to create open lawns flanking McDonough Hall , the main building on the campus . 
 = = = Facilities abroad = = = 
 In December 1979 , the <unk> Margaret Rockefeller de <unk> , granddaughter of John D. Rockefeller , gave the Villa Le <unk> to Georgetown University . The Villa is in Fiesole , Italy , on a hill above the city of Florence . The Villa is used year @-@ round for study abroad programs focused on specialized interdisciplinary study of Italian culture and civilization . The main facility for the McGhee Center for Eastern Mediterranean Studies was donated to Georgetown in 1989 by alumnus and former United States Ambassador to Turkey George C. McGhee . The school is in the town of Alanya , Turkey within the Seljuq @-@ era Alanya Castle , on the Mediterranean . The Center operates study abroad programs one semester each year , concentrating on Turkish language , architectural history , and Islamic studies . 
 In 2002 , the Qatar Foundation for Education , Science and Community Development presented the School of Foreign Service with the resources and space to open a facility in the new Education City in Doha , Qatar . SFS @-@ Qatar opened in 2005 as a liberal arts and international affairs undergraduate school for regional students . In December 2007 , Georgetown opened a liaison office in Shanghai , China to coordinate with Fudan University and others . In 2008 , the Georgetown University Law Center in conjunction with an international consortium of law schools established the Center for Transnational Legal Studies in London , England . 
 = = Student life = = 
 The Georgetown undergraduate student body , at 7 @,@ 636 as of 2014 , is composed primarily of students from outside the District of Columbia area , with 34 % of new 2010 students coming from Mid @-@ Atlantic states , 11 % being international students and the remainder coming from other areas of the US . The student body also represented 129 different countries , with 11 % being international , including over 330 undergraduate and 1 @,@ 050 graduate students who chose to come to Georgetown as a study abroad destination in 2009 – 10 . In 2014 – 2015 , the racial diversity of the undergraduate student body was 57 @.@ 0 % white , 8 @.@ 8 % Asian , 6 @.@ 2 % black , and 7 @.@ 5 % Hispanic ; Additionally , 55 @.@ 1 % of undergraduates are female . 
 Although it is a Jesuit university , only 41 % of the student body identify as Roman Catholic , while 22 % identify as Protestant as of 2009 . Georgetown employs a full @-@ time rabbi , as 6 @.@ 5 % of undergraduates are Jewish . It was the first U.S. college to have a full @-@ time imam , to serve the over four @-@ hundred Muslims on campus , and in 2014 , they appointed their first Hindu priest to serve a weekly community of around one hundred . Georgetown also sponsors student groups for Bahá 'i , Buddhist , and Mormon traditions . The student body consists of both religious and non @-@ religious students , and more than four @-@ hundred freshmen and transfer students attend a nonreligious Ignatian retreat annually , called <unk> . 
 A 2007 survey of undergraduates also suggests that 62 @.@ 8 % are sexually active , while 6 @.@ 2 % identify as LGBTQ . Discrimination can be an issue on campus , and three @-@ fourths of a 2009 survey considered homophobia a campus problem . Newsweek , however , rated Georgetown among its top " Gay @-@ Friendly Schools " in 2010 . A survey by the school in 2016 showed that 31 % of females undergraduates reported experiencing unwanted sexual contact , and 86 % of LGBTQ students reported some form of sexual harassment at the college . In 2011 , College Magazine ranked Georgetown as the tenth most hipster U.S. college , while People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals considered it the third most vegan friendly small U.S. school . 
 Almost all undergraduates attend full @-@ time . A majority of undergraduates , 76 % , live on @-@ campus in several dormitories and apartment complexes , including all underclassmen . As of 2011 , 1255 undergraduates and 339 graduate students live off @-@ campus , mostly in the Georgetown , Glover Park , Burleith , and Foxhall neighborhoods . Although many of the University 's hall directors and area coordinators attend graduate level courses , on @-@ campus housing is not available for main campus graduate students . The school hopes to build such housing by 2020 . All students in the Medical School live off @-@ campus , most in the surrounding neighborhoods , with some in Northern Virginia and elsewhere through the region . 
 = = = Student groups = = = 
 As of 2012 , 92 @.@ 89 % of Georgetown University undergraduates are involved in at least one of the 179 registered student organizations which cover a variety of interests : student government , club sports , media and publications , performing arts , religion , and volunteer and service . Students also operate campus stores , banks , and medical services . Students often find their interests at the Student Activities Commission Club Fair , where both official and unofficial organizations set up tables . The Georgetown University Student Association is the student government organization for undergraduates . There are also student representatives within the schools , to the Board of Directors , and , since 1996 , to the Georgetown Advisory Neighborhood Commission . 
 Georgetown 's student organizations include one of the nation 's oldest debating clubs , the Philodemic Society , founded in 1830 , and the oldest university theater group , the Mask and Bauble Dramatic Society . Nomadic Theatre , founded in 1982 as an alternative troupe without an on @-@ campus home , produces " plays which educate and challenge all members of the university community through thought @-@ provoking theatre . " The Georgetown Improv Association , founded in 1995 , performs monthly long @-@ form improvisational shows on @-@ campus at Bulldog Alley in addition to hosting " <unk> " , one of the oldest improv festivals in the country . The Model United Nations team that is run by the Georgetown International Relations Club , the largest club on campus , and its affiliate , Georgetown International Relations Association , has attained the status of best in the world on several occasions . 
 There are a total of seven a cappella groups on campus , including The Georgetown <unk> , The Georgetown Chimes , the Phantoms , Superfood , The <unk> , the Chamber Singers , Essence , Harmony , and the Capitol G 's . These groups perform annually at the " D.C. A Cappella Festival " , held since 1991 , and the " Cherry Tree Massacre " concert series , held since 1974 . The Georgetown University Band is composed of the Georgetown Pep Band and the Georgetown Wind Ensemble , and performs on campus , in Washington , D.C. , and at post @-@ season basketball tournaments . 
 In addition to student organizations and clubs , Georgetown University is home to the nation 's largest entirely student @-@ owned and -operated corporation , Students of Georgetown , Inc . Founded in 1972 , " The Corp " operates three coffee shops , two grocery stores , a salad and health food service , catering and printing services , as well as running seasonal storage and airport shuttles for students . The business has annual revenues of about $ 2 million , and surpluses are directly re @-@ invested into the Georgetown student body through Corp Philanthropy , which gave out over $ 85 @,@ 000 in scholarships and donations to Georgetown groups in 2014 – 2015 . Georgetown University Alumni & Student Federal Credit Union is the oldest and largest all student @-@ run financial institution , with over $ 17 million in assets and 12 @,@ 000 members . The Georgetown University Student Investment Fund is one of a few undergraduate @-@ run investment funds in the United States , and hosted CNBC 's Jim Cramer to tape Mad Money in September 2006 . 
 Another student @-@ run group , the Georgetown Emergency Response Medical Service , " <unk> " , is an all @-@ volunteer ambulance service founded in 1982 that serves campus and the surrounding communities . Georgetown 's Army Reserve Officer Training Corps ( ROTC ) unit , the Hoya Battalion , is the oldest military unit native to the District of Columbia , and was awarded the top ranking among ROTC programs in 2012 . The proportion of ROTC students at Georgetown was the 79th highest among universities in the United States as of 2010 . <unk> , the Georgetown University <unk> Society , has been a Georgetown tradition since 2002 , selling half @-@ pound hamburgers in Red Square on most Fridays . 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Georgetown University student organizations include a diverse array of groups focused on social justice issues , including organizations run through both Student Affairs and the Center for Social Justice . Oriented against gender violence , Take Back the Night coordinates an annual rally and march to protest against rape and other forms of violence against women . Georgetown Solidarity Committee is a workers ' rights organization whose successes include ending use of sweatshops in producing Georgetown @-@ <unk> apparel , and garnering pay raises for both university cleaning staff and police . Georgetown Students for Fair Trade successfully advocated for all coffee in campus cafeterias to be Fair Trade Certified . 
 Georgetown has many additional groups representing national , ethnic , and linguistic interests . Georgetown 's has the second most politically active student body in the United States according to the Princeton Review . Groups based on local , national , and international issues are popular , and political speech is protected on campus . Student political organizations are active on campus and engage their many members in local and national politics . The Georgetown University College Republicans represent their party , while the Georgetown University College Democrats , the largest student organization on campus in 2008 , represent theirs . 
 The reproductive rights organization H * <unk> for Choice is not officially recognized by the University as its positions on abortion are in opposition to University policy , prompting the asterisk in " Hoyas . " While not financially supported by the school , the organization is permitted to meet and table in university spaces . The issue contributes to Georgetown 's ' red light ' status on free speech under the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education rating system . In 2010 , the " Plan A : Hoyas for Reproductive Justice " campaign led several protests against the school policy against the sale of birth control on campus , and in 2007 , Georgetown University Law Center students protested the University 's decision to cease funding for a student 's internship at Planned Parenthood 's litigation department despite funding it previous years . Law Center student Sandra Fluke petitioned the university to change its health insurance policy to include coverage for contraception for three years prior to addressing the issue before the House Democratic Steering and Policy Committee in 2012 . Though the remarks Rush Limbaugh subsequently directed at Fluke were criticized by Georgetown administrators as both misogynist and vitriolic , the school remains opposed to the coverage of contraception . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 Georgetown University has several student @-@ run newspapers . The Hoya is the University 's oldest newspaper . It has been in print since 1920 , and since 1987 , has been published twice weekly . The Georgetown Voice , known for its weekly cover stories , is a newsmagazine that was founded in March 1969 to focus more attention on citywide and national issues . The Georgetown Independent is a monthly journal of news , commentary and the arts . Founded in 1966 , the Georgetown Law Weekly is the student @-@ run paper on the Law Center campus , and is a three @-@ time winner of the American Bar Association 's Best Newspaper award . The Georgetown Journal of International Affairs , established in 2000 , is a student @-@ managed , semi @-@ annual publication on current affairs and international relations . The Hoya and The Georgetown Voice both run online blogs , and there are other popular blogs written about the school and its sports teams . 
 The Georgetown Academy , restarted in 2008 after a hiatus , targets traditionalist Catholic readers , and the Georgetown Federalist , founded in 2006 , purports to bring a conservative and libertarian viewpoint to campus . Other political publications include the Georgetown Progressive , an online publication run by the Georgetown University College Democrats , and Counterpoint Magazine , a liberal monthly founded in the spring of 2011 . The Fire This Time is Georgetown 's minority <unk> . The Georgetown Heckler is a humor magazine founded on the Internet in 2003 by Georgetown students , releasing its first print issue in 2007 . The Gonzo was a former student humor magazine , published from 1993 to 1998 . 
 The University has a campus @-@ wide television station , <unk> , which began broadcasting in 1999 . The station hosts an annual student film festival in April for campus filmmakers . WGTB , Georgetown 's radio station , is available as a webcast and on 92 @.@ 3 FM in certain dormitories . The station was founded in 1946 , and broadcast on 90 @.@ 1 FM from 1960 to 1979 , when university president Timothy S. Healy gave away the frequency and broadcast capabilities to the University of the District of Columbia because of WGTB 's far left political orientation . The station now broadcasts through the Internet in its headquarters in the Leavey Center . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 Although Jesuit schools are not obliged to disassociate from Greek systems , many do , and Georgetown University officially recognizes and funds only one of the many Greek organizations on campus , Alpha Phi Omega , the national co @-@ ed community service fraternity . Despite this , other Greek organizations exist on campus , however , none require members to live in fraternal housing . Additionally , Georgetown University students are affiliated , in some cases , with fraternities at other nearby universities and colleges . 
 Active fraternities at Georgetown include Delta Phi Epsilon , a professional foreign service fraternity and sorority ; Alpha Kappa Psi , a professional co @-@ ed business fraternity ; Alpha Phi Omega , a national co @-@ ed community service fraternity ; Alpha Epsilon Pi , a Jewish social fraternity ; and social fraternities Sigma Phi Epsilon , Zeta Psi , and Sigma Alpha Epsilon . Delta Phi Epsilon was founded at Georgetown in 1920 , and members of their Alpha Chapter include Jesuits and several deans of the School of Foreign Service . The Delta Phi Epsilon foreign service sorority , founded in 1973 , is the only professional sorority active at Georgetown . In October 2013 the first social Greek sorority came to the Georgetown campus with the Eta Tau chapter of Kappa Kappa Gamma , followed by the Theta Iota chapter of Kappa Alpha Theta in the spring of 2014 . Georgetown 's chapter of Alpha Epsilon Pi , was established in 2002 . Sigma Phi Epsilon chartered its chapter as a general social fraternity in 2007 . The Omega Lambda chapter of professional business fraternity Alpha Kappa Psi replaced Delta Sigma Pi , which lost its charter in 2006 . The Zeta Psi chapter , named Gamma Epsilon , was chartered in March 2009 after a year as a colony . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Annual events on campus celebrate Georgetown traditions , culture , alumni , sports , and politics . In late April , Georgetown University celebrates Georgetown Day . Besides the full @-@ day carnival , the day rewards the best professor of the year with the Dorothy Brown Award , as voted by students . Halloween is celebrated with public viewings of alumnus William Peter Blatty 's film The Exorcist , which takes place in the neighborhood surrounding the university . 
 Homecoming coincides with a home football game , and festivities such as tailgating and a formal dance are sponsored by the Alumni Association to draw past graduates back to campus . The largest planned sports related celebration is the first basketball practice of the season . Dubbed Midnight Madness , this event introduces the men 's and women 's basketball teams shortly after midnight on the first day the teams are allowed by NCAA rules to formally practice together . In 2013 , Georgetown hosted the east regional finals round of the NCAA Men 's Basketball Tournament . 
 Georgetown University hosts notable speakers each year , largely because of the success of the Georgetown Lecture Fund and the Office of Communications . These are frequently important heads of state who visit Georgetown while in the capital , as well as scholars , authors , U.S. politicians , and religious leaders . Many prominent alumni are known to frequent the main campus . The Office of the President hosts numerous symposia on religious topics , such as Nostra aetate , Pacem in <unk> , and the Building Bridges Seminar . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Georgetown fields 23 varsity teams and the Club Sports Board supports an additional 23 club teams . The varsity teams participate in the NCAA 's Division I. The school generally competes in the Big East Conference , although the football team competes in the Division I FCS Patriot League , the sailing team in Middle Atlantic Intercollegiate Sailing Association , and the rowing teams in the Eastern Association of Rowing Colleges . U.S. News & World Report listed Georgetown 's athletics program among the 20 best in the nation . Georgetown 's student athletes have a 94 % graduation success rate , and over one @-@ hundred have gone on to play professionally . 
 The school 's teams are called " Hoyas " , a name whose origin is uncertain . Sometime before 1893 , students well versed in classical languages invented the mixed Greek and Latin chant of " Hoya Saxa " , translating roughly as " what ( or such ) rocks . " The school 's baseball team , then called the Stonewalls , began in 1870 , and football in 1874 , and the chant likely refers to one of these teams . By the 1920s , the term " Hoyas " was used to describe groups on campus , and by 1928 , campus sports writers started using it instead of the older team name , the " Hilltoppers . " The name was picked up in the local publications , and became official shortly after . Jack the Bulldog has been the mascot of Georgetown athletics programs since 1962 , and the school fight song is There Goes Old Georgetown . 
 The men 's basketball team is particularly noteworthy as it won the NCAA championship in 1984 under coach John Thompson . The current coach is his son , John Thompson III , who coached the team to the Final Four in the 2007 NCAA tournament . The team is tied for the most Big East conference tournament titles with seven , and has made twenty @-@ seven NCAA tournament appearances . Well @-@ known team alumni include Sleepy Floyd , Patrick Ewing , Dikembe Mutombo , Alonzo Mourning , Allen Iverson , Jeff Green , and Roy Hibbert . Georgetown 's NBA alumni are collectively among the highest earners from a single program . 
 The sailing team has won nine national championships since 2001 , as well as one World Championship in match racing . Over that time they have graduated 79 All @-@ Americans and 6 College Sailors of the year . Georgetown has been nationally successful in both cross country and track and field , and in 2011 , the women 's cross country team won Georgetown 's only other NCAA Championship . The rowing teams are perennial contenders as well for national titles . The men 's and women 's lacrosse teams have both been ranked in the top ten nationally , as have both soccer teams , with the men making the national championship game in 2012 , and the women making the national quarterfinals in 2010 . The rugby club team also made it to the Division II Final Four in 2005 and 2009 . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 Georgetown graduates have found success in a wide variety of fields , and have served at the heads of diverse institutions both in the public and private sector . Immediately after graduation , about 54 – 61 % of undergraduates enter the workforce , while others go on to additional education . Georgetown graduates have been recipients of 23 Rhodes Scholarships , 21 Marshall Scholarships , 26 Truman Scholarships , and 14 Mitchell Scholarships . Georgetown is also one of the top @-@ ten yearly producers of Peace Corps volunteers as of 2010 , with 35 active and 866 total volunteers since 1961 . Georgetown alumni have a median starting salary of $ 55 @,@ 000 with a median mid @-@ career salary of $ 110 @,@ 000 , according to <unk> <unk> , the Notable Names Database , lists 493 notable alumni as of 2015 . 
 Eight former heads of state are alumni . Former President of the United States Bill Clinton is a 1968 graduate of the School of Foreign Service , and other former world leaders include Laura Chinchilla of Costa Rica , Gloria Macapagal @-@ Arroyo of the Philippines , Saad Hariri of Lebanon , and Alfredo <unk> of El Salvador . Two SFS graduates are also currently elected presidents , Dalia <unk> of Lithuania , who completed a six @-@ month program in 1992 , and Željko <unk> , one of the tripartite Presidents of Bosnia and Herzegovina . Six alumni serve in the United States Senate , and thirteen in the House of Representatives . Current congressional alumni include Dick Durbin , Senate minority whip , and Steny Hoyer , House minority whip . Governor Pat Quinn of Illinois graduated from the SFS in 1971 while Governor Terry McAuliffe of Virginia received his J.D. from the Law Center in 1984 . On the U.S. Supreme Court , alumni include former Associate Justice Antonin Scalia and former Chief Justice Edward Douglass White . Members of the current Obama Administration cabinet include Treasury Secretary Jack Lew who graduated from the law school in 1983 and White House Chief of Staff Denis McDonough who received his master 's degree in 1996 . 
 King Felipe VI of Spain , King Abdullah II of Jordan , Prince Guillaume of Luxembourg , Prince Turki bin Faisal Al Saud of the Saudi Arabia royal family , and Prince Pavlos of Greece and Denmark are among the royals who attended Georgetown . Besides numerous members of the senior diplomatic corps , graduates have also headed military organizations on both the domestic and international level , such as former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and former National Security Advisor General James L. Jones . Notable alumni in business include Mary Callahan <unk> , CEO of J.P. Morgan Asset Management , Patricia Russo , former Alcatel @-@ Lucent CEO , William J. Doyle of the Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan , and Ted Leonsis , owner of the Washington Capitals , Wizards , and Mystics franchises and former America Online executive . Leonsis is among four other undergraduate alumni who own professional sports teams , making Georgetown the most popular undergraduate university for major North American sports franchise owners . Actor Bradley Cooper , People Magazine 's Sexiest Man Alive 2011 , is also a graduate of Georgetown and its English program . Actors / comedians Nick Kroll , John Mulaney , Jim Gaffigan , and Mike Birbiglia are also graduates of Georgetown . 
 = The Boat Race 1858 = 
 The 15th Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 27 March 1858 . Typically held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge . The 1858 race , disrupted by poor rowing and a collision with a barge , was won by Cambridge who defeated Oxford by seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 21 minutes 23 seconds . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into this year 's race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by eleven lengths in the previous year 's race . Cambridge however led overall with eight wins to Oxford 's six . 
 Cambridge were coached for the fifth time by Thomas Selby Egan , ( who had coxed the Light Blues in the 1836 , 1839 and 1840 races ) , while Oxford 's coach was Alfred Shadwell ( cox for the Dark Blues in the 1842 race and coach for the fourth time ) . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 8 @.@ 875 lb ( 73 @.@ 7 kg ) , 1 pound ( 0 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Archibald Levin Smith , Robert Wharton and Robert Lewis @-@ Lloyd ( who was rowing his third Boat Race for the Light Blues ) had featured in Cambridge 's 1857 crew . Oxford 's crew included five participants who had competed in the previous race , including J. T. Thorley , who was making his third appearance in the event . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race commenced at 1pm and almost immediately the Oxford boat club president and stroke J. T. Thorley " caught a crab " which " completely brought their eight to standstill . " Cambridge took the lead but were caught following a clash of their port @-@ side oars with a barge . The boats were level at the Crab Tree pub but here Cambridge began to draw ahead and passed under Hammersmith Bridge with a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lead . The Light Blues continued to increase their lead and passed the flag @-@ boat at Mortlake seven @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead of Oxford in a time of 21 minutes 23 seconds . 
 It was the fastest time since the 1846 race ( which was held on the ebb tide ) , and took the overall record in the event to 9 – 6 in Cambridge 's favour . Although it was hoped that a rematch would be conducted at the Henley Royal Regatta , Oxford failed to make up a crew , and Cambridge went on to defeat Leander Club before winning the Grand Challenge Cup against London Rowing Club . 
 = Old Church of St Gwenllwyfo , Llanwenllwyfo = 
 The Old Church of St Gwenllwyfo , Llanwenllwyfo is a medieval ruined church near Dulas , in Anglesey , north Wales , perhaps built in the 15th century to replace another church from which only the 12th @-@ century font survived . Dedicated to Gwenllwyfo , a 7th @-@ century female saint about whom nothing else is known , it was used as a chapel of ease for the church in Amlwch , about 5 miles ( 8 km ) away . Restored in 1610 and again in the 18th and 19th centuries , it contained an oak screen and pulpit from 1610 . 
 It was replaced in the middle of the 19th century by a larger church about two @-@ thirds of a mile ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) away , to which some of the contents , including a memorial brass plaque from the early 17th century and the church bell , were removed ; other items were left behind . The disused church was noted to be in bad condition in 1937 , and the roof collapsed in 1950 . Little of the structure now remains , as the walls have been reduced to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in height . 
 = = History and location = = 
 The ruins of St Gwenllwyfo 's Church stand near Dulas , in the north @-@ east of Anglesey , Wales . The date of construction of the first church on the site is unknown . There was a church here in medieval times : one 19th @-@ century writer suggested that the present building dates from the 15th century and that the font , probably 12th century in date , was the only surviving part of an earlier church on the site . Restoration work was carried out in about 1610 and in the 18th century ; the latter changes eradicated the church 's historical details . 
 The church ( dedicated to Gwenllwyfo , a 7th @-@ century woman about whom nothing else is known ) was a chapel of ease attached to the parish of Amlwch , about 5 miles ( 8 km ) away . The parish tithes , however , were divided between the Bishop of Bangor and the incumbent of St Eilian 's Church , Llaneilian . The area takes its name from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " ‑ <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name . 
 In 1812 , the priest responsible for the church was Edward Hughes , whose wife was the niece of the owner of <unk> Dulas , the landed estate in the area . He employed an architect to carry out some further restoration work , although the details are unknown . The church was in need of further repair by the middle of the 19th century , and the congregation needed a larger building . A new church was therefore built between 1854 and 1856 about two @-@ thirds of a mile ( 1 @.@ 1 km ) away , financed largely by the widow of William Hughes , 1st Baron <unk> ( the son of Edward Hughes ) . The old church , which was allowed to fall into ruins , stands in a disused cemetery surrounded by trees . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The nave and chancel of the church were not structurally divided , and measure 39 feet 6 inches by 15 feet 9 inches ( 12 by 4 @.@ 8 m ) . The walls are 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) thick . In 1844 , it was recorded as having a coved roof , doors in the north and south walls and windows in the east , north and west walls . It also had a pulpit and an oak screen , 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) high , both dated 1610 . The screen had inscriptions in Welsh and Latin , and a note that " Richard Williams of Rhodogeidio who married <unk> Lloyd at his own charge caused all this worke to be don to the honor of God and his church " . A brass plaque , erected in 1609 by Williams in memory of his wife , was moved to the new church . Another screen was later added at the west end to stop the wind blowing into the nave , and two windows were added on opposite sides of the chancel . Two box pews were installed during the 18th century , and a bell ( now used by the new church ) was added . 
 At the time of a survey by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire in 1937 , although the building was in bad condition with an insecure roof , it still retained an 18th @-@ century oak communion table , a rectangular font dating from the 12th century , the 1610 screen ( damaged ) , the pulpit , fragments of an oak sounding board ( also dated 1610 ) and some 18th @-@ century memorials . There were also stone benches along the north and south walls , and some wooden benches from the 18th or early 19th century . The medieval roof trusses were also still in place in 1937 , but the roof collapsed in 1950 . The walls have since been lowered to a height of 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the church in 1833 as " a small neat edifice , appropriately fitted up for the performance of divine service " . Samuel Lewis , writing in the middle of the 19th century , said that the church was " a conspicuous and interesting object " in a parish that " partakes much of the general character of dreary sterility by which the mining districts in the immediate vicinity are distinguished " . However , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones , writing in 1859 about the church as it had been 15 years earlier , said that " the whole building was in bad repair " . One writer described the church in the 1970s as " a roofless , forgotten shell " . 
 = The Boat Races 2015 = 
 The 2015 Boat Races took place on 11 April 2015 . Held annually , The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between male crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along a 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) tidal stretch of the River Thames in south @-@ west London . For the first time in the history of the event , the men 's , women 's and both reserves ' races were all held on the Tideway ; in the men 's reserve race , Cambridge 's Goldie faced Oxford 's Isis after the women 's race , as a preliminary to the main men 's race , while the women 's reserve race , held the day before , saw Oxford 's Osiris race against Cambridge 's Blondie . 
 Oxford 's women won the first running of the Women 's Boat Race on the Tideway , and the 70th overall , by six and a half lengths , to take the overall record in the event to 41 – 29 in Cambridge 's favour . Oxford also won the men 's reserve race , with Isis winning by three lengths . In the main men 's race , umpired by the six @-@ time Blue Boris Rankov , Oxford won by six lengths in a time of 17 minutes 35 seconds , taking the overall record in the event to 81 – 79 in Cambridge 's favour . The women 's reserve race was won by Oxford 's Osiris by fifteen lengths , making the overall record 21 – 20 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course , between Putney and Mortlake on the River Thames in south @-@ west London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as champions , having won the 2014 race by a margin of eleven lengths , but Cambridge led overall with 81 victories to Oxford 's 78 ( excluding the " dead heat to Oxford by five feet " of 1877 ) . 
 It was the first time in the history of The Boat Race that the three main races , the men 's , women 's and men 's reserves ' , were held on the same day and on the same course along the Tideway . Prior to this year , the women 's race which first took place in 1927 , was usually held at the Henley Boat Races along the 2 @,@ 000 @-@ metre ( 2 @,@ 200 yd ) course . However , on at least two occasions in the interwar period , the women competed on the Thames between Chiswick and Kew . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 2014 race by four lengths , with Cambridge leading 41 – 28 overall . For the third year , the men 's race was sponsored by BNY Mellon while the women 's race saw BNY Mellon 's subsidiary Newton Investment Management as sponsors . It was part of the sponsorship deal with Newton Investment Management that mandated the women 's race to be rowed on the same course and with the same funding as the men 's race . According to their chief executive , Helena Morrissey , the company " didn 't just want a name on a shirt ; [ it ] wanted to do something meaningful " . The women 's race was scheduled to take place at 4 : 50 p.m. , the men 's reserves ' race half an hour later and the men 's race a further half @-@ hour after that at 5 : 50 p.m. The women 's reserve race between Cambridge 's Blondie and Oxford 's Osiris took place on the Tideway for the first time , one day before the main races , at 4 : 05 p.m. 
 The television historian and former Oxford rower Dan Snow ( who represented the Dark Blues in the 1999 , 2000 and 2001 races ) said : " Most televised sport is a carnival of misogyny so it is great news that the Boat Race is leading the way in ensuring that women take their rightful place alongside men . " The BBC sports broadcaster Eleanor <unk> suggested that scheduling the races on the same course and day was " a game @-@ changing move " for female sport , and " now they 've achieved equality – same course , same distance , same prize money [ sic ] , same BBC TV coverage , to an expected global audience of 100 million " . The television presenter Clare Balding opted to cover the women 's race instead of the 2015 Grand National , claiming that the combined rowing event would have a " ripple effect all across society , business and sport " . 
 The autumn reception was held at the London headquarters of BNY Mellon . As Oxford had won the previous year 's race , it was Cambridge 's responsibility to offer the traditional challenge to the Dark Blues . To that end , Alexander Leichter and Caroline Reid , presidents of the Cambridge boat clubs , challenged Constantine Louloudis and Anastasia Chitty , their counterparts , who duly accepted . Umpires for the senior races were announced on 4 March : the former Cambridge rower Simon Harris , who represented the Light Blues in the 1982 and 1983 races oversaw the Women 's race , while the six @-@ time Oxford Blue Boris Rankov umpired the men 's race for the fourth time . Rob Clegg , the umpire of the 2011 race oversaw the men 's reserve race while the Olympic bronze medallist Sarah Winckless umpired the women 's reserve race . 
 = = Coaches = = 
 The Cambridge men 's crew coaching team was led by their Chief Coach Steve Trapmore . Appointed to the post in 2010 , Trapmore was a gold medal @-@ winning member of the men 's eight at the 2000 Summer Olympics . He was assisted by Ed Green , the former head coach at University College Cork and development coach at Molesey Boat Club . Green 's primary responsibility will be to coach Goldie . Mark Beer , former Cambridge University Boat Club assistant coach , was appointed as the development coach for the Light Blues . Sean Bowden returned as Chief Coach for Oxford , having been responsible for the senior men 's crew since 1997 . He was a former Great Britain Olympic coach and coached the Light Blues in the 1993 and 1994 Boat Races . His assistant coach was Andy <unk> who has coached the senior boat since 2006 . 
 Oxford 's women 's Head Coach was the Canadian Christine Wilson who had previously assisted in coaching the United States Olympic team and held the position of Head Coach of women 's rowing at Yale University . She was assisted by Natasha Townsend who had represented Great Britain in the women 's eights at two Olympics . Cambridge were coached by the former Goldie coach Rob Baker who was assisted by Paddy Ryan and Nick Acock , along with two guest coaches in Jonathan Condor and Annie Vernon ; Ed Hallam was their strength and conditioning coach . 
 = = Trials = = 
 = = = Women 's trials = = = 
 The trials took place on The Championship Course on 9 December 2014 , in each case being the first and only time the crews would have to practice the route while racing side @-@ by @-@ side . Both races were umpired by Simon Harris in windy conditions . 
 Oxford University Women 's Boat Club 's ( OUWBC ) trial eights , Real Life and Fantasy , set off at 1 : 15 p.m. Real Life , starting from the Middlesex station , made a better start and were three seats ahead at the Town Buoy before holding a length 's lead after the first bend . Following a warning from Harris as the crews approached Hammersmith Bridge , the lead was reduced to half @-@ a @-@ length around the Surrey bend . Fantasy allowed Real Life to take a clear water advantage by the Bandstand , and they pulled away at Barnes Bridge to win by three lengths . The Oxford coach Christine Wilson noted that " today the crews pushed each other to know the course and to take risks when a racing opportunity presents itself " . 
 The two boats in the Cambridge University Women 's Boat Club ( CUWBC ) trials were denoted as Rise and Grind , with the race commencing at 2 : 30 p.m. Starting from the Surrey station , Rise , despite the lower stroke rate , were half a length ahead within the first 20 strokes , and held a length 's lead by Craven Cottage . They gradually extended their lead to two lengths by Hammersmith Bridge , three by Chiswick Steps and finished five lengths ahead of Grind . Cambridge 's coach Rob Baker was mildly disappointed but remained upbeat , suggesting " Though I would have liked a closer race , I saw some excellent performances " . 
 = = = Men 's trials = = = 
 The men 's trials took place along The Championship Course on 11 December 2014 , and according to the author Chris Dodd , were held in conditions " perfect ... for coaches in the process of testing their men and trying to seat people in the right order . " Both races were umpired by Boris Rankov , the former Oxford Blue who rowed for the Dark Blues on a record six occasions . 
 Cambridge 's senior men 's trial boats were called 63 and Not Out in honour of the Australian Test cricketer Phillip Hughes who had died earlier in the year after being struck in the neck by a bouncer during a domestic match . Not Out made the better start but lost their canvas @-@ length lead by Barn Elms , and the crews passed the Mile Post level . Shooting Hammersmith Bridge , 63 were half a length down , and a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half down by Chiswick Steps . Not Out held a two @-@ length lead by the time the crews passed under Barnes Bridge which they extended to two @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarters by the finishing post . Dodd described the race as " epic " , while senior coach Trapmore expressed his contentment with the trial suggesting " it is an invaluable exercise . " 
 The Oxford trial saw Per Terram line up against Per Mare , so named to commemorate the 350th anniversary of the foundation of the Royal Marines whose motto is " Per Mare , Per Terram " ( " By sea , by land " ) . Per Terram , stroked by the Oxford University Boat Club president Louloudis , took an early lead and were half @-@ a @-@ length ahead before Per Mare recovered the deficit to be level by Barn Elms . A spurt from Per Terram at the Mile Post saw them regain the lead but at Harrods Furniture Depository , Per Mare took the lead back , shooting Hammersmith Bridge precisely and holding a three @-@ quarter length lead by St Paul 's School . Both crews experienced fierce winds with Per Terram coping better and taking a half @-@ length advantage . Per Mare kept in touch through to Barnes Bridge but Per Terram pushed on and passed the finishing post with a winning margin of two lengths . Oxford 's coach Bowden was cautious , stating that the " trial shows that Oxford is in good shape , but this race is not the only bit of the trials process " . Dodd described the race as " cracking " . 
 = = Build @-@ up = = 
 = = = Women 's = = = 
 On 25 January 2015 , a CUWBC crew raced against a crew from Newcastle University Boat Club along three sections of the Championship Course . Cambridge won all three races with relative ease , and their boat club president Reid , rowing at number four , reflected that it had been " a useful experience " . Cambridge raced against an Imperial College Boat Club crew on 8 March over two sections of the Tideway course , first between the start and Hammersmith Bridge , before racing between the Mile Post and Chiswick Steps . The first leg was declared to be too close to call by the umpire Simon Harris , while the second ended in a two @-@ thirds length victory to the Light Blues . OUWBC raced against Molesey Boat Club on 21 February 2015 , in three stages on the Tideway , and comfortably won each race . This was followed by a race against Imperial College Boat Club on 22 March over three sections of the Thames . Imperial were waterlogged in the first piece , but Oxford easily won the second and third races . 
 OUWBC were rescued by the Royal National Lifeboat Institution ( RNLI ) on the Thames on 1 April 2015 after becoming waterlogged in rough conditions . They were inadvertently discovered stranded during an RNLI exercise . Prior to race day , Rachel Quarrell , the former Oxford cox ( who steered OUWBC in the 1991 race ) writing in The Daily Telegraph noted that " since the start of this season the Oxford women have been notably faster " . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 On 16 March 2015 , CUBC raced in two pieces along the Tideway against a Leander Club crew steered by Oxford 's 2012 race cox Zoe De Toledo . Cambridge won the first race , from the Boat Race start to the top of Chiswick Eyot , by two and a half lengths , and the second , between the Eyot and Mortlake by four lengths . OUBC faced a crew from Molesey Boat Club in three races along the Tideway five days later . Despite Imperial being given a head start in two of the three races , Oxford won all three pieces relatively easily . The same day , Cambridge faced a Netherlands Eight in two races on the Thames . The Light Blues easily won the first race , but finished the second level against " experienced and accomplished opposition . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The official weigh @-@ in for both women 's and men 's crews took place at the Royal Academy of Arts on 19 March 2015 , hosted by Clare Balding . 
 = = = Women 's = = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 11 st 6 lb 2 oz ( 72 @.@ 5 kg ) , 2 pounds ( 0 @.@ 9 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw four rowers with Boat Race experience return , including bow Maxie <unk> and Anastasia Chitty who was making her third appearances in the event . Cambridge 's crew included three former Blues in Caroline Reid , Claire Watkins and Melissa Wilson ( who was also making her third appearance in the event ) . Oxford 's stroke , the American Caryn Davies , was a three @-@ time Olympic medallist , having taken silver in the women 's coxed eights at the 2004 Summer Olympics and gold at both the 2008 and 2012 Summer Olympics . Cambridge 's cox Rosemary <unk> steered Goldie the previous year . Over the Easter weekend , Oxford switched their number five and seven , moving Nadine <unk> <unk> behind stroke . Cambridge swapped bow for stroke , switching Hannah Evans for Fanny <unk> . 
 = = = Men 's = = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 14 st 4 lb 11 oz ( 90 @.@ 8 kg ) , 11 @.@ 5 pounds ( 5 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford saw four rowers with Boat Race experience return , including number seven Sam O 'Connor and stroke Louloudis who made their third consecutive appearances in the event . Louloudis was an Olympic bronze medallist , having stroked Great Britain to third place in the men 's eight at the 2012 Summer Olympics . The New Zealand brothers Sam and James O 'Connor were the first siblings to row in the event since the Winklevoss twins represented Oxford in the 2010 race . Cambridge 's crew contained five Blues who participated in the 2014 race , including their cox Ian Middleton . During " Tideway week " , James Mountain replaced James O 'Connor , the latter suffering from illness . On O 'Connor 's return to the boat , he was switched with Thomas Swartz at number two . 
 = = Races = = 
 Over 250 @,@ 000 spectators lined the Thames to watch the three races . Around eighty people needed to be rescued as the river level rose from the high tide and the wake of the flotilla . 
 = = = Reserves = = = 
 The women 's reserve race , the 41st since 1968 , was contested between Oxford 's Osiris and Cambridge 's Blondie on 10 April 2015 . Osiris won by 15 lengths in a time of 18 minutes 58 seconds , their fourth consecutive victory and thirteenth win in the past fifteen years . It took the overall record in the event to 21 – 20 in CUWBC 's favour . 
 The men 's reserve race was the 51st contest between Isis and Goldie , and started at 5 : 20 p.m. on 11 April 2015 . The overall record in the event stood at 29 – 21 in Goldie 's favour . The Light Blue reserves won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Isis . Goldie took an early lead , despite warnings from the umpire around Barn Elms , and Isis were behind by five seconds at Hammersmith Bridge . Coming round to St Paul 's School , both crews came into a strong head wind and Isis rating 34 to Goldie 's 36 began to close the gap . The crews were level by the Bandstand , but Isis had taken a half length lead by Barnes Bridge , and they pulled away again to win by three lengths . This was the fifth consecutive victory for Isis , taking the overall event to 29 – 22 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = = Main races = = = 
 = = = = Women 's = = = = 
 The women 's race was the 70th contest between OUWBC and CUWBC , and started at 4 : 50 p.m. on 11 April 2015 . The overall record in the event before the race stood at 41 – 28 in Cambridge 's favour , but Oxford were considered favourites to win . Prior to the race , The Boat Race Company Limited announced that the two boats had been named to honour this auspicious occasion . Cambridge elected to name their boat Project Ely while Oxford had opted for Catalyst . OUWBC won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to CUWBC . The conditions were sunny but very windy . OUWBC took an immediate lead and were five seconds ahead at the Mile Post . Despite out @-@ rating their opponents , Cambridge failed to make any ground on Oxford , and were around three lengths down by St Paul 's School . Approaching Barnes Bridge , Oxford 's cox called for a push , and OUWBC passed below the central arch with a substantial lead . OUWBC won by a margin of six and a half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 45 seconds , taking the overall record to 41 – 29 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = = = Men 's = = = = 
 The men 's race was the 161st contest between OUBC and CUBC , and was held at 5 : 50 p.m on 11 April 2015 . Prior to the race , the overall record in the event stood at 81 – 78 in Cambridge 's favour , with one dead heat . The Dark Blues went into the race as the " strongest favourites in the history of the race " . Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . Oxford made the better start and were quickly ahead , with a quarter @-@ length lead after a minute . Cambridge drew back into contention and held a canvas lead after two minutes where both crews were warned by Rankov as they closed . Cambridge marginally out @-@ rated the Dark Blues as Oxford took a slight lead and were one second ahead by the Mile Post . Rankov issued further warnings as the crews passed beside Harrods Furniture Depository , Oxford half a length ahead , but with the Light Blues holding the advantage of the bend in the river as they approached Hammersmith Bridge . 
 Cambridge failed to make the best of the bend , and Oxford went clear after a push , taking an additional half a length and crossed in front of the Light Blues nine minutes into the race . The Dark Blues were over a length clear by the end of Chiswick Eyot and continued to pull away , holding a seven @-@ second lead by Chiswick Steps . Passing through Barnes Bridge , Oxford were around five lengths ahead . Oxford passed the finishing post six lengths ahead in a winning time of 17 minutes 35 seconds . It was the Dark Blues ' third consecutive victory and took the overall record in the event to 81 – 79 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The trophies were presented to the winning crews by the five @-@ time Olympic gold medallist Steve Redgrave . OUWBC 's winning president Chitty said " It 's a really special moment , something I 've been working towards for three years " while her counterpart Reid accepted that Cambridge " didn 't get off to [ their ] best start and Oxford did " and that the conditions were " pretty horrendous around the halfway mark with the wind against the tide and some pretty high waves " . Oxford 's stroke Davies said : " I 'm so glad we can be role models to all the young women out there . " Cambridge 's coach Baker noted " We ’ ve got a young crew that has come a long way and they raced their best ... We ’ ve improved quite a lot , but it just wasn ’ t good enough " . 
 The Cambridge 's men 's president Leichter was generous in defeat : " It was 100 % fair . It was very painful but they took us round the outside of Surrey and we couldn 't respond " while four @-@ time winner Louloudis was content : " We stuck to our plan and executed a really good race " . Oxford 's coach Bowden said of his eleven victories with the Dark Blues in the event , " they are all different and tough but we came together well " . He went on to honour the former Oxford coach Dan Topolski who had died in February : " We definitely had Dan in our hearts throughout the campaign and we ’ re just so pleased to have won in style for him " . 
 = Joyas Prestadas = 
 Joyas Prestadas : Pop and Joyas Prestadas : Banda ( English : Borrowed Jewels ) are the twelfth and final studio albums released by American recording artist Jenni Rivera on November 21 , 2011 by Fonovisa Records . Joyas Prestadas consists of eleven cover versions , with the first album being recorded in Latin pop , while the second was recorded in banda . Both albums were produced by Enrique Martinez . According to Rivera , the songs she chose to cover were those she was enamored with while working as a cashier in a record store . It was her first production to include ballad recordings . 
 Joyas Prestadas : Pop reached number one on the Mexican Albums Chart and number one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart in the United States while Joyas Prestadas : Banda peaked at number three on the Mexican Albums Chart and number two on the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart . Three singles were released from the album : " ¡ Basta Ya ! " , " A Cambio de Qué " , and " Detrás de Mi Ventana " . David Jeffries of Allmusic gave both albums a positive review and called the productions " polished " . 
 Joyas Prestadas : Pop received a Lo Nuestro award for Pop Album of the Year and Billboard Latin Music Award nomination for Latin Pop Album of the Year and a nomination for Pop Album of the Year by a Female Artist at the 2013 Oye ! Awards . Joyas Prestadas : Banda was awarded two Oye ! awards for Banda Albums of the Year and Popular Album of the Year and a Billboard Latin Music Award nomination for Regional Mexican Album of the Year . 
 = = Background = = 
 On August 23 , 2011 , Jenni Rivera renewed her contract with Universal Music Latin Entertainment / Fonovisa Records . To celebrate this event , she performed at the Staples Center in Los Angeles , California , becoming the first female Regional Mexican singer to do so . Rivera also announced she would be recording two albums in pop and banda titled Joyas Prestadas . The album was her first production to include ballads in a recording . 
 = = Recording and covers = = 
 Joyas Prestadas is a double album consisted of eleven tracks originally performed by other singers . Rivera recorded these songs on two versions : pop and banda . According to her , the songs she chose were recordings she listened to while working as a record store cashier . The albums were produced by Enrique Martinez and were recorded at the Twin Recording Studio in Burbank , California . A deluxe version of Joyas Prestadas : Pop was released on August 28 , 2012 which contains a DVD of her performing the album live at the Teatro de la Ciudad in Mexico City , Mexico . 
 The first track , " A Cambio de Qué " , was first recorded by Mexican singer <unk> on her album <unk> Tuya ( 1985 ) . The second track , " A Que no le <unk> " , was first performed by Puerto Rican singer Ednita Nazario on her album , Ednita ( 1982 ) . " Así Fue " and " <unk> " were both composed by Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Juan Gabriel and originally performed by Isabel Pantoja and Lucha Villa respectively . Rivera also covers Pantoja 's song , " Porque Me <unk> a Morir " . " ¡ Basta Ya " and " Como Tu Mujer " were composed by Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Marco Antonio Solís and first performed by Olga Tañón and Rocío <unk> . Rivera had previously collaborated with Tañón with their cover of " Cosas del Amor " on the latter 's album Exitos en 2 Tiempos ( 2007 ) . Solís himself appears on both tracks . 
 The sixth track , " Detrás de Mi Ventana " , was written by Ricardo Arjona in 1993 and included in Nueva era ( 1993 ) , a studio album by Mexican singer Yuri , who performed the song for the first time . Melina Leon also performed the song for Arjona in his compilation album <unk> , released in 2009 . " Lo <unk> Mi Amor " and " Señora " are covers of Rocío Jurado 's songs . " Que Ganas de No Verte Más " was first performed by Argentine singer Valeria Lynch . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 Jenni Rivera performed the pop version of " ¡ Basta Ya ! " live at La Voz ... México on November 27 , 2011 . Four months later at the end of Yuri 's concert at the National Auditorium , Rivera was invited to sing with her . After which Rivera took over the concert and performed ballads from the album as well as songs from her career . At the 19th Latin Billboard Awards ceremony , Rivera performed the pop versions of " Como Tu Mujer " and " Asi Fue " . The tour for the album officially began on May 18 , 2012 where she performed throughout concerts Mexico and the United States . It abruptly ended on December 9 , 2012 after her concert in the Monterrey Arena when a plane carrying her and five other members crashed near Near Iturbide , Nuevo León killing her and everyone else on board . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 In Mexico , Joyas Prestadas : Pop peaked at number one on the Top 100 Mexico albums chart while Joyas Prestadas : Banda peaked at number three on the Top 100 Mexico albums chart . Joyas Prestadas : Pop was certified quadruple platinum and gold by AMPROFON for shipping 270 @,@ 000 copies in the country while Joyas Prestadas : Banda was certified triple platinum by AMPROFON for shipping 180 @,@ 000 copies . In the United States , Joyas Prestadas : Pop peaked at number one on the Billboard Top Latin Albums and number one on the Billboard Latin Pop Albums charts . Similarly , Joyas Prestadas : Banda peaked at number two on the Top Latin Albums chart and number one on the Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart . Within the week of her death , sales for both albums soared in the United States selling over 2 @,@ 000 copies . Both albums were certified double platinum ( Latin field ) by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 200 @,@ 000 copies . Joyas Prestadas : Pop was the best @-@ selling Latin pop album of 2013 in the United States . As of December 2013 , both albums have sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies combined . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Both versions of " ¡ Basta Ya ! " were released as the lead single from the album on August 29 , 2011 . In the United States , the song peaked at number fourteen on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart and number six on the Billboard Regional Mexican Songs chart . In Mexico , the song reached number one the Monitor Latino charts and number three on the Billboard Mexican Airplay chart . A music video was released for the pop version of the song which was directed by Ricardo Moreno and filmed in Los Angeles , California . " A Cambio de Qué " was the second single to be released from the album on February 28 , 2012 . In the United States , the song peaked at number forty @-@ nine on the Hot Latin Songs chart and at number twenty @-@ one on the Regional Mexican Songs chart . In Mexico , the song peaked at number twenty @-@ one on the Mexican Airplay chart . " Detrás de Mi Ventana " was the final single released from the album on July 3 , 2012 . The song peaked at number sixteen on the Hot Latin Songs chart and number six on the Regional Mexican Songs chart . 
 = = Reception = = 
 David Jeffries of Allmusic gave the album a 3 @.@ 5 of 5 stars and called the productions for both album " polished " . At the 2012 Juventud Awards , the album received a nomination for Best Music Album . At the second Billboard Mexican Music Awards in 2012 , Joyas Prestadas : Banda received an award for Banda Album of the Year and a nomination for Album of the Year . At the 25th Lo Nuestro Awards in 2013 , Rivera was posthumously awarded Pop Female Artist of the Year , Pop Album of the Year for Joyas Prestadas : Pop and Pop Song of the Year for her cover of " A Cambio de Qué " . A tribute to Rivera was made during the ceremony . 
 At the 2013 Latin Billboard Awards , Joyas Prestadas : Pop was awarded Album of the Year by a Female Artist while both albums were nominated Latin Pop Album of the Year and Regional Mexican Album of the Year . At the 2013 Mexican Oye ! Awards , Joyas Prestadas : Banda was recognized Popular Album of the Year and Banda Album of the Year by a Soloist or Group , while Joyas Prestadas : Pop was nominated Pop Album of the Year by a Female Artist . Joyas Prestadas : Banda was nominated Album of the Year and Banda Album of the Year at the third Billboard Mexican Music Awards . Joyas Prestadas : Pop was nominated Top Latin Album of the Year and Latin Pop Album of the Year at the 2014 Billboard Latin Music Awards . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The following credits are from Allmusic : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
