 Organic finds are rarely well documented with hoards , because most coin and treasure finds are removed hastily by the finder or have previously been disrupted by farm work rather than excavated . The Hoxne organic finds included bone , wood and other plant material , and leather . Small fragments from a decorated ivory <unk> ( a cylindrical lidded box ) were found , along with more than 150 tiny shaped pieces of bone inlay or veneer , probably from a wooden box or boxes that have decayed . Minuscule fragments of wood adhering to metal objects were identified as belonging to nine species of timber , all native to Britain : wood traces associated with the iron fittings of the outer chest established that it was made of oak . Silver locks and hinges were from two small wooden boxes or caskets , one made of decorative cherry wood and one made of yew . Some wheat straw survived from padding between the plain silver bowls , which also bore faint traces of linen cloth . Leather fragments were too degraded for identification . 
 = = Scientific analysis of finds = = 
 The initial metallurgical analysis of the hoard was carried out in late 1992 and early 1993 by Cowell and Hook for the procedural purposes of the coroner 's inquest . This analysis used X @-@ ray fluorescence , a technique that was applied again later to cleaned surfaces on specimens . 
 All 29 items of gold jewellery were analysed , with silver and copper found to be present . Results were typical for Roman silver in hoards of the period , in terms of the presence of copper alloyed with the silver to harden it , and trace elements . One repaired bowl showed a mercury @-@ based solder . 
 The large armlet of pierced gold ( opus <unk> ) showed traces of hematite on the reverse side , which probably would have been used as a type of jeweller 's rouge . This is the earliest known and documented use of this technique on Roman jewellery . Gilt items showed the presence of mercury , indicating the mercury gilding technique . The black inlay on the cast silver tigress shows the niello technique , but with silver sulphide rather than lead sulphide . The settings of stones where garnet and amethyst remain , in the body chain , have vacant places presumed to be where pearls were set , and show elemental sulphur as adhesive or filler . 
 = = Burial and historical background = = 
 The Hoxne Hoard was buried during a period of great upheaval in Britain , marked by the collapse of Roman authority in the province , the departure of the majority of the Roman army , and the first of a wave of attacks by the Anglo @-@ Saxons . Attacks on Italy by the Visigoths around the turn of the fifth century caused the general Stilicho to recall Roman army units from Rhaetia , Gaul , and Britannia . While Stilicho held off the Visigoth attack , the Western provinces were left defenceless against Suebi , Alans , and Vandals who crossed the frozen Rhine in 406 and overran Gaul . The remaining Roman troops in Britain , fearing that the invaders would cross the Channel , elected a series of emperors of their own to lead the defence . 
 The first two such emperors were put to death by the dissatisfied soldiery in a matter of months , but the third , who would declare himself Constantine III , led a British force across the English Channel to Gaul in his bid to become Roman Emperor . After scoring victories against the " barbarians " in Gaul , Constantine was defeated by an army loyal to Honorius and beheaded in 411 . Meanwhile , Constantine 's departure had left Britain vulnerable to attacks from Saxon and Irish raiders . 
 After 410 , Roman histories give little information about events in Britain . Writing in the next decade , Saint Jerome described Britain after 410 as a " province fertile of tyrants " , suggesting the collapse of central authority and the rise of local leaders in response to repeated raids by Saxons and others . By 452 , a Gaulish chronicler was able to state that some ten years previously " the Britons , which to this time had suffered from various disasters and misfortunes , are reduced by the power of the Saxons " . 
 = = = Burial = = = 
 Exactly who owned the Hoxne Hoard , and their reasons for burying it , are not known , and probably never will be . However , the hoard itself and its context provide some important clues . The hoard evidently was buried carefully , some distance from any buildings . The hoard very likely represents only a portion of the precious @-@ metal wealth of the person , or people , who owned it ; many common types of jewellery are missing , as are large tableware items such as those found in the Mildenhall Treasure . It is unlikely that anyone would have possessed the rich gold and silver items found in the Hoxne Hoard without owning items in those other categories . Whoever owned the hoard also would have had wealth in the form of land , livestock , buildings , furniture , and clothing . At most , the Hoxne Hoard represents a moderate portion of the wealth of someone rich ; conversely , it may represent a minuscule fraction of the wealth of a family that was incredibly wealthy . 
 The appearance of the names " Aurelius Ursicinus " and " Juliane " on items in the Hoxne Hoard need not imply that people by those names owned the rest of the hoard , either at the time of its burial or previously . There are no historical references to an " Aurelius Ursicinus " in Britain in this period . While a " Marcus Aurelius Ursicinus " is recorded in the Praetorian Guard in Rome in the period 222 – 235 , a soldier or official of the late fourth or early fifth century would be more likely to take the imperial nomen Flavius , rather than Aurelius . This leads Tomlin to speculate " The name " Aurelius Ursicinus " might sound old @-@ fashioned ; it would certainly have been more appropriate to a provincial landowner than an army officer or government official " . 
 There are a number of theories about why the hoard was buried . One is that the hoard represented a deliberate attempt to keep wealth safe , perhaps in response to one of the many upheavals facing Roman Britain in the early fifth century . This is not the only hypothesis , however . Archaeologist Peter Guest argues that the hoard was buried because the items in it were used as part of a system of gift @-@ exchange , and as Britain separated from the Roman Empire , they were no longer required . A third hypothesis is that the Hoxne Hoard represents the proceeds of a robbery , buried to avoid detection . 
 = = = Late Roman hoards = = = 
 The Hoxne Hoard comes from the later part of a century ( c . 350 – 450 ) from which an unusually large number of hoards have been discovered , mostly from the fringes of the Empire . Such hoards vary in character , but many include the large pieces of silver tableware lacking in the Hoxne Hoard : dishes , jugs and <unk> , bowls and cups , some plain , but many highly decorated . Two other major hoards discovered in modern East Anglia in the last century are from the fourth century ; both are now in the British Museum . The Mildenhall Treasure from Suffolk consists of thirty items of silver tableware deposited in the late fourth century , many large and elaborately decorated , such as the " Great Dish " . The Water Newton Treasure from Cambridgeshire is smaller , but is the earliest hoard to have a clearly Christian character , apparently belonging to a church or chapel ; the assorted collection probably includes items made in Britain . The <unk> Treasure from the site at Augusta Raurica in modern Switzerland ( now in Basel ) contained 257 items , including a banqueting service with sophisticated decoration . The Esquiline Treasure , found in Rome , evidently came from a wealthy Roman family of the late fourth century , and includes several large items , including the " Casket of <unk> " . Most of the Esquiline Treasure is in the British Museum , as are bowls and dishes from the Carthage Treasure which belonged to a known family in Roman Africa around 400 . 
 The Mildenhall , <unk> , and Esquiline treasures comprise large items of tableware . Other hoards , however , such as those found at Thetford and <unk> consist mostly of coins , jewellery , and small tableware items ; these two hoards probably are pagan votive offerings . A hoard from Traprain Law in Scotland contains decorated Roman silver pieces cut up and folded , showing regard for the value of their metal alone , and may represent loot from a raid . 
 = = = Local context = = = 
 Hoxne , where the hoard was discovered , is located in Suffolk in modern @-@ day East Anglia . Although no large , aristocratic villa has been located in the Hoxne area , there was a Roman settlement nearby from the first through fourth centuries at Scole , about 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) north – west of Hoxne , at the intersection of two Roman roads . One of these , Pye Road , ( today 's <unk> ) , linked Venta Icenorum ( Caistor St Edmund ) to Camulodunum ( Colchester ) and Londinium ( London ) . 
 The field in which the hoard was discovered was shown by the 1994 excavation to probably have been cleared by the early Bronze Age , when it began to be used for agriculture and settlement . Some settlement activity occurred near the hoard findspot by the first half of the first millennium BC , but there is no evidence of Roman buildings in the immediate vicinity . The field where the hoard was deposited may have been in cultivation during the early phase of the Roman period but the apparent absence of fourth @-@ century coins suggests that it may have been converted to pasture or else had reverted to woodland by that time . 
 The Hoxne Hoard is not the only cache of Roman treasure to have been discovered in the area . In 1781 some labourers unearthed a lead box by the river at Clint Farm in Eye , 4 @.@ 8 km ( 3 @.@ 0 mi ) south of Scole and 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) south – west of Hoxne . The box contained about 600 Roman gold coins dating to the reigns of Valens and Valentinian I ( reigned 364 – 375 ) , Gratian ( 375 – 383 ) , Theodosius I ( 378 – 395 ) , Arcadius ( 395 – 408 ) , and Honorius ( 393 – 423 ) . This was the largest hoard of Roman gold coins ever discovered in Britain , but the coins were dispersed during the 18th and 19th centuries , and cannot now be easily be identified in coin collections . As a result , the relationship ( if any ) between the Eye hoard and that in Hoxne cannot be determined , even if the proximity suggests they may have been related . 
 Soon after the Hoxne Hoard was discovered , there was speculation , based on the name " Faustinus " engraved on one of the spoons , that it may have come from the " Villa <unk> " that is recorded in Itinerary V of the Antonine Itinerary . The exact location of Villa <unk> is unknown , but as it was the first station after Colchester , it is believed to have been somewhere on the Pye Road ( modern <unk> ) and one of the possible locations for it is the modern village of Scole , only a couple of miles from Hoxne . This early theory has since been rejected , however , because " Faustinus " was historically a common name , and it only occurs on a single spoon in the hoard . Furthermore , the logic of using inscriptions on individual items in the hoard to determine ownership of the hoard as a whole is considered flawed . Based on the dating of the coins in the hoard , the majority of which belong to the period 394 – 405 , it also has been speculated that the contents of the hoard originally belonged to a military family that accompanied Count Theodosius to Britain in 368 – 369 , and which may have left with Constantine III in 407 . 
 = = Acquisition , display , and impact = = 
 The hoard was acquired by the British Museum in April 1994 . As the Museum 's entire purchase fund amounted to only £ 1 @.@ 4 million at the time , the hoard had to be purchased with the assistance of donors that included the National Heritage Memorial Fund , the National Art Collections Fund ( now the Art Fund ) , and the J. Paul Getty Trust . The grants from these and other benefactors enabled the museum to raise the £ 1 @.@ 75 million needed for the acquisition . 
 Items from the hoard have been on display almost continuously since the treasure was received at the British Museum . Some items were displayed at the Museum as early as September 1993 in response to public interest . Much of the hoard was exhibited at Ipswich Museum in 1994 – 1995 . From 1997 , the most important items went on permanent display at the British Museum in a new and enlarged Roman Britain gallery ( Room 49 ) , alongside the roughly contemporary Thetford Hoard , and adjacent to the Mildenhall Treasure , which contains large silver vessels of types that are absent from the Hoxne Hoard . Some items from the Hoxne Hoard were included in " Treasure : Finding Our Past " , a touring exhibition that was shown in five cities in England and Wales in 2003 . A perspex reconstruction of the chest and inner boxes in which it was deposited was created for this tour , showing the arrangement of the different types of items with sample items inside . It is now part of the permanent display in London , along with other items laid out more traditionally . 
 The first comprehensive research on the Hoard was published in the full catalogue of the coins by Peter Guest in 2005 , and the catalogue of the other objects by Catherine Johns in 2010 . The hoard was third in the list of British archaeological finds selected by experts at the British Museum for the 2003 BBC Television documentary Our Top Ten Treasures , which included archive footage of its finder , Eric Lawes , and the " Empress " pepper @-@ pot was selected as item 40 in the 2010 BBC Radio 4 series A History of the World in 100 Objects . 
 The discovery and excavation of the Hoxne Hoard improved the relationship between the archaeological profession and the community of metal detectorists . Archaeologists were pleased that Lawes reported the find promptly and largely undisturbed , allowing a professional excavation . Metal detectorists noted that Lawes ' efforts were appreciated by the archaeological profession . The 1996 Treasure Act is thought to have contributed to more hoards being made available to archaeologists . The act changed the law so that the owner of the land and the person who finds the hoard have a strong stake in the value of the discovery . The manner of the finding of the Hoxne Hoard by metal detector , and its widespread publicity , contributed to changing the previous system of common law for dealing with treasure trove into a statutory legal framework that takes into account technology such as metal detectors , provides incentives for treasure hunters to report finds , and considers the needs of museums and scholars . 
 = James Chadwick = 
 Sir James Chadwick , CH , FRS ( 20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974 ) was an English physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in Physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932 . In 1941 , he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report , which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts . He was the head of the British team that worked on the Manhattan Project during the Second World War . He was knighted in England in 1945 for his achievements in physics . 
 Chadwick graduated from the Victoria University of Manchester in 1911 , where he studied under Ernest Rutherford ( known as the " father of nuclear physics " ) . At Manchester , he continued to study under Rutherford until he was awarded his MSc in 1913 . The same year , Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 . He elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger in Berlin . Using Geiger 's recently developed Geiger counter , Chadwick was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous spectrum , and not discrete lines as had been thought . Still in Germany when the First World War broke out in Europe , he spent the next four years in the Ruhleben internment camp . 
 After the war , Chadwick followed Rutherford to the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge , where Chadwick earned his Doctor of Philosophy degree under Rutherford 's supervision from Gonville and Caius College , Cambridge , in June 1921 . He was Rutherford 's assistant director of research at the Cavendish Laboratory for over a decade at a time when it was one of the world 's foremost centres for the study of physics , attracting students like John Cockcroft , Norman Feather , and Mark Oliphant . Chadwick followed his discovery of the neutron by measuring its mass . He anticipated that neutrons would become a major weapon in the fight against cancer . Chadwick left the Cavendish Laboratory in 1935 to become a professor of physics at the University of Liverpool , where he overhauled an antiquated laboratory and , by installing a cyclotron , made it an important centre for the study of nuclear physics . 
 During the Second World War , Chadwick carried out research as part of the Tube Alloys project to build an atomic bomb , while his Liverpool lab and environs were harassed by Luftwaffe bombing . When the Quebec Agreement merged his project with the American Manhattan Project , he became part of the British Mission , and worked at the Los Alamos Laboratory and in Washington , D.C. He surprised everyone by earning the almost @-@ complete trust of project director Leslie R. Groves , Jr . For his efforts , Chadwick received a knighthood in the New Year Honours on 1 January 1945 . In July 1945 , he viewed the Trinity nuclear test . After this , he served as the British scientific advisor to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission . Uncomfortable with the trend toward Big Science , Chadwick became the Master of Gonville and Caius College in 1948 . He retired in 1959 . 
 = = Education and early life = = 
 James Chadwick was born in Bollington , Cheshire , on 20 October 1891 , the first child of John Joseph , a cotton spinner , and Anne Mary Knowles , a domestic servant . He was named James after his paternal grandfather . In 1895 , his parents moved to Manchester , leaving him in the care of his maternal grandparents . He went to Bollington Cross Primary School , and was offered a scholarship to Manchester Grammar School , which his family had to turn down as they could not afford the small fees that still had to be paid . Instead he attended the Central Grammar School for Boys in Manchester , rejoining his parents there . He now had two younger brothers , Harry and Hubert ; a sister had died in infancy . At the age of 16 , he sat two examinations for university scholarships , and won both of them . 
 Chadwick chose to attend Victoria University of Manchester , which he entered in 1908 . He meant to study maths , but enrolled in physics by mistake . Like most students , he lived at home , walking the 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the university and back each day . At the end of his first year , he was awarded a <unk> Scholarship to study physics . The physics department was headed by Ernest Rutherford , who assigned research projects to final @-@ year students , and he instructed Chadwick to devise a means of comparing the amount of radioactive energy of two different sources . The idea was that they could be measured in terms of the activity of 1 gram ( 0 @.@ 035 oz ) of radium , a unit of measurement which would become known as the curie . Rutherford 's suggested approach was unworkable — something Chadwick knew but was afraid to tell Rutherford — so Chadwick pressed on , and eventually devised the required method . The results became Chadwick 's first paper , which , co @-@ authored with Rutherford , was published in 1912 . He graduated with first class honours in 1911 . 
 Having devised a means of measuring gamma radiation , Chadwick proceeded to measure the absorption of gamma rays by various gases and liquids . This time the resulting paper was published under his name alone . He was awarded his Master of Science ( MSc ) degree in 1912 , and was appointed a Beyer Fellow . The following year he was awarded an 1851 Exhibition Scholarship , which allowed him to study and research at a university in continental Europe . He elected to go to the Physikalisch @-@ Technische <unk> in Berlin in 1913 , to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger . Using Geiger 's recently developed Geiger counter , which provided more accuracy than the earlier photographic techniques , he was able to demonstrate that beta radiation did not produce discrete lines , as has been previously thought , but rather a continuous spectrum with peaks in certain regions . On a visit to Geiger 's laboratory , Albert Einstein told Chadwick that : " I can explain either of these things , but I can 't explain them both at the same time . " The continuous spectrum would remain an unexplained phenomenon for many years . 
 Chadwick was still in Germany at the start of the First World War , and was interned in the Ruhleben internment camp near Berlin , where he was allowed to set up a laboratory in the stables and conduct scientific experiments using improvised materials such as radioactive toothpaste . With the help of Charles Drummond Ellis , he worked on the ionisation of phosphorus , and the photochemical reaction of carbon monoxide and chlorine . He was released after the Armistice with Germany came into effect in November 1918 , and returned to his parents ' home in Manchester , where he wrote up his findings over the previous four years for the 1851 Exhibition commissioners . 
 Rutherford gave Chadwick a part @-@ time teaching position at Manchester , allowing him to continue research . He looked at the nuclear charge of platinum , silver , and copper , and experimentally found that this was the same as the atomic number within an error of less than 1 @.@ 5 per cent . In April 1919 , Rutherford became director of the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge , and Chadwick joined him there a few months later . Chadwick was awarded a Clerk @-@ Maxwell studentship in 1920 , and enrolled as a Doctor of Philosophy ( PhD ) student at Gonville and Caius College , Cambridge . The first half of his thesis was his work with atomic numbers . In the second , he looked at the forces inside the nucleus . His degree was awarded in June 1921 . In November , he became a Fellow of Gonville and Caius College . 
 = = Researcher = = 
 = = = Cambridge = = = 
 Chadwick 's Clerk @-@ Maxwell studentship expired in 1923 , and he was succeeded by the Russian physicist Pyotr Kapitza . The Chairman of the Advisory Council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , Sir William McCormick arranged for Chadwick to become Rutherford 's assistant director of research . In this role , Chadwick helped Rutherford select PhD students . Over the next few years these would include John Cockcroft , Norman Feather and Mark Oliphant , who would become firm friends with Chadwick . As many students had no idea what they wanted to research , Rutherford and Chadwick would suggest topics . Chadwick edited all the papers produced by the laboratory . 
 In 1925 , Chadwick met Aileen Stewart @-@ Brown , the daughter of a Liverpool stockbroker . The two were married in August 1925 , with Kapitza as Best Man . The couple had twin daughters , Joanna and Judith , who were born in February 1927 . 
 In his research , Chadwick continued to probe the nucleus . In 1925 , the concept of spin had allowed physicists to explain the Zeeman effect , but it also created unexplained anomalies . At the time it was believed that the nucleus consisted of protons and electrons , so nitrogen 's nucleus , for example , with a mass number of 14 , was assumed to contain 14 protons and 7 electrons . This gave it the right mass and charge , but the wrong spin . 
 At a conference at Cambridge on beta particles and gamma rays in 1928 , Chadwick met Geiger again . Geiger had brought with him a new model of his Geiger counter , which had been improved by his post @-@ doctoral student Walther Müller . Chadwick had not used one since the war , and the new Geiger – Müller counter was potentially a major improvement over the scintillation techniques then in use at Cambridge , which relied on the human eye for observation . The major drawback with it was that it detected alpha , beta and gamma radiation , and radium , which the Cavendish laboratory normally used in its experiments , emitted all three , and was therefore unsuitable for what Chadwick had in mind . However , polonium is an alpha emitter , and Lise Meitner sent Chadwick about 2 millicuries ( about 0 @.@ 5 µg ) from Germany . 
 In Germany , Walther Bothe and his student Herbert Becker had used polonium to bombard beryllium with alpha particles , producing an unusual form of radiation . Chadwick had his Australian 1851 Exhibition scholar , Hugh Webster , duplicate their results . To Chadwick , this was evidence of something that he and Rutherford had been hypothesising for years : the neutron , a theoretical nuclear particle with no electric charge . Then in January 1932 , Feather drew Chadwick 's attention to another surprising result . Frédéric and Irène Joliot @-@ Curie had succeeded in knocking protons from paraffin wax using polonium and beryllium as a source for what they thought was gamma radiation . Rutherford and Chadwick disagreed ; protons were too heavy for that . But neutrons would need only a small amount of energy to achieve the same effect . In Rome , Ettore Majorana came to the same conclusion : the Joliot @-@ Curies had discovered the neutron but did not know it . 
 Chadwick dropped all his other responsibilities to concentrate on proving the existence of the neutron , frequently working late at night . He devised a simple apparatus that consisted of a cylinder containing a polonium source and beryllium target . The resulting radiation could then be directed at a material such as paraffin wax ; the displaced particles , which were protons , would go into a small ionisation chamber where they could be detected with an oscilloscope . 
 In February 1932 , after only about two weeks of experimentation with neutrons , Chadwick sent a letter to Nature titled " Possible Existence of a Neutron " . He communicated his findings in detail in an article sent to Proceedings of the Royal Society A titled " The Existence of a Neutron " in May . His discovery of the neutron was a milestone in understanding the nucleus . Reading Chadwick 's paper , Robert Bacher and Edward Condon realised that anomalies in the then @-@ current theory , like the spin of nitrogen , would be resolved if the neutron has a spin of 1 / 2 and that a nitrogen nucleus consisted of seven protons and seven neutrons . 
 The theoretical physicists Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg considered whether the neutron could be a fundamental nuclear particle like the proton and electron , rather than a proton – electron pair . Heisenberg showed that the neutron was best described as a new nuclear particle , but its exact nature remained unclear . In his 1933 Bakerian Lecture , Chadwick estimated that a neutron had a mass of about 1 @.@ <unk> u . Since a proton and an electron had a combined mass of 1 @.@ <unk> u , this implied the neutron as a proton – electron composite had a binding energy of about 2 MeV , which sounded reasonable , although it was hard to understand how a particle with so little binding energy could be stable . Estimating such a small mass difference required challenging precise measurements , however , and several conflicting results were obtained in 1933 – 4 . By bombarding boron with alpha particles , Frédéric and Irène Joliot @-@ Curie obtained a large value for the mass of a neutron , but Ernest Lawrence 's team at the University of California produced a small one . Then Maurice Goldhaber , a refugee from Nazi Germany and a graduate student at the Cavendish Laboratory , suggested to Chadwick that deuterons could be <unk> by the 2 @.@ 6 MeV gamma rays of <unk> ( then known as thorium C " ) : 
 An accurate value for the mass of the neutron could be determined from this process . Chadwick and Goldhaber tried this and found that it worked . They measured the kinetic energy of the protons produced as 1 @.@ 05 MeV , leaving the mass of the neutron as the unknown in the equation . Chadwick and Goldhaber calculated that it was either 1 @.@ 0084 or 1 @.@ <unk> atomic units , depending on the values used for the masses of the proton and deuteron . ( The mass of the neutron is 1 @.@ <unk> u . ) The mass of the neutron was too large to be a proton – electron pair . 
 For his discovery of the neutron , Chadwick was awarded the Hughes Medal by the Royal Society in 1932 , the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1935 , the Copley Medal in 1950 and the Franklin Medal in 1951 . His discovery of the neutron made it possible to produce elements heavier than uranium in the laboratory by the capture of slow neutrons followed by beta decay . Unlike the positively charged alpha particles , which are repelled by the electrical forces present in the nuclei of other atoms , neutrons do not need to overcome any Coulomb barrier , and can therefore penetrate and enter the nuclei of even the heaviest elements such as uranium . This inspired Enrico Fermi to investigate the nuclear reactions brought about by collisions of nuclei with slow neutrons , work for which Fermi would receive the Nobel Prize in 1938 . 
 Wolfgang Pauli proposed another kind of particle on 4 December 1930 in order to explain the continuous spectrum of beta radiation that Chadwick had reported in 1914 . Since not all of the energy of beta radiation could be accounted for , the law of conservation of energy appeared to be violated , but Pauli argued that this could be redressed if another , undiscovered , particle was involved . Pauli also called this particle a neutron , but it was clearly not the same particle as Chadwick 's neutron . Fermi renamed it the neutrino , Italian for " little neutron " . In 1934 , Fermi proposed his theory of beta decay which explained that the electrons emitted from the nucleus were created by the decay of a neutron into a proton , an electron , and a neutrino . The neutrino could account for the missing energy , but a particle with little mass and no electric charge was difficult to observe . Rudolf Peierls and Hans Bethe calculated that neutrinos could easily pass through the Earth , so the chances of detecting them were slim . Frederick Reines and Clyde Cowan would confirm the neutrino on 14 June 1956 by placing a detector within a large antineutrino flux from a nearby nuclear reactor . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 With the onset of the Great Depression in the United Kingdom , the government became more parsimonious with funding for science . At the same time , Lawrence 's recent invention , the cyclotron , promised to revolutionise experimental nuclear physics , and Chadwick felt that the Cavendish laboratory would fall behind unless it also acquired one . He therefore chafed under Rutherford , who clung to the belief that good nuclear physics could still be done without large , expensive equipment , and turned down the request for a cyclotron . 
 Chadwick was himself a critic of Big Science in general , and Lawrence in particular , whose approach he considered careless and focused on technology at the expense of science . When Lawrence postulated the existence of a new and hitherto unknown particle that he claimed was a possible source of limitless energy at the Solvay Conference in 1933 , Chadwick responded that the results were more likely attributable to contamination of the equipment . While Lawrence <unk> his results at Berkeley only to find that Chadwick was correct , Rutherford and Oliphant conducted an investigation at the Cavendish that found that deuterium fuses to form helium @-@ 3 , thereby causing the effect that the Lawrence had observed . This was another major discovery , but the Oliphant @-@ Rutherford particle accelerator was an expensive state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art piece of equipment . 
 In March 1935 , Chadwick received an offer of the Lyon Jones Chair of physics at the University of Liverpool , in his wife 's home town , to succeed Lionel Wilberforce . The laboratory was so antiquated that it still ran on direct current electricity , but Chadwick seized the opportunity , assuming the chair on 1 October 1935 . The university 's prestige was soon bolstered by Chadwick 's Nobel Prize , which was announced in November 1935 . His medal was sold at auction in 2014 for $ 329 @,@ 000 . 
 Chadwick set about acquiring a cyclotron for Liverpool . He started by spending £ 700 to refurbish the antiquated laboratories at Liverpool , so some components could be made in @-@ house . He was able to persuade the university to provide £ 2 @,@ 000 and obtained a grant for another £ 2 @,@ 000 from the Royal Society . To build his cyclotron , Chadwick brought in two young experts , Bernard Kinsey and Harold Walke , who had worked with Lawrence at the University of California . A local cable manufacturer donated the copper conductor for the coils . The cyclotron 's 50 @-@ ton magnet was manufactured in Trafford Park by Metropolitan @-@ Vickers , which also made the vacuum chamber . The cyclotron was completely installed and running in July 1939 . The total cost of £ 5 @,@ 184 was more than Chadwick had received from the University and the Royal Society , so Chadwick paid the rest from his 159 @,@ 917 kr ( £ 8 @,@ 243 ) Nobel Prize money . 
 At Liverpool the Medicine and Science faculties worked together closely . Chadwick was automatically a committee member of both faculties , and in 1938 he was appointed to a commission headed by Lord Derby to investigate the arrangements for cancer treatment in Liverpool . Chadwick anticipated that neutrons and radioactive isotopes produced with the 37 @-@ inch cyclotron could be used to study biochemical processes , and might become a weapon in the fight against cancer . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Tube Alloys and the MAUD Report = = = 
 In Germany , Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann bombarded uranium with neutrons , and noted that barium , a lighter element , was among the products produced . Hitherto , only the same or heavier elements had been produced by the process . In January 1939 , Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch astounded the physics community with a paper that explained this result . Using Bohr 's liquid drop model , they showed how uranium atoms bombarded with neutrons can break into two roughly equal fragments , a process they called fission . They calculated that this would result in the release of about 200 MeV , implying an energy release orders of magnitude greater than chemical reactions , and Frisch confirmed their theory experimentally . It was soon noted by Hahn that if neutrons were released during fission , then a chain reaction was possible . French scientists , Pierre Joliot , Hans von Halban and Lew Kowarski , soon verified that more than one neutron was indeed emitted per fission . In a paper co @-@ authored with the American physicist John Wheeler , Bohr theorised that fission was more likely to occur in the uranium @-@ 235 isotope , which made up only 0 @.@ 7 percent of natural uranium . 
 Chadwick did not believe that there was any likelihood of another war with Germany in 1939 , and took his family for a holiday on a remote lake in northern Sweden . The news of the outbreak of the Second World War therefore came as a shock . Determined not to spend another war in an internment camp , Chadwick made his way to Stockholm as fast as he could , but when he arrived there with his family , he found that all air traffic between Stockholm and London had been suspended . They made their way back to England on a tramp steamer . When he reached Liverpool , Chadwick found Joseph Rotblat , a Polish post @-@ doctoral fellow who had come to work with the cyclotron , was now destitute , as he was cut off from funds from Poland . Chadwick promptly hired Rotblat as a lecturer , despite his poor grasp of English . 
 In October 1939 , Chadwick received a letter from Sir Edward Appleton , the Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , asking for his opinion on the feasibility of an atomic bomb . Chadwick responded cautiously . He did not dismiss the possibility , but carefully went over the many theoretical and practical difficulties involved . Chadwick decided to investigate the properties of uranium oxide further with Rotblat . In March 1940 , Otto Frisch and Rudolf Peierls at the University of Birmingham re @-@ examined the theoretical issues involved in a paper that became known as the Frisch – Peierls memorandum . Instead of looking at uranium metal , they considered what would happen to a sphere of pure uranium @-@ 235 , and found that not only could a chain reaction occur , but that it might require as little as 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of uranium @-@ 235 , and unleash the energy of tons of dynamite . 
 A special subcommittee of the Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Warfare ( CSSAW ) , known as the MAUD Committee , was created to investigate the matter further . It was chaired by Sir George Thomson and its original membership included Chadwick , along with Mark Oliphant , John Cockcroft and Philip Moon . While other teams investigated uranium enrichment techniques , Chadwick 's team at Liverpool concentrated on determining the nuclear cross section of uranium @-@ 235 . By April 1941 , it had been experimentally confirmed that the critical mass of uranium @-@ 235 might be 8 kilograms ( 18 lb ) or less . His research into such matters was complicated by all @-@ but @-@ incessant Luftwaffe bombings of the environs of his Liverpool lab ; the windows were blown out so often that they were replaced by cardboard . 
 In July 1941 , Chadwick was chosen to write the final draft of the MAUD Report , which , when presented by Vannevar Bush to President Franklin D. Roosevelt in October 1941 , inspired the U.S. government to pour millions of dollars into the pursuit of an atomic bomb . When George B. Pegram and Harold Urey visited Britain to see how the project , now known as Tube Alloys , was going , Chadwick was able to tell them : " I wish I could tell you that the bomb is not going to work , but I am 90 per cent sure that it will . " 
 In a recent book about the Bomb project , Graham <unk> wrote that " Chadwick did more than any other scientist to give Churchill the Bomb . ... Chadwick was tested almost to the breaking point . " So worried that he could not sleep , Chadwick resorted to sleeping pills , which he continued to take for most of his remaining years . Chadwick later said that he realised that " a nuclear bomb was not only possible — it was inevitable . Sooner or later these ideas could not be peculiar to us . Everybody would think about them before long , and some country would put them into action " . Sir Hermann Bondi suggested that it was fortunate that Chadwick , not Rutherford , was the doyen of UK physics at the time , as the latter 's prestige might otherwise have overpowered Chadwick 's interest in " looking forward " to the Bomb 's prospects . 
 = = = Manhattan Project = = = 
 Owing to the danger from aerial bombardment , the <unk> sent their twins to Canada as part of a government evacuation scheme . Chadwick was reluctant to move Tube Alloys there , believing that the United Kingdom was a better location for the isotope separation plant . The enormous scope of the effort became more apparent in 1942 : even a pilot separation plant would cost over ₤ 1 million and strain Britain 's resources , to say nothing of a full @-@ scale plant , which was estimated to cost somewhere in the vicinity of £ 25 million . It would have to be built in America . At the same time that the British became convinced that a joint project was necessary , the progress of the American Manhattan Project was such that British cooperation seemed less essential , although the Americans were still eager to utilise Chadwick 's talents . 
 The matter of cooperation had to be taken up at the highest level . In September 1943 , the Prime Minister , Winston Churchill , and President Roosevelt negotiated the Quebec Agreement , which reinstated cooperation between Britain , the United States and Canada . Chadwick , Oliphant , Peierls and Simon were summoned to the United States by the director of Tube Alloys , Sir Wallace Akers , to work with the Manhattan Project . The Quebec Agreement established a new Combined Policy Committee to direct the joint project . The Americans disliked Akers , so Chadwick was appointed technical advisor to the Combined Policy Committee , and the head of the British Mission . 
 Leaving Rotblat in charge in Liverpool , Chadwick began a tour of the Manhattan Project facilities in November 1943 , except for the Hanford Site where plutonium was produced , which he was not allowed to see . He became the only man apart from Groves and his second in command to have access to all the American research and production facilities for the uranium bomb . Observing the work on the K @-@ 25 gaseous diffusion facility at Oak Ridge , Tennessee , Chadwick realised how wrong he had been about building the plant in wartime Britain . The enormous structure could never have been concealed from the Luftwaffe . In early 1944 , he moved to Los Alamos , New Mexico , with his wife and their twins , who now spoke with Canadian accents . For security reasons , he was given the cover name of James Chaffee . 
 Chadwick accepted that the Americans did not need British help , but that it could still be useful in bringing the project to an early and successful conclusion . Working closely with the director of the Manhattan Project , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , he attempted to do everything he could to support the effort . He also endeavoured to place British scientists in as many parts of the project as possible in order to facilitate a post @-@ war British nuclear weapons project to which Chadwick was committed . Requests from Groves via Chadwick for particular scientists tended to be met with an immediate rejection by the company , ministry or university currently employing them , only to be overcome by the overriding priority accorded to Tube Alloys . As a result , the British team was critical to the Project 's success . 
 Although he had more knowledge of the project than anyone else from Britain , Chadwick had no access to the Hanford site . Lord Portal was offered a tour of Hanford in 1946 . " This was the only plant to which Chadwick had been denied access in wartime , and now he asked Groves if he could accompany Portal . Groves replied that he could , but if he did then ' Portal will not see very much ' . " For his efforts , Chadwick received a knighthood in the New Year Honours on 1 January 1945 . He considered this to be a recognition of the work of the whole Tube Alloys project . 
 By early 1945 , Chadwick was spending most of his time in Washington , D.C. , and his family relocated from Los Alamos to a house on Washington 's Dupont Circle in April 1945 . He was present at the meeting of the Combined Policy Committee on 4 July when Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson gave Britain 's agreement to use the atomic bomb against Japan , and at the Trinity nuclear test on 16 July , when the first atomic bomb was detonated . Inside its pit was a polonium @-@ beryllium modulated neutron initiator , a development of the technique that Chadwick had used to discover the neutron over a decade before . William L. Laurence , the New York Times reporter attached to the Manhattan Project , wrote that " never before in history had any man lived to see his own discovery materialize itself with such telling effect on the destiny of man . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 Shortly after the war ended , Chadwick was appointed to the Advisory Committee on Atomic Energy ( <unk> ) . He was also appointed as the British scientific advisor to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission . He clashed with fellow <unk> member Patrick Blackett , who disagreed with Chadwick 's conviction that Britain needed to acquire its own nuclear weapons ; but it was Chadwick 's position that was ultimately adopted . He returned to Britain in 1946 , to find a country still beset by wartime rationing and shortages . 
 At this time , Sir James Mountford , the Vice Chancellor of the University of Liverpool , wrote in his diary " he had never seen a man ' so physically , mentally and spiritually tired " as Chadwick , for he " had plumbed such depths of moral decision as more fortunate men are never called upon even to peer into ... [ and suffered ] ... almost insupportable agonies of responsibility arising from his scientific work ' . " 
 In 1948 , Chadwick accepted an offer to become the Master of Gonville and Caius College . The job was prestigious but ill @-@ defined ; the Master was the titular head of the College , but authority actually resided in a council of 13 fellows , of whom one was the Master . As Master , Chadwick strove to improve the academic reputation of the college . He increased the number of research fellowships from 31 to 49 , and sought to bring talent into the college . This involved controversial decisions , such as hiring in 1951 the Chinese biochemist Tien @-@ chin Tsao and the Hungarian @-@ born economist Peter Bauer . In what became known as the Peasants ' Revolt , fellows led by Patrick Hadley voted an old friend of Chadwick 's off the council and replaced him with Bauer . More friends of Chadwick 's were removed over the following years , and he retired in November 1958 . It was during his mastership that Francis Crick , a PhD student at Gonville and Caius College , and James Watson discovered the structure of DNA . 
 Over the years , Chadwick received many honours , including the Medal for Merit from the United States , and the Pour le Mérite from Germany . In 1946 he became foreign member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences . He was made a Companion of Honour in the New Year Honours on 1 January 1970 for " services to science " , and went to Buckingham Palace for the investiture ceremony . He died in his sleep on 24 July 1974 . His papers are held at the Churchill Archives Centre in Cambridge , and are accessible to the public . The Chadwick Laboratory at the University of Liverpool is named after him , as is its Sir James Chadwick Chair of Experimental Physics , which was named after him in 1991 as part of celebrations of the centenary of his birth . A crater on the moon is also named after him . The James Chadwick Building , which houses part of the School of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Sciences , University of Manchester is named in his honour . He was described by the UK Atomic Energy official historian Lorna Arnold as " a physicist , a scientist @-@ diplomat , and a good , wise , and humane man . " 
 = Hartsdown Park = 
 Hartsdown Park is a football stadium located in Margate , Kent , England . It has been the home of Margate F.C. ( known as Thanet United F.C. between 1981 and 1989 ) since 1929 , apart from between 2002 and 2005 , when the club was forced to share the grounds of other Kent clubs while protracted redevelopment work occurred . 
 Although the football club was able to return to the stadium in 2005 , redevelopment work is still at a very early stage , and many of the ground 's facilities are still of a temporary nature . Nonetheless , the club has extensive plans for the future development of the site . 
 = = History = = 
 The stadium has been the home of Margate F.C. since 1929 , the same year the park itself opened to the public . The local council had purchased the former grounds of Hartsdown House for public use and built a stadium which it was agreed the football club would lease , initially at a charge of £ 200 per year . Initially the players had to change in Hartsdown House itself , approximately 200 yards from the pitch . A small wooden grandstand with 500 bench seats was soon added , followed shortly afterwards by new dressing rooms and a second stand on the north side of the ground containing a mixture of standing and seated accommodation . The first ever match at the new stadium was a friendly against Folkestone on 31 August 1929 and the first competitive match a Kent League fixture against Dover two weeks later . In 1934 the club entered into an agreement to become a nursery team for Arsenal , and as part of the agreement the Hartsdown pitch was altered to exactly match the size of that at Highbury . 
 Further covered spectator accommodation was erected at the ground in 1935 , but this blew down in a storm in 1952 and had to be rebuilt . At around the same time the club added a new terrace next to the main stand , where supporters had previously stood on banked earth . A new covered terrace was installed at the Tivoli Park Avenue end of the ground in the late 1950s , officially named the Cornhill Stand but more usually known to fans as the Coffin End , the name deriving from a prominent piece of graffiti which adorned its rear wall for many years . The club 's first set of floodlights was erected in September 1959 and inaugurated with a friendly match against West Ham United . 
 In 1966 a new clubhouse was built , but there was little further development of the ground , although in the late 1980s the North Stand , which had been condemned by council officials was demolished and the clubhouse extended . In 1982 the club was nearly evicted from the ground by the local council after its name change to Thanet United . A legal loophole was discovered which meant that the lease on the ground was held in the name of Margate F.C. and therefore the renamed club was technically no longer permitted to use the stadium , but this was eventually resolved and the club was allowed to remain . Upon promotion to the Football Conference in 2001 the club spent £ 175 @,@ 000 on improvements designed to bring the stadium up to the standard required for that level of football , but soon afterwards launched an ambitious scheme to completely redevelop the site . The club moved out and the old stadium , which was constructed mainly from timber and corrugated iron , was demolished in early 2003 , but the local council disputed the plans submitted . Although planned to be completed by August 2003 , the redevelopment process lasted for three years , delayed by issues regarding planning permission for the commercial facilities the club wanted to build in addition to the stadium itself . The team ground @-@ shared with other Kent clubs for three seasons , but club officials ' failure to confirm a return date to Hartsdown led to Margate 's expulsion from the Conference National in 2004 . In 2005 the club was finally able to return to the ground , albeit with pre @-@ fabricated stands and temporary buildings in place . Five years later , plans for the redevelopment of the north end of the ground , reportedly including the construction of a new terrace , a bar , and a three @-@ storey hotel , were approved . Club chairman Keith Piper also announced that companies had expressed interest in paying for the naming rights of individual stands or even the entire stadium . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 As most of the stadium was demolished and little of the proposed redevelopment work has as yet been carried out at Hartsdown Park , the stadium 's current facilities are limited . On the south side of the pitch , the site of the former main stand , portable buildings are in place behind the dugouts . The opposite side of the ground currently contains two prefabricated seated stands . 
 Behind the goal at the western end of the ground , known as the Hartsdown Road end , the one terrace remaining from before the redevelopment work has been renovated , along with the clubhouse behind it . A plan was reportedly in place for a temporary standing structure at the opposite end of the ground , known as the Tivoli Park Avenue end , but this has yet to come to fruition . 
 The first stage in the wider development of the site was the construction of a 5 @-@ a @-@ side pitch complex . Although it was initially announced that work was to begin on the complex in May 2007 , ground was not in fact broken for a further four months . The complex opened on 9 December 2007 . 
 = = Future = = 
 The club 's ultimate plan involves a stadium with a capacity of 5 @,@ 000 forming part of a complex incorporating a hotel , fitness centre , conference centre , all @-@ weather pitch and ten 5 @-@ a @-@ side pitches . In 2004 the club 's stadium manager , Keith Piper quoted the total cost of the hotel alone as more than £ 6 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , but stated that the club had sufficient financial backing . The following year the total cost of the project , which it was revealed would be funded by developers CNC Properties , was put at £ 8 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . It has been claimed that the redevelopment will raise the standard of the stadium to that required for entry to the Football League . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 The stadium was used as the home venue for the Thanet Vikings American football club during the late 1980s . It was also the venue for a charity match held in 2006 in memory of former Margate player Paul Sykes , who collapsed and died while playing for Folkestone Invicta , in which current and former professionals Andy Hessenthaler , Adrian Pennock and Danny Spiller played . 
 = = Records = = 
 The highest attendance recorded for a Margate match at Hartsdown Park was 14 @,@ 169 for the visit of Tottenham Hotspur in the FA Cup on 13 January 1973 . The lowest attendance recorded was 29 , for a match against Salisbury City on 24 April 1986 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The stadium is approximately 0 @.@ 7 miles ( 1 km ) from Margate railway station , which lies on Southeastern 's Chatham Main Line from London Victoria to Ramsgate and is also the northern terminus of the Kent Coast Line to Dover Priory . 
 = U.S. Route 40 in Delaware = 
 U.S. Route 40 ( US 40 ) is a US highway running from Park City , Utah east to Atlantic City , New Jersey . In the US state of Delaware , it serves as a major east – west highway in northern New Castle County , just south of Wilmington . It runs from the Maryland border east of Elkton , Maryland east to the Delaware Memorial Bridge over the Delaware River to New Jersey , at which point it is concurrent with Interstate 295 ( I @-@ 295 ) . Along the way , US 40 runs through suburban areas of Glasgow and Bear before following US 13 and I @-@ 295 around New Castle . US 40 is a multilane divided highway the entire length across Delaware . 
 US 40 was originally built as a state highway during the 1920s , comprising Elkton Road and a part of the Dupont Highway . When first designated , the route followed these two roads to Wilmington , where it crossed the Delaware River on a ferry to Penns Grove , New Jersey . By the 1930s , the route was rerouted at Hares Corner to head east into New Castle and cross the river on a ferry to Pennsville , New Jersey . Also , the entire length of US 40 west of Hares Corner was widened to a divided highway during the 1930s . The Delaware Memorial Bridge opened in 1951 , and US 40 was rerouted up US 13 to the bridge approach , with Delaware Route 273 ( DE 273 ) being extended along the former route into New Castle . In 1959 , the Delaware Memorial Bridge approach became a part of I @-@ 295 . Between the 1960s and 1990s , US 301 ran along the US 13 / US 40 concurrency and US 301N followed US 40 between Glasgow and State Road from the 1970s to the 1980s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 40 enters Delaware from Maryland west of Glasgow , heading east on the four @-@ lane divided Pulaski Highway . From the state line , the route passes near residential subdivisions . Upon reaching Glasgow , the road continues into commercial areas and the median of the road widens to include businesses in it . US 40 comes to an intersection with DE 896 Bus. in the center of the community . The median of the road narrows as it reaches an intersection with the northern terminus of US 301 and DE 896 on the eastern edge of Glasgow . Past this intersection , the route runs between Glasgow Park to the north and commercial areas to the south . US 40 passes through residential and business areas and comes to an intersection with DE 72 . Past this intersection , the road curves to the northeast , crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The route passes through wooded areas with some development as it enters Bear . US 40 continues through suburban areas , coming to an intersection with DE 7 . 
 Past this intersection , the road comes to an interchange with the DE 1 freeway . After this interchange , the route passes more development and some farm fields . Farther east , US 40 heads through business areas immediately to the north of Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary railroad line as it reaches a directional intersection with US 13 in State Road . 
 At this point , US 40 heads northeast for a concurrency with US 13 on South Dupont Highway , an eight @-@ lane divided highway . The road runs through commercial areas , coming to an intersection with DE 273 in Hares Corner . Past this intersection , US 13 / US 40 passes between Wilmington Airport to the northwest and businesses to the southeast as North Dupont Highway , reaching a cloverleaf interchange with the southern terminus of US 202 and DE 141 at the end of the airport property . Following this , the two routes narrow to six lanes , passing to the northwest of Wilmington University and heading through Wilmington Manor before reaching an interchange with I @-@ 295 ( Delaware Turnpike ) . 
 Here , US 40 splits from US 13 by heading east along with I @-@ 295 on an eight @-@ lane freeway maintained by the Delaware River and Bay Authority ( DRBA ) . The road has an eastbound ramp to Landers Lane before it passes between residential neighborhoods and has an interchange with DE 9 north of New Castle . This interchange provides access to Veterans Memorial Park , where a war memorial honoring veterans from Delaware and New Jersey is located . Past DE 9 , the median of the freeway widens to include the DRBA headquarters , with direct access to and from the westbound lanes while eastbound access is provided by way of DE 9 . After this , the westbound direction comes to a toll plaza for the Delaware Memorial Bridge . I @-@ 295 / US 40 continues east and passes over Norfolk Southern 's New Castle Secondary before crossing the Delaware River on the twin @-@ span Delaware Memorial Bridge , at which point both routes head into New Jersey . 
 US 40 in Delaware has an annual average daily traffic count ranging from a high of 92 @,@ 113 vehicles at the DE 9 interchange to a low of 28 @,@ 768 vehicles at the DE 896 Bus. intersection . The entire length of US 40 in Delaware is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what would become the Delaware portion of US 40 was a county road , with the portion along US 13 under contract to become a state highway . The portion of US 40 along the Dupont Highway was completed by 1923 . The Pulaski Highway portion of the road was built as a state highway by 1924 . When the US Highway System was created in 1926 , US 40 was designated to pass through Delaware along Elkton Road ( Pulaski Highway ) between the Maryland border and State Road , US 13 from State Road to Wilmington , and Christiana Avenue from US 13 to a ferry across the Delaware River which carried the route to Penns Grove , New Jersey . In 1926 , the Delaware State Highway Department suggested that the portion of US 40 that followed US 13 along the DuPont Highway be <unk> . This widening was completed a year later . By 1931 , US 40 was rerouted at Hares Corner to head east through New Castle and cross the Delaware River on a ferry to Pennsville , New Jersey . All of the route was a state highway by this time except the portion from Hares Corner to Basin Road . 
 In 1931 , work began on widening US 40 along the US 13 concurrency to a divided highway . The completion of the divided highway between State Road and Wilmington was slated for summer 1933 . Recommendations were made in 1932 to widen US 40 into a divided highway between the Maryland border and State Road . A year later , the divided highway portion of US 40 had been graded between the Maryland border and Glasgow while paving of the divided highway was in progress between Bear and State Road . Grading of the divided highway between the Maryland border and State Road had been completed in 1934 with construction of the remainder of the road underway . Work on widening US 40 to a divided highway between the Maryland border and US 13 was finished in 1936 . In 1934 , recommendations were made to upgrade US 40 to a state highway between Hares Corner and New Castle . The portion of US 40 between Hares Corner and New Castle was taken over by the state on July 1 , 1935 . Construction on upgrading this section began in 1936 . This project was completed later that year . The same year , a bridge was constructed over a Pennsylvania Railroad line ( now the New Castle Industrial Track Trail ) in New Castle . 
 Construction on the Delaware Memorial Bridge began in 1949 . At the same time , work was underway on the Delaware Memorial Bridge approach , a divided highway which would begin at a directional @-@ T interchange with US 13 in Farnhurst and head east to a cloverleaf interchange at New Castle Avenue ( present DE 9 ) before leading to the bridge . Construction on the US 13 interchange at Farnhurst began on July 12 , 1950 . On August 16 , 1951 , the Delaware Memorial Bridge opened to traffic . US 40 was rerouted to use the new Delaware Memorial Bridge to cross the Delaware River , being realigned to follow US 13 north from Hares Corner and Farnhurst and the bridge approach road between Farnhurst and the bridge . The ferry connecting New Castle to Pennsville was discontinued and DE 273 was extended along the former alignment of US 40 into New Castle . 
 In 1954 , plans were made to replace the intersection with DE 41 / DE 141 in Basin Corner with a modified cloverleaf interchange in an effort to reduce traffic congestion . Construction on the interchange began in September of that year . The interchange between US 13 / US 40 and DE 41 / DE 141 was completed in 1956 . In 1958 , construction began for a bridge at the Farnhurst interchange that would link the US 40 approach to the Delaware Memorial Bridge to the Delaware Turnpike that was proposed to run west to the Maryland border . A year later , the Farnhurst interchange and the bridge approach were upgraded to Interstate Highway standards , and it was designated as part of I @-@ 295 . Construction at the interchange connecting to the Delaware Turnpike at Farnhurst was completed in July 1961 . On November 14 , 1963 , the Delaware Turnpike opened to traffic , with I @-@ 295 extended west along that road to I @-@ 95 . In the middle of 1964 , work began on a second span at the Delaware Memorial Bridge due to increasing traffic volumes . The second span of the bridge was opened to traffic in fall 1968 . 
 By 1966 , US 301 was designated along the US 13 / US 40 concurrency . US 301N was designated to follow US 40 between DE 896 and US 13 in 1971 . US 301N was removed from US 40 in 1985 . By 1994 , US 301 was removed from the US 13 / US 40 concurrency , having been rerouted to follow DE 896 to end at US 40 in Glasgow . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = New York State Route 254 = 
 New York State Route 254 ( NY 254 ) is a state highway that extends for 6 @.@ 01 miles ( 9 @.@ 67 km ) through Warren and Washington counties in the Capital District of New York in the United States . The route runs from exit 19 along the Adirondack Northway ( Interstate 87 or I @-@ 87 ) in Queensbury and follows Aviation Road , Quaker Road , and Lower Warren Street through Queensbury to Hudson Falls , where it terminates at an intersection with U.S. Route 4 ( US 4 ) in the center of the village . 
 The portion of NY 254 along Lower Warren Street and River Street has had several designations over the years . From 1924 to 1930 , it was part of the original NY 30 . In 1927 , it also became part of US 4 , which initially overlapped NY 30 from Glens Falls to Whitehall . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 30 was reassigned elsewhere while US 4 was rerouted to bypass Glens Falls to the east . As a result , Lower Warren Street and River Street became part of NY 32B . 
 The NY 32B designation remained in place until the mid @-@ 1960s when the Quaker Road arterial was built . NY 32B was partially replaced c . 1965 by NY 254 , the designation assigned to the new highway around Glens Falls . The portion of NY 254 between US 9 and Lower Warren Street is maintained by Warren County and co @-@ designated as County Route 47 ( CR 47 ) and CR 70 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 254 begins at the southbound ramp of Adirondack Northway ( I @-@ 87 ) exit 19 north of Glens Falls in the town of Queensbury . The route heads eastward from the interchange as Aviation Road , passing by many commercial buildings and Aviation Mall . As it passes along the north side of the mall , NY 254 curves to the southeast before veering back to the northeast ahead of an intersection with the four @-@ lane US 9 ( Upper Glen Street ) . The route continues past US 9 ; however , maintenance of the highway is transferred from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to Warren County at the US 9 junction . Now co @-@ designated as CR 47 , NY 254 progresses eastward along the four @-@ lane Quaker Road , serving as a northerly bypass of the city of Glens Falls . 
 As the route heads east , it passes Pine View Cemetery and several local businesses . At an intersection with Glenwood Avenue ( CR 34 ) , the county 's internal designation for NY 254 becomes CR 70 , whereafter the route passes over Halfway Brook and under the Gerald B. Solomon Bikeway Bridge – a part of the Warren County Bikeway . The highway progresses southeasterly upon intersecting NY 9L as NY 254 turns due southeast to avoid Floyd Bennett Memorial Airport . Along this stretch , NY 254 heads through undeveloped land before entering another area of commercial development as it approaches the outskirts of Hudson Falls . Here , the route meets NY 32 at Highland Avenue before intersecting Lower Warren Street ( here unsigned NY 911E ) on the banks of the Hudson River . 
 NY 254 turns east at NY 911E , becoming state maintained once more as it follows Lower Warren Street across the Glens Falls Feeder Canal and along the Hudson River into Washington County and the village of Hudson Falls . As River Street , NY 254 heads to the southeast for a short distance before terminating at an intersection with US 4 in downtown Hudson Falls . NY 196 begins one block to the south of this junction . 
 = = History = = 
 Warren Street in Glens Falls , Lower Warren Street in Queensbury , and River Street in Hudson Falls were originally designated as part of NY 30 in 1924 . In late 1926 , the U.S. Highway System was created . One of the routes assigned at this time was US 4 , which overlapped NY 30 between Glens Falls and Whitehall . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , the NY 30 designation was reassigned elsewhere while US 4 was reconfigured to continue south from Hudson Falls to East Greenbush . The former routing of US 4 into Glens Falls became part of NY 32B , an alternate route of NY 32 that followed the Hudson River between Schuylerville and Glens Falls . All of NY 32B south of Hudson Falls was concurrent to US 4 . 
 NY 32B was truncated over time , eventually consisting of just the portion between Boulevard ( then @-@ NY 32 ) in Queensbury and US 4 in Hudson Falls . In the mid @-@ 1960s , a new arterial was constructed around the northern and eastern extents of Glens Falls . The roadway , designated as NY 254 c . 1965 , extended from I @-@ 87 in the north to Warren Street ( NY 32B ) in the south . NY 254 then continued east to US 4 in Hudson Falls , replacing NY 32B . The short 0 @.@ 20 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) segment of Warren Street between NY 32 and NY 254 , formerly the westernmost portion of NY 32B , is now NY 911E , an unsigned reference route . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 1992 – 93 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1992 – 93 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season lasted longer than normal , with the first storm Aviona forming on September 27 and the final storm Konita not dissipating until May 7 . It was an above @-@ average season , with four tropical cyclones – the equivalent of a minimal hurricane – along with six tropical storms , one subtropical depression , and several depressions including one that was named . The basin is defined as the area west of 90 ° E and south of the Equator in the Indian Ocean , which includes the waters around Madagascar westward to the east coast of Africa . Tropical cyclones in this basin are monitored by the Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre in Réunion ( MFR ) , as well as by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) . 
 At the time , the season officially went from November 15 , 1991 , to April 30 , 1992 , although this season began in September with the formation of Tropical Storm Aviona in the northeastern portion of the basin . A month later , Tropical Storm Babie also formed in the northeastern portion of the basin before the season 's official start . After several depressions formed in December and early January , Cyclone Colina formed and struck Réunion , which damaged houses and killed 2 people and left 12 missing there . Three storms were active at the same time in the middle of January , including Colina – Tropical Storm Dessilia moved across Madagascar with gusty winds , and Cyclone Edwina was the longest @-@ lasting and strongest storm of the season . Edwina brushed the Mascarene Islands with gusty winds and light rainfall . In mid @-@ February , Tropical Storm Finella brought locally heavy rainfall to Réunion , reaching 1 @,@ 074 mm ( 42 @.@ 3 in ) along the island 's east coast and causing minimal rainfall along the southern coast . The Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) became active toward the end of February , spawning tropical storms Gracia and Ionia as well as Tropical Depression Hutelle . Ionia , the last of five system to cross Madagascar during the season , killed eight people in the country . The season ended with Cyclone Jourdanne , which was the second @-@ strongest storm of the season in April , and Cyclone Konita in May . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 During the season , the Météo @-@ France office ( MFR ) on Réunion island issued warnings in tropical cyclones within the basin . The agency estimated intensity through the Dvorak technique , and warned on tropical cyclones in the region from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E , south of the equator . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , which is a joint United States Navy – United States Air Force task force , also issued tropical cyclone warnings for the southwestern Indian Ocean . The storms in the season lasted about five days on average , although Cyclone Edwina lasted the longest at 11 days . Storms formed throughout the basin and were fairly evenly distributed throughout the season , with the exception of a lull in November . Most storms originated from the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . MFR named storms throughout the season using 11 names from a sequential list . The remainder of the list was Laura , Monette , Neige , Octavie , Pamela , Rosita , Stella , <unk> , <unk> , Wendy , and Yolande . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Aviona = = = 
 On September 25 , a low pressure area persisted between the Cocos Islands and Sumatra in the Australian region , east of 90 ° E. It moved southwestward into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean due to a large ridge to the south . The system slowly organized , becoming a tropical disturbance on September 27 ; on the same day , the JTWC also initiated advisories on the system as Tropical Cyclone 01S . This marked an unusual event of such an early storm formation . On September 29 , the system was named Moderate Tropical Storm Aviona , although the MFR later assessed that the system reached tropical storm status on the previous day . In addition , the JTWC estimated the system attained 1 @-@ minute sustained peak winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) on September 28 , the equivalent of a minimal hurricane . When Aviona was named , the MFR estimated peak 10 @-@ minute sustained winds of 75 km / h ( 45 km / h ) . Subsequently , increased wind shear incurred weakening due to a trough to the south , which stripped the convection from the center . A building ridge behind the trough turned Aviona to the west . The storm weakened to a depression on October 1 , the same day the JTWC discontinued advisories . The circulation continued generally west @-@ southwestward until dissipating on October 5 to the north of Rodrigues island . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Babie = = = 
 The ITCZ became active on October 17 , spawning an area of disturbed weather about 900 km ( 560 mi ) east of Diego Garcia in conjunction with a pre @-@ existing low pressure area . Convection quickly organized around a center , and a tropical disturbance formed on October 18 . On the same day , the JTWC began issuing warnings on the system as Tropical Cyclone 02S . A trough to the south steered the system to the south @-@ southwest . Following steady intensification , the disturbance became Tropical Storm Babie on October 19 , reaching peak winds of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) . A building ridge to the south increased wind shear , causing Babie to quickly weaken ; the JTWC and MFR discontinued advisories on October 21 , and the circulation dissipated on October 23 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Colina = = = 
 The ITCZ spawned an area of convection on January 11 near the Chagos Archipelago . A circulation developed within the system on January 13 about 400 km ( 250 mi ) southwest of Diego Garcia , and at that time it became a tropical disturbance . A large ridge to the south steered the system generally to the southwest . The disturbance intensified into a depression on January 14 , the same date that the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 10S , and following an increase in convection , the depression intensified into Moderate Tropical Storm Colina on January 15 . Turning more to the south @-@ southwest , Colina strengthened further into a tropical cyclone on January 18 , developing a 30 km ( 19 mi ) eye . On the next day , the cyclone attained peak 10 @-@ minute winds of 135 km / h ( 85 mph ) , according to MFR , while the JTWC estimated peak 1 @-@ minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) . That day , the eye crossed over the western portion of Réunion at around 14 : 30 UTC , exiting 45 minutes later . Subsequently , Colina accelerated to the southeast over cooler waters , weakening in the process . On December 20 , the cyclone weakened to tropical storm status , and the next day Colina became extratropical , dissipating two days later . 
 Early in its duration , Colina dropped rainfall in Seychelles through the interaction with the ITCZ . The rains caused flooding and mudslides , and the storm also produced high waves and gusty winds . Moving across Réunion , Colina produced strong wind gusts in the mountainous peaks , reaching 205 km / h ( 127 mph ) at La Plaine @-@ des @-@ Palmistes . The storm dropped rainfall across the entire island , peaking at 894 mm ( 35 @.@ 2 in ) at <unk> in a 24 ‑ hour period . The winds and rainfall damaged crops and houses and also caused power outages . The storm killed two people on the island during its passage , with 12 others missing . On nearby Mauritius , Colina dropped about 106 mm ( 4 @.@ 2 in ) of rainfall and produced wind gusts of 114 km / h ( 71 mph ) ; the storm did not cause much damage there . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Dessilia = = = 
 While Colina was intensifying northeast of Réunion , the monsoon spawned an area of convection in conjunction with a low pressure area in the Mozambique Channel . On January 16 , the system developed into a tropical disturbance , although initially the circulation was poorly @-@ defined . It moved toward the coast of Mozambique before turning southeastward and organizing more . The system intensified into Tropical Storm Dessilia on January 19 , reaching peak 10 minute winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) at 12 : 00 UTC on the next day . At around that time , Dessilia made landfall on northwestern Madagascar between Morondava and Morombe . Over a 30 @-@ hour period , the storm moved southeastward across the country , remaining fairly well @-@ organized . Initially , it appeared that Colina absorbed Dessilia once the latter storm emerged from the Madagascar coastline , although they remained separate systems . After having weakened to tropical depression status , Dessilia restrengthened into a tropical storm on January 22 . Increased wind shear weakened the convection , and the storm dissipated on January 24 ; the next day , the remnants were absorbed by a passing cold front . 
 While intensifying and passing near Juan de Nova Island , Dessilia produced wind gusts of 98 km / h ( 61 mph ) . Wind gusts on Madagascar reached 104 km / h ( 65 mph ) at Morombe . Later , the storm produced 3 to 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) waves to the southwest coast of Réunion . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Edwina = = = 
 A few days after Colina formed , the ITCZ spawned another area of convection on January 16 in the northeast portion of the basin . The next day , a low pressure area formed between the Chagos Archipelago and Diego Garcia , and on January 19 the system developed into a tropical disturbance after convection increased . Following further organization , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Edwina on January 20 while moving generally westward . Increasing wind shear prevented significant strengthening initially , but Edwina was able to intensify more on January 21 . On January 23 , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane on the same day that MFR upgraded Edwina to tropical cyclone status . On the next day , the JTWC estimated the cyclone attained peak winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) , after Edwina developed a well @-@ defined 75 km ( 47 mi ) wide eye . On January 26 , the MFR estimated that the cyclone reached peak 10 @-@ minute winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) , making Edwina the strongest storm of the season . Around that time , the cyclone turned more to the south around a large ridge , maintaining peak winds through January 27 . By that time , the eye became large and ragged while passing halfway between Rodrigues and St. Brandon . On January 27 , Edwina passed about 220 km ( 140 mi ) east of Mauritius . On the next day , increased wind shear caused marked weakening , quickly destroying the eye and lowering the winds below tropical cyclone force . On January 29 , Edwina ceased existing as a tropical system , although its remnants persisted several more days , affecting Île Amsterdam in the south @-@ central Indian Ocean on February 2 . 
 On Rodrigues island , Edwina produced peak wind gusts of 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) . The fringes of the storm affected Mauritius , producing peak gusts of 124 km / h ( 77 mph ) and 108 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) of rainfall . Farther west , Edwina produced gusts of 104 km / h ( 65 mph ) on Réunion . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Finella = = = 
 A large low pressure area persisted on February 11 across northern Madagascar , centered near Cape Masoala along the country 's eastern coast . Moving southward and later southeastward due to a trough , the system developed into a tropical disturbance on February 12 and slowly organized . On the next day , the JTWC began tracking the system as Tropical Cyclone 19S . The MFR upgraded the system to Tropical Storm Finella on February 14 after an eye feature developed within the central dense overcast . As a result , the JTWC upgraded the system to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane that day , estimating peak 1 @-@ minute winds of 130 km / h ( 85 mph ) , although the MFR only estimated peak 10 @-@ minute winds of 80 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Increased wind shear weakened Finella , and it was no longer a tropical depression on February 15 . The remnants affected Réunion , bringing localized heavy rainfall ; Saint @-@ Benoît along the east coast recorded 1 @,@ 074 mm ( 42 @.@ 3 in ) of precipitation in 24 hours , including 122 mm ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) that fell in just one hour . The southern portion of the island received minimal rainfall , in contrast . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Gracia = = = 
 A circulation within the ITCZ developed on February 20 just south of Mayotte in the Mozambique Channel . It developed good outflow and showed initial signs of development , although on February 21 the system weakened . The convection reorganized , developing a ragged eye with circular rainbands , and the system intensified into Tropical Storm Gracia on February 22 . It was a small system , just 100 km ( 60 mi ) from the Madagascar coast when it attained tropical storm status . Late on February 22 , the storm attained peak winds of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Shortly thereafter , the convection rapidly disintegrated as Gracia made landfall on northwestern Madagascar near Besalampy , dissipating early on February 23 . The storm produced locally heavy rainfall , reaching 140 mm ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) where it made landfall . The JTWC did not track the system . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Ionia = = = 
 The ITCZ remained active in early March , spawning a tropical depression in the northern Mozambique Channel on March 2 . It failed to organize at first , although an increase in convection on March 3 allowed the system to strengthen into Tropical Storm Ionia . That day , it attained peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . After passing about 50 km ( 30 mi ) north of Juan de Nova island , Ionia progressed southeastward and approached the western Madagascar coastline . The circulation paralleled the coast for about 250 km ( 160 mi ) before moving ashore at Belo on March 4 . The storm weakened over land , re @-@ emerging over open waters on March 5 from southeastern Madagascar . Ionia briefly re @-@ intensified into a tropical depression that night , but it lost tropical characteristics on March 7 . The remnants persisted several more days until dissipating south of the Mascarene Islands on March 11 . 
 The fifth depression of the season to move across Madagascar , Ionia dropped heavy rainfall , reaching 356 mm ( 14 in ) in some areas ; this caused river flooding in southern Madagascar . The storm left 3 @,@ 644 people homeless and killed eight . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Jourdanne = = = 
 After a period of inactivity lasting slightly less than a month , the tropics became active again in early April when the ITCZ spawned an area of convection in the northeastern portion of the basin . This was in association with a preexisting low pressure area , and developed into a tropical disturbance on April 2 . On the next day , the JTWC began tracking the system as Tropical Cyclone 24S . The system moved to the west @-@ southwest due to a ridge to the south , gradually intensifying due to favorable conditions , such as warm water temperatures . On April 4 , the system intensified into a tropical storm and was given the name Jourdanne . An eye developed on April 5 , indicating that the storm attained tropical cyclone status . Although the convection was initially elongated , Jourdanne became much more symmetrical on April 6 , which corresponded to its peak 10 @-@ minute intensity of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) that day . Around the same time , the JTWC estimated peak 1 @-@ minute winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) , which was tied for the strongest system in the southern hemisphere in the cyclone year by the agency . Due to a trough in the region , Jourdanne executed a small loop and turned to a southeast drift . Gradually increasing wind shear induced weakening , causing the eye to dissipate on April 7 . On the next day , Jourdanne weakened below tropical cyclone intensity , and on April 9 , the convection was stripped from the center . By the next day , Jourdanne was no longer a tropical disturbance , although its remnants persisted April 15 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Konita = = = 
 A low pressure area formed on April 29 to the southeast of the Chagos Archipelago with an area of convection , but it failed to organize into a tropical disturbance until May 2 . By that time , the JTWC was already classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 26S , and the system gradually organized while moving southwestward . Despite being late in the season , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Konita on May 4 , and the next day attained tropical cyclone status . The upgrade was based on satellite imagery showing an eye , with MFR estimating peak 10 @-@ minute winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , and JTWC estimating 1 @-@ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . By the time of peak intensity , Konita was moving more to the south into an area of weak steering currents . A trough northwest of the storm caused the convection to rapidly diminish , leaving the center exposed from the thunderstorms on May 6 . After moving erratically to the northeast and looping , Konita dissipated on May 7 . The storm did not directly affect land , although it indirectly caused an increase of rainfall over Seychelles . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 In addition to the 11 named storms , one of which failed to attain tropical storm status , there were several additional systems . The first was Tropical Depression C1 , that originated from the ITCZ in the northeastern portion of the basin from a small area of convection on November 24 . It moved westward with pulsating convection around the center , failing to organize due to the presence of wind shear . On December 4 , the system organized into a tropical disturbance , and three days later it passed about 400 km ( 250 mi ) north of the northern tip of Madagascar . That day , it intensified to tropical depression status , reaching peak winds of 50 km / h ( 30 mph ) . Increased wind shear weakened the convection , and the circulation dissipated on December 10 . On December 18 , a tropical low developed in the Australian basin northeast of the Cocos Islands . It moved southwestward , intensifying into a tropical storm and being named Ken by the BoM . Wind shear in the region prevented much development , and the storm crossed into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean on December 21 . At that time , the MFR classified the system as Tropical Depression C2 , but the agency only issued two warnings . The JTWC tracked the system until December 23 when the system dissipated well to the southwest of Indonesia . 
 On December 24 , a cold front exited the southern African coastline , accompanied by a low pressure area that moved into the Mozambique Channel . The system produced a large area of convection , and with warm water temperatures in the area , the low gradually organized . On December 26 , the MFR began tracking the system off the southwest coast of Madagascar . Around that time , the convection began to wrap into the center , while the system produced gale force winds on Europa Island . The storm tracked generally to the southeast , passing south of Madagascar while intensifying gradually . Due to the structure , the storm was considered a subtropical depression . Late on December 26 , the storm attained peak winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) , but subsequently , increased wind shear caused weakening . The subtropical storm continued to the southeast until December 30 , when an approaching trough absorbed it . 
 After the subtropical depression dissipated , there were three additional depressions before Tropical Cyclone Colina developed on January 11 . The ITCZ became active toward the end of February . On February 24 , Tropical Disturbance H1 formed from a low pressure area to the west of Réunion . It moved quickly to the southeast , intensifying into a tropical depression , but dissipating on February 26 when it was absorbed into a trough . A day later , another disturbance formed near Réunion , which produced torrential rainfall , reaching 1 to 2 metres ( 3 @.@ 3 to 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in some locations . The system moved westward , intensifying into a tropical depression after further organization . Despite not being a tropical storm , the system was named Hutelle by the Meteorological Service of Madagascar on March 1 . Shortly thereafter , Hutelle made landfall near Mahanoro , Madagascar , and dissipated the next day . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This table lists all the cyclones that developed in the Indian Ocean , during the 1993 – 94 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season . It includes their intensity , duration , name , landfalls , deaths , and damages . 
 = A Puro Dolor = 
 " A Puro Dolor " is a song recorded by Puerto Rican band Son by Four . It was written by Omar Alfanno and released as the first single of the second studio album of the band in 2000 . Two versions of the track were produced for the album ; one as a salsa and the other as a ballad . The ballad version was arranged by Alejandro Jaén . 
 The song reached number @-@ one on Billboard Top Latin Songs chart , and became the longest running chart topper of its history , spending 20 weeks at the top ; this record was broken five years later by Colombian singer @-@ songwriter Shakira with " La Tortura " which spent 25 weeks at number @-@ one . " A Puro Dolor " also reached the Billboard 100 ; this led to the recording of an English @-@ language version of the track " Purest of Pain " , which was also charted in the United States . 
 The composition also met with critical acclaim receiving the Lo Nuestro Award , the Billboard Music Award and a Latin Grammy Award nomination . In 2009 , " A Puro Dolor " was named the best @-@ performing Latin single of the 2000s decade in the United States . Two music videos were made for the ballad and the English versions . The record was covered by Mexican group <unk> y la Juventud and Brazilian boy band KLB both of which received radio airplay . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 In 1998 , Son by Four released their first album , <unk> . The success of the singles " Nada " and " No Hay Razón " , distributed in Puerto Rico by the independent label <unk> , captured the attention of the Sony Music CEO Oscar Llord , who made an agreement with <unk> to re @-@ release the album and start the recording sessions of the next album . The first single taken from the following album was " A Puro Dolor " , written and arranged by Panamanian record producer Omar Alfanno , with a ballad version arranged by Alejandro Jaén . Alfanno , well known for his work with salsa recording singers Marc Anthony , Víctor <unk> , Jerry Rivera and Gilberto Santa Rosa was in charge of the album production . Alfanno declared that he wrote the song in ten minutes , and that after the success of the track , he analyzed the composition , since he did not understand how " A Puro Dolor " became that popular . He named it " the Cinderella of all his songs . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was released in the United States and Puerto Rico in February 2000 . It became very successful with the ballad and tropical / salsa versions setting an airplay record for a Latin single with 23 @.@ 4 million impressions in those countries . The reaction to the song was intense , and Son by Four was asked to record an English @-@ language version of the track . This version , titled " Purest of Pain " , was serviced to English @-@ speaking radio stations in May 2000 . The success of the song took by surprise the leader of the band , Ángel López , who told Billboard magazine : " When they told us we were going to be signed by Columbia for the single , we flipped . " A ranchera version was also recorded for the Regional Mexican audience . About the song , López also declared that " has something everybody can relate to . We 're adults , we 've been all through that [ rejection ] . The way the song reaches out to people is outstanding . " In his album review for AllMusic , Evan C. Gutierrez declared that " A Puro Dolor " set " an impossibly high standard for the rest of the playlist . " 
 Son by Four received seven Billboard Latin Music Award nominations in 2001 for " Hot Latin Track of the Year " , " Pop Track of the Year " and " Tropical / Salsa Track of the Year " ( " A Puro Dolor " ) ; " Tropical / Salsa Album of the Year , New Artist " and " Tropical / Salsa Album of the Year , Group " ( Son by Four ) ; and " Billboard Latin 50 Artist of the Year " and " Hot Latin Track Artist of the Year " . With further nominations for Alfanno as " Songwriter of the Year " and Jaén for " Producer of the Year " . Son by Four won all the awards , and Alfanno won the award for the writing of the song . 
 At the Lo Nuestro Awards of 2001 , the group earned six awards ; among them " Pop Song of the Year " and " Tropical Song of the Year " . Alfanno also received a Latin Grammy Award nomination for the Best Tropical Song , which it lost to " El <unk> en <unk> " by Juan Luis Guerra . " A Puro Dolor " was given three Billboard Music Award in 2000 for Latin Track of the Year , Latin Pop Track of the Year , and Tropical / Salsa Track of the Year . At the 2001 ASCAP Latin Music Awards , Alfanno was awarded " Song of the Year " and " Pop / Balada Song of the Year " for his composition of the song and was named Songwriter of the Year . In 2015 , " A Puro Dolor " ranked # 35 on Billboard 's Best Latin Songs of All Time . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote the single , Son by Four opened a Ricky Martin live performance in the Madison Square Garden in New York City . They also did a concert with the R & B trio Destiny 's Child , and were presented in the 1st Latin Grammy Awards along with the boy band N <unk> , performing the medley " A Puro Dolor " / " Purest of Pain " with " This I Promise You " / " Yo Te Voy a Amar " . The song was featured in the Mexican telenovela Frente al Espejo , broadcast by Televisa . In 2000 , due to the success of the track in the American market , they were asked to perform on The Tonight Show hosted by Jay Leno . The salsa version of the song was included on their greatest hits album Salsa Hits ( 2001 ) and Lo <unk> ( 2008 ) and on the compilation album <unk> 2001 ( 2000 ) . 
 Two music videos were made for the song ; the first one for the ballad version , and the other for the English version . The ballad version was directed by Felipe Niño . In the video , the group is shown performing the song along with an orchestra behind them . It is filmed on a stage where shows López singing his verses , while the others members of the group , follow up with the chorus . At the end of the video the people of the orchestra starts to applaud when the group ends to sing . In the English version of the video , the plot is completely different . The video starts in a cloudy afternoon after a storm , where the group is situated in a white room . It shows López singing in a ladder when it later starts to fill with water . At the last part of the video , it shows Son by Four singing out of the house after the storm has ended . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " A Puro Dolor " reached the top spot of the Billboard Top Latin Songs , Latin Pop Songs and Tropical / Salsa charts with the song spending 20 weeks at number @-@ one on the former chart . This chart run led the song to be named the best @-@ performing Latin single of the 2000s decade . In the aforementioned chart only four songs have had similar week runs at the top : " Me <unk> " by Juanes , " Te Quiero " by Flex , and " <unk> " by Enrique Iglesias featuring <unk> Bueno and Gente De Zona with 20 weeks each , and " La Tortura " by Shakira featuring Alejandro Sanz with 25 non @-@ consecutive weeks at the top . " Purest of Pain " , the English version of the track , peaked at number twenty @-@ six in the Billboard Hot 100 chart and ranked 61 at the Billboard Year @-@ End Hot 100 singles of 2000 . This exposure led to the parent album to receive a Gold certification in Argentina , Mexico , and the United States . " A Puro Dolor " ranked 1st at the Hot Latin Songs 25th Anniversary chart . " Purest of Pain " was also a modest success in Europe where it peaked at number seven and eighteen in the Flanders and Wallonia regions of Belgium and number three in the Netherlands . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 The credits are adapted from the Son by Four liner notes . 
 Oscar Llord - executive producer 
 Omar Alfanno – songwriting , production 
 Ángel López – lead vocals 
 Son by Four – chorus 
 E. Ender - songwriting ( " Purest of Pain " ) 
 M. Llord - songwriting ( " Purest of Pain " ) 
 = = Other recordings = = 
 In 2000 , Mexican group <unk> y la Juventud performed a cover " A Puro Dolor " in cumbia music . Their version peaked at number forty @-@ six on the Hot Latin Songs chart and number fifteen on the Billboard Regional Mexican Songs chart . The success of their cover led to the group receiving a Lo Nuestro Award for New Regional Mexican Artist of the Year . A music video for the song was filmed for the group . 
 <unk> , a Brazilian producer and composer , wrote the lyrics for a cover version of the song , which was recorded by the boy band KLB , and released in their eponymous debut album under the title " A Dor <unk> Amor " . It was later released as a single , and became the group 's first single to play in radio stations in the country . The cover became a hit ; it was the tenth most @-@ played song in Brazilian radios in 2000 . A music video , directed by Preta Gil , was filmed for KLB . 
 In 2009 , Son by Four recorded a new version of the track for their studio album Abba Nuestro which did not have López 's involvement as he left the band in 2003 . López himself recorded a new version of the track on his studio album Historias de Amor ( 2010 ) which features a cover of Alfanno 's other compositions which was produced by Alfanno . He also recorded it as a duet with fellow Puerto Rican singer Ana Isabelle on her studio album Mi Sueño ( 2010 ) . 
 = Scotland national football team manager = 
 The role of a Scotland national football team manager was first established in May 1954 , when Andy Beattie was appointed . Beattie took charge of six matches before and during the 1954 FIFA World Cup , when Scotland competed at their first major tournament . Twenty @-@ two men have occupied the post since its inception , with Beattie and Jock Stein occupying it in two different spells . Five of those managers were in caretaker or interim roles . Craig Brown held the position for the longest to date ; a tenure of 9 years , comprising two major tournaments and a total of 71 matches . 
 No manager has progressed beyond the first group stage of a major competition , even though Scotland qualified for several between 1954 and 1998 . Beattie ( 1954 ) , Walker ( 1958 ) , Willie Ormond ( 1974 ) , Ally MacLeod ( 1978 ) , Stein ( 1982 ) , Ferguson ( 1986 ) , Andy Roxburgh ( 1990 and 1992 ) and Brown ( 1996 and 1998 ) have all managed the team at major competitions . Ian McColl , Ormond and MacLeod all won the British Home Championship outright . 
 The team has not qualified for a major competition since 1998 . German coach Berti Vogts became the first foreign manager of the team in 2002 , but his time in charge was generally seen as a failure and the FIFA World Ranking declined to an all @-@ time low of 88 in March 2005 . Walter Smith and Alex McLeish achieved better results , with the ranking improving to an all @-@ time high of 13 in October 2007 , but both were only briefly in charge before returning to club management . George Burley and Craig Levein both had worse results with the team and were eventually sacked . Levein was replaced on a caretaker basis by Billy Stark , before Gordon Strachan was named as Levein 's permanent replacement in January 2013 . 
 = = Position = = 
 = = = Role = = = 
 The Scotland manager has sole responsibility for all on @-@ the @-@ field elements of the Scotland team . Among other activities , this includes selecting the national team squad , the starting team , captain , tactics , substitutes and penalty @-@ takers . The manager has input in selecting the coaching ( " back room " ) staff . For example , in 2008 manager George Burley helped to recruit Terry Butcher , a former teammate at Ipswich Town , as his assistant . The Scotland manager may also involve himself in wider issues beyond the on @-@ the @-@ field team issues , such as negotiating fixtures . In the period before a manager was appointed , the team was picked by the international selection committee of the Scottish Football Association ( SFA ) . This committee was made up of officials from Scottish clubs , who had responsibility for picking their own sides . There were large inconsistencies in selection ; however , and players were often picked without some or all of the selectors having watched them play . 
 = = = Appointment = = = 
 The process of appointing a new Scotland manager is undertaken by the main SFA board . After a review was conducted by former First Minister of Scotland Henry McLeish , the SFA board structure was streamlined considerably in 2011 . Professional game and non @-@ professional game boards govern their respective areas of football , while the main board has a strategic focus . There are seven members on the main board , consisting of four SFA office bearers , one representative each from the professional game and non @-@ professional game boards and one independent member . As of September 2013 , these positions are occupied by Stewart Regan ( chief executive ) , Campbell Ogilvie ( president ) , Alan MacRae ( first vice @-@ president ) , Rod Petrie ( second vice @-@ president ) , Peter <unk> ( professional game ) and Barrie Jackson ( independent ) . The non @-@ professional game position is presently vacant . 
 All but one of the 22 people to manage Scotland had played the game professionally . The exception is Dawson Walker , who was placed in interim charge of the team while Matt Busby was recovering from the effects of the Munich air disaster . Of the 21 Scotsmen to hold the post of manager , ten were never capped for the senior Scotland team as a player ( Walker , Stein , Prentice , McDonald , MacLeod , Ferguson , Roxburgh , Brown , Smith and Stark ) , although some of them did represent the Scottish Football League ( Stein , Prentice , McDonald and Ferguson ) . Of the 11 that played for Scotland , six earned at least 10 caps : McColl ( 14 ) , Docherty ( 25 ) , McLeish ( 77 ) , Burley ( 11 ) , Levein ( 16 ) and Strachan ( 50 ) . Four also served as Scotland captains ; Docherty ( 8 ) , McLeish ( 8 ) , Levein ( 1 ) and Strachan ( 5 ) . Berti Vogts , the only foreign manager to hold the post , earned 96 caps for West Germany and was part of their 1974 World Cup winning side . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1950s : Selection committee and temporary managers = = = 
 Until 1954 , the Scotland team was managed by a SFA selection committee . The role of manager was first established in May 1954 with the appointment of Andy Beattie , who took charge on a part @-@ time basis while continuing as manager of Huddersfield Town . Beattie took the team to the 1954 FIFA World Cup , but the SFA only allowed him to select a travelling party of 13 players . Beattie , who felt this restriction made it impossible for him to perform his duties well , resigned during the tournament . Scotland were eliminated from the tournament after a 7 – 0 defeat by Uruguay . 
 After the 1954 World Cup , the selection committee resumed their duties , continuing until the appointment of Matt Busby in 1958 . Busby was initially unable to assume his duties due to the serious injuries he sustained in the Munich air disaster , with Dawson Walker taking charge of the team while Busby recovered . Busby only took charge of two Scotland matches , but he did give a young Denis Law his first Scotland cap . In March 1959 , Andy Beattie became Scotland manager for a second time . During his second spell as Scotland manager , Beattie combined those duties with managing a football club . He resigned in November 1960 in order to manage English club Nottingham Forest on a full @-@ time basis . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Ian McColl , who had just retired from a long playing career with Rangers , was appointed Scotland manager in 1960 . He enjoyed significant success , winning British Home Championships in 1962 and 1963 and had an impressive winning percentage . McColl left the team in 1965 to become manager of Sunderland . 
 Celtic manager Jock Stein was then appointed manager of Scotland on a part @-@ time basis . Stein took charge of their attempt to qualify for the 1966 World Cup . Scotland achieved good results in their first two qualifiers , a draw against Poland and a win against Finland . Stein was criticised by the Scottish press after the team conceded two late goals and lost 2 – 1 at home to Poland , but they managed to beat Italy 1 – 0 at Hampden Park to raise some hope of qualification . Scotland suffered from several players withdrawing from the return match against Italy due to injury and a 3 – 0 defeat meant that they failed to qualify . Clyde manager John Prentice then took the job on a full @-@ time basis in 1966 , but left to manage Dundee after just six months and four games in charge . 
 After Malky McDonald took charge of two games on a caretaker basis , Bobby Brown was appointed manager . Brown was the first Scotland manager to be given full control of the team , as until then the SFA selection committee had continued to choose the players . Scotland achieved one of their most famous victories in his first game in charge , a 3 – 2 win against 1966 World Cup winners England at Wembley . The team generally performed well under Brown , but were drawn with West Germany in 1970 FIFA World Cup qualification . Scotland needed to avoid defeat in Hamburg to keep their qualification hopes alive , but lost 3 – 2 . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 Tommy Docherty was appointed manager in 1971 and had a brief , but successful , time in charge . Docherty lost only three of his 12 matches as manager , but he left the job in late 1972 to become manager of Manchester United . Despite losing 5 – 0 to England in his first match in charge , Scotland qualified for the 1974 World Cup under the management of Willie Ormond . Scotland performed creditably at the finals , winning against Zaire and drawing against Brazil and Yugoslavia , but were eliminated on goal difference . Ormond suffered from player indiscipline during his tenure , which included an infamous incident where Jimmy Johnstone , after a night out drinking , sat in a rowing boat that was drifting out to sea . Two teammates attempted to rescue Johnstone , but eventually he had to be retrieved by local fishermen . Ormond left the Scotland job in 1977 to become manager of Hearts . 
 Ally MacLeod had an immediate impact as Scotland manager , winning against England at Wembley . His team then qualified for the 1978 FIFA World Cup by defeating Wales at Anfield , although Scotland were controversially given a penalty kick . MacLeod was confident about the team 's prospects , quipping that his plan for after the World Cup was to " retain it " . The supporters shared in this enthusiasm , as Hampden Park was packed for a farewell parade before the team flew to the tournament , hosted by Argentina . MacLeod dismissed his first two opponents , Peru and Iran , as " old men " and " minnows " respectively . A defeat by Peru and a draw with Iran left Scotland needing to defeat the Netherlands by three clear goals to qualify . MacLeod made a number of contested selection decisions , preferring the out of form Don Masson and Bruce Rioch to Graeme Souness . Winger Willie Johnston failed a drugs test after the Peru match and was sent home . Scotland produced an outstanding performance against the Netherlands and won 3 – 2 , but were eliminated on goal difference . MacLeod stayed on as Scotland manager after the World Cup , but resigned after a defeat by Austria in September 1978 . Writers have since considered the question of whether MacLeod was the cause of a lack of Scottish self @-@ confidence , or was someone who tried to counter it . 
 = = = 1978 – 1986 : Stein and Ferguson = = = 
 Jock Stein , who was working as manager of Leeds United , was recruited by the SFA to manage the Scotland team for a second time . Two defeats to Belgium meant that Scotland failed to qualify for the 1980 European Championship . This was followed by losses to Northern Ireland and England in the 1980 British Home Championship , which led to some criticism in the media . Scotland qualified for the 1982 World Cup in Spain , but exited on goal difference after they drew 2 – 2 with the Soviet Union in a must @-@ win game . Scotland then failed to qualify for the 1984 European Championship , which led to criticism of Stein leading into the next competition , the 1986 World Cup . As a consequence , Stein was facing significant pressure to ensure qualification for the tournament in Mexico . 
 Scotland defeated Spain 3 – 1 , but then lost 1 – 0 at home to Wales . This left Scotland needing to secure at least a point from their final group match , against Wales in Cardiff , to qualify for a play @-@ off against Australia . Stein was not helped by the fact that a number of his senior players , including Graeme Souness ( his captain ) , Kenny Dalglish , Alan Hansen and Steve Archibald would all miss the game through injury or suspension . Stein was also taking diuretics to manage heart failure at the time but had , in the build @-@ up to the game , decided to stop taking them to try and remained focused and negate any potential side @-@ effects the medication might have . Despite his enthusiasm for the job and for football , the strain on Stein , combined with his poor health , had led to him indicating that he would step down after the World Cup Finals in Mexico . Scotland drew 1 – 1 thanks to a late penalty kick by Davie Cooper , but Stein suffered a fatal heart attack . Assistant manager Alex Ferguson took temporary charge of the team until the 1986 World Cup , from which Scotland were eliminated in the group stage . 
 = = = 1986 – 2001 : Roxburgh and Brown = = = 
 After the 1986 World Cup , the SFA appointed their Director of Coaching , Andy Roxburgh , as the national team manager . Scotland failed to qualify for UEFA Euro 1988 , but Roxburgh then guided Scotland to qualification for the 1990 FIFA World Cup . Scotland defeated Argentina in a pre @-@ tournament friendly , but were eliminated in the group stage with one win ( against Sweden ) and two losses . The team then qualified for UEFA Euro 1992 , the first time Scotland had qualified for a European championship finals . Roxburgh resigned in September 1993 after failing to qualify for the 1994 FIFA World Cup . 
 Roxburgh was succeeded by Craig Brown , who had been his assistant . Brown had first joined the Scotland coaching setup in 1986 , when the team was managed by Alex Ferguson . His appointment was greeted critically , as Brown had a low @-@ profile career in football beforehand . Despite limited resources , Brown managed to lead Scotland to qualification for two major tournaments , UEFA Euro 1996 and the 1998 FIFA World Cup . Scotland played well in a narrow defeat against Brazil and a draw against Norway , but were eliminated after suffering a 3 – 0 defeat against Morocco . During 2002 FIFA World Cup qualification , Brown continued to rely on a group of ageing players , including Colin Hendry and Tom Boyd . None of his strikers were playing regularly for their clubs and the team lacked pace . Brown resigned immediately after the last qualification match . 
 = = = 2001 – present = = = 
 Former Germany manager Berti Vogts was appointed Scotland manager in January 2002 . A number of players retired from international football after Craig Brown resigned , which meant that Vogts had to build a new squad . He tried new players and formations , but the team suffered a number of heavy defeats in early friendly fixtures . Scotland reached the UEFA Euro 2004 qualification playoffs and won the first leg at home against the Netherlands , but were then beaten 6 – 0 in the return match . Vogts continued as manager into the 2006 FIFA World Cup qualification matches , but resigned after the team took just two points from their first three matches . Debate about why Vogts had failed centred on whether Scotland had sufficient playing talent to compete , or if poor results had been due to his own failings . 
 By the time Walter Smith had been appointed manager , Scotland had dropped to a record low position in the FIFA World Rankings . Smith was credited with creating a " club atmosphere " within the national squad . Scotland performed well in the early stages of a tough UEFA Euro 2008 qualification group , but Smith resigned from the Scotland job in January 2007 to manage Rangers . Alex McLeish was hired to replace Smith . Scotland continued to pursue qualification for Euro 2008 under McLeish , but were eliminated after losing against Italy in the final match . McLeish left the Scotland job soon afterwards , to manage Birmingham City . Despite failing to qualify for a tournament , the improved results under both Smith and McLeish lifted Scotland to 13th place in the world rankings . 
 George Burley was appointed manager in January 2008 . Burley suffered from disruptions to the squad . During a goalless home draw against Norway , Burley substituted in Chris <unk> , who missed an open goal from 3 yards . Striker Kris Boyd , who had been left on the bench , announced his retirement from international football . Burley dropped Barry Ferguson and Allan McGregor from the team for a qualifying match against Iceland after it was reported they had been drinking through the night at the team hotel . The two players made gestures at photographers while sitting on the substitutes ' bench during the match against Iceland and were then banned by the SFA . Despite failing to qualify for the 2010 FIFA World Cup , the SFA initially decided to keep Burley in the job , but then decided to dismiss him after a heavy defeat in a friendly match against Wales . 
 Dundee United manager Craig Levein was appointed in December 2009 . Levein was heavily criticised by the media for his decision to play without any strikers in a Euro 2012 qualifier against the Czech Republic , which Scotland lost 1 – 0 . Levein continued to defend this tactical approach , even after he had left the position . Scotland failed to qualify for Euro 2012 , but Levein argued that the team was improving . For 2014 World Cup qualification , Levein and the SFA successfully pushed for Scotland to have their first two fixtures at home . This policy backfired , however , as Scotland could only draw those two matches . Defeats in following away matches against Wales and Belgium resulted in Levein being sacked by the SFA . 
 Gordon Strachan was appointed to replace Levein . Strachan was credited with improving the fortunes of the team in his first year in charge , as Scotland achieved victories against Croatia ( twice ) , Macedonia and Norway . In UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying , Scotland appeared to have a better chance of qualification as the finals tournament was expanded from 16 teams to 24 , but were drawn in a tough group with Germany , Poland and Republic of Ireland . After losing their opening match in Germany , Scotland recorded home wins against Georgia , Ireland and Gibraltar , and away draws against Poland and Ireland . In their following game Scotland produced an " insipid " performance , as they lost 1 – 0 in Georgia . A home defeat by Germany and a late equalising goal by Poland eliminated Scotland from contention . After a win against Gibraltar in the last qualifier , Strachan agreed a new contract with the SFA . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 The following table provides a summary of the complete record of each Scotland manager , including their progress in both the World Cup and the European Championship . Statistically the most successful manager was Alex McLeish , who won seven of the ten games he took charge of . Discounting managers who took charge of less than ten games , the least successful manager was George Burley , with just three wins in 14 games . 
 Last updated : France v Scotland , 4 June 2016 . Statistics include official FIFA @-@ recognised matches only . 
 = = = British Home championships = = = 
 The following table provides a summary of results for each Scotland manager in the British Home Championship , held annually until the 1983 – 84 season . 
 Key : P – Number of complete tournaments played , W – Number of tournaments won , S – Number of tournaments shared , % – win percentage 
 = Jillian Hall = 
 Jillian Faye Hall ( née Fletcher ; September 6 , 1980 ) is an American retired professional wrestler and singer best known for her time in World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) as a WWE Diva under the ring name Jillian ( Hall ) . She also worked as a trainer in WWE 's developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling . 
 After debuting in 1998 , Hall worked on the independent circuit under the name <unk> Mercedes . She won numerous championships , before beginning to work for Ohio Valley Wrestling in 2003 under her real name . She debuted on WWE 's SmackDown brand as the " fixer " for the MNM faction . After leaving MNM , she became John " Bradshaw " Layfield 's " image consultant " , and managed him to the WWE United States Championship at WrestleMania 22 . In February 2007 , Hall developed an in @-@ ring persona as a tone @-@ deaf singer . In June 2007 , she was drafted to Raw , where she participated in numerous tag team matches after allying with Melina . In October 2009 , she won the WWE Divas Championship , but lost it to Melina the same night . Hall was released from her WWE contract in November 2010 . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Training and independent circuit ( 1998 – 2003 ) = = = 
 Hall was trained by Dave Finlay at his professional wrestling school . Debuting in 1998 , Fletcher wrestled under the ring name <unk> Mercedes on the independent circuit as a villainess . Mercedes won numerous championships on the independent circuit , including Southern States Wrestling 's Women 's Championship . She wrestled for women @-@ only promotions , including G.L.O.R.Y. , the Professional Girl Wrestling Association ( PGWA ) , and the Women 's Wrestling Alliance ( WWA ) , and held both the WWA Women 's Championship and the PGWA Championship . She also competed for other promotions including Hoosier Pro Wrestling ( HPW ) , where she won both the HPW Cruiserweight Championship and HPW Ladies ' Championship , Canadian International Wrestling ( CWI ) , where she won the CIW Indy Women 's Championship , Mid – States Championship Wrestling , where she won the MCW Mid @-@ American title , and Blue Water Championship Wrestling , where she won the <unk> Women 's title . Her greatest independent circuit success was in the Superstar Wrestling Federation ( SWF ) , where she held the SWF Women 's Championship and also competed in numerous intergender matches . She held the SWF Tag Team Championship twice , once with Tiny Tim and once with Randy Allen . In 2002 and early 2003 , Mercedes wrestled regularly for the Apocalypse Wrestling Federation and Wrestle And Respect , where she competed in intergender matches and was involved in a scripted rivalry with the " Fabulous Firebird " Phoenix over the G.L.O.R.Y. Ladies ' Wrestling Championship . On January 23 , 2003 , Mercedes won the G.L.O.R.Y. Ladies ' Wrestling Championship , when she defeated the " Fabulous Firebird " Phoenix via referee 's decision at an Apocalypse Wrestling Federation show . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 Hall made her debut for Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) at the OVW Six Flags Summer <unk> Series event on May 30 , 2003 , where she defeated Passion in a singles match . On the July 25 episode of OVW Television , Hall teamed up with Victoria in a winning effort defeating Nikita and Passion . She eventually signed a developmental contract with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) in 2004 . She started out in OVW as a fan favorite — gaining the nickname " Chronically Cute " — and had a series of matches against Alexis Laree . After getting breast implants , as well as straightening and bleaching her hair blonde , she turned into a villain . The villainous turn was motivated in an angle where her implants " leaked into her brain " , causing her to become psychotic . As a villain , she managed the OVW Southern Tag Team Champions Blonde Bombers ( Tank and Chad Toland ) alongside her bodyguard Melissa Coates and went on a spree of blinding people with rubbing alcohol in storyline . 
 = = = = SmackDown ; Managing JBL and MNM ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 Hall made her WWE debut on the July 28 , 2005 episode of SmackDown ! with a gimmick of a " fixer " for the villainous faction MNM ( Joey Mercury , Johnny Nitro , and Melina ) . She also had a " growth " on the left side of her face , which she referred to as a " blemish " , the nature of which the announcers constantly speculated over . The gimmick carried over to OVW , where the Blonde Bombers forced her to choose between them and MNM . She eventually chose MNM , but did not stay with that group for very long . As MNM 's fixer , she , in storyline , helped them to obtain a photo shoot for the cover of SmackDown ! magazine , and helped to fix a problem that Melina had with Torrie Wilson , by helping Melina defeat her . 
 Hall was later approached by John " Bradshaw " Layfield ( JBL ) , a former WWE Champion who asked for help repairing his image after a loss to underdog Rey Mysterio . During this time , she was involved in her first feud on SmackDown ! , against Stacy Keibler , with the two confronting each other many times until Hall cheated to defeat Keibler in Keibler 's final match on Velocity , one of WWE 's secondary television programs . As JBL 's " Image Consultant " , she had an important role in JBL 's feud with The Boogeyman , which included The Boogeyman spitting worms across her chest , putting worms down her skirt and biting off her mole . She also successfully guided JBL to winning the United States Championship from Chris Benoit at WrestleMania 22 in April . 
 That April , he fired her after Hall accidentally slammed a cage door on JBL 's head during a steel cage match and put together a " second @-@ rate " United States championship celebration . After being fired , she turned into a fan favorite and began a scripted rivalry with former client , Melina of MNM . She defeated her in a six @-@ man tag team match along with Paul London and Brian Kendrick and in singles competition at Judgment Day in a controversial fashion . 
 = = = = Feud with Ashley Massaro ( 2006 @-@ 2007 ) = = = = 
 Throughout mid @-@ 2006 , she teamed with Ashley Massaro in a feud against Michelle McCool and Kristal . In July , she participated in a Bra and Panties match at The Great American Bash which was won by Massaro . She appeared only sporadically throughout the end of 2006 , competing mainly in dance and lingerie contests . 
 In January 2007 , Hall began a scripted rivalry with Massaro centered on Hall 's jealousy of Massaro 's recent Playboy appearance ; the rivalry turned Hall into a villain and matches between the two mainly resulted in losses for Hall . During the feud , Hall attempted to prove that she was talented in areas beyond wrestling and being eye candy by creating a new in @-@ ring persona , in which she sang badly at every opportunity , but thought she was a very good singer . She later attempted to impress music producer Timbaland by performing a song she claimed to have composed herself , looking for a spot in a video he was preparing and a possible future collaboration on a music project , but he turned her down . Massaro , with whom she had been involved in a rivalry , was one of the Divas who was chosen to work with Timbaland instead . Jealous of Massaro 's recent successes , she attacked her and , in storyline , seriously injured her , with the reasoning that if she could not appear in Timbaland 's music project , neither could Massaro . 
 Following this incident , she had a short rivalry with Michelle McCool , who had come to Massaro 's aid , and was annoyed by Hall 's singing . She defeated McCool in a singles match on the April 27 episode of SmackDown ! . They continued to compete against each other throughout May and June , with McCool coming out on top . 
 = = = = Raw and Divas Champion ( 2007 – 2010 ) = = = = 
 Hall was drafted from SmackDown ! to the Raw brand on June 17 , 2007 as part of the 2007 Supplemental Draft . The following night , Hall won her Raw debut where she teamed with Melina to defeat Mickie James and Candice Michelle in a tag team match . From then on , Hall mainly competed in tag team matches , wrestling James , Michelle , and Maria . She resumed her singing gimmick not long after , frequently appearing in backstage and in @-@ ring segments , including a stint as one of the contestants for the WWE Idol segment on the August 13 , 2007 episode . She also entered into an on @-@ and @-@ off angle with ring announcer Lilian Garcia stemming from her jealousy of Garcia 's flourishing singing career . In October , Hall formed an alliance with fellow villainous Diva Melina , and the pair teamed together on numerous occasions throughout the end of the year . She also competed in the 10 @-@ Diva tag team match at Survivor Series , but her team was not successful . 
 At the start of 2008 , Hall continued her alliance with Melina , both teaming with her and accompanying her to the ring on numerous occasions . Hall was utilized mainly in a backup role throughout the next few months , teaming with Melina , as well as competing in a 12 Diva tag team match at the Backlash pay @-@ per @-@ view in April , which her team won . In mid @-@ 2008 , Hall began a scripted rivalry with Mickie James and Kelly Kelly , teaming up with multiple partners , including Layla and Katie Lea Burchill to face them in tag team matches . She continued to have a rivalry with Kelly throughout October , and was also a part of the winning team in a Raw versus SmackDown 10 @-@ Diva tag team elimination match at Survivor Series in November , although she was eliminated by Maria . 
 In January 2009 , she formed an alliance with the Women 's Champion , Beth Phoenix to face Kelly Kelly and former ally Melina in tag team matches , which Phoenix and Hall won due to the interference of Rosa Mendes , Phoenix 's associate . She also sporadically competed in singles matches , losing to both Kelly Kelly and Melina . Hall then took a brief hiatus and made her return on August 3 , teaming with Phoenix to defeat Mickie James and Gail Kim . Hall unsuccessfully competed at WrestleMania XXV in a 25 @-@ Divas Battle Royal to determine the first Miss WrestleMania after being eliminated by Gail Kim . On the October 12 episode of Raw , Hall defeated Mickie James to win the Divas Championship , her first championship in WWE , but lost it to Melina immediately afterwards after Melina was traded to the Raw brand thanks to the divas trade by Nancy O 'Dell . The following week on Raw , Hall unsuccessfully challenged Melina for the Divas Championship in a rematch . On the October 26 episode of Raw , Hall teamed up with Chavo Guerrero in a losing effort to Melina and Santino Marella in a mixed @-@ tag @-@ team match . At the Survivor Series pay @-@ per @-@ view , Hall teamed up with Alicia Fox , Beth Phoenix , Layla and Michelle McCool in a losing effort to Mickie James , Kelly Kelly , Gail Kim , Eve Torres , Melina in a Survivor Series Tag Team Elimination match . 
 On September 27 episode of Raw Hall participated in a # 1 Contenders Divas Battle Royal which was won by Natalya . In the middle to late @-@ 2010 , Hall began a scripted rivalry with The Bella Twins ( Brie and Nikki ) , teaming up with multiple partners , including Maryse and Alicia Fox to face them in tag team matches . 
 On October 2 , 2010 , Hall announced that she was taking a break from television as she had been assigned as a trainer for WWE 's developmental territory Florida Championship Wrestling . On November 19 , 2010 , Hall 's contract expired , and WWE announced it was not to be renewed . 
 = = = Return to independent circuit and retirement ( 2011 – 2014 ) = = = 
 Hall was scheduled for a match against TNA Knockout Winter at Family Wrestling Entertainment show in Brooklyn , New York on May 14 , but was pulled out of the show due to injury . On June 18 , Jillian got her first victory since was released by WWE in Xtreme Pro Wrestling defeating Santana G. On June 25 , 2011 at The Uncensored Rumble IV event , Jillian made her Women Superstars Uncensored debut against Kristin <unk> in a losing effort . On the January 28 , 2012 episode of Xtreme Pro Wrestling , Hall defeated Leva Bates . On February 5 , 2012 , Hall made her debut for World Wrestling Fan Xperience ( WWFX ) losing to former WWE Diva Melina . On September 27 , 2012 , Hall wrestled Tara in a tryout dark match for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) but lost . 
 Hall made her debut for Crossfire Wrestling on August 4 , as a face defeating Jessicka Havok by disqualification after match Hall would get a measure of revenge by attacking Havok . Hall made an appearance at Crossfire Wrestling , with Reby Sky and Maria Kanellis on November 2 , 2012 . Hall made an appearance at Crossfire Wrestling , in support for the Make a Wish foundation on November 3 , 2012 . Hall made her debut for Pro Wrestling Xtreme ( PWX ) on January 28 , 2012 at the PWX A Wrestling Odyssey event , where she defeated Leva Bates to win the vacant PWX Women 's Championship . At the PWX 1 year Anniversary show on April 28 , Hall dropped the championship to Shooter Storm . Jillian made her debut for Family Wrestling Entertainment ( FWE ) at the FWE Empire State Showdown pay @-@ per @-@ view , as a face defeating Jackie Gayda . At the FWE <unk> Family pay @-@ per @-@ view , Hall defeated FWE Women 's champion Maria Kanellis with Winter as the special guest referee turning heel in the process . Later that night , she teamed with Winter in a losing effort to Kanellis and Rosita . On March 17 , 2013 , Hall returned to TNA to take part in the tapings of the TNA Knockout Knockdown One Night Only pay @-@ per @-@ view , where she was defeated by Velvet Sky . On January 21 , 2014 , Hall announced her retirement . 
 = = A Jingle with Jillian = = 
 Hall released her first album A Jingle with Jillian on December 11 , 2007 on iTunes nationwide . The album features five traditional Christmas songs covered by Hall in her character of a terrible singer . The album itself reached number 20 in the UK Holidays Top 100 shortly after its release . 
 = = = Chart position = = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 As a teenager , Hall was a cheerleader and also took gymnastics classes . After graduating from high school , Hall attended college , but dropped out in order to train as a professional wrestler . At nineteen , she legally changed her last name from Fletcher to Hall . She was a fan of Rick Martel . Hall is friends with fellow WWE alumni Melina Perez . 
 Hall is divorced and has a daughter from the marriage . In 2009 , Hall was engaged to fellow wrestler John Toland , whom she met when they were both training at Ohio Valley Wrestling . On September 10 , 2010 , Hall married her new boyfriend , Mike <unk> , in a Las Vegas wedding . Hall announced in February 2011 that the couple was expecting their first child together . On March 9 , 2011 , Hall announced that she had suffered a miscarriage 14 weeks into her pregnancy . 
 On April 23 , 2012 , Hall was arrested in Orange County , Florida and charged with battery . Following her arrest , it was reported that Hall had separated from her husband . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 450 ° splash 
 Missile dropkick – 1998 – 2002 
 Moonsault – 1998 – 2002 
 Sitout facebuster 
 Sitout full nelson facebuster – 2007 
 Signature moves 
 Backbreaker 
 Crash Test ( Cartwheel splash ) 
 Cartwheel elbow drop 
 Handspring back elbow to a cornered opponent 
 Hair @-@ pull snapmare , followed by a shoot kick to the back of the opponent 's head 
 Hair @-@ pull whip 
 Fender Bender ( Handstand leg drop ) 
 Powerbomb , sometimes from out of the corner 
 Monkey flip 
 Samoan drop 
 Standing hair @-@ pull 
 Wrestlers managed 
 The Blonde Bombers ( Chad Toland and Tank Toland ) 
 Melissa Coates 
 John " Bradshaw " Layfield 
 MNM ( Joey Mercury , Johnny Nitro and Melina ) 
 Orlando Jordan 
 Nicknames 
 " Chronically Cute " 
 " The Bombshell " 
 " The Fixer " 
 " The Pop Princess " 
 " The Songstress " 
 " The Tone Deaf Diva " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Thunderstruck " by AC / DC ( OVW ) 
 " Move It Up " by Billy Lincoln ( WWE ; November 2005 – February 2006 ) 
 " Top Spin " by Adam Salkeld ( WWE ; 2006 – 2008 ) 
 " Sliced Bread " performed by Hall and composed by Jim Johnston ( WWE ; 2008 – 2010 ) 
 " Toxic " by Britney Spears ( Independent circuit ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Blue Water Championship Wrestling 
 <unk> Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Canadian International Wrestling 
 CIW Indy Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 GLORY Wrestling 
 GLORY Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Hoosier Pro Wrestling 
 HPW Cruiserweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 HPW Ladies ' Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Mid @-@ States Championship Wrestling 
 MCW Mid @-@ American Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Professional Girl Wrestling Association 
 PGWA Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked her # 24 of the best 50 female singles wrestlers in the PWI Female 50 in 2010 
 Pro Wrestling Xtreme 
 PWX Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Southern States Wrestling 
 SSW Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Superstar Wrestling Federation 
 SWF Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Randy " The King " Allen ( 1 ) and Pyro ( 1 ) 
 SWF Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Women 's Wrestling Alliance 
 WWA Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 WWE Divas Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Vargo Statten Science Fiction Magazine = 
 Vargo Statten Science Fiction Magazine ( later Vargo Statten British Science Fiction Magazine , The British Science Fiction Magazine and The British Space Fiction Magazine ) was a British science fiction magazine which published nineteen issues between 1954 and 1956 . It was initially published by Scion Press , with control passing to a successor company , Scion Distributors , after Scion went bankrupt in early 1954 . At the end of 1954 , as part payment for a debt , Scion Distributors handed control of the magazine to Dragon Press , who continued it for another twelve issues . E.C. Tubb and John Russell Fearn were regular contributors , and Kenneth Bulmer also published several stories in the magazine . Barrington Bayley 's first published story , " Combat 's End " , appeared in May 1954 . The editor was initially Alistair Paterson , but after seven issues Fearn took the helm : " Vargo Statten " was one of Fearn 's aliases , and the magazine 's title had been chosen because of his popularity . Neither Paterson nor Fearn had enough of a budget to attract good quality submissions , and a printing strike in 1956 brought an end to the magazine 's life . 
 = = Publication history and contents = = 
 In the early 1950s , British publisher Scion published dozens of science fiction ( sf ) novels by John Russell Fearn under the pseudonym " Vargo Statten " . These were very successful , and Scion decided to take advantage of the popularity of the name by issuing a monthly sf magazine . The first issue was dated January 1964 and was edited by Alistair Paterson . The target audience included long @-@ time fans : Scion had notified established science fiction fan groups before the launch , so there was a letter column in the first issue , and a column by Vincent Clarke , a well @-@ known fan , covered fan news . Scion 's stated intention was to have at least 10 % of the magazine devoted to the sf fan community , and also to publish only stories by British writers . Paterson 's editorial policy for the fiction was aimed at younger readers , which led him to return a story by Brian Aldiss with a request for a rewrite to make it more suitable for teenaged readers . Aldiss , then right at the start of his career , refused , and never submitted a story to the magazine again . The stories in the early issues were mostly written by Fearn , E.C. Tubb , and F. <unk> Fawcett , who also wrote gangster fiction for Scion . 
 In early 1954 , Scion were fined heavily for publishing a pornographic gangster novel . Key Scion staff decided to restart the company under the name Scion Distributors , with Paterson continuing as editor . The magazine format was changed from pulp to digest with the May 1954 issue — the first from the new company . Scion Distributors had also acquired Scion 's debts when they restarted the company , and this included a large debt to the printers , Dragon Press . Scion gave Dragon Press control of the magazine with the December 1954 issue as payment for the debt , along with the novels they had rights to and their contract with Fearn . Paterson resigned and Fearn took his place , insisting when he did so that his pseudonym be removed from the magazine 's title . It was renamed The British Science Fiction Magazine from the September 1954 issue . In the opinion of sf historians Philip Harbottle and Stephen Holland , the quality of the magazine began to improve significantly , with stories by E.C. Tubb , Kenneth Bulmer , Fearn himself , and Barrington Bayley , whose first story , " Combat 's End " , had appeared in the May 1954 issue . However , sf historian Mike Ashley suggests that despite Fearn 's efforts , only the E.C. Tubb stories , published under the pseudonym " George Holt " , were a noticeable improvement in quality . When the circulation began to fall , Dragon Press quickly cut Fearn 's budget in half , from 25 shillings to only 12 / 6 per thousand words . This was half the word rate on offer at other British science fiction magazines of the era , and left Fearn unable to compete for the best stories . Fearn printed material of his own that he had been unable to sell elsewhere , and was also able to save some money by reprinting stories of his that had originally appeared in the U.S. magazines . More money was saved by changing the format to paperback size , and simplifying and standardizing the cover design . The magazine struggled on until early 1956 , when a printers strike caused Dragon Press to fold . The last issue appeared in January 1956 . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 The first seven issues were edited by Alistair Paterson , and the remainder by John Russell Fearn . The magazine was priced at 1 / 6 throughout its run . It was initially pulp @-@ sized and 64 pages long , but changed to digest format at 128 pages with the May 1954 issue , and then to a paperback size , also at 128 pages , from the February 1955 issue onwards . 
 The title was initially Vargo Statten Science Fiction Magazine ; this changed to Vargo Statten British Science Fiction Magazine with the May 1954 issue , then to The British Science Fiction Magazine with the September 1954 issue , and finally to The British Space Fiction Magazine with the June 1955 issue . The publisher was Scion , Ltd. of London for the first three issues , then Scion Distributors , Ltd. of London for the next four issues , and finally Dragon Publications Ltd. of Luton for the remaining issues . 
 = Metroid = 
 Metroid ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : <unk> ) is a science fiction action @-@ adventure video game series created by Nintendo . The series is primarily produced by the company 's first @-@ party developers , although some installments were handled by other developers , including Fuse Games , Team Ninja and Next Level Games . 
 The series chronicles the missions of space @-@ faring bounty hunter Samus Aran , who protects the galaxy from the depredations of the Space Pirates and their attempts to harness the power of the eponymous Metroids . Metroid combines the platforming of Super Mario Bros. and the exploration aspect of The Legend of Zelda with a decidedly darker atmosphere and a greater emphasis on nonlinear gameplay . 
 The series consists of eleven games that were released on almost every Nintendo video game console . It is one of the Nintendo 's most successful franchises , and the games have received varying levels of critical acclaim . As of September 2012 , the Metroid series sold over 17 @.@ 44 million copies . The series has been represented in other Nintendo media , including the Super Smash Bros. series . Additional media for the Metroid series has also been released , including soundtracks , comic books and manga adaptations . 
 = = Common gameplay elements = = 
 The Metroid series contains gameplay elements from shooter , platformer , and adventure games . The series is notable for its non @-@ linear progression and solitary exploration format where the player only controls Samus Aran , with few or no other characters to interact with . The series has been a 2D side @-@ scroller in all its incarnations until the Metroid Prime series changed the perspective to a first @-@ person perspective , leading to a new first @-@ person shooter element . The player gains items and power @-@ ups for Samus 's cybernetic suit primarily through exploration , and occasionally by defeating alien creatures through real @-@ time combat with the suit 's arm cannon . Many such upgrades enable further avenues of exploration . A recurring upgrade is the Morph Ball , which allows Samus to curl into a ball , roll into tight places and plant bombs . 
 The original Metroid was influenced by two other major Nintendo franchises : Mario , from which it borrowed extensive areas of platform jumping , and The Legend of Zelda , from which it borrowed non @-@ linear exploration . The game differed in its atmosphere of solitude and foreboding . Metroid was also one of the first video games to feature an exploration to the left as well as the right , and backtracking to already explored areas to search for secret items and paths . 
 = = Games = = 
 The twelve games in the Metroid series focus on the adventures of Samus Aran and her assignments to wipe out threats to the Galactic Federation presented by the Space Pirates and their attempts to harness various biological weapons such as the Metroids and Phazon . 
 Metroid 
 Samus travels through the caverns of the planet Zebes to stop the Space Pirates from exploiting the parasitic organisms known as Metroids for galactic domination . She confronts the cybernetic lifeform Mother Brain , as well as its guardians , Kraid and Ridley . It was released on the Nintendo Entertainment System , also known as the NES . 
 Metroid II : Return of Samus 
 The Galactic Federation deems the Metroid species too dangerous to exist , and after their own failed attempts , employs Samus to travel to the Metroid homeworld , SR388 , and exterminate the entire species . After killing every Metroid ( among them Alpha , Gamma , Zeta , and Omega Metroids ) and the Queen Metroid , Samus finds an unhatched egg behind the Queen Metroid 's chamber . Before Samus fires on the Metroid egg , an infant Metroid hatches and believes Samus to be its mother . After it helps her escape back to her ship , Samus hands the hatchling over to the Ceres research station for study . It was released on the <unk> and is also playable on 3DS . 
 Super Metroid 
 Just after she leaves , Samus receives a distress signal from the Ceres research lab . She returns just in time to catch Ridley stealing the hatchling , having killed all of the scientists . She follows Ridley to a rebuilt base on Zebes , where the Space Pirates are once again attempting to clone the Metroids and use them as weapons . Samus kills the reborn versions of Ridley and Kraid , as well as new guardians <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , then confronts Mother Brain once again . Samus is nearly killed in the battle , but the Metroid hatchling , now having grown immensely , rescues her . Mother Brain kills it just after it restores Samus 's energy , and Samus in turn destroys Mother Brain with a supercharged weapon known as the Hyper Beam apparently left by the hatchling 's death . She then escapes Zebes during a countdown that leads to the entire planet exploding , taking with it the few remaining cloned Metroids . It was released on the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) , and said to be " one of the greatest games of all time " by IGN . 
 Metroid Fusion 
 While acting as a bodyguard for researchers on the planet SR388 , Samus is infected by a native creature known as the X Parasite , originally the prey of the Metroid species . Doctors surgically remove portions of her armor and cure the X infection with a vaccine created from the DNA of the Metroid hatchling ( Metroid II : Return of Samus ) . The vaccine not only allows her to survive the parasites , but to absorb them to power up her energy and weapons . She is then sent to investigate a disturbance at the Biologic Space Labs research station , where it is revealed that specimens from SR388 had been carriers of the X parasite . An X mimicking Samus , nicknamed the SA @-@ X , has taken control of Samus 's old suit , methodically breaking into different parts of the station to allow the X parasites to infect the entire station . While trying to destroy the rapidly multiplying X as well as clones of the SA @-@ X , Samus discovers a secret Federation Metroid breeding program . Before Samus can react , the SA @-@ X discovers the lab and triggers a security system that ejects it into space , killing the Metroids . Realizing that the X pose a threat to galactic civilization , Samus 's shipboard computer , Adam , suggests that she alter the station 's propulsion to intercept with SR388 and destroy the planet as well to finally wipe out both X populations . After changing the station 's propulsion , Samus races back to her ship , where she encounters an Omega Metroid which seems to have escaped the laboratory breach , and is also invulnerable to every weapon Samus has . The SA @-@ X returns and tries to kill the Metroid , since the ice @-@ beam it has seems to be the only weapon able to damage it , but the SA @-@ X is badly damaged in the battle . Samus absorbs the SA @-@ X parasite to regain her weapons , destroys the Omega Metroid and leaves the station before it collides with SR388 . It was released on the Game Boy Advance . 
 Metroid Prime 
 Samus receives a distress signal in her new ship and travels to Tallon IV to stop the Space Pirates from exploiting a powerful radioactive substance known as Phazon . She discovers that the Chozo once settled on this planet , and their disappearance , as well as the emergence of Phazon , is due to a meteor impacting the planet decades ago . After ruining a Space Pirate mining operation and collecting the twelve Chozo Artifacts that allow access to the sealed impact crater , she confronts and defeats Ridley before delving deeper into the impact site and discovering Metroid Prime , a matured Metroid , mutated and corrupted by Phazon . Metroid Prime had been feeding off the Phazon Core of the meteor to increase in size and strength . During the final battle against Metroid Prime , Metroid Prime grabs and takes Samus 's Phazon Suit from her . She flees the impact site and after the credits , there is a glimpse of a dark hand coming out of a pool of Phazon in the arena where Samus and Metroid Prime fought . It is implied that this hand is Dark Samus in the future games and that Metroid Prime by taking Samus 's suit becomes Dark Samus . It was released on the GameCube and is the first of the Metroid Prime Trilogy . 
 Metroid : Zero Mission 
 Metroid : Zero Mission is an enhanced remake of the original Metroid designed to retell the game 's story . It has an addendum to the original storyline : After defeating Mother Brain , Samus is ambushed by Space Pirates and her ship crash @-@ lands back on the surface . With her ship and arsenal destroyed and armed with only an emergency pistol , she is forced to infiltrate the Space Pirate mothership to find a way off the planet . She finds ancient Chozo armor more powerful than her original while deep within Chozo ruins , then goes on to defeat the Ridley Robot and escapes from the mothership before it self @-@ destructs . It was originally released on the Game Boy Advance , and a version was released for the Wii U Virtual Console . 
 Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes 
 Samus is sent to investigate the planet Aether after a squad of GF Marines was lost there . Samus finds them all dead , killed by several creatures , mostly by an evil race called the Ing . The Ing possess life forms , transforming them into monstrous " dark " versions of their former selves to wage war with Aether 's dominant race , the Luminoth . Upon meeting the only remaining member of Luminoth ( the others are frozen in stasis chambers , awaiting the destruction of the Ing ) , Samus learns Aether has been split into two dimensions by a meteor similar to the one that crashed on Tallon IV . Samus agrees to assist by recovering Aether 's planetary energy ( the " Light of Aether " ) from Dark Aether . She does this by going to Dark Aether and absorbing the energy into her suit , then placing the energy back into the Energy Controllers on Light Aether . By completing this task , she destroys Dark Aether and the Ing that inhabit it . The final boss fights consist of one against the Emperor Ing and Dark Samus . Dark Samus vaporizes in front of Samus 's eyes , but as she flees , Dark Samus is shown to reform in outer space . It was released on the GameCube in 2004 . 
 Metroid Prime Pinball 
 Metroid Prime Pinball is a pinball version of Metroid Prime , following the same storyline and has similar gameplay elements ; however , it is just presented through pinball format rather than as a first @-@ person adventure . 
 Metroid Prime Hunters 
 When the Federation receives an unusual telepathic message regarding an " Ultimate Power " , Samus is sent to the remote Alimbic Cluster in the Tetra Galaxy to investigate and secure it . Others have also received the message , and six rival bounty hunters arrive with similar intent . When all parties arrive at the source of the transmission , it is revealed that the message was a false lure sent by an ancient creature known as Gorea , who intended to manipulate visitors into releasing it from a void between dimensions . Upon this revelation , Gorea attacks and syphons the energy from the other hunters , allowing it to commandeer their weapons . After killing Gorea , Samus and the other hunters escape the cluster , empty handed , but alive . It was released on the handheld Nintendo DS in 2006 . It was also the first game that many played on the DS since , at its original release in some regions , the console came bundled with a game card entitled Metroid Prime Hunters : First Hunt , a demo of the game . 
 Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption 
 Space Pirates shut down and infect Galactic Federation supercomputer network formed by the Aurora Units systems and then engage in large scale combat in an attempt to further spread Phazon . Enormous Phazon @-@ based <unk> , called Leviathans , impact planets and begin corrupting them with Phazon . Samus is charged with destroying the " Phazon Seeds " and restoring functionality to the Federation 's computer network . After purging three planets of Phazon ( including a Space Pirate homeworld ) , the Federation locates the source of Phazon , planet Phaaze , which is made entirely of Phazon . As the Federation engages the Space Pirates in orbit , Samus enters the depths of the planet and succeeds at destroying Dark Samus and Phaaze . A ship is seen following her into Warp Space at the end . It is the final game of the Metroid Prime trilogy , and was released for the Wii console . 
 Metroid : Other M 
 Samus receives a distress signal and follows it to a mysterious vessel named the Bottle Ship . There , she encounters a squad of Galactic Federation soldiers , including her friend Anthony Higgs and her former superior officer Adam Malkovich . They find out that the director of the ship , Madeline Bergman , has been conducting research on illegal bioweapons for the Federation . Eventually , Samus finds a survivor who claims to be Madeline Bergman , but is later revealed to be an android with an artificial intelligence duplicating that of Mother Brain , so that the bioweapon Metroids can be telepathically controlled . The Federation soldiers are mysteriously killed by a secret assassin among their ranks . Samus refers to this assassin as " the Deleter " . His or her identity is never explicitly revealed in @-@ game , but the Deleter is thought to be James Pierce for a few evidential reasons . Samus later discovers that these weapons are Metroids that have been genetically modified to remove their weakness to cold , making them virtually indestructible . Adam sacrifices himself to detach Sector Zero , the Metroid breeding area , from the main ship and activate its self @-@ destruct sequence . After defeating a Queen Metroid , Samus finds the real Madeline Bergman , who tells her the truth about the android she found earlier . The artificial intelligence , named MB , took on a human shape to build an ideal relationship with the Metroids , similar to the one Samus had with the Metroid hatchling ( Super Metroid ) . After developing emotions , MB revolted , telepathically ordering the cloned <unk> life forms on the ship to attack their captors . MB appears and attacks Samus and Madeline , but is stopped when Galactic Federation reinforcements show up , led by Anthony , the only surviving member of the original squad . Samus , Anthony and Madeline all escape on Samus 's gunship . In an optional epilogue , Samus returns to retrieve " something irreplaceable " : Adam 's helmet . 
 Metroid Prime : Federation Force 
 Announced at E3 2015 , Metroid Prime : Federation Force is a spin off of the Metroid Prime series . The game is a 4 player co @-@ op game focusing on missions . It also features a mode called Metroid Prime : Blast Ball . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 Nintendo 's Research and Development 1 ( R & D1 ) began development of Metroid , an action game for the Family Computer Disk System that was released in Japan on August 6 , 1986 . In North America and Europe , Metroid was published for the Nintendo Entertainment System in August 1987 and on January 15 , 1988 , respectively . Unlike the Japanese release , the Western versions of the game used passwords instead of a save system . Codes also allow for changes in gameplay ; the " JUSTIN <unk> " code lets the player play as Samus without her Power Suit , and " <unk> <unk> " grants Samus infinite ammunition , health , all power @-@ ups , and a modified Ice Beam . 
 A sequel , Metroid II : Return of Samus , was released for the Game Boy in 1991 in North America , and in 1992 in Japan . It was the first game of the Metroid series whose North American release featured a save system , allowing the player to have three separate save files . Metroid II also established the current " look " of Samus Aran and her Power Suit , namely the bulky look of the Varia Suit upgrade and the visual difference between the " Beam Mode " and " Missile Mode " of Samus 's arm cannon . Dan Owsen of Nintendo acknowledged in an interview that Nintendo R & D1 was involved in developing the Game Boy Color . He noted that Nintendo R & D1 included a special " Metroid palette " in the console 's hardware , which " makes Metroid II look really , really nice on Game Boy Color " , remarking that this made the game 's graphics comparable to the original Metroid . 
 Director Yoshio Sakamoto began planning concepts for Super Metroid in early 1990 , but his studio was committed to making another game , so developers from Intelligent Systems were brought in to help complete the game . After Super Metroid 's release , there would not be another sequel for eight years . A Nintendo 64 title was considered during the period , but Nintendo " couldn 't come up with any concrete ideas " . In 1999 , Retro Studios , a newly formed second @-@ party developer based in Austin , Texas , was given the project for Metroid Prime . Nintendo rarely allows overseas teams to work on its games but this was one occasion when they allowed a high profile title to be developed by a studio outside Japan . After it became a top seller on the GameCube , a trilogy was authorized . 
 Rumors abounded since 2005 about the development of a title called Metroid Dread , supposedly a 2D side @-@ scroller for the Nintendo DS . In Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption , there is a message in the Metroid breeding zone of the Space Pirate Homeworld on a computer panel that if scanned says " Experiment status report update : Metroid project ' Dread ' is nearing the final stages of completion . " Developers from Retro Studios gave a full but cryptic denial of any connection with the rumored game , and Nintendo denied they were making another 2D Metroid title . However , at E3 2009 , Sakamoto confirmed Metroid Dread existed at one point , and may still be in development , though in a later interview Sakamoto stated that Nintendo prefers to keep secrecy on the project , and also that he would like to " reset the situation at once and start from scratch . " On the May 3 , 2010 , 75th episode of IGN 's Nintendo Voice Chat Podcast , editor Craig Harris confirmed that the story for Metroid Dread was fully written and he had seen it at one point in time , claiming " [ Nintendo ] has it and can bring it back at any time . " 
 A new Metroid title was announced at E3 2009 , titled Metroid : Other M. This title was developed in cooperation with Team Ninja and directed by long @-@ time series developer Yoshio Sakamoto . It was released on the Wii on August 31 , 2010 . Sakamoto complimented Team Ninja 's work and expressed interest in working with them again , but said he currently has no ideas for new Metroid games . Retro Studios ' senior designer Mike Wikan said he would like to see a game continuing the story of the Prime trilogy , and producer Kensuke Tanabe said other Prime @-@ like games could explore Samus ' unique abilities such as the Morph Ball in a multiplayer feature . 
 While Nintendo has not formally announced plans for a Metroid title for the Wii U , Animal Crossing producer Katsuya Eguchi mentioned in an interview how such a title could make use of the console 's tablet controller to perform actions such as scanning enemies and retrieving information . A demo program for the Wii U , titled Battle Mii , showed Mii characters dressed in Varia Suits , as well as Samus 's gunship from Other M ; this was later revealed as a mini @-@ game called " Metroid Blast " , which is featured in Nintendo Land . Nintendo Land producer Shigeru Miyamoto , who was also involved with the Prime trilogy , has declared that this minigame reflects his ideas for future Metroid titles , while also displaying the series is " a franchise that we value and we certainly want to see what we can do with it in the future " . Miyamoto added that Retro is " a very high priority " in the development of more Metroid games . In 2014 , a former artist from Next Level Games revealed his company had interest in developing a 3DS Metroid game , going as far as building a prototype , before Nintendo asked them to do Luigi 's Mansion : Dark Moon instead . 
 = = = Creation and design = = = 
 Metroid was designed to be a shooting game that combined the platform jumping of Super Mario Bros. with the non @-@ linear exploration of The Legend of Zelda and a distinctly darker aesthetic . The name of the game is a portmanteau of the words " metro " ( as in rapid transit ) and android , and was meant to allude to the mainly underground setting of the first game as well as its robot @-@ like protagonist . Half way through development of the original Metroid , one of the staff said to his fellow developers " Hey , wouldn 't that be kind of cool if it turned out that this person inside the suit was a woman ? " , and the idea was accepted . Ridley Scott 's 1979 science @-@ fiction horror film Alien was described by Sakamoto as a " huge influence " after the world of the first Metroid had been created . The development staff was affected by the work of the film 's creature designer H. R. Giger , and found his creations to be fitting for the Metroid universe . In recognition of this , the game 's secondary antagonist was given the name Ridley , after the director of the movie . 
 Metroid , Metroid II : Return of Samus , Super Metroid , Metroid Fusion , and Metroid : Zero Mission were all developed by Nintendo 's internal R & D1 division . The games which have been developed by separate teams are Metroid Prime , 2 , and 3 ( Retro Studios ) , Metroid Prime Hunters ( Nintendo Software Technology Corporation ) , Metroid Prime Pinball ( Fuse Games ) , and Metroid : Other M ( Project M ) . The central figures in the production and development of the Metroid series are Yoshio Sakamoto , who has directed or supervised the development of most games ; Gunpei Yokoi , who headed the R & D1 division and produced the first two games ; Makoto Kano , who wrote the scenario for Metroid , co @-@ designed the second game , and produced the third ; and Hiroji Kiyotake , who designed characters for the original game . Mario and The Legend of Zelda creator Shigeru Miyamoto was involved with the Prime trilogy , having been the one that suggested Retro to work with the franchise . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 The Metroid series has been noted and praised for its unique style of video game music . Hirokazu " Hip " Tanaka , composer of the original Metroid , has said he wanted to make a score that made players feel like they were encountering a " living organism " and had no distinction between music and sound effects . The only time the main Metroid theme was heard was after Mother Brain is defeated ; this is intended to give the player a catharsis . At all other times , no melodies are present in the game . The composer of Super Metroid , Kenji Yamamoto , came up with some of the games ' themes by humming them to himself while riding his motorcycle to work . He was asked to compose the music for Metroid Prime to reinforce the series continuity . Metroid Prime 's Dolby Pro Logic II surround sound was mixed by a member of Dolby . Developers from Retro Studios noted how the 6 MB memory budget for all sound effects of a level in Metroid Prime was crucial in producing a quality soundtrack , as each sound had to be of very high quality to be included . Composer Kenji Yamamoto utilizes heavy drums , piano , voiced chants , <unk> of pipes , and electric guitar . Metroid Prime 3 took advantage of the increase in the amount of RAM that took place when the series switched from the GameCube to the Wii ; this allowed for higher quality audio samples to be used and thus allowing a better overall audio quality . Kenji Yamamoto , who composed the music to Super Metroid and the Prime trilogy , copied the musical design of the original Metroid in Metroid Prime 3 , by keeping the music and themes dark and scary until the very end , when uplifting music is played during the credits . 
 = = In other media = = 
 Characters and elements from the Metroid series have appeared in different mediums . Samus has appeared in Nintendo games such as Super Mario RPG , Tetris ( Nintendo Entertainment System version ) , Tetris DS , Galactic Pinball , Kirby Super Star , Kirby 's Dream Land 3 and WarioWare . Several characters and game environments have appeared in the Super Smash Bros. series . Samus is a playable character in all four Super Smash Bros. games . Super Smash Bros. Brawl , also features Zero Suit Samus , a version of the heroine using the blue form @-@ fitting suit seen in Zero Mission and the Prime series . Ridley makes cameos in Super Smash Bros. , where he can be seen flying through the level Zebes , and in Super Smash Bros. Melee both as an unlockable trophy and in the game 's opening , where he is fighting Samus at Ceres Space Station . In Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Ridley , in both normal and Meta Ridley forms , appears as a boss character . Kraid also appeared in Super Smash Bros. Melee as a stage hazard in Brinstar Depths and unlockable trophy . Various other characters such as Metroids , Mother Brain and Dark Samus appear as either trophies or stickers in the Super Smash Bros series as well . 
 Mother Brain was also the primary villain in the Captain N : The Game Master TV show . A Metroid @-@ lookalike enemy , called the <unk> , was encountered by Pit in Kid Icarus for the NES . In Dead or Alive : Dimensions , a fighting game developed by Team Ninja for the Nintendo 3DS , one stage is a replica of the arena in which Samus fights Ridley in Metroid : Other M and features both as assist characters ; Samus , however , is not featured as a playable character in Dimensions , as Team Ninja 's Yosuke Hayashi stated in an interview that " it would be better to let her focus on her job rather than kicking everyone 's butt in [ Dead or Alive : Dimensions ] " . A Wii U launch title Nintendo Land has a mini @-@ game based on the series called " Metroid Blast " . 
 Comics and manga have been made for various magazines based on Metroid , Super Metroid , Metroid Prime , Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes , and Metroid : Zero Mission in both the United States and Japan . Samus Aran and other Metroid characters also featured in the Captain N : The Game Master comic books by Valiant Comics . In Japan , six short " E @-@ comics " were created to chronicle Samus ' life and were published by Kodachi . Also in Japan , Comic Bom Bom published a three @-@ volume manga starring Samus called Samus and Joey ( <unk> <unk> & <unk> ) . 
 Both Samus Aran and Link from the The Legend of Zelda series were planned to be playable characters for the Wii version of Marvel : Ultimate Alliance however they didn 't make the final release . 
 The MMO Kingdom of Loathing has a minigame called " <unk> " , which is a text @-@ and @-@ button based version of Metroid . 
 = = = Possible live @-@ action movie = = = 
 In 2003 , two producers optioned the rights to create a live @-@ action film based on Metroid , but the rights expired . John Woo acquired the rights a few years later , and Lion Rock Productions was to produce and release the film before 2006 , but it either has been canceled or remains in limbo . Sakamoto has expressed no interest in working on a Metroid movie himself , but stated he could support such a project by Ryuji Kitaura , director of the CG scenes in Other M , if the concept and methodologies were good enough . 
 In December 2012 , Peer Schneider of IGN published an article explaining the fate and some production details of the proposed John Woo @-@ directed Metroid movie with an exclusive interview with one of the former producers of the Metroid movie , Brad Foxhoven . The movie with John Woo as director was first pitched in 2004 and initially had Nintendo 's full support . Foxhoven stated in the IGN interview , " Nintendo was quite supportive of the idea , as they were all fans of John 's previous films " and that production studio Tiger Hill was " in it for the long haul " and had started a three @-@ year development period . The Metroid movie was originally set for a 2006 release but slipped because Tiger Hill was spending most of the development time attempting to cope with Nintendo 's restrictions on the Metroid franchise . The reason for Nintendo 's restrictions was the past critical and commercial failure of the Super Mario Bros. movie which , according to IGN , " had left an indelible impression on Nintendo and how it would approach future licensing deals with Hollywood . " One writer that was brought in to write a script for the Metroid movie , among " several writers " , was David Greenwalt of Buffy the Vampire Slayer , Angel and Grimm fame , the furthest that the production process reached was " a treatment for a live action film that John would possibly direct . ” 
 The article revealed that early scripts for the movie were going to focus on series heroine Samus Aran and her origin . Tiger Hill wanted to explore Samus prior to her becoming the lone bounty hunter featured in the series . According to Foxhoven , the movie version of Samus Aran was " to be an exceptionally talented , but also flawed character who was looking for redemption , " and elaborating that , " We wanted to see her struggle , to be humbled , and to be forced to rise up against crazy odds . And of course we wanted to see the cool weapons in all of their glory . " The major problem that the writers faced was attempting to build @-@ out Samus 's back @-@ story , Nintendo had " creative " and " licensing " walls that the writers ran into . Foxhoven stated that these questions came up : “ What are they doing when they are NOT fighting ? What is their daily existence and relationships ? What are Samus 's aspirations , history , and fears ? " and further stated that " Nintendo appreciated the questions , but had never thought about them before , and ultimately didn 't have a lot of answers " and at the end , Nintendo " felt uncomfortable with our team [ Hollywood ] being the ones to propose those answers ” which basically caused the Metroid movie project to be ultimately canceled sometime in 2007 . Foxhoven however foresees Metroid becoming a movie , stating at the end of the IGN interview that " for Nintendo , they walked away appreciating the process and how much further they needed to explore the franchise so that it has a chance for a feature film at some point " and he revealed that " there are quite a few Hollywood executives in town who grew up playing Metroid , and who would be willing to take the time needed to bring Nintendo along in the process . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 The series has been highly praised by critics , being ranked as the 70th top game ( collectively ) by Next Generation in 1996 and as the eighth best video game franchise ever by IGN in 2008 . In 2001 , Electronic Gaming Monthly chose Super Metroid as the best game ever . The Metroid games have since appeared in other " best game " lists , with all games released up to 2005 included in a Nintendo Power top 200 Nintendo games list , Prime in the IGN top 100 , Metroid , Super Metroid , Prime and Echoes in a list by GameFAQs users ; Metroid and Super Metroid in Game Informer 's list ; and Prime and Super Metroid in Edge 's list . The series has been influential in many other games , including Castlevania : Symphony of the Night . 
 Samus Aran was recognized by Guinness World Records as being " enduringly popular " and as the " first playable human female character in a mainstream videogame " , although Toby <unk> ( " Kissy " ) from Namco 's Alien Sector predates her by one year . Other characters from the Metroid series have also received their own share of acclaim . Ridley was the number two most requested Nintendo character by IGN and number one by the fans to be added as a playable character to the Super Smash Bros. series and Mother Brain has been commonly ranked among the all @-@ time best video game bosses . 
 The original Metroid has been described as being boosted by its " eerie " music , adding a " sense of mystery and exploration " to the game by making the game " moody and atmospheric " . IGN praised the well timed music that helped add suspense to the experience . GameSpot described Super Metroid as better than the original " in literally every conceivable way " , Metroid Fusion was noted for its " understated score " which fit the mood of the adventure and its excellent stereo sound effects , making it an uncommonly good Game Boy Advance sound experience . Metroid Prime was considered one of the best games ever made upon its release , winning Game of the Year from various publications and websites . IGN called the aural experience with Metroid Prime 2 : Echoes " mesmerizing " . Music from Metroid has been frequently re @-@ released as part of " best of " video game music releases . Metroid Prime 's soundtrack was called the best sound design on the GameCube . The sound effects were also noted for a high degree of accuracy and blending with the soundtrack . On the popular video game music site OverClocked ReMix , Super Metroid is the tenth most remixed video game , while the first Metroid video game was twenty @-@ fifth . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The Metroid series has been commercially successful , with Super Metroid , Metroid Fusion , Metroid Prime , and Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption exceeding one million copies sold . By September 2012 , the series had sold over 17 @.@ 44 million copies worldwide . 
 Sales of Metroid games in Japan , however , have typically been lower than in the United States . In particular , the first two installments of the Metroid Prime series did not sell well in Japan , though it should be noted that Japanese gamers tend to dislike first @-@ person shooters in general as it causes many Japanese players motion sickness . In its debut week in Japan , Metroid Prime 3 : Corruption sold 32 @,@ 388 units , ranking it behind Ryū ga <unk> <unk> ! , Super Smash Bros. Brawl , Wii Fit , and Gundam Musou Special . Furthermore , Metroid : Other M was the third best @-@ selling video game in Japan during its week of release with 45 @,@ 398 copies sold , ranking it behind Wii Party and Monster Hunter Diary : Poka Poka <unk> Village . It sold an additional 11 @,@ 239 copies the following week . 
 = Thirty Seconds to Mars = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars ( commonly stylized as 30 Seconds to Mars ) is an American rock band from Los Angeles , California , formed in 1998 . The band consists of Jared Leto ( lead vocals , guitar , bass , keyboards ) , Shannon Leto ( drums , percussion ) and Tomo Miličević ( lead guitar , bass , violin , keyboards , other instruments ) . 
 The band 's debut album , 30 Seconds to Mars ( 2002 ) , was produced by Bob Ezrin and released to positive reviews but only to limited commercial success . The band achieved worldwide fame with the release of their second album A Beautiful Lie ( 2005 ) , which received multiple certifications all over the world , including platinum in the United States . Their next release , This Is War ( 2009 ) , showed a dramatic evolution in the band 's musical style , as they incorporated experimental music as well as eclectic influences . The recording process of the album was marked by a legal dispute with record label EMI that eventually became the subject of the documentary film Artifact ( 2012 ) . Thirty Seconds to Mars then moved to Universal Music and released the fourth album , Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) , to critical and commercial success . As of September 2014 , the band has sold over 15 million albums worldwide . 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars has consistently enjoyed sold out tours and numerous headlining festival slots . The band is noted for its energetic live performances and for fusing many music genres . They have been compared to the sounds of bands such as Pink Floyd , The Cure , Tool , and U2 , for their philosophical and spiritual lyrics , concept albums and their use of experimental music . Thirty Seconds to Mars has received several awards and accolades throughout their career , including a Guinness World Record , and has been included in the Kerrang ! list of best artists of the 2000s . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and first years ( 1998 – 2000 ) = = = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars started in 1998 in Los Angeles , California , as a collaboration between brothers Jared Leto and Shannon Leto , who had been playing music together since their childhood . The duo later expanded to a four piece when they added guitarist Solon Bixler and bassist Matt <unk> to the line @-@ up . Additional guitarist Kevin Drake , who first auditioned for the position of bassist , also joined the band as a touring musician . The band played its first concerts under different names , before finally settling on the name " Thirty Seconds to Mars " , which was taken from a rare manuscript titled Argus Apocraphex . Jared Leto spoke of the name as " a reference , a rough translation from the book . I think the idea is interesting , it 's a metaphor for the future , " he explained . " Thirty seconds to Mars — the fact that we 're so close to something that 's not a tangible idea . Also Mars being the God of War makes it really interesting , as well . You could substitute that in there , but what 's important for my brother and I , is that it be imaginative and really represent the sound of our music in as unique a way as possible . " He described it as a name that " works on several different levels , a phrase that is lyrical , suggestive , cinematic , and filled with immediacy . " When Thirty Seconds to Mars first started , Jared Leto did not allow his vocation as a Hollywood actor to be used in promotion of the band . 
 By 1998 , the group performed gigs at small American venues and clubs . Their eponymous debut album had been in the works for a couple of years , with Leto writing the majority of the songs . During this period , the band recorded demo tracks such as " Valhalla " and " Revolution " , or " Jupiter " and " Hero " , which later appeared on the band 's debut album as " Fallen " and " Year Zero " respectively , but also " Buddha for Mary " . Their work led to a number of record labels being interested in signing Thirty Seconds to Mars , which eventually signed to Immortal Records . In 1999 , Virgin Records entered into the contract . 
 = = = Debut album ( 2001 – 03 ) = = = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars retreated to the isolation of Wyoming 's countryside in 2001 to record their debut album , working with Bob Ezrin and Brian Virtue . They contacted Ezrin because they grew up listening to his work with Pink Floyd , Kiss and Alice Cooper and they felt he was the only one who could help them capture the size and scope of what they wanted to accomplish on their debut recording . The band chose an empty warehouse lot on 15 @,@ 000 acres , striving for the precise location that would enhance their sound . Even before the album was released , Puddle of Mudd invited Thirty Seconds to Mars to open a six @-@ week tour for them in the spring of 2002 . The band later embarked on a North American tour to support Incubus and began a club tour in August . 
 The band released their first studio album , 30 Seconds to Mars , on August 27 , 2002 in the United States through Immortal and Virgin . Jared Leto described the record as a concept album that focuses on human struggle and self @-@ determination , in which otherworldly elements and conceptual ideas are used to illustrate a truthful personal situation . The album reached number 107 on the US Billboard 200 and number one on the US Top Heatseekers , selling 121 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It was preceded by the single " Capricorn ( A Brand New Name ) " , which peaked at number 31 on the US Mainstream Rock chart . Upon its release , 30 Seconds to Mars was met with mostly positive reviews ; music critic Megan O 'Toole felt that the band has " managed to carve out a unique niche for themselves in the rock realm . " The album was a slow @-@ burning success , and eventually sold two million copies worldwide as of March 2011 . 
 In October 2002 , the band toured with I Mother Earth and Billy Talent on MTV Campus Invasion . The following month , Thirty Seconds to Mars made their first appearance on television on Last Call with Carson Daly and opened concerts for Our Lady Peace and Sevendust . Released in 2003 , " Edge of the Earth " became the second single from the album . In early 2003 , Bixler left the band due to issues primarily related to touring . He was later replaced by Tomo Miličević , who successfully auditioned for the part of guitarist . The band later went on tour with Chevelle , Trust Company , and Pacifier , and took a slot on the 2003 Lollapalooza tour . 
 = = = A Beautiful Lie ( 2004 – 08 ) = = = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars returned to the studio in March 2004 to begin working on their second album A Beautiful Lie , with Josh Abraham producing . During the recording process , the band traveled to four different continents to accommodate Jared Leto 's acting career . A Beautiful Lie was notably different from the band 's debut album , from both musical and lyrical aspect . " On the first record I created a world , then hid behind it , " Leto said . " With A Beautiful Lie , it was time to take a more personal and less cerebral approach . Although this record is still full of conceptual elements and thematic ideas it is ultimately much more wrapped around the heart than the head . It 's about brutal honesty , growth , change . It 's an incredibly intimate look into a life that is in the crossroads . A raw emotional journey . A story of life , love , death , pain , joy , and passion . Of what it is to be human . " 
 A Beautiful Lie was released on August 30 , 2005 in the United States . It has since been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and has reached platinum and gold status in several countries , with a sales total of over four million . Its lead single , " Attack " , made its radio debut on June 6 , 2005 and became the most added track on American modern rock radio during its first week of release . During 2005 , Thirty Seconds to Mars went on tour with Chevelle , Audioslave and The Used . The group embarked on their first headlining tour Forever Night , Never Day in March 2006 . At the same time , the band released the album 's second single , " The Kill " , which set a record for the longest @-@ running hit in the history of the US Modern Rock chart when it remained on the national chart for more than 50 weeks , following its number three peak in 2006 . Its music video , directed by Jared Leto under the pseudonym of Bartholomew Cubbins , received a largely positive response and numerous accolades , including an MTV Video Music Award . 
 In October 2006 , the band began their Welcome to the Universe Tour , sponsored by MTV2 , and were supported by Head Automatica , The Receiving End of Sirens , Cobra Starship , and several other bands including Street Drum Corps . The third single from the album , " From Yesterday " , was released in November 2006 and became the band 's first number one on the Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks . Jared Leto directed a short film for the single , which became the first ever American music video shot in the People 's Republic of China in its entirety . A Beautiful Lie was released in Europe in February 2007 . During the year , Thirty Seconds to Mars toured extensively throughout Europe and played at several major festivals , including Roskilde , Pinkpop , Rock am Ring , and Download . In March 2007 , Matt <unk> left the group to spend more time with his family and was replaced by Tim Kelleher , performing live only . 
 On November 1 , 2007 , Thirty Seconds to Mars won an MTV Europe Music Award in the category of Best Rock . The band also received the Kerrang ! Award for Best Single in two consecutive years for " The Kill " and " From Yesterday " in 2007 and 2008 , respectively . The album 's title track , " A Beautiful Lie " , was released as the fourth single in North America and selected European countries . Its music video was filmed 200 miles north of the Arctic Circle in Greenland , and proceeds from the sales benefited the Natural Resources Defense Council . At the 2008 MTV Europe Music Awards on November 6 , Thirty Seconds to Mars earned their second Best Rock and Best Video for " A Beautiful Lie " . 
 = = = EMI lawsuit and This Is War ( 2008 – 11 ) = = = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars began recording their third studio album This Is War in August 2008 . To produce the record , the band worked with Flood and Steve Lillywhite . Thirty Seconds to Mars had attempted to sign with a new label after the A Beautiful Lie tour , prompting EMI ( the parent label of Virgin ) to file a lawsuit for $ 30 million . EMI claimed that the band had failed to produce three of the five records they were obligated to deliver under their 1999 contract , which Virgin entered into with the now @-@ defunct Immortal Records . Jared Leto responded to some of the claims in the suit stating " under California law , where we live and signed our deal , one cannot be bound to a contract for more than seven years . " Thirty Seconds to Mars had been contracted for nine years , so the band decided to exercise their " legal right to terminate our old , out @-@ of @-@ date contract , which , according to the law is null and void . " 
 After nearly a year of the lawsuit battle , the band announced on April 28 , 2009 , that the case had been settled . The suit was resolved following a defense based on a contract case involving actress Olivia de Havilland decades before . Leto explained , " The California Appeals Court ruled that no service contract in California is valid after seven years , and it became known as the De Havilland Law after she used it to get out of her contract with Warner Bros. " Thirty Seconds to Mars then signed a new contract with EMI . Leto said the band had resolved their differences with EMI and the decision had been made because of " the willingness and enthusiasm by EMI to address our major concerns and issues , [ and ] the opportunity to return to work with a team so committed and passionate about Thirty Seconds to Mars . " 
 In a bid to involve their fans for This Is War , Thirty Seconds to Mars held an event , called The Summit , at the Avalon Club in Los Angeles , where they invited fans to provide backing vocals and percussion . After the success of the initial Summit , the group repeated the event in eight countries and extended it digitally . The band also invited fans to submit close @-@ up shots of their faces in order to make 2 @,@ 000 different individual covers for the album . Leto described This Is War as a record about survival : " It was a two @-@ year creative battle that was ferocious and tough but creatively rewarding , and all of those adverse elements , in hindsight , made us stronger and made the record stronger . " 
 Although the release date was changed many times , This Is War was eventually released in December 2009 . The album reached the top ten of several national album charts and entered the Billboard 200 at number 18 , with first @-@ week sales of 67 @,@ 000 in the United States . Its first two singles , " Kings and Queens " and " This Is War " , reached the number @-@ one spot on the US Alternative Songs chart . After a promotional tour in winter 2009 , Thirty Seconds to Mars embarked on their Into the Wild Tour in February 2010 . 
 At the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards , " Kings and Queens " received four nominations , including Video of the Year and Best Direction , and went on to win Best Rock Video . The album 's third single , " Closer to the Edge " , was the 2010 best @-@ selling rock single in the United Kingdom , topping the UK Rock Chart for eight consecutive weeks . Thirty Seconds to Mars collaborated with rapper Kanye West on the song " Hurricane " , which was released on the deluxe edition of This Is War and became the album 's fourth single in some countries . On November 7 , Thirty Seconds to Mars and West performed " Hurricane " at the 2010 MTV Europe Music Awards at the Puerta de Alcalá in Madrid , where the band also received their third Best Rock . On May 13 , 2011 , Thirty Seconds to Mars recorded a performance for the television program MTV Unplugged . They performed with musicians from the Vitamin String Quartet and invited a gospel choir to join the group for a rendition of U2 's song " Where the Streets Have No Name " . 
 A <unk> study indicated that , based on quantity of tour dates , Thirty Seconds to Mars was among the hardest @-@ working touring artists in 2010 . On October 16 , 2011 , it was announced that the band would enter the Guinness World Records for most live shows during a single album cycle , with 300 shows . The 300th show , called Tribus Centum <unk> , took place on December 7 , 2011 at the Hammerstein Ballroom in New York City and was followed by a special series of shows which marked the end of the Into the Wild Tour . 
 = = = Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2012 – present ) = = = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars took a break from touring in 2012 and spent most of the year recording their fourth album , entitled Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams . The album was produced by Jared Leto with previous collaborator Steve Lillywhite . Leto said that the band took a new direction with Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams . He explained that the album " is more than an evolution , it 's a brand new beginning . Creatively , we 've gone to an entirely new place , which is exciting , unexpected , and incredibly inspiring . " In September 2012 , Artifact , a documentary about the band 's legal battle against the record label EMI and the making of This Is War , premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival and won the People 's Choice Documentary Award . 
 In February 2013 , it was announced that " Up in the Air " would be the first single from the fourth album . In partnership with NASA , Thirty Seconds to Mars launched the first copy of " Up in the Air " aboard the Dragon spacecraft on SpaceX CRS @-@ 2 . The mission was launched atop a Falcon 9 rocket on March 1 , 2013 , sending the first ever commercial copy of music into space . On March 18 , 2013 , the single premiered from the International Space Station , after a Q & A session with the band and Expedition 35 flight engineer Tom <unk> , while Annise Parker , mayor of the city of Houston , proclaimed the Thirty Seconds to Mars Day . " Up in the Air " made its radio debut on March 18 and became commercially available for downloading the following day . The song reached number three on the US Alternative Songs chart and experienced success in international markets . 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars released Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams on May 21 , 2013 , through Universal in the United States . The album received generally positive reviews and reached the top ten in more than fifteen countries , including the United Kingdom and the United States . The band began their Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour in June , which included festival dates at Rock Werchter , Pinkpop , Rock in Rio , and Rock am Ring . The second single from the album , " Do or Die " , achieved a level of play on modern rock radio , while " City of Angels " , the third single , was released to rave reviews from critics and eventually reached number eight on the Alternative Songs chart in the US . At the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards , held on August 25 , " Up in the Air " won the award for Best Rock Video . 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars announced on April 25 , 2014 that they have parted from Virgin Records after tumultuous years with the label , with Leto telling Billboard , " We 're free and clear and excited about the future . It 's the most wonderful place to be . " In August 2014 , the group embarked on a double @-@ headline tour , dubbed the Carnivores Tour , with American rock band Linkin Park , visiting arenas and stadiums throughout North America . Thirty Seconds to Mars then launched a music festival called Camp Mars . The first edition took place in Malibu , California , in August 2015 and included a series of activities in a semi @-@ rustic setting and several DJ sets . On November 3 , 2015 , it was announced that Thirty Seconds to Mars are working on their fifth studio album . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The style of the band 's first studio album combined progressive metal and space rock with influences and elements from electronica , utilizing programming and synthesizers . Ryan Rayhill from Blender described the album as a " high @-@ minded space opera of epic scope befitting prog @-@ rock prototypes Rush , " and wrote that Thirty Seconds to Mars " emerged with an eponymous debut that sounds like Tool on The Dark Side of the Moon , " referring to the 1973 album by Pink Floyd . 
 Whereas the eponymous concept album 's lyrics focus on human struggle and self @-@ determination , A Beautiful Lie 's lyrics are more personal and the music introduces intense screaming vocals . The transformation that resonates throughout the album reflects the personal and artistic changes experienced by the band members before and during the creation of the record . The album widened the band 's sound by combining elements from progressive rock , hard rock and emo . Such alternative rock style has been compared to bands like The Cure , U2 and The Smashing Pumpkins . 
 Their third release This Is War was described as " an extremely progressive rock sound with killer choruses , " drawing inspirations from experimental Pink Floyd to melodic M83 . Chris Harris from Rolling Stone considered it " an ambitious collection of experimental rock " shaped by the band 's personal struggles and legal battle with their record label . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic acknowledged the band 's progression , referring to the overall style of the record as a mixture of synth rock , heavy metal , and progressive rock . 
 In Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams the band experimented with different instruments and drew influences from a wider and more varied range of styles . The album mixes experimental instrumentation with elements both symphonic and electronic , and the music introduces a minimalist approach full of ethereal sonics . The record carries the concept album format of This Is War and expands the spectrum to revolve around the themes after which it is named . 
 = = Activism = = 
 Thirty Seconds to Mars launched a website , called <unk> , to provide information about environmental issues and ways to participate in environmental activities . People can make donations through the site to support the Natural Resources Defense Council . In 2006 , Jared Leto created the cover art for The <unk> Green Room : Volume 2 , a compilation of live music that includes a Thirty Seconds to Mars song , which proceeds from the sales benefited The Nature Conservancy . During their Welcome to the Universe Tour , the group worked to develop strategies that would minimize fuel consumption to offset the impact that the tour would have had on the environment . 
 In June 2008 , the band joined Habitat for Humanity to work on a home being repaired and renovated through the Greater Los Angeles Area 's " A Brush With Kindness " programme . In advance of the build , the band organized an auction of " build slots " to give fans the opportunity to volunteer alongside them . In less than a week , six extra workers were enlisted and over $ 10 @,@ 000 was raised to fund additional Habitat for Humanity projects . Thirty Seconds to Mars fans , termed as the Echelon , started several philanthropic organizations and projects with the purpose of supporting various charities and humanitarian causes . 
 After the 2010 Haiti earthquake , Thirty Seconds to Mars raised $ 100 @,@ 100 for Haitian relief through a charity auction . The band has also supported the Haitian population through the Echelon project " House for Haiti " and Hope For Haiti Now telethon special . The group auctioned a quantity of items raising funds to help the Red Cross assist people affected by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami . The band contributed one dollar per concert ticket sold on the Carnivores Tour to the charity Music for Relief to support disaster relief and programs to protect and restore the environment . 
 = = Members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 30 Seconds to Mars ( 2002 ) 
 A Beautiful Lie ( 2005 ) 
 This Is War ( 2009 ) 
 Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams ( 2013 ) 
 = = Concert tours = = 
 Forever Night , Never Day Tour ( 2006 ) 
 Welcome to the Universe Tour ( 2006 ) 
 A Beautiful Lie Tour ( 2007 – 08 ) 
 Into the Wild Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) 
 Love , Lust , Faith and Dreams Tour ( 2013 – 15 ) 
 Carnivores Tour ( with Linkin Park ) ( 2014 ) 
 = Cordyline australis = 
 Cordyline australis , commonly known as the cabbage tree , cabbage @-@ palm or tī kōuka , is a widely branched monocot tree endemic to New Zealand . 
 It grows up to 20 metres ( 66 feet ) tall with a stout trunk and sword @-@ like leaves , which are clustered at the tips of the branches and can be up to 1 metre ( 3 @.@ 3 feet ) long . With its tall , straight trunk and dense , rounded heads , C. australis is a characteristic feature of the New Zealand landscape . Its fruit is a favourite food source for the New Zealand pigeon and other native birds . It is common over a wide latitudinal range from the far north of the North Island at 34 ° <unk> to the south of the South Island at 46 ° 30'S . Absent from much of Fiordland , it was probably introduced by Māori to the Chatham Islands at 44 ° <unk> and to Stewart Island at 46 ° 50'S . It grows in a broad range of habitats , including forest margins , river banks and open places , and is abundant near swamps . The largest known tree with a single trunk is growing at <unk> , Golden Bay . It is estimated to be 400 or 500 years old , and stands 17 metres ( 56 feet ) tall with a circumference of 9 metres ( 30 feet ) at the base . 
 Known to Māori as tī kōuka , the tree was used as a source of food , particularly in the South Island , where it was cultivated in areas where other crops would not grow . It provided durable fibre for textiles , anchor ropes , fishing lines , baskets , waterproof rain capes and cloaks , and sandals . Hardy and fast growing , C. australis is widely planted in New Zealand gardens , parks and streets , and numerous cultivars are available . The tree can also be found in large numbers in island restoration projects such as <unk> Matangi Island , where it was among the first seedling trees to be planted . 
 It is also grown as an ornamental tree in Northern Hemisphere countries with mild maritime climates , including parts of the upper West Coast of the United States and the warmer parts of the British Isles , where its common names include Torbay palm and Torquay palm . It does not do well in hot tropical climates like Queensland , Southeast Asia and Florida . 
 = = Description = = 
 Cordyline australis grows up to 20 metres ( 66 feet ) tall with a stout trunk 1 @.@ 5 to 2 metres ( 4 @.@ 9 to 6 @.@ 6 ft ) in diameter . Before it flowers , it has a slender unbranched stem . The first flowers typically appear at 6 to 10 years old , in spring . The right conditions can reduce the first flowering age to 3 years ( Havelock North , 2015 mast year ) . After the first flowering , it divides to form a much @-@ branched crown with tufts of leaves at the tips of the branches . Each branch may fork after producing a flowering stem . The pale to dark grey bark is corky , persistent and fissured , and feels spongy to the touch . 
 The long narrow leaves are sword @-@ shaped , erect , dark to light green , 40 to 100 cm ( 16 to 39 in ) long and 3 to 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 8 in ) wide at the base , with numerous parallel veins . The leaves grow in crowded clusters at the ends of the branches , and may droop slightly at the tips and bend down from the bases when old . They are thick and have an indistinct midrib . The fine nerves are more or less equal and parallel . The upper and lower leaf surfaces are similar . 
 In spring and early summer , sweetly perfumed flowers are produced in large , dense panicles ( flower spikes ) 60 to 100 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 3 ft ) long , bearing well @-@ spaced to somewhat crowded , almost sessile to sessile flowers and axes . The flowers are crowded along the ultimate branches of the panicles . The bracts which protect the developing flowers often have a distinct pink tinge before the flowers open . In south Canterbury and North Otago the bracts are green . 
 The individual flowers are 5 to 6 mm ( about 0 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter , the tepals are free almost to the base , and reflexed . The stamens are about the same length as the tepals . The stigmas are short and <unk> . The fruit is a white berry 5 to 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 20 to 0 @.@ 28 in ) in diameter which is greedily eaten by birds . The nectar attracts great numbers of insects to the flowers . 
 Large , peg @-@ like rhizomes , covered with soft , purplish bark , up to 3 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 feet ) long in old plants , grow vertically down beneath the ground . They serve to anchor the plant and to store fructose in the form of fructan . When young , the rhizomes are mostly fleshy and are made up of thin @-@ walled storage cells . They grow from a layer called the secondary thickening meristem . 
 = = = Regional diversity = = = 
 New Zealand 's native Cordyline species are relics of an influx of tropical plants that arrived from the north 15 million years ago in the warm Miocene era . Because it has evolved in response to the local climate , geology and other factors , C. australis varies in appearance from place to place . This variation can alter the overall appearance of the tree , canopy shape and branch size , the relative shape and size of the leaves , and their colour and stiffness . There may also be invisible adaptations for resistance to disease or insect attack . Some of these regional <unk> are different enough to have been named by North Island Māori : <unk> in the north , tī manu in the central uplands , <unk> in the east and wharanui in the west . In Northland , C. australis shows a great deal of genetic diversity — suggesting it is where old genetic lines have endured . Some trees in the far north have floppy , narrow leaves , which botanist Philip Simpson attributes to hybridisation with C. pumilio , the dwarf cabbage tree . In eastern Northland , C. australis generally has narrow , straight dark green leaves , but some trees have much broader leaves than normal and may have hybridised with the Three Kings cabbage tree , C. obtecta , which grows at North Cape and on nearby islands . These obtecta @-@ like characteristics appear in populations of C. australis along parts of the eastern coastline from the <unk> Peninsula to the Coromandel Peninsula . In western Northland and Auckland , a form often called tītī grows . When young , tītī are generally very spindly , and are common in young kauri forests . When growing in the open , tītī can become massive trees with numerous , long thin branches and relatively short , broad leaves . 
 In the central Volcanic Plateau , cabbage trees are tall , with stout , relatively unbranched stems and large stiff straight leaves . Fine specimens are found along the upper Whanganui River . On old trees , the leaves tend to be relatively broad . The leaves radiate strongly , suggesting that tī manu is adapted to the cold winters of the upland central plateau . It may have originated in the open country created by lava , volcanic ash , and pumice . Trees of the tī manu type are also found in northern Taranaki , the King Country and the Bay of Plenty lowlands . 
 <unk> are found in the east of the North Island from East Cape to the Wairarapa . Māori valued the narrow spiky leaves as a source of particularly tough , durable fibre . <unk> 's strong leaf fibres may be an adaptation to the region 's hot , dry summers . In parts of the Wairarapa , the trees are particularly spiky , with stiff leaves and partially rolled leaf @-@ blades . The trees near East Cape , by contrast , have leaves that hang <unk> on the tree . In Hawke 's Bay , some trees have greener , broader leaves , and this may be because of wharanui characteristics brought in across the main divide through the Manawatu Gorge . 
 <unk> grow to the west of the North Island 's main divide . They have long , broad flaccid leaves , which may be an adaptation to persistent westerly winds . The wharanui type occurs in Wellington , Horowhenua and Whanganui , and extends with some modifications to the southern Taranaki coast . In Taranaki , cabbage trees generally have a compact canopy with broad straight leaves . In the South Island , wharanui is the most common form , but it is variable . The typical form grows , with little variation , from Cape Campbell to the northern Catlins , and from the eastern coast to the foothills of the Southern Alps . In Marlborough 's Wairau Valley , cabbage trees tend to retain their old , dead leaves , lending them an untidy appearance . The climate there is an extreme one , with hot , dry summers and cold winters . 
 In north @-@ west Nelson , there are three ecotypes defined by soil and exposure . Trees growing on limestone bluffs have stiff , blue @-@ green leaves . On the river flats , the trees are tall with narrow , lax , dark green leaves , and an uneven canopy . They resemble the cabbage trees of the North Island 's East Cape . Along the coast to the far west , the trees are robust with broad , bluish leaves . The latter two forms extend down the West Coast , with the lax @-@ leaved forms growing in moist , fertile , sheltered river valleys while the bluish @-@ leaved forms prefer rocky slopes exposed to the full force of the salt @-@ laden coastal winds . 
 In Otago , cabbage trees gradually become less common towards the south until they come to an end in the northern Catlins . They reappear on the south coast at Waikawa , Southland , but they are not the wharanui type . Rather they are vigorous trees with broad , green leaves and broad canopies . They extend along the coast towards Fiordland , and inland to the margins of some of the glacier @-@ fed lakes . Very vigorous when they are young , these trees seem well adapted to the very cold winters of the south . 
 A study of seedlings grown from seed collected in 28 areas showed a north @-@ south change in leaf shape and dimensions . Seedling leaves get longer and narrower southwards . Seedlings often have leaves with red @-@ brown pigmentation which disappears in older plants , and this coloration becomes increasingly common towards the south . The changes in shape — leaves getting narrower and more robust from north to south and from lowland to montane — suggest adaptations to colder weather . 
 = = Taxonomy and names = = 
 Cordyline australis was collected in 1769 by Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Daniel Solander , naturalists on the Endeavour during Lieutenant James Cook 's first voyage to the Pacific . The type locality is Queen Charlotte Sound . It was named Dracaena australis by Georg Forster who published it as entry 151 in his <unk> Insularum Australium Prodromus of 1786 . It is sometimes still sold as a Dracaena , particularly for the house plant market in Northern Hemisphere countries . 
 The genus name Cordyline derives from an Ancient Greek word for a club ( <unk> ) , a reference to the enlarged underground stems or rhizomes , while the species name australis is Latin for " southern " . The common name cabbage tree is attributed by some sources to early settlers having used the young leaves as a substitute for cabbage . However the name probably predates the settlement of New Zealand — Georg Forster , writing in his Voyage round the World of 1777 about the events of Friday , April 23 , 1773 , refers on page 114 to the discovery of a related species in Fiordland as " not the true cabbage palm " and says " the central shoot , when quite tender , tastes something like an almond 's kernel , with a little of the flavour of cabbage . " 
 Cordyline australis is the tallest of New Zealand 's five native Cordyline species . Of these , the commonest are C. banksii , which has a slender , sweeping trunk , and C. indivisa , a handsome plant with a trunk up to 8 metres ( 26 feet ) tall bearing a massive head of broad leaves up to 2 metres ( 6 @.@ 6 feet ) long . In the far north of New Zealand , C. australis can be distinguished by its larger heavily branched tree form , narrower leaves and smaller seeds from C. obtecta , the Three Kings cabbage tree , its closest relative . C. australis is rather variable , and forms from the northern offshore islands may be hybrids with C. obtecta . Hybrids with C. pumilio and C. banksii also occur often where the plants are in close vicinity , because they flower at about the same time and share the chromosome number 2n = 38 , with C. australis . 
 The tree was well known to Māori before its scientific discovery . The generic Māori language term for plants in the Cordyline genus is tī , and names recorded as specific to C. australis include tī kōuka , tī <unk> , tī <unk> , tī awe , tī <unk> , and tī <unk> . Each tribe had names for the tree depending on its local uses and characteristics . Simpson reports that the names highlight the characteristics of the tree that were important to Māori . These include what the plant looked like — whether it was a large tree ( tī <unk> , tī <unk> ) , the whiteness of its flowers ( tī <unk> ) , whether its leaves were broad ( tī wharanui ) , twisted along the edges ( tī <unk> ) , or spiky ( tī <unk> ) . Other names refer to its uses — whether its fruit attracted birds ( tī manu ) , or the leaves were particularly suitable for making ropes ( tī <unk> ) and nets ( tī <unk> ) . The most widely used name , tī kōuka , refers to the use of the leaf hearts as food . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 A quote from Philip Simpson sums up the wide range of habitats the cabbage tree occupied in early New Zealand , and how much its abundance and distinctive form shaped the impression travellers received of the country : 
 " In primeval New Zealand cabbage trees occupied a range of habitats , anywhere open , moist , fertile and warm enough for them to establish and mature : with forest ; around the rocky coast ; in lowland swamps , around the lakes and along the lower rivers ; and perched on isolated rocks . Approaching the land from the sea would have reminded a Polynesian traveller of home , and for a European traveller , conjured up images of the tropical Pacific " . 
 Cordyline australis occurs from North Cape to the very south of the South Island , where it becomes less and less common , until it reaches its southernmost natural limits at Sandy Point ( 46 ° 30 ' S ) , west of Invercargill near <unk> Beach . It is absent from much of Fiordland , probably because there is no suitable habitat , and is unknown on the subantarctic islands to the south of New Zealand , probably because it is too cold . It occurs on some offshore islands — Poor Knights , Stewart and the <unk> — but was probably introduced by Māori . In the Stewart Island region , it is rare , growing only on certain islands , headlands and former settlement sites where it may have been introduced by <unk> collectors , while on the Chatham Islands it is also largely " a notable absentee " . 
 Generally a lowland species , it grows from sea level to about 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 feet ) , reaching its upper limits on the volcanoes of the central North Island , where eruptions have created open spaces for it to exploit , and in the foothills of the Southern Alps in the South Island , where deforestation may have played a part in giving it room to grow . C. australis in the central North Island has evolved a much sturdier form called tī manu " with branches bearing broad , straight upright leaves . " This form resembles that found in the far south of the South Island , suggesting that they are both adapted to cold conditions . 
 Cordyline australis is a light @-@ demanding pioneer species , and seedlings die when overtopped by other trees . To grow well , young plants require open space so they are not shaded out by other vegetation . Another requirement is water during the seedling stage . Although adult trees can store water and are drought resistant , seedlings need a good supply of water to survive . This stops the species from growing in sand dunes unless there are wet depressions present , and from hillsides unless there is a seepage area . The fertility of the soil is another factor — settlers in Canterbury used the presence of the species to situate their homesteads and gardens . The fallen leaves of the tree also help to raise the fertility of the soil when they break down . Another factor is temperature , especially the degree of frost . Young trees are killed by frost , and even old trees can be cut back . This is why C. australis is absent from upland areas and from very frosty inland areas . 
 Early European explorers of New Zealand described " jungles of cabbage trees " along the banks of streams and rivers , in huge swamps and lowland valleys . Few examples of this former abundance survive today — such areas were the first to be cleared by farmers looking for flat land and fertile soil . In modern New Zealand , cabbage trees usually grow as isolated individuals rather than as parts of a healthy ecosystem . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The cabbage tree 's year begins in autumn among the tight spike of unopened leaves projecting from the centre of each tuft of leaves . Some of the growing tips have changed from making leaves to producing inflorescences for the coming spring , and around these , two or three buds begin to produce leaves . The inflorescence and the leaf buds pass the winter protected by the enveloping spike of unopened leaves . Months later in spring or early summer , it bears its flowers on the outside of the tree , exposed to insects and birds . Flowering takes place over a period of four to six weeks , giving maximum exposure to pollinating insects . The flowers produce a sweet perfume which attracts large numbers of insects . The nectar produced by the flowers contains aromatic compounds , mainly esters and terpenes , which are particularly attractive to moths . Bees use the nectar to produce a light honey to feed their young and increase the size of the hive in the early summer . It takes about two months for the fruit to ripen , and by the end of summer a cabbage tree can have thousands of small fruits available for birds to eat and disperse . The strong framework of the inflorescence can easily bear the weight of heavy birds like the New Zealand pigeon , which was formerly the major disperser of the seeds . Each fruit contains three to six shiny , black seeds which are coated in a charcoal @-@ like substance called <unk> . The latter may serve to protect the seeds from the digestive process in the gut of a bird . The seeds are also rich in linoleic acid as a food source for the developing embryo plant , a compound which is also important in the egg @-@ laying cycle of birds . Because it takes about two years for a particular stem to produce an inflorescence , cabbage trees tend to flower heavily in alternative years , with a bumper flowering every three to five years . Each inflorescence bears 5 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 flowers , so a large inflorescence may carry about 40 @,@ 000 seeds , or one million seeds for the whole tree in a good flowering year — hundreds of millions for a healthy grove of trees . 
 = = = Response to fire = = = 
 Cordyline australis is one of the few New Zealand forest trees that can recover from fire . It can renew its trunk from buds on the protected rhizomes under the ground . This gives the tree an advantage because it can regenerate itself quickly and the fire has eliminated competing plants . Cabbage tree leaves contain oils which make them burn readily . The same oils may also slow down the decay of fallen leaves , so that they build up a dense mat that prevents the seeds of other plants from germinating . When the leaves do break down , they form a fertile soil around the tree . Cabbage tree seed also has a store of oil , which means it remains viable for several years . When a bushfire has cleared the land of vegetation , cabbage tree seeds germinate in great numbers to make the most of the light and space opened up by the flames . 
 Older trees sometimes grow epicormic shoots directly from their trunks after storm or ﬁre damage . Aerial rhizomes can also be produced from the trunk if it sustains damage or has become hollow , and grow down into the soil to regenerate the plant . Such regeneration can lead to trees of great age with multiple trunks . 
 = = = Biodiversity = = = 
 Many plants and animals are associated with C. australis in healthy ecosystems . The most common epiphytes are ferns , <unk> and orchids . Old trees often carry large clumps of the climbing fern Asplenium , and in moist places , filmy ferns and kidney ferns cling to the branches . <unk> species and <unk> often establish in the main fork of the tree , and one tree can host several species of native orchid . Other common epiphytes include <unk> lucida , as well as a range of mosses , liverworts , lichens and fungi . Two fungus species which infect living tissue — <unk> cordylines and <unk> cordylines — occur almost exclusively on C. australis . 
 Animals and birds associated with C. australis include lizards which forage among the flowers , including the gold @-@ striped gecko which is well camouflaged for life among the leaves of the tree . New Zealand bellbirds like to nest under the dead leaves or among the flower stalks , and paradise shelducks commonly build their nests in the base of an old cabbage tree standing in the middle of a field . Red @-@ crowned parakeets are often seen foraging in cabbage trees . In South Canterbury , long @-@ tailed bats shelter during the day in the hollow branches , which would once have provided nesting holes for many birds . 
 The berries of C. australis are enjoyed by bellbirds , <unk> and pigeons . Māori sometimes planted groves of cabbage trees ( pā tī ) to attract pigeons which could be snared when they came to eat the berries . Reminiscing in 1903 about life in New Zealand sixty or more years earlier , George Clarke describes how such a tapu grove of cabbage trees would attract huge numbers of pigeons : " About four miles from our house , there was a great preserve of wood pigeons , that was made as tapu as the native chiefs could devise . At a certain season , the pigeons came in vast flocks to feed on the white berries of the Ti tree ( <unk> ) [ sic ] and got so heavy with fat that they could hardly fly from one tree to another . No gun was allowed in the place . The Maoris , with a long slender rod and a slip noose at the end , squatted under the leaves and noiselessly slipped the noose over the necks of the stupid pigeons as they were feeding . " As the native birds have vanished from much of New Zealand with the clearing of forests , it is now flocks of starlings which descend upon the fruit . 
 The nectar of the <unk> is sought after by insects , bellbirds , <unk> and <unk> . The leaves and the rough bark provide excellent homes for insects such as caterpillars and moths , small beetles , <unk> larvae , weta , snails and slugs . Many of these are then eaten by birds such as saddlebacks and robins . The rough bark also provides opportunities for epiphytes to cling and grow , and lizards hide amongst the dead leaves , coming out to drink the nectar and to eat the insects . Good flowering seasons occur every few years only . While it is said that they foretell dry summers , it has been observed that they tend to follow dry seasons . 
 Insects , including beetles , moths , wasps and flies , use the bark , leaves and flowers of the tree in various ways . Some feed or hide camouflaged in the skirt of dead leaves , a favourite dry place for weta to hide in winter . Many of the insect companions of C. australis have followed it into the domesticated surroundings of parks and home gardens . If the leaves are left to decay , the soil underneath cabbage trees becomes a black humus that supports a rich array of amphipods , earthworms and millipedes . 
 There are nine species of insect only found on C. australis , of which the best known is <unk> <unk> , the cabbage tree moth , which is perfectly adapted to hide on a dead leaf . Its caterpillars eat large holes and wedges in the leaves . The moth lays its eggs at the base of the central spike of unopened leaves . The caterpillars eat holes in the surface of the leaves and leave characteristic notches in the leaf margins . They can infest young trees but seldom damage older trees , which lack the skirt of dead leaves where the parent moths like to hide . 
 = = Threats , pests and diseases = = 
 = = = Sudden Decline = = = 
 Cases of sick and dying trees of C. australis were first reported in the northern part of the North Island in 1987 . The syndrome , eventually called Sudden Decline , soon reached epidemic proportions in Northland and Auckland . Affected trees usually suffer total defoliation within 2 to 12 months . The foliage turns yellow , and the oldest leaves wither and fall off . Growth of leaves ceases , and eventually all the leaves fall , leaving dead branches , often with the dried @-@ out flowering panicles still attached . At the same time , the bark on the trunk becomes loose and detaches easily . The greatest number of dead trees ( 18 to 26 percent ) was recorded around Auckland . 
 For some years , the cause of the disease was unknown , and hypotheses included tree ageing , fungi , viruses , and environmental factors such as an increase in ultra @-@ violet light . Another hypothesis was that a genetic problem may have been induced in Northland and Auckland by the thousands of cabbage trees brought into the area from elsewhere and planted in gardens and parks . The Lands and Survey Department had a native plant nursery at Taupo in the central North Island , which was used to grow plants for use in parks , reserves and carparks . In many Northland parks , cabbage trees from the central North Island were growing and flowering within metres of natural forms . Any offspring produced might have been poorly adapted to local conditions . After nearly five years of work , scientists found the cause was a bacterium <unk> <unk> , which may be spread from tree to tree by a tiny sap @-@ sucking insect , the introduced passion vine hopper . 
 Populations of C. australis were decimated in some parts of New Zealand because of Sudden Decline . In some areas , particularly in the north , no big trees are left . Although Sudden Decline often affects cabbage trees in farmland and open areas , trees in natural forest patches continue to do well . Trees in the southern North Island and northern South Island are generally unaffected with few dead branches and no symptoms of Sudden Decline . By 2010 , there was evidence to suggest the severity of the disease was lessening . 
 = = = Rural Decline = = = 
 The plight of Cordyline australis in the Sudden Decline epidemic drew attention to another widespread threat to the tree in rural areas throughout New Zealand . Rural Decline was the name proposed by botanists to refer to a decline in health of older trees in pasture and grazed shrubland , leading over many years to the loss of upper branches and eventual death . 
 Often farmers would leave a solitary cabbage tree — or even groves of trees — standing after the swamps were drained . Most of these trees will slowly die out because livestock eat the seedlings and damage the trunks and roots of adult trees . When a cabbage tree is the only shade in a field , stock will shelter underneath it , damaging the bark by rubbing against it , and compacting the soil around the tree . Cows , sheep , goats , and deer eat the nutritious tissue under the bark of cabbage trees . Once the trunk has been damaged by animals , it seldom heals and the wounds get bigger over time . Eventually the tissue in the centre of the stem rots away and a cavity forms along its entire length . The trunk becomes misshapen or completely ring @-@ barked for a metre above the ground . Often the growth layer dies and the injuries may lead to bacterial or fungal infections that spread into the branches until the canopy too begins to die . Other factors thought to contribute to Rural Decline include wood @-@ rotting fungi like <unk> cordylines , micro @-@ organisms which cause saprobic decay and leaf @-@ feeding caterpillars . 
 Other mammals can be destructive . <unk> tend not to eat the leaves of the tree , but are very fond of eating the sugar @-@ rich flowering stalks as they emerge . They also like using the tree as a sleeping place . Rabbits can be more destructive , especially during periods of drought , when they have been seen to eat through the base until a tree falls , and then eating the fallen tree completely . Horses can also fell a tree by eating through the trunk . 
 = = Māori cultural uses = = 
 In traditional times , Māori had a rich knowledge of the cabbage tree , including spiritual , ecological and many practical aspects of its use . While much of that specialised knowledge was lost after the European settlement of New Zealand , the use of the tree as food and medicine has persisted , and the use of its fibres for weaving is becoming more common . 
 = = = Food = = = 
 The stems and fleshy rhizomes of C. australis are high in natural sugars and were steam @-@ cooked in earth ovens ( umu tī , a large type of <unk> ) to produce <unk> , a carbohydrate @-@ rich food used to sweeten other foods . The growing tips or leaf hearts were stripped of leaves and eaten raw or cooked as a vegetable , when they were called kōuka — the origin of the Māori name of the tree . The southern limit of <unk> ( sweet potato ) cultivation was at Banks Peninsula at 43 ° S , and south of there a culture developed around C. australis . Natural and planted groves of the cabbage tree were harvested . 
 Large parties trimmed the cut stems , and left them to dry for days or weeks . As well as stems , the rhizomes — extensions of the trunk below the surface of the ground shaped like enormous carrots — were also dug up to be cooked . In the early 1840s , Edward Shortland said Māori preferred rhizomes from trees growing in deep rich soil . They dug them in spring or early summer just before the flowering of the plant , when they were at their sweetest . November was the favourite month for preparing <unk> in the South Island . 
 After drying , the harvested stems or rhizomes were steamed for 24 hours or more in the umu tī pit . Steaming converted the carbohydrate fructan in the stems to very sweet fructose . The cooked stems or rhizomes were then <unk> by beating and carried back to villages for storage . <unk> could be stored dry until the time came to add it to fern root and other foods to improve their palatability . The sugar in the stems or rhizomes would be partially crystallised , and could be found mixed in a sugary pulp with other matter between the fibres of the root , which were easily separated by tearing them apart . <unk> could also be dipped in water and chewed , and was said to smell and taste like molasses . 
 Evidence of large cooking pits ( umu tī ) can still be found in the hills of South Canterbury and North Otago , where large groves of cabbage trees still stand . Europeans used the plant to make alcohol , and the often fearsome brews were relished by whalers and sealers . 
 The <unk> , the growing tip of the plant , was eaten raw as medicine . When cooked , it was called the kōuka . If the spike of unopened leaves and a few outer leaves is gripped firmly at the base and bent , it will snap off . The leaves can be removed , and what remains is like a small artichoke heart that can be steamed , roasted or boiled to make kōuka , a bitter vegetable available at any time of the year . <unk> is delicious as a relish with fatty foods like eel , muttonbirds , or pigeons , or in modern times , pork , mutton and beef . Different trees were selected for their degree of bitterness , which should be strong for medicinal use , but less so when used as a vegetable . 
 = = = Fibre = = = 
 A tough fibre was extracted from the leaves of C. australis , and was valued for its strength and durability especially in seawater . The leaves were used for making anchor ropes and <unk> lines , cooking mats , baskets , sandals and leggings for protection when travelling in the South Island high country , home of the prickly <unk> ( <unk> ) and <unk> or <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) . <unk> swings provided a source of amusement for Māori children . The ropes had to be strong , so they were often made from the leaves or fibre of C. australis , which were much tougher than the fibres of New Zealand flax . The leaves were also used for rain capes , although the mountain cabbage tree C. indivisa , was preferred . The <unk> made from cabbage tree leaves is stronger than that made from New Zealand <unk> . 
 = = = Medicine = = = 
 The Māori used various parts of Cordyline australis to treat injuries and illnesses , either boiled up into a drink or pounded into a paste . The <unk> , the growing tip of the plant , was eaten raw as a blood tonic or cleanser . Juice from the leaves was used for cuts , cracks and sores . An infusion of the leaves was taken internally for diarrhoea and used externally for bathing cuts . The leaves were rubbed until soft and applied either directly or as an ointment to cuts , skin cracks and cracked or sore hands . The young shoot was eaten by nursing mothers and given to children for colic . The liquid from boiled shoots was taken for other stomach pains . The seeds of Cordyline australis are high in linoleic acid , one of the essential fatty acids . 
 = = Cultivation today = = 
 Cordyline australis is one of the most widely cultivated New Zealand native trees , very popular as an ornamental tree in Europe , Great Britain and the United States . Hardy forms from the coldest areas of the southern or inland South Island tolerate Northern Hemisphere conditions best , while North Island forms are much more tender . It is easily grown from fresh seed — seedlings often spontaneously appear in gardens from bird @-@ dispersed seed — and can be grown very easily from shoot , stem and even trunk cuttings . It does well in pots and tubs . 
 It grows well as far north as western coast of Scotland , including the village of <unk> . It is more common in Southern England and in Ireland where it is grown all over the island . Although not a palm , it is locally named Cornish palm , Manx palm or Torbay palm . The last name is due to its extensive use in Torbay , it being the official symbol of that area , used in tourist posters promoting South Devon as the English Riviera . It also grows in Spain , Italy and Japan . Even though the natural distribution of C. australis ranges from 34 ° S to 46 ° S , and despite its ultimately tropical origins , it also grows at about five degrees from the Arctic Circle in <unk> , Norway , latitude <unk> , in a microclimate protected from arctic winds and moderated by the Gulf Stream . 
 = = = Cultivars = = = 
 In the North Island , Māori cultivated selected forms of C. australis for food . One of these , called tī para or tī <unk> , was grown because it suckers readily and forms multiple <unk> rhizomes . A dwarf non @-@ flowering selection of C. australis , it has a rubbery , pulpy stem , and thick green leaves . Although it was recorded by the early naturalists , botanists only rediscovered it in the 1990s , being grown by gardeners as the cultivar Cordyline ' Thomas Kirk ' . Recent and unpublished DNA work suggests it derives from C. australis of the central North Island . 
 Cordyline ' Ti Tawhiti ' was " the subject of an intense discussion amongst the leading botanists of New Zealand at a meeting of the Royal Society ... in Wellington 100 years ago . It was saved from extinction because its dwarf form found favour with gardeners and it came to be known as Cordyline ' <unk> ' recording the interest Thomas Kirk had in the plant . Its origin as a Maori selection was forgotten until rediscovered in 1991 . The name ' Tawhiti ' is equivalent to ' Hawaiki ' and indicates the traditional belief that the plant was introduced to Aotearoa by the ancestral canoes of Maori . However , it is more probable that the name arose from it being moved around its native land as a domesticated plant . " 
 Numerous cultivars of C. australis are sold within New Zealand and around the world . Like other Cordyline species , C. australis can produce sports which have very attractive colouration , including pink stripes and leaves in various shades of green , yellow or red . An early cultivar was published in France and England in 1870 : Cordyline australis ' <unk> ' was described as having tinted leaves with brownish red spots . Other early cultivars included ' <unk> ' ( 1871 ) with crimson <unk> , ' <unk> ' ( 1882 ) with bronze leaves infused with red , ' <unk> ' ( 1886 ) and ' <unk> ' ( 1890 ) with purple leaves , and a range of variegated forms : ' <unk> ' ( 1878 ) , ' Argento @-@ striata ' ( 1888 ) and ' <unk> ' ( 1890 ) . In New Zealand and overseas , hybrids with other Cordyline species feature prominently in the range of cultivars available . New Plymouth plant breeders Duncan and Davies included hybrids of C. australis and C. banksii in their 1925 catalogue , and have produced many new cultivars since . In New Zealand , some of the coloured forms and hybrids seem to be more susceptible to attacks from the cabbage tree moth . 
 Immature forms have become a popular annual house or ornamental plant under the name ' Spikes ' , or Dracaena ' Spikes ' . To add to the confusion , these may be misidentified as Cordyline indivisa ( syn . Dracaena indivisa ) . 
 C. australis is hardy to USDA zones 8 – 11 . 
 In cultivation in the United Kingdom , C. australis and its cultivars ' Sundance ' , ' Torbay Dazzler ' , and ' Torbay Red ' have all gained the Royal Horticultural Society 's Award of Garden Merit . 
 = Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity = 
 Natural Theology or Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity is an 1802 work of Christian apologetics and philosophy of religion by the English clergyman William Paley ( July 1743 – 25 May 1805 ) . The book expounds his arguments from natural theology , making a teleological argument for the existence of God , notably beginning with the watchmaker analogy . 
 The book was written in the context of the natural theology tradition . In earlier centuries , theologians such as John Ray and William Derham , as well as philosophers of classical times such as Cicero , argued for the existence and goodness of God from the general well @-@ being of living things and the physical world . 
 Paley 's Natural Theology is an extended argument , constructed around a series of examples including finding a watch ; comparing the eye to a telescope ; and the existence of finely adapted mechanical structures in animals , such as joints which function like hinges or manmade ball and socket joints . Paley argues that these all lead to an intelligent Creator , and that a system is more than the sum of its parts . The last chapters are more theological in character , arguing that the attributes of God must be sufficient for the extent of his operations , and that God must be good because designs seen in nature are beneficial . 
 The book was many times republished and remains in print . It continues to be consulted by creationists . Charles Darwin took its arguments seriously and responded to them ; evolutionary biologists like Stephen Jay Gould and Richard Dawkins continue to discuss Paley 's book to respond to modern proponents with similar ideas . 
 = = Context = = 
 The main thrust of William Paley 's argument in Natural Theology is that God 's design of the whole creation can be seen in the general happiness , or well @-@ being , that is evident in the physical and social order of things . This sets the book within the broad tradition of the Enlightenment 's natural theology ; and this explains why Paley based much of his thought on John Ray ( 1691 ) , William Derham ( 1711 ) and Bernard <unk> ( 1750 ) . 
 Paley 's argument is built mainly around anatomy and natural history . " For my part " , he says , " I take my stand in human anatomy " ; elsewhere he insists upon " the necessity , in each particular case , of an intelligent designing mind for the contriving and determining of the forms which organized bodies bear " . In making his argument , Paley employed a wide variety of metaphors and analogies . Perhaps the most famous is his analogy between a watch and the world . Historians , philosophers and theologians often call this the watchmaker analogy . Building on this mechanical analogy , Paley presents examples from planetary astronomy and argues that the regular movements of the solar system resemble the workings of a giant clock . To bolster his views he cites the work of his old friend John Law and the Dublin Astronomer Royal John Brinkley . 
 The germ of the idea is to be found in ancient writers who used sundials and Ptolemaic epicycles to illustrate the divine order of the world . These types of examples can be seen in the work of the ancient philosopher Cicero , especially in his De Natura Deorum , ii . 87 and 97 . The watch analogy was widely used in the Enlightenment , by deists and Christians alike . 
 = = Outline = = 
 Chapter I. State of the Argument 
 The basic watchmaker analogy : if you find a watch , you suppose there 's a watchmaker . 
 Chapter II . State of the Argument continued 
 Now the watch can reproduce itself . Paley argues that the watchmaker must have power , and specific intentions . 
 Chapter III . Application of the Argument 
 Paley says it is atheism not to agree with the watchmaker argument . He compares the eye to a telescope , and argues from the eye 's construction . 
 Chapter IV Of the Succession of Plants and Animals 
 Paley argues from the properties of plant seeds and animal eggs . 
 Chapter V. Application of the Argument continued 
 The argument is extended to ' all the organized parts of the works of nature ' . Paley considers whether chance alone could explain these , and concludes not . 
 Chapter VI . The Argument cumulative 
 No argument , writes Paley , other than ' the necessity of an intelligent Creator ' , can explain the eye ( or any other elaborate living structure ) . 
 Chapter VII . Of the Mechanical And <unk> Parts and Functions of Animals and Vegetables 
 Animals use muscles to move ; even if we don 't understand how they work , we can see they work mechanically , argues Paley , moving joints to and fro . Other organs such as the stomach work chemically to digest food . 
 Chapter VIII . Of Mechanical Arrangement in the human Frame 
 The bones and joints form a mechanical structure with features comparable to hinges , <unk> and tenon and ball and socket joints , etc , to provide both support and suitable flexibility . He compares the spine to The Iron Bridge at Bishop Wearmouth . 
 Chapter IX . Of the Muscles 
 The muscles exactly relate to the joints , operating them mechanically like the wires and strings of a puppet . A complex case is the tongue . <unk> muscles are admired also . 
 Chapter X. Of the Vessels of Animal Bodies 
 The blood vessels and lymph vessels are considered , the valves of the heart , and the separate functions of arteries and veins . Paley argues that such functions as that of the epiglottis could not have formed gradually ( as by evolution ) . 
 Chapter XI . Of the Animal Structure regarded as a Mass 
 Paley considers the bilateral symmetry of animals , and how well @-@ packaged all the delicate organs are , resulting in both beauty and utility . 
 Chapter XII . Comparative Anatomy 
 Paley considers the equivalents of human anatomy in other animals . Human clothing is compared to the fur , feathers , quills and scales of animals . The structure of the feather is admired . The teeth and jaws of carnivores , herbivores and omnivores are considered . Similarly , the adaptations of birds ' bills in species like the crossbill , spoonbill and ( long @-@ billed ) snipe are discussed . 
 Chapter XIII . Peculiar Organizations 
 Paley considers organs which seem to have no comparison , like the oil glands of birds and swim bladders of fishes . 
 Chapter XIV . Prospective <unk> 
 Paley considers how some structures are seen to be prepared for future function , like the milk @-@ teeth of a baby , ready formed inside the gums at birth . Similarly , the circulation of the foetus is supported by temporary short @-@ circuits with the foramen ovale and the ductus arteriosus , as the lungs are not yet in use for breathing . 
 Chapter XV . Relations 
 Paley considers how the whole of a system is more than the sum of its parts . This is seen to be so both in a mechanical watch and in living systems . 
 Chapter XVI . Compensation 
 The ' defects ' of one organ are remedied by the structure of another . The elephant has , Paley argues , a short neck because its head is so heavy , but in compensation it has a long trunk , enabling it to reach out . Similarly the spider has no wings to enable it to chase its flying prey , but has a web , and organs adapted to produce it , which compensates for the lack . 
 Chapter XVII . The Relation of animated Bodies to inanimate Nature 
 Organs such as the wings of birds and the fins of fish are expressly adapted to the surrounding ' elements ' of air or water in which they operate . 
 Chapter XVIII . Instincts 
 Instincts enable newly @-@ hatched young of salmon to find food , and later to migrate to the sea and finally back to their rivers to spawn . 
 Chapter XIX . Of Insects 
 " WE are not writing a system of natural history " , begins Paley , apologising for not covering every class systematically . He mentions insects for some examples unique to them , as the antennae , elytra ( scaly wing @-@ cases ) , ovipositors ( he calls them ' awls ' ) for laying eggs deep in plants or wood , stings , the proboscis of bees , the light @-@ producing organ of the glow @-@ worm and so on . 
 Chapter XX . Of Plants 
 Admitting that plants generally have less obvious evidence of ' a designed and studied mechanism ' than animals , still Paley adds some examples , as of the parts of the seed , the delicate germ being protected by a tough or spiny husk , and dispersed by wings or other appendages . 
 Chapter XXI . Of the Elements 
 Paley considers how the ' elements ' of water , air etc are exactly as needed . 
 Chapter XXII . Astronomy 
 Paley admits that astronomy is not the best proof of ' the agency of an intelligent Creator ' , but all the same it shows his magnificence . 
 Chapter XXIII . Personality of the Deity 
 All the above items show the ' contrivances ' in existence , which Paley argues prove the personality of the Deity , arguing that only persons can contrive or design . 
 Chapter XXIV . Of the natural Attributes of the Deity 
 The attributes of God must , Paley argues , be ' adequate to the magnitude , extent , and multiplicity of his operations ' . 
 Chapter XXV . Of the Unity of the Deity 
 Paley argues that the uniformity of plan seen in the universe indicates a single God . 
 Chapter XXVI . The Goodness of the Deity 
 God must be good , Paley argues , because in many cases the designs seen in nature are beneficial , and because animals perceive pleasure , beyond what would be strictly necessary . Pain is admitted to exist , but even such things as venomous bites of snakes exist to a good end , namely defence or the capture of prey . Pain too is mitigated , as in intervals between the acute pain of gout which are beneficial to sufferers . The appearance of chance , too , is necessary in the world . 
 Chapter XXVII . Conclusion 
 Paley concludes that natural theology offers many proofs of the goodness of God , though any one would be sufficient . The many proofs show that the conclusion is stable , and together they can make a suitable impression on those who study them . 
 = = Editions = = 
 The first edition of Natural Theology : or , Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity was published in 1802 in London by J. Faulder . In the United States , the book was published and released by E Sargeant and Company of New York on December 15 , 1802 . A later edition published by E. S. Gorham contained revisions by F. LeGros Clark in order to " harmonize with modern science " . 
 The book was republished in many editions by publishers in cities including London , Oxford , Cambridge , Edinburgh and Philadelphia . The twentieth reprint was made in 1820 . Versions appeared in years including 1802 , 1807 , 1809 , 1813 , 1818 , 1819 , 1821 , 1823 , 1825 , 1826 , 1829 , 1830 , 1840 , 1854 and many later years . The book remains in print , with more recent editions for example in 2006 , 2008 , 2009 , 2010 and 2014 . The book was also republished in editions of Paley 's Collected Works . It has been translated into languages including French and Welsh . 
 = = Opinions on Paley 's arguments = = 
 = = = Philosophy = = = 
 The Scottish philosopher David Hume ( who died in 1776 , before Paley assembled his arguments into Natural Theology ) criticised Paley 's arguments on several grounds . Firstly , he rejected the making of an analogy between the world and a human artifact such as a watch , since these are so dissimilar that any analogy must be very weak and unreliable . Secondly , Hume argues that even if one accepted the analogy , it would not prove that the creator is infinite , good , or perfectly intelligent , nor that there would be only one creator god . After all , wrote Hume , " what shadow of an argument … can you produce from your hypothesis to prove the unity of the Deity ? A great number of men join in building a house or ship , in rearing a city , in framing a commonwealth ; why may not several deities combine in contriving and framing a world ? " 
 = = = Contemporary reception = = = 
 The Edinburgh Review of 1802 @-@ 3 commented that 
 With less learning and less originality than some of his distinguished predecessors [ such as John Ray and William Derham , who are mentioned ] , it would be difficult , perhaps , to point out his superior in soundness of judgement , or in vigilant and comprehensive sagacity . With great strength of reasoning and power of decision , he has also united more moderation and liberality of sentiment , than is usually to be found among disputants ; and added weight to his argument by a certain plainness and sobriety of manner , that is infinitely better calculated to produce conviction than the sallies of an ambitious eloquence . 
 The review agreed with Paley that " No thinking man , we conceive , can doubt that there are marks of design in the universe " and that either a single example like the eye would be conclusive , or no quantity of examples would be . Paley is praised for relying on " mechanical phenomena " rather than arguments about human intelligence . 
 The bible commentator William Jenks described the book in 1838 as " a work highly celebrated for the justness of its reflections , and the benevolence , good sense , and piety which it breathes . " 
 = = = Evolutionary biology = = = 
 Charles Darwin read Natural Theology during his student years , and later stated in his autobiography that he was initially convinced by the argument : 
 Although I did not think much about the existence of a personal God until a considerably later period of my life , I will here give the vague conclusions to which I have been driven . The old argument of design in nature , as given by Paley , which formerly seemed to me so conclusive , fails , now that the law of natural selection has been discovered . We can no longer argue that , for instance , the beautiful hinge of a bivalve shell must have been made by an intelligent being , like the hinge of a door by man . There seems to be no more design in the variability of organic beings and in the action of natural selection , than in the course which the wind blows . Everything in nature is the result of fixed laws . 
 In 1993 the evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould compared Paley to Voltaire 's Doctor Pangloss , the man who could argue any case ( however hopeless ) . Gould is struck that Paley can claim that even the agonising pain of gallstones or gout could indicate the goodness of a loving God , with the justification that it felt so good when the pain stopped . Gould makes it clear he finds Paley 's argument incorrect scientifically , but states that he respects it as a coherent and well @-@ defended philosophy . Gould particularly respects Paley 's method of identifying alternative possibilities and then systematically refuting them . Gould notes that Paley envisages a <unk> kind of evolution and rebuts it with the observation that men have not lost their nipples through disuse . However , Gould writes , Paley did not manage to think of one more alternative , natural selection , which has no purpose at all but just kills off whatever works less well in every generation . 
 The evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins described himself as a neo @-@ <unk> in The Blind Watchmaker ( 1986 ) , where he argued , following the evolutionary biologist and humanist Julian Huxley , that Paley 's watch analogy fails to recognise the difference between the complexity of living organisms and that of inanimate objects . Living organisms can reproduce themselves , so they can change to become more complex from generation to generation . Inanimate objects such as watches are unable to pass on any changes , so they never become more complex unless a watchmaker redesigns them . The comparison breaks down , in Dawkins 's view , because of this important distinction . 
 = = = Creationism = = = 
 The arguments in Paley 's book have been rejected by " virtually all biologists " . In its place , the theory of evolution has been widely accepted by scientists from Darwin onwards , and Darwin persuaded " most educated people " that processes such as evolution were governed by natural laws . This has not stopped creationists such as those in the Intelligent Design movement from continuing to use Paley 's arguments : 
 Although proponents of ID claim that their premises differ from Paley 's , and , unlike Paley , do not specify who or what the designer is , most evolutionary biologists see ID as a version of Paley 's arguments updated to account for advances in our understanding of biology . " 
 = = = Versions = = = 
 Paley , William ( 1802 ) , Natural Theology : or , Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity ( 1st ed . ) , London : J. Faulder 
 --- Darwin online : 12th edition 
 --- Archive.org : 1879 Sheldon edition 
 = My Prerogative = 
 " My Prerogative " is a song by American singer Bobby Brown from his second solo studio album , Don 't Be Cruel . It was released on October 11 , 1988 as the second single from the album . After recording sessions for the album were completed , Brown and producer Gene Griffin travelled to New York City , since he felt something was " missing " from the record . " My Prerogative " was written by Brown as a response to the criticism he received for his departure from New Edition . He explained the song was about making decisions in one 's life and not caring about other people 's judgment . " My Prerogative " is often considered a new jack swing anthem , and contains many elements from Teddy Riley productions due to his involvement as one of the song 's session musicians . 
 The song was positively received by critics and was nominated for a Grammy Award in the category of Best R & B Urban Contemporary Single . It was also commercially successful , reaching number one in Billboard 's Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs charts . " My Prerogative " also reached top ten positions in many countries , such as Ireland , New Zealand , the Netherlands and the United Kingdom . The music video for the song features Brown performing the song on stage with his band and dancers . The song was also performed at most of his concerts , usually as the last song of the set list . On the February 4 , 1989 performance at Madison Square Garden , he was joined on stage by many popular rap artists and producers of the time . 
 " My Prerogative " has been covered and sampled by a number of artists from different genres , including Britney Spears . She released her cover in her first compilation , Greatest Hits : My Prerogative ( 2004 ) . The cover was produced by Bloodshy & Avant and was noted for aptly referring to Spears 's relationship with the media at the time . Although the song only appeared in component charts in the United States , Spears 's cover surpassed Brown 's version worldwide , peaking at the top of the charts in Finland , Ireland , Italy and Norway and reaching the top ten in another fourteen countries . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brown had already completed recording sessions for Don 't Be Cruel in Los Angeles , California , but felt something was missing in the record . He said , " I felt my album was lacking a strong , aggressive song and I thought , ' Where better than New York to come up with it ' " . He travelled to the city with producer Gene Griffin . " My Prerogative " was written and co @-@ produced by Brown and Griffin . It was recorded at Axis Studios and mixed at <unk> , in New York . The track was mastered at Future Disc Systems in Hollywood , California . During an interview with The Hour on March 17 , 1989 , Brown explained the theme behind the song , saying , " A lot of things had been said about Bobby Brown , why was he doing this [ a solo career ] . It 's my way of expressing to people it 's your prerogative to do as you want , but make sure what you do is the right thing " . A CD single of remixes by Joe T. <unk> was released on October 13 , 1995 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " My Prerogative " is considered a new jack swing anthem , that merges hip hop beats with elements of synthpop and soul . It features a triplet swing in the sixteenth note , as included in many of Riley 's productions . Jake Brown said in his book Your body 's calling me : music , love , sex & money ( 2003 ) , that like most new jack swing songs from the late 1980s , it was composed by " punchy , street @-@ savvy beats , with sexually energetic melodies and poppy choruses " . The bassline of the track was described by Cam 'Ron Davis of CMJ New Music Monthly as " truly sinister " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by EMI Music Publishing , the song is composed in the key of A minor , with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . Brown 's vocal range spans from the high @-@ note of C4 to A5 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Barry Michael Cooper of Spin said " My Prerogative " " sounds like gin @-@ drenched , Roaring Twenties swing " . Arion Berger of Rolling Stone called it " a grumpy and undeniably adult dance hit " . " My Prerogative " was nominated for at the 30th Grammy Awards in the category of Best R & B Urban Contemporary Single by a Male , but lost to Michael Jackson 's " Man in the Mirror " . The following year , Spin listed the song at number 72 on the " 100 Greatest Singles of All Time " list . It ranked at number 98 on VH1 's " 100 Greatest Songs of the 80 's " . The track is often referred to as Brown 's signature song . 
 " My Prerogative " debuted on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 during the week of October 29 , 1988 at number 61 . The following week , it climbed 16 positions to number 45 . On January 14 , 1989 , it peaked at the top position of the chart . The song also peaked at number one in Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs and at number seven in Hot Dance Club Songs . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for sales over 500 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the song debuted on the RPM Singles Chart at position 98 , on the issue dated December 23 , 1989 . In the United Kingdom , " My Prerogative " debuted at number 87 on December 10 , 1988 . On February 18 , 1989 , the song peaked at number six and stayed in the position for two weeks . Following the release of the remixes single on October 14 , 1995 , " My Prerogative " re @-@ entered the UK charts at number 17 , and stayed on the chart for two weeks . By 17 October 2015 , it had sold 275 @,@ 000 units in the country . Across Europe , the song reached the top ten in Ireland and the Netherlands , and the top 20 in Germany and Sweden . In Australia and New Zealand , the track peaked at number 40 and number three , respectively . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " My Prerogative " was directed by Alek Keshishian . It begins with Brown driving a car while his musicians start to perform the song on a stage . Shortly after , he descends to the stage in an elevator , wearing a black jumpsuit and a headset . He dances flanked by two women , one of them playing a keytar . 
 J. D. Considine of Rolling Stone wrote in the review of Bobby ( 1992 ) , " As anyone who saw him swagger through the videos for ' My Prerogative ' and ' Every Little Step ' can attest , Brown had a phenomenal ability to convey a sense of street toughness that was utterly without malice or menace , making him credible and likable " . The music video was nominated at the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards for Best Stage Performance in a Video , but lost to the music video of Living Colour 's " Cult of Personality " . It also charted at number nine on RPM video chart on July 21 , 1990 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " My Prerogative " was performed during his tour in promotion for Don 't Be Cruel as the last song of the night . Brown usually performed it wearing a black outfit , flanked with two male dancers wearing white clothes . On the February 4 , 1989 , show at Madison Square Garden in New York City , Brown wore a red boxing robe with the words " King of the Stage " printed on the back . During the performance , Joseph Simmons of Run @-@ DMC , LL Cool J and Heavy D joined him onstage and freestyle rapped . Eric B. , KRS @-@ One , L. A. Reid , Babyface and Teddy Riley also joined him onstage , with the latter performing a keyboard solo . Peter Watrous of The New York Times commented that , " The communal scene on stage mirrored the feeling in the audience ; everybody seemed aware that this was a generation that had rewritten the rules of pop entertainment , and was justifiably proud of its achievement " . Brown also performed the song at the 1997 Home Again Tour with New Edition , during the second portion of the show in which he performed hits from his solo career . On November 10 , 2005 , he performed the song for the first time in eight years at a concert at House of Blues in Atlantic City . He wore a white suit and matching hat , and sang it as the last song of the evening . On January 17 , 2006 , he performed it at a New Edition show in Atlantic City 's Trump Taj Mahal . During the performance , he tore open his orange dress shirt , singing bare @-@ chested with a tie and a fur coat on . Brown performed the song during his 2007 July shows in Australia . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Bobby Brown – lead vocals , songwriting , co @-@ production 
 Gene Griffin – songwriting , mixing , co @-@ production 
 Teddy Riley – background vocals , keyboards , mixing 
 Dennis Mitchell – engineering , mixing , recording 
 Jim Hanneman – engineering , mixing , recording 
 Markell Riley – drum programming 
 Aaron Hall – background vocals 
 Bernard Belle – background vocals 
 Lee Drakeford – background vocals 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Britney Spears version = = 
 = = = Background and composition = = = 
 In 2004 , Britney Spears recorded a cover of " My Prerogative " with Swedish production team Bloodshy & Avant , who produced her single " Toxic " from her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . Bloodshy & Avant recorded the song at Murlyn Studios in Stockholm , Sweden . Spears recorded the vocals at <unk> Studios in Berlin , Germany . On August 13 , 2004 , Spears 's label Jive Records announced through a press release that she had covered the song and was planning to release it on her first greatest hits compilation , titled Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . The song was set to premiere on radio stations on September 14 , 2004 , however , it leaked in the Real <unk> Inc . ' s mixtape The Future of R & B on September 10 , 2004 . 
 Spears ' cover of " My Prerogative " is musically different from its original version , with the bass and new jack swing sound replaced with a synthpop sound , synthesizers and elements typical of Bloodshy & Avant productions . It was noted by Christy Lemire of msnbc.com that the cover also contains elements of Bollywood music . At the beginning of the song , Spears says in a breathy voice the lines " People can take everything away from you / But they can never take away your truth / But the question is , can you handle mine ? " . The rest of the lyrics do not deviate much from the original version , instead they are changed to fit a woman 's perspective . Jennifer Vineyard of MTV commented the cover could be interpreted as a statement on Spears 's life and the media reaction to some of her decisions at the time , including her engagement to American dancer Kevin Federline . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The cover received mixed to negative reviews from contemporary critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic called the cover " a useless remake , which seems to exist solely for its video " . Spence D. of IGN said that the lyrics fit perfectly with Spears 's relationship with the media at the time . He also added , " As for her interpretation , it 's an interesting chameleonic diversion that comes off like a mash @-@ up between vintage Prince @-@ styled production , Cameo swagger , and Madonna sultriness , but never seems to capture the gloss and glory of any of the aforementioned influences " . Christy Lemire of msnbc.com called it " utterly unnecessary " . Louis Pattison of the New Musical Express commented that " judging by the fuck @-@ you sentiments " of the cover , Spears liked to play the role of " [ the ] pop brat careering off the rails " . Sarah <unk> of Salon.com wrote in an article about contemporary teen idols that the cover " became an anthem for teen @-@ idol rebellion " . American director Quentin Tarantino included the song in a playlist that inspired him during production of his 2009 film Inglourious Basterds . 
 In the United States , " My Prerogative " failed to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 but charted in Billboard 's Top 40 Tracks and Mainstream Top 40 at number 22 and 34 , respectively . " My Prerogative " has sold 374 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . On November 15 , 2004 , the song debuted at the Australian Singles Chart at number seven . It received a gold certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments over 35 @,@ 000 units . The same week , it debuted at number seventeen in New Zealand . On November 7 , 2004 , the song debuted at number three in the United Kingdom , during a competitive week of new releases , only surpassed by Eminem 's " Just Lose It " and Destiny 's Child 's " Lose My Breath " . According to Official Charts Company , the song has sold 130 @,@ 000 copies there . The song also reached success throughout Europe , peaking at number one in Finland , Ireland , Italy and Norway , number two in Spain and number three in Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Denmark and Germany . It also reached top ten positions in Austria , Czech Republic , Sweden , Switzerland and the Netherlands . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " My Prerogative " was filmed in August 2004 at The Paramour Mansion in Silver Lake , Los Angeles and was directed by Jake Nava . It premiered on MTV 's TRL on September 16 , 2004 , and on BET 's 106 & Park on January 18 , 2005 . According to Spears 's mother Lynne , the video was " about capturing gorgeous close @-@ ups and very subtle movement " since Spears could not do any choreography due to her knee injury at the " Outrageous " music video shoot . She also described the video as " [ having ] an element of old Hollywood glamour and mystery " . 
 The music video begins with Spears driving a Porsche 928 at high speed in the Hollywood Hills . She crashes through a fence and lands into a pool inside a manor where a party is taking place . She emerges from the water and crawls in top of the car to sing the first verse . Spears 's brother Bryan makes a cameo in these scenes . After she leaves the pool , she enters the manor and passes couples making out around her . She appears in a stainless steel kitchen , where a maid cuts the straps of her black wet dress . In the next scene , she walks into a study in which her husband at the time , Kevin Federline , is smoking and watching a black @-@ and @-@ white video of Spears on a projection screen . According to Jennifer Vineyard from MTV , the clip had the style of pornographic films from the 1940s and 1950s . Rolling Stone in their article " Britney Spears : The Complete Video Guide " , compared it to Madonna 's performances of her 1984 single " Like a Virgin " . She then entered a dressing room with mirrors , wearing lingerie , high heels , stockings and a short fur jacket . She proceeds to a bedroom , in which a black dress is laid out on the comforter . She puts on the new dress and the camera cuts to the party outside where people gathered waiting . During the song 's bridge , it is revealed that the party is actually Spears 's wedding , as she starts walking towards the aisle and Federline waits next to a priest . The video ends with a shot of the black @-@ and @-@ white video and Spears looking into the camera . The black @-@ and @-@ white footage was released as an alternate version of the music video in the 2004 DVD Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = Blue whale = 
 The blue whale ( Balaenoptera musculus ) is a marine mammal belonging to the baleen whales ( Mysticeti ) . At up to 30 metres ( 98 ft ) in length and with a maximum recorded weight of 173 tonnes ( 191 short tons ) and probably reaching over 181 tonnes ( 200 short tons ) , it is the largest animal ever known to have existed . 
 Long and slender , the blue whale 's body can be various shades of bluish @-@ grey dorsally and somewhat lighter underneath . There are at least three distinct subspecies : B. m. musculus of the North Atlantic and North Pacific , B. m. intermedia of the Southern Ocean and B. m. brevicauda ( also known as the pygmy blue whale ) found in the Indian Ocean and South Pacific Ocean . B. m. indica , found in the Indian Ocean , may be another subspecies . As with other baleen whales , its diet consists almost exclusively of small crustaceans known as krill . 
 Blue whales were abundant in nearly all the oceans on Earth until the beginning of the twentieth century . For over a century , they were hunted almost to extinction by whalers until protected by the international community in 1966 . A 2002 report estimated there were 5 @,@ 000 to 12 @,@ 000 blue whales worldwide , in at least five groups . The IUCN estimates that there are probably between 10 @,@ 000 and 25 @,@ 000 blue whales worldwide today . Before whaling , the largest population was in the Antarctic , numbering approximately 239 @,@ 000 ( range 202 @,@ 000 to 311 @,@ 000 ) . There remain only much smaller ( around 2 @,@ 000 ) concentrations in each of the eastern North Pacific , Antarctic , and Indian Ocean groups . There are two more groups in the North Atlantic , and at least two in the Southern Hemisphere . As of 2014 , the Eastern North Pacific blue whale population has rebounded to nearly its pre @-@ hunting population . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Blue whales are rorquals ( family Balaenopteridae ) , a family that includes the humpback whale , the fin whale , Bryde 's whale , the sei whale , and the minke whale . The family Balaenopteridae is believed to have diverged from the other families of the suborder Mysticeti as long ago as the middle Oligocene ( 28 Ma ago ) . It is not known when the members of those families diverged from each other . 
 The blue whale is usually classified as one of eight species in the genus Balaenoptera ; one authority places it in a separate monotypic genus , <unk> , but this is not accepted elsewhere . DNA sequencing analysis indicates that the blue whale is phylogenetically closer to the sei whale ( Balaenoptera borealis ) and Bryde 's whale ( Balaenoptera <unk> ) than to other Balaenoptera species , and closer to the humpback whale ( Megaptera ) and the gray whale ( Eschrichtius ) than to the minke whales ( Balaenoptera acutorostrata and Balaenoptera <unk> ) . If further research confirms these relationships , it will be necessary to reclassify the rorquals . 
 There have been at least 11 documented cases of blue whale @-@ fin whale hybrid adults in the wild . Arnason and <unk> describe the genetic distance between a blue and a fin as about the same as that between a human and a gorilla . Researchers working off Fiji believe they photographed a hybrid humpback @-@ blue whale including the discovery through DNA analysis from a meat sample found in a Japanese market . 
 The first published description of the blue whale comes from Robert Sibbald 's <unk> Nova ( 1694 ) . In September 1692 , Sibbald found a blue whale that had stranded in the Firth of Forth — a male 24 m ( 78 ft ) long — which had " black , horny plates " and " two large apertures approaching a pyramid in shape " . 
 The specific name musculus is Latin and could mean " muscle " , but it can also be interpreted as " little mouse " . Carl Linnaeus , who named the species in his seminal Systema Naturae of 1758 , would have known this and may have intended the ironic double meaning . Herman Melville called this species " sulphur @-@ bottom " in his novel Moby @-@ Dick due to an orange @-@ brown or yellow tinge on the underparts from diatom films on the skin . Other common names for the blue whale have included " Sibbald 's rorqual " ( after Sibbald , who first described the species ) , the " great blue whale " and the " great northern rorqual " . These names have now fallen into disuse . The first known usage of the term " blue whale " was in Melville 's Moby @-@ Dick , which only mentions it in passing and does not specifically attribute it to the species in question . The name was really derived from the Norwegian <unk> , coined by Svend Foyn shortly after he had perfected the harpoon gun ; the Norwegian scientist G. O. Sars adopted it as the Norwegian common name in 1874 . 
 Authorities classify the species into three or four subspecies : B. m. musculus , the northern blue whale consisting of the North Atlantic and North Pacific populations , B. m. intermedia , the southern blue whale of the Southern Ocean , B. m. brevicauda , the pygmy blue whale found in the Indian Ocean and South Pacific , and the more problematic B. m. indica , the great Indian rorqual , which is also found in the Indian Ocean and , although described earlier , may be the same subspecies as B. m. brevicauda . 
 = = Description and behaviour = = 
 The blue whale has a long tapering body that appears stretched in comparison with the stockier build of other whales . The head is flat , U @-@ shaped and has a prominent ridge running from the blowhole to the top of the upper lip . The front part of the mouth is thick with baleen plates ; around 300 plates , each around one metre ( 3 ft ) long , hang from the upper jaw , running 0 @.@ 5 m ( 20 in ) back into the mouth . Between 70 and 118 grooves ( called ventral pleats ) run along the throat parallel to the body length . These pleats assist with evacuating water from the mouth after lunge feeding ( see feeding below ) . 
 The dorsal fin is small ; its height averages about 28 centimetres ( 11 in ) , and usually ranges between 20 cm ( 8 in ) and 40 cm ( 16 in ) , though it can be as small as 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) or as large as 70 cm ( 28 in ) . It is visible only briefly during the dive sequence . Located around three @-@ quarters of the way along the length of the body , it varies in shape from one individual to another ; some only have a barely perceptible lump , but others may have prominent and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) dorsals . When surfacing to breathe , the blue whale raises its shoulder and blowhole out of the water to a greater extent than other large whales , such as the fin or sei whales . Observers can use this trait to differentiate between species at sea . Some blue whales in the North Atlantic and North Pacific raise their tail fluke when diving . When breathing , the whale emits a vertical single @-@ column spout , typically 9 metres ( 30 ft ) high , but reaching up to 12 metres ( 39 ft ) . Its lung capacity is 5 @,@ 000 litres ( 1 @,@ 300 US gal ) . Blue whales have twin blowholes shielded by a large <unk> . 
 The flippers are 3 – 4 metres ( 10 – 13 ft ) long . The upper sides are grey with a thin white border ; the lower sides are white . The head and tail fluke are generally uniformly grey . The whale 's upper parts , and sometimes the flippers , are usually mottled . The degree of mottling varies substantially from individual to individual . Some may have a uniform slate @-@ grey color , but others demonstrate a considerable variation of dark blues , greys and blacks , all tightly mottled . 
 Blue whales can reach speeds of 50 kilometres per hour ( 31 mph ) over short bursts , usually when interacting with other whales , but 20 kilometres per hour ( 12 mph ) is a more typical traveling speed . When feeding , they slow down to 5 kilometres per hour ( 3 @.@ 1 mph ) . 
 Blue whales most commonly live alone or with one other individual . It is not known how long traveling pairs stay together . In locations where there is a high concentration of food , as many as 50 blue whales have been seen scattered over a small area . They do not form the large , close @-@ knit groups seen in other baleen species . 
 = = = Size = = = 
 The blue whale is the largest animal ever known to have lived . By comparison , one of the largest known dinosaurs of the Mesozoic Era was Argentinosaurus , which is estimated to have weighed up to 90 tonnes ( 99 short tons ) , comparable to the average blue whale . 
 Blue whales are difficult to weigh because of their size . As a whole , blue whales from the Northern Atlantic and Pacific are smaller on average than those from Antarctic waters . Adult weights typically range from 73 – 136 tonnes ( 80 – 150 short tons ) . There is some uncertainty about the biggest blue whale ever found , as most data came from blue whales killed in Antarctic waters during the first half of the twentieth century , which were collected by whalers not well @-@ versed in standard zoological measurement techniques . The standard measuring technique is to measure in a straight line from the upper jaw to the notch in the tail flukes . This came about because the edges of the tail flukes were typically cut off , and the lower jaw often falls open upon death . Many of the larger whales in the whaling records ( especially those over 100 feet ) were probably measured incorrectly or even deliberately exaggerated . The heaviest weight ever reported was 173 metric tons ( 191 short tons ) for a southern hemisphere female in 1947 , although it is likely that the largest blue whales would have weighed over 200 tons . The longest whales ever recorded were two females measuring 33 @.@ 6 and 33 @.@ 3 metres ( 110 and 109 ft ) , although in neither of these cases was the piecemeal weight gathered . 
 Verified measurements rarely exceed 28 meters ( 92 ft ) . The longest measured by Macintosh and Wheeler ( 1929 ) was a female 28 @.@ 5 m ( 93 @.@ 5 ft ) , while the largest male was 26 @.@ 45 m ( 87 ft ) , although one of the same authors later found a male of 26 @.@ 65 m ( 87 @.@ 5 ft ) and stated that those lengths may be exceeded . The longest whale measured by scientists was 29 @.@ 9 metres ( 98 ft ) long , Lieut . Quentin R. Walsh , USCG , while acting as whaling inspector of the factory ship Ulysses , verified the measurement of a 29 @.@ 9 m ( 98 ft ) pregnant blue whale caught in the Antarctic in the 1937 – 38 season . A 26 @.@ 8 m ( 88 ft ) male was verified by Japanese scientists in the 1947 @-@ 48 whaling season . The longest reported in the North Pacific was a 27 @.@ 1 metres ( 89 ft ) female taken by Japanese whalers in 1959 , and the longest reported in the North Atlantic was a 28 metres ( 92 ft ) female caught in the Davis Strait . The average weight of the longest scientifically verified specimens ( 29 @.@ 9 m , 98 ft ) would be calculated to be 176 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 194 @.@ 5 tons ) , varying from 141 tonnes ( 155 @.@ 5 tons ) to 211 @.@ 5 tonnes ( 233 @.@ 5 tons ) depending on fat condition . One study found that a hypothetical 33 meter ( 108 foot ) blue whale would be too large to exist in real life , due to metabolic and energy constraints . 
 Due to its large size , several organs of the blue whale are the largest in the animal kingdom . A blue whale 's tongue weighs around 2 @.@ 7 tonnes ( 3 @.@ 0 short tons ) and , when fully expanded , its mouth is large enough to hold up to 90 tonnes ( 99 short tons ) of food and water . Despite the size of its mouth , the dimensions of its throat are such that a blue whale cannot swallow an object wider than a beach ball . The heart of an average sized blue whale weighs 400 pounds ( 180 kg ) and is the largest known in any animal . During the first seven months of its life , a blue whale calf drinks approximately 380 litres ( 100 US gal ) of milk every day . Blue whale calves gain weight quickly , as much as 90 kilograms ( 200 lb ) every 24 hours . Even at birth , they weigh up to 2 @,@ 700 kilograms ( 6 @,@ 000 lb ) — the same as a fully grown hippopotamus . Blue whales have proportionally small brains , only about 6 @.@ 92 kilograms ( 15 @.@ 26 lb ) , about 0 @.@ 007 % of its body weight . The blue whale penis is the largest penis of any living organism and also set the Guinness World Record as the longest of any animal 's . The reported average length varies but is usually mentioned to have an average length of 2 @.@ 4 m ( 8 ft ) to 3 @.@ 0 m ( 10 ft ) . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Blue whales feed almost exclusively on krill , though they also take small numbers of copepods . The species of this zooplankton eaten by blue whales varies from ocean to ocean . In the North Atlantic , Meganyctiphanes norvegica , Thysanoessa raschii , Thysanoessa inermis and Thysanoessa <unk> are the usual food ; in the North Pacific , Euphausia pacifica , Thysanoessa inermis , Thysanoessa longipes , Thysanoessa spinifera , Nyctiphanes <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; and in the Southern Hemisphere , Euphausia superba , Euphausia <unk> , Euphausia <unk> , and Nyctiphanes australis . 
 An adult blue whale can eat up to 40 million krill in a day . The whales always feed in the areas with the highest concentration of krill , sometimes eating up to 3 @,@ 600 kilograms ( 7 @,@ 900 lb ) of krill in a single day . The daily energy requirement of an adult blue whale is in the region of 1 @.@ 5 million kilocalories ( 6 @.@ 3 GJ ) . Their feeding habits are seasonal . Blue whales gorge on krill in the rich waters of the Antarctic before migrating to their breeding grounds in the warmer , less @-@ rich waters nearer the equator . The blue whale can take in up to 90 times as much energy as it expends , allowing it to build up considerable energy reserves . 
 Because krill move , blue whales typically feed at depths of more than 100 metres ( 330 ft ) during the day and only surface @-@ feed at night . Dive times are typically 10 minutes when feeding , though dives of up to 21 minutes are possible . The whale feeds by lunging forward at groups of krill , taking the animals and a large quantity of water into its mouth . The water is then squeezed out through the baleen plates by pressure from the ventral pouch and tongue . Once the mouth is clear of water , the remaining krill , unable to pass through the plates , are swallowed . The blue whale also incidentally consumes small fish , crustaceans and squid caught up with krill . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
