 In a country where demographic surveys estimated the Buddhist majority to be between 70 and 90 percent , President Ngô Đình Diệm 's policies generated claims of religious bias . A member of the Roman Catholic minority in Vietnam , he pursued pro @-@ Catholic policies that antagonized many Buddhists . Specifically , historians regard the government as being biased towards Catholics in public service and military promotions , as well as in the allocation of land , business favors , and tax concessions . 
 Diệm 's family also seized businesses belonging to Buddhists in order to enrich themselves . Many officers in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam converted to Catholicism in the belief that their military prospects depended on it . Forgetting that he was talking to a Buddhist , Diệm once told a high @-@ ranking officer , " Put your Catholic officers in sensitive places . They can be trusted . " The distribution of firearms to village self @-@ defense militias intended to repel Vietcong guerrillas resulted in weapons only being given to Catholics . Some Catholic priests ran their own private armies , and in some areas , forced conversions , looting , shelling and demolition of Buddhist pagodas occurred . Some Buddhist villages converted en masse to receive aid or avoid being forcibly resettled by Diệm 's regime . 
 The Catholic Church was the largest landowner in the country , and the " private " status that was imposed on Buddhism by the French colonial authorities , which required official permission to conduct public Buddhist activities and restricted the construction of Buddhist temples , was not repealed by Diệm . Furthermore , the land owned by the Catholic Church was exempt from redistribution under land reform programs . Catholics were de facto exempt from the corvée labor that the government obliged all citizens to perform and the government disproportionately allocated funding to Catholic majority villages . Under Diệm , the Roman Catholic Church enjoyed special exemptions in property acquisition , and in 1959 , he dedicated the country to the Virgin Mary . The Vatican flag was regularly flown at major public events in South Vietnam . 
 On 7 May 1963 , government officials invoked a rarely enforced 1958 law known as Decree Number 10 to prohibit the display of religious flags , forbidding Buddhists from flying their flag on Vesak , the birthday of Gautama Buddha . The application of the law caused indignation among Buddhists in the lead @-@ up to the most important religious festival of the year , as Catholics had been allowed to display Vatican flags a week earlier at a celebration for Diệm 's elder brother , Archbishop Ngô Đình Thục . On 8 May , in Huế , a crowd of Buddhists protested against the ban on the Buddhist flag . The police and army broke up the protest by opening fire and throwing grenades at the demonstrators , leaving nine dead . 
 Diệm 's denial of governmental responsibility for the incident , and instead blaming members of the Viet Cong insurgency , led to growing discontent among the Buddhist majority . The incident spurred a protest movement by Buddhists against the religious discrimination of Diệm 's Roman Catholic @-@ dominated regime . The dispute came to be known as the Buddhist crisis , and it provoked widespread and large @-@ scale civil disobedience throughout South Vietnam , persisting throughout May . The objective of the protests was to have Decree Number 10 repealed , and to force the implementation of religious equality . At the time , the United States , the main backer of South Vietnam in the Cold War , had 16 @,@ 000 military advisers in the country to assist the Army of the Republic of Vietnam in the war against the Vietcong insurgency , which sought to reunify Vietnam under communist rule . Washington wanted the dispute with the Buddhists to be resolved quickly so that it would not dampen public morale and detract from the fight against the Vietcong . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On 3 June , Buddhists held another series of protests across the country . 
 In the morning , attention focused on the capital Saigon , where approximately 500 Buddhist laypeople , mostly youths , protested in front of the Government Delegate 's office while 300 troops stood by . The crowd and a government official equipped with a loudspeaker exchanged taunts and accusations . When the official claimed that Vietcong were among the crowd and attempting to cause trouble , the troops aimed their firearms at the protestors . 
 When the crowd responded by taunting the soldiers as " stupid killers " , the troops fixed bayonets to their guns and put on gas masks before charging at the protestors and throwing tear gas grenades at them . Some of the demonstrators ran away , while others remained stationary and began praying . Deaths and injuries were averted when a Buddhist leader urged the protestors to either retreat to a pagoda and receive medical treatment for the tear gas or to go home . When the entrance to the pagoda was blocked with barbed wire , some protestors simply sat on the ground and continued praying . After a standoff lasting almost three hours , troops wearing gas masks forcibly dispersed the crowd . 
 The situation was worse in Huế , where Diệm had banned demonstrations and ordered his forces to arrest those who engaged in civil disobedience . At 13 : 00 , some 1 @,@ 500 protestors attempted to march towards the Từ Đàm Pagoda in Huế for a rally , having gathered at the Bến <unk> Bridge near the Perfume River . A confrontation ensued when the protestors attempted to cross the bridge . Six waves of ARVN tear gas and attack dogs failed to disperse the crowd . 
 Government officials stood on trucks , using loudspeakers to call out above the noise , urging the Buddhists — primarily high school and university students who had arrived on bicycles — to disperse . The announcements were met by jeers when the government spokesperson blamed the unrest on the Vietcong . At 18 : 30 , the military personnel at the scene dispersed the crowd by emptying vials of brownish @-@ red liquid on the heads of praying protestors , resulting in 67 Buddhists being hospitalized for chemical injuries . The symptoms consisted of severe blistering of the skin and respiratory ailments . The crowd responded angrily to the apparent use of poison gas , and the incident became a public relations disaster for Diệm . 
 = = Reaction and investigation = = 
 By midnight , tensions were high as a curfew and martial law were enacted . Rumors circulated that three people had died , and Newsweek reported that police had lobbed blister gas into the crowd . Reports citing reliable sources claimed that Diệm was planning a military showdown against the Buddhists . US consul John Helble suspected that the ARVN troops had used tear gas , and in a report to the US Embassy , Saigon , he noted that " possibly another type of gas which caused skin blisters " was used . Helble reported that the substance , although unidentified , had raised concerns by the US State Department that poison gas was used because the symptoms were not consistent with standard tear gas . 
 If this were the case , Helble concluded that the United States should tell Diệm that his regime must condemn the actions of the troops and punish the culprits . If Diệm refused , the United States should threaten to publicly condemn and distance itself from Saigon . With the US also decrying the use of troops against civilian protests , the South Vietnamese government complained that unlike their Saigon counterparts , the Huế police were not trained in riot control . Diệm 's authorities requested that the Americans airlift 350 military personnel from Vũng Tàu in the far south to quell the protests in Huế , but the Americans refused . William Trueheart , who was in charge of the US Embassy , Saigon while Ambassador Frederick Nolting was on holiday , confronted Secretary of State Nguyễn Đình Thuận about the allegations of blister gas usage the next day . Thuận appeared to be astounded and asked Trueheart what blister gas was . Trueheart explained that the symptoms of the victims were consistent with those of mustard gas and passed on the US threat to denounce the regime for the chemical attacks . 
 Thuan started an inquiry into the usage of chemical weapons on the protestors . The investigation exonerated the Diệm regime of the most serious allegations of using poison or mustard gas . Before the president was deposed in November , the inquiry 's report declared that only tear gas was used , and that the liquid components of the grenades were poured onto the protestors after they had failed to vaporize as they were designed to . A further commission chaired by General Trần Văn Đôn prior to February 1964 concluded that the tear gas was left behind by French colonial forces in the 1950s . The tear gas used came in glass containers in the form of a liquid that was transformed into gaseous vapor upon activation by acid . The injuries were attributed to the acid failing to activate the liquid into gaseous form . United States Army chemists in Maryland confirmed that the tear gas had come from canisters dating back to French World War I stocks . During World War I , France had used tear gas containing a mixture of <unk> and ethyl bromoacetate against German troops at Ypres on the Western Front , which was known to strongly irritate mucous membranes . 
 <unk> turns brown @-@ orange when exposed to light , while ethyl bromoacetate is a yellow liquid at tropical outdoor temperatures . Both have similar colors to the liquid used on the demonstrators . Some varieties of French tear gas contained phosgene oxime or hydrogen cyanide . These two chemicals can be fatal , but none of the protestors in this incident died . 
 = = Repercussions = = 
 Diệm responded to the controversy of the chemicals by agreeing to formal talks with the Buddhist leaders . He appointed a three @-@ member Interministerial Committee , which comprised Vice President Nguyễn Ngọc Thơ as chairman , Thuan and Interior Minister Bui Van Luong . Despite continuing protests , including public self @-@ immolations by monks such as Thích Quảng Đức , a Joint Communique resulting from the discussions was signed in mid @-@ June , which promised to end the Buddhist crisis . 
 The Joint Communique was not implemented and the situation continued to deteriorate , particularly after the Ngô family ordered South Vietnam 's Special Forces to attack Buddhist pagodas across the country on 21 August . The U.S. condemned the raids , and began to cut aid to the Special Forces , which was effectively a private Ngô family army , in addition to other government programs that were closely identified with the ruling clan . Regarding such gestures as a green light , and safe in the knowledge that the US would not intervene in Diệm 's defense , the army staged a successful coup in November , resulting in the assassination of the president . The removal of Diệm resulted in a period of political instability , as a series of military juntas deposed one another . This led to a deterioration in the military situation as the communist Viet Cong made substantial gains against the ARVN , prompting the US to deploy hundreds of thousands of combat troops in 1965 , escalating the Vietnam War . 
 = Rakoto Frah = 
 Philibert <unk> ( 1923 – 29 September 2001 ) , better known by the name Rakoto Frah , was a flautist and composer of traditional music of the central highlands of Madagascar . Born in 1923 near the capital city of Antananarivo to a poor rural family , Rakoto Frah surmounted the challenges posed by his underprivileged origins to become the most acclaimed 20th century performer of the sodina flute , one of the oldest traditional instruments on the island . Through frequent international concerts and music festival performances , he promoted the music of the highlands of Madagascar and became one of the most famous Malagasy artists , both within Madagascar and on the world music scene . 
 After gaining regional recognition for his sodina skills as a youth , Rakoto Frah rose to national fame in 1958 when he was selected by Malagasy President Philibert Tsiranana to perform on the sodina for the visiting French president Charles de Gaulle . This event launched his career as a professional musician . He first played at traditional ceremonies around the country , then expanded his performances from 1967 to include participation in international music competitions and festivals . His popularity declined in the 1970s but underwent a revival that began in the mid @-@ 1980s and continued until his death in 2001 . During this period Rakoto Frah recorded ten albums , toured extensively in Madagascar and overseas , was featured in two French documentaries , and collaborated with a variety of international and Malagasy artists . Over the course of his career he recorded over 800 original compositions . Rakoto Frah and his sodina were depicted on the 200 ariary Malagasy banknote in honor of his key role in revitalizing and internationally popularizing the sodina . Despite the artist 's worldwide acclaim , he lived simply and died having earned little from his lifetime of musicianship . His death was widely mourned and marked by a state funeral , and in 2011 a famadihana ( the Malagasy highland " turning of the bones " funerary tradition ) was organized to celebrate the artist 's life . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Philibert <unk> was born in 1923 in Ankadinandriana , a suburb of Antananarivo . His mother was born in Antananarivo and his father , a herdsman and farmer from Fianarantsoa , had previously been a singer at the Merina royal court before the colonization of Madagascar in 1897 . Both of Philibert 's parents were already aged at the time of his birth and they struggled to care for their new son alongside his six brothers and four sisters . As a child , Philibert assisted his family with looking after the livestock and farming their plot of land . In his early years he was given the nickname Rakoto by an older brother of the same name . 
 Like many residents of the rural areas in central Madagascar at that time , Rakoto 's brothers played the sodina , an end @-@ blown tube traditionally made of bamboo or reed with three or six finger holes and a thumb hole down its length . One of the oldest and most iconic musical instruments in Madagascar , it is believed to have arrived on the island with the earliest settlers from Borneo around 2 @,@ 000 years ago and remains widespread throughout the central highlands . Young Rakoto began playing the sodina when he was seven years old . He honed his skills by listening to village elders ' sodina performances , and three years later the boy formed a small musical group called <unk> that performed locally at traditional festivities . During this period Rakoto had the opportunity to participate in a community musical competition . His competitors , who performed on accordions and guitars , threw stones at Rakoto when he stepped forward to perform on the sodina . Despite being struck in the face he completed his performance and was awarded first prize . In 1935 he was nominated by the local governor to represent his district in a national musical competition organized by the French colonial authority at Mahamasina stadium in Antananarivo . That same year Rakoto was orphaned at the age of 12 , preventing him from further pursuing an education in the interest of earning a livelihood . A Frenchman hired the boy to work as an assistant baker until he came of age . Upon reaching adulthood , Rakoto left the bakery to become a metalworker while continuing to perform on the sodina in musical ensembles . 
 = = = Rise to prominence = = = 
 Rakoto 's opportunity for national fame arrived with the 1958 visit of French President Charles de Gaulle to Madagascar . The visit was in conjunction with the dissolution of colonial status and naming of Philibert Tsiranana as Prime Minister , part of the island 's transition to full independence in 1960 . Tsiranana had previously seen the flutist perform and invited Rakoto and his group of 18 musicians to accompany de Gaulle and perform traditional pieces during a portion of the French statesman 's walking tour through the capital city of Antananarivo . Following this performance , Rakoto dedicated himself full @-@ time to a career in music , performing regularly at traditional celebrations on the island . Tsiranana , who became president of Madagascar two years later , was the first to refer to the artist as Rakoto Frah , the name that the musician would use for the rest of his career . 
 International recognition of Rakoto Frah and his performance of traditional sodina music began with his first overseas voyage to Algeria in 1967 . The artist led a troupe of 18 Malagasy musicians selected to represent the island 's various ethnic groups at the International Festival of Algiers . Among the 80 competitors hailing from a variety of countries , Rakoto Frah 's troupe won the gold medal . This success was followed by performances in Japan , England , the United States , India , Germany , China , Norway , Finland , Australia and France , making him one of the first musicians to perform traditional Malagasy music at music festivals and concerts outside of Madagascar . At these performances , he was often accompanied by supporting musicians under the group name Orchestre Nationale . By exposing international audiences to sodina performances , Rakoto Frah promoted the instrument and the traditional musical heritage of Madagascar across the globe . The government of President <unk> fell into disfavor and was overturned in 1972 , and Rakoto Frah 's close association with the unpopular former head of state led the artist to be marginalized for the first half of the administration of his successor , Didier Ratsiraka ( 1975 – 1993 ) . 
 = = = Renewed popularity = = = 
 In 1985 , producers Ben Mandelson and Roger Armstrong visited Madagascar in search of artists to record for a planned album of Malagasy music . Rakoto Frah soon came to their attention , and they offered him a full @-@ length album of his own . Two of Rakoto Frah 's granddaughters provided vocals for this album , which was entitled Rakoto Frah : Flute Master of Madagascar . From the mid @-@ 1980s onward , Rakoto Frah enjoyed a revival in popularity , particularly among the youth , many of whom were seeking to reconnect with the traditions of their elders . In addition to recording numerous tracks and albums of his own , the flutist often appeared as a guest artist on the albums of others . Rakoto Frah again became one of the most famous and respected musicians within Madagascar and among the most recognized Malagasy performers in the world music circuit . 
 Rakoto Frah released a series of albums and performed internationally throughout the 1990s . The World Out of Time compilation , recorded and produced by David Lindley and Henry Kaiser in 1991 , featured him alongside a variety of other performers of the island 's diverse musical genres and instruments ; two further compilations with Lindley and Kaiser followed in 1993 and 1994 . In 1994 Rakoto Frah performed with the Malagasy All Stars on their tour of Germany . The following year he experienced a further increase in national and international prominence as a founding member of the group Feo Gasy , which also featured the internationally acclaimed Malagasy guitarist and singer @-@ songwriter Erick Manana . Together the band recorded two albums : <unk> in 1996 and <unk> Rano in 1999 . Malagasy guitarist Solo <unk> produced Rakoto Frah 's <unk> de Vie in 1998 , and Rakoto Frah 's final album , Chants et <unk> en Imerina , was released in October 2000 . 
 Despite his popularity , the artist earned very little from his musical career . This was in part due to weak enforcement of copyright laws in Madagascar , which enabled the profits from illegally copied albums to go directly to pirates . Throughout his career as a professional musician he lived in the poor neighborhood of <unk> @-@ Isotry in Antananarivo with 30 members of his family . There he produced instruments and provided lessons in sodina performance . In the later years of his life , Rakoto Frah had over 80 students at any given time . He was also a respected source of counsel in the neighborhood and was frequently visited by community members seeking his wisdom and advice . When based in Madagascar , the artist regularly accepted paid offers to perform on the sodina at traditional events such as famadihana ( the Malagasy highland " turning of the bones " funerary tradition ) , circumcision ceremonies , weddings , engagement ceremonies , and traditional festivals held to celebrate the first rice harvest of the year . These events could last up to seven days , including performances throughout the night , and often required several days of travel to arrive at the site . Rakoto Frah was an avid fan of rugby , and he and his ensemble would regularly perform flute and drum music at national team matches . His final international festival performance was the Festival de Langon held in France in August 2001 . 
 Rakoto Frah died on 29 September 2001 in the Ravoahangy <unk> hospital of Antananarivo following heart problems and a lung infection . In the days following his death , the Malagasy government organized a public celebration in his honor at Mahamasina stadium . His body was laid in the family tomb in his home village of Ankadinandriana on 3 October . 
 = = Style = = 
 Rakoto Frah performed traditional <unk> and <unk> pieces for sodina , commonly heard at a variety of holidays and rites observed in the central highlands of Madagascar . The music accompanying the famadihana reburial ceremonies of the central highlands , for instance , is typically performed by an ensemble of sodina players accompanied by the <unk> drum . These sodina performances , which express the joy of reuniting with the ancestors , are often competitive . More than one troupe may be present at the famadihana and will take turns showing off their musical skills , with the rapid flight of notes intended to inspire dancing over the course of the entire day or week of the celebration . The rural artistic tradition of the hira gasy is equally joyful but more elaborate , showcasing the music , dance and oratory skills of a large troupe that includes male and female vocalists , drums , sodina , and a variety of orchestral instruments such as clarinets , trumpets and violins . 
 Although he learned his repertoire by listening to elders perform traditional pieces , Rakoto Frah often performed personalized variations and interpreted the traditional airs in original ways . The themes addressed in his songs ranged from serious to light @-@ hearted and could touch on social concerns , behavior and the description of places . Rakoto Frah used both traditional flutes and those he crafted himself using diverse locally available materials . These included flutes crafted from sections of metal ski poles , PVC pipes and plastic curtain rods . He was never known to be without a flute and was widely respected for his musical virtuosity and his kindness alike . Rakoto Frah described music the most important element of life , even more important to him than his own family . Over the course of his career , the artist produced more than 800 pieces of instrumental and vocal music . 
 Several collaborations between Rakoto Frah and other international artists have been recorded . Rakoto Frah is featured on tracks recorded with Manu Dibango , jazz artists David Lindley and Henry Keiser , Kassav ' , and Ladysmith Black Mambazo , whom he met while performing in India . As a musician who played by ear , he would join an ongoing performance by listening carefully to determine the key of the song . The American composer and jazz saxophonist Ornette Coleman described Rakoto Frah as having " some of the best phrasing of any musician in the world " . He was also cited as a key influence by Ian Anderson , the flutist and leader of 1970s British rock group Jethro Tull . In the liner notes for the 1991 compilation A World Out of Time , producers David Lindley and Henry Kaiser expressed their admiration for the artist , stating : " He is one of the most amazing master musicians and individuals that we have ever met . His mastery of the sodina is on a level that you could only compare to great , western instrumental masters like John Coltrane , Ornette Coleman , Billy <unk> or Miles Davis . Rakoto Frah certainly seems to know mysterious things about the phrasing of melodies that nobody else knows . " Contemporary Malagasy artists performing in diverse genres ranging from heavy metal and hip hop to jazz and the traditional mangaliba have cited the sodina master as an inspiration and legend in the pantheon of Malagasy cultural figures . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Over the course of his life , Rakoto Frah was commemorated by fellow artists and by the government of Madagascar , which issued him numerous awards and commendations throughout his career . The design for the 1 @,@ 000 Malagasy franc ( 200 ariary ) banknote first printed by the Central Bank in 1983 depicted Rakoto Frah dressed in a traditional straw hat and lamba and playing the sodina . He is the only artist to have been featured on a Malagasy banknote . According to a representative of the Central Bank , the artist was selected because he was the most representative of the Malagasy identity . After the Rakoto Frah banknote design was discontinued in the 1990s it became a rare collector 's item valued in 2011 at over 100 @,@ 000 ariary , more than 500 times its face value . The artist was also invited by international filmmakers to feature in two French films : the Madagascar documentary L 'Ile Rouge released in 1992 by French director Jean @-@ Michel Carré , and an eponymous documentary about the artist himself , produced by director Camille Marchand in 1997 . 
 The legacy of Rakoto Frah remains strong over a decade after his death . In 2011 , ten years after his death , a series of commemorative events were organized in Madagascar to celebrate his life and music . In May 2011 a discussion panel and debate were organized around the themes of traditional culture and heritage . In June , a Catholic mass and a half @-@ day hira gasy performance were held in his honor and a three @-@ day gallery exposition was organized to commemorate his life and work . Regional cabarets were organized in Mahajanga and Toamasina by his former group Feo Gasy , his sons ' group Rakoto Frah Junior and traditional musical group Telofangady . September was marked by the unveiling of an opus specially composed in his honor , and a tribute concert at Mahamasina stadium featuring artists such as Dama of Mahaleo , Ricky , Samoëla and Faly <unk> , as well as Telofangady , Rakoto Frah Junior , and Feo Gasy . On 28 October 2011 the Ministry of Culture renamed a street in the capital city after him . These events culminated in a famadihana that the artist 's friends and family organized for Rakoto Frah at <unk> in Ankadinandriana . The event , which was attended by a state minister and numerous artists like Rakoto Frah Junior and Haja Telofangady , included performances by <unk> of Mahaleo , Faly , <unk> , Ra @-@ Jean Knack , <unk> Raymond <unk> , <unk> <unk> of Toamasina and Solo Ra @-@ Jean of Moramanga . According to custom , the remains of Rakoto Frah ( affectionately called " <unk> " among his inner circle ) were removed from the tomb to be wrapped in fresh silk shrouds . A new sodina was tucked into the cloth to replace the deteriorated one originally buried with him . The customary dish of vary be <unk> ( rice cooked with oil and pork ) was served and musicians performed pieces of the traditional genre which the artist had so often played at the famadihana ceremonies of others . 
 In November 2012 , several of Rakoto Frah 's adult children launched the École Rakoto Frah Junior ( " Rakoto Frah Junior School " ) initiative in November 2012 to continue the artist 's work as an educator of sodina performance . The informal cultural school organized lessons in sodina performance for 50 students at the community center in the artist 's former neighborhood of Isotry and awarded certificates of completion to 31 graduates on 16 December with plans to continue training further cohorts of sodina players . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Typhoon Prapiroon ( 2006 ) = 
 Typhoon Prapiroon , known in the Philippines as Tropical Storm Henry , was a minimal typhoon which caused deadly flooding in southern China in August 2006 . Prapiroon developed out of a persistent area of convection accompanied by an area of low pressure on July 25 about 120 km ( 75 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Yap . Two days later , both the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) and PAGASA classified the system as a tropical depression , with PAGASA giving it the local name ' Henry ' . By July 31 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) classified the system as Tropical Depression 07W . A strong subtropical ridge located to the north of the depression led to a west @-@ northwest movement for most of the storm existence . 
 A few hours after the JTWC began issuing advisories , the depression made landfall in <unk> , Philippines . The next day , after crossing into the South China Sea , the depression was upgraded to a tropical storm and named Prapiroon . Several hours later , PAGASA issued their final advisory on the storm as it moved out of their area of responsibility . By the morning of August 2 , Prapiroon intensified into a typhoon and reached its peak intensity with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph 10 @-@ min ) . The typhoon maintained this intensity until shortly before landfall near <unk> , China at 12 : 00 UTC on August 3 , where it weakened to a severe tropical storm . Prapiroon quickly weakened and dissipated early on August 5 . 
 Severe flooding in the Philippines and China from Prapiroon killed 94 people and left 10 others missing . Over 20 million people were affected by the storm in China alone . Significant flight delays and cancellations in Hong Kong led to $ 1 @.@ 9 million in compensation pay to travelers . About 30 @,@ 000 homes collapsed and 140 @,@ 000 others were damaged by the storm . Damages were estimated at $ 640 @,@ 000 ( 2006 USD ) in the Philippines and $ 984 million ( 2006 USD ) in China . The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement sought $ 4 @,@ 825 @,@ 791 ( 2006 USD ) in funds for victims of the typhoon . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 25 , an area of convection persisted about 120 km ( 75 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Yap . Satellite imagery indicated that a low level circulation had developed and was under an area of light to moderate wind shear . The low traveled in a general northwest fashion as upper level outflow improved . By July 27 , the low deteriorated , becoming elongated , and convection remained disorganized . However , as the low neared Central Luzon , Philippines , shower and thunderstorm activity near the center of the low increased , and based on its organization , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) classified the system a tropical depression early that morning . Shortly after , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) designated the system as Tropical Depression Henry . As the depression neared the northern Philippines , wind shear increased , partially exposing the center of the system to the south . At 02 : 30 UTC on June 30 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert , and at 00 : 00 UTC the next morning , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Depression 07W . 
 Upon first becoming a tropical cyclone , the depression tracked towards the west @-@ northwest due to a strong subtropical ridge located to the north of the system . A few hours later , the system made landfall in <unk> , Philippines with winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . After being over land for most of July 31 , the depression relocated into the South China Sea and the JTWC determined that it intensified into a tropical storm . At around 06 : 00 UTC , the JMA designated the storm Tropical Storm Prapiroon about 300 km ( 185 mi ) northwest of Dagupan City , Philippines , a few hours later , PAGASA issued their final advisory on Tropical Storm Henry ( Prapiroon ) as it moved out of their area of responsibility . Prapiroon gradually intensified as it moved towards the west @-@ northwest at 24 km / h ( 15 mph ) , and by that afternoon , the system had completely moved into the South China Sea . By the nighttime hours , the JMA upgraded Prapiroon to a severe tropical storm , as they determined that the maximum sustained winds had reached 95 km / h ( 60 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) . By the morning of August 2 , the JTWC upgraded Prapiroon to a typhoon , and a few hours later , the JMA upgraded Prapiroon to a typhoon . 
 Heading towards the northwest , Prapiroon reached its peak intensity early on August 3 . The JMA estimated that Prapiroon peaked with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) with a minimum pressure of 970 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 64 inHg ) , while the JTWC estimated that the storm peaked with winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . Prapiroon maintained this intensity for 12 hours before weakening slightly as it made landfall near <unk> at 12 : 00 UTC . At the time of landfall , the JMA downgraded Prapiroon to a severe tropical storm , with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph 10 @-@ minute winds ) while the JTWC analyzed Prapiroon to have had winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph 1 @-@ minute winds ) . Due to the interaction with land , the storm quickly weakened . Early on August 5 , both agencies issued their final advisories on Prapiroon as it dissipated over central Guangxi . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 As Tropical Depression 07W , locally named ' Henry ' by PAGASA , neared the <unk> the northern Philippines , a total of 17 provinces were placed under a storm alert as winds of 30 <unk> ( 55 km / h ) were likely to affect areas near the depression . Residents in the northern Philippines were advised to avoid low @-@ lying areas and be alert for flooding . About 15 @,@ 000 people were evacuated following heavy rains from the outer bands of the storm . 
 = = = China = = = 
 The Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) and Macau 's Meteorological and Geophysical Bureau both hoisted strong wind signal 1 on August 1 as the system was located within 800 km ( 497 mi ) of their respective cities . As Prapiroon neared the southern coast of China , the signal was raised to strong wind signal 3 as strong winds were expected to strike the area . This was further increased to strong wind signal 8 SE on August 3 , as gale @-@ force winds were expected in the southeastern areas . All signals were cancelled the next afternoon as Prapiroon moved inland . 
 In advance of Prapiroon , government officials in Guangdong Provence , China sent out 11 million mobile text messages to alert people of the approaching storm . About 843 @,@ 000 people were evacuated ahead of the storm , 335 @,@ 000 in Guangdong , 382 @,@ 000 in Guangxi , and 126 @,@ 000 in Hainan . Officials ordered 62 @,@ 023 ships to return to port to prevent them from being stranded at sea . Kindergarten and special schools in Hong Kong were suspended for at least two days for the day of and following the storms landfall . 
 = = Impact = = 
 In the wake of Prapiroon , severe flooding left 94 people dead and 10 others missing . Damages from the storm were estimated at $ 984 @.@ 8 million ( 2006 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 1 billion 2008 USD ) . Throughout southern China , Prapiroon affected over 20 million people . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 As a tropical depression , Prapiroon caused heavy rains over the northern Philippines , leaving six people dead . In <unk> , a two @-@ year @-@ old boy , identified as Elmer Celso , drowned in floodwaters outside his home . Five other fatalities were reported due to flooding . Two other people were listed as missing . Agricultural damage was estimated at $ 640 @,@ 000 ( 2006 USD ) . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Despite weakening to a severe tropical storm before landfall , Prapiroon brought torrential rains and flooding which left 88 people dead and eight others missing . About 10 million people were affected by the typhoon , while 30 @,@ 000 homes collapsed and 140 @,@ 000 others were damaged . Damages from the typhoon were estimated at $ 984 million ( 2006 USD ; $ 1 @.@ 1 billion 2008 USD ) . Guangdong Province was the hardest hit of the three provinces affected by Typhoon Prapiroon . About 3 @.@ 72 million people were affected by the storm and 7 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed in the province . A tornado struck Foshan , Shanwei and Shaoguan , killing nine . A police officer was killed when a landslide buried him during a rescue in <unk> . Another hard hit province , Guangxi , was struck by Prapiroon . About 5 @.@ 1 million people were affected by the storm and 219 @,@ 441 were displaced . Ten people were killed by a flash flood and landslide in <unk> and <unk> . Another flash flood swept away a shelter which thirteen migrant workers resided in , all of whom were confirmed to have been killed . Three more people were killed when a landslide caused their home to collapse in Luming Village . About 9 @,@ 300 homes and 195 @,@ 900 hectares of farmland were destroyed . 
 = = = = Hong Kong = = = = 
 As Prapiroon neared Hong Kong , thousands of people were stranded in airports as hundreds of flights in and out of the area were cancelled . Twenty cargo containers in the harbor were tipped over and one person was injured by the falling containers . A total of 381 flights were cancelled and 725 were delayed , affecting about 10 million people . Compensation costs from the travel delays amounted to $ 1 @.@ 9 million ( 2006 USD ) . According to airport authorities , the storm caused the worst disruption in the airport 's 20 @-@ year history . Winds were recorded up to 103 km / h ( 63 mph ) in the harbor . The highest gust was recorded on Green Island at 193 km / h ( 119 mph ) . Seven people were injured by objects blown around by the wind . A cargo vessel , with a crew of 23 , ran aground near the harbor . No injuries were reported from the incident . Two other incidents with vessels occurred near Ma Wan and Tuen Mun . Seven hundred trees were blown down and another 1 @,@ 600 sustained damage . Maximum rainfall from Prapiroon was estimated at 8 @.@ 1 in ( 207 @.@ 5 mm ) . Two landslides were also reported and about 200 hectares of farmland was damaged . A storm surge of 2 @.@ 71 m ( 8 @.@ 89 ft ) was recorded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After Prapiroon dissipated , the regional Disease Prevention and Control Center of Guangxi Autonomous Region sent out eight teams of health workers to help avoid epidemics in affected areas . Despite the damage in the wake of the typhoon , China 's Ministry of Civil Affairs did not activate any emergency response plans . The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement sought for $ 4 @,@ 825 @,@ 791 ( 2006 USD ) in funds to assist 240 @,@ 000 people who were affected over a 12 month span . Reconstruction in the areas devastated by Prapiroon began shortly after the typhoon dissipated . 
 = Cape sparrow = 
 The Cape sparrow or <unk> ( Passer melanurus ) is a bird of the sparrow family Passeridae found in southern Africa . A medium @-@ sized sparrow at 14 – 16 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) , it has distinctive plumage including large pale head stripes . Both sexes are mostly coloured grey , brown , and chestnut , and the male has some black and white markings on its head and neck . It inhabits semi @-@ arid savannah , cultivated areas , and towns , and ranges from the central coast of Angola to eastern South Africa and Swaziland . Three subspecies are distinguished . 
 Cape sparrows are primarily granivorous , and also eat soft plant parts and insects . The birds typically breed in colonies and gather in large , often nomadic flocks while not breeding . The nest can be constructed in a variety of locations , in a tree or a bush in a hole or an empty nest of another species . A typical clutch contains three or four eggs , and both parents are involved in breeding from nest building to feeding young . The Cape sparrow is common in most of its range and coexists successfully in urban habitats with two of its relatives , the introduced house sparrow and native southern grey @-@ headed sparrow . The population has not been recorded decreasing significantly , so according to the IUCN Red List the species is not threatened . 
 = = Description = = 
 For a sparrow , the Cape sparrow is brightly coloured and distinctive , and is medium @-@ sized at 14 – 16 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) long . The breeding male has a mostly black head , but with a broad white mark on each side , curling from behind the eye to the throat . On the throat a narrow black band connects the black bib of the breast to black of the head . The underparts are greyish , darker on the flanks . The back of the male 's neck is dark grey , and its back and shoulders are bright chestnut . The male has a white and a black wing bar below its shoulders , and flight feathers and tail streaked grey and black . 
 The female is plumaged like the male , but is duller and has a grey head with a different pattern from the male , though it bears a hint of the pale head markings of the male . The juvenile is like the female , but young males have black markings on the head from an early age . 
 The Cape sparrow 's vocalisations are chirps similar to those of the house sparrow , but much more musical and mellow . The basic call is used in flight and while perching socially and transcribed as <unk> , chirrup , <unk> , or <unk> . A call used by the male to advertise nest ownership is transcribed as <unk> or <unk> . Distinctive and loud , this call sometimes becomes a jerky and repetitive song , transcribed as chip <unk> , chip <unk> . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Cape sparrow was first described by Philipp Ludwig Statius Müller in 1776 , as Loxia <unk> . Some other earlier biologists described the Cape sparrow in Loxia or Fringilla , but it has otherwise been regarded as a member of the genus Passer . Within this genus its relations have generally been regarded as obscure . Mitochondrial DNA studies , however , have strongly suggested that the Cape sparrow among the most basal member ( the earliest offshoot ) of its genus . It seems to be related to the southern grey @-@ headed sparrow and its relatives , and to the saxaul sparrow of Central Asia . 
 The Cape sparrow 's specific epithet comes from the Greek <unk> ( melas , " black " ) and ουρά ( oura , " tail " ) , while the name of the genus Passer comes from a Latin word for small birds . 
 The Cape sparrow has three subspecies . The nominate subspecies Passer melanurus melanurus is found in eastern South Africa , east to the western part of Free State . The subspecies <unk> , which is sometimes included in subspecies melanurus , occurs from Free State east to Eastern Cape and Lesotho . The subspecies <unk> ranges from the extreme southern coastal areas of Angola into Namibia , Botswana and southern of Zimbabwe , as well as northern South Africa . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Cape sparrow inhabits southern Africa south of Angola and as far east as Swaziland . The northernmost point in its range is Benguela in Angola , and it is found in the coastal and central parts of Namibia , except for the driest parts of the Namib Desert . It occurs in all of South Africa except the farthest east , in southern Botswana and <unk> in the Kalahari Basin of central Botswana . In the east , it breeds at small number of localities in southeastern Zimbabwe . It has been recorded as a vagrant in Harare , in central Zimbabwe . The eastern limit of its range is reached in the wet forests of Limpopo and KwaZulu Natal , extending into the hills of western Swaziland . 
 The original habitats of this species were the semi @-@ arid savanna , <unk> , and light woodland typical of southern Africa . When settled agriculture arrived in its range about a thousand years ago , it adapted to cultivated land , and since the arrival of settlement , it has moved into towns . The Cape sparrow prefers habitats with an annual rainfall of less than 75 centimetres ( 30 in ) , though in desert areas it is usually found near watercourses or watering holes . While it occurs in urban centres , it prefers parks , gardens , and other open spaces , and has a low reproductive success in more built @-@ up areas . 
 In towns , the Cape sparrow competes with both the native southern grey @-@ headed sparrow and the introduced house sparrow . Since it is more established around humans in its range than either , it successfully competes with both species , though they may exclude it from nesting in holes . There are reports by birdwatchers in suburban areas of South Africa of increases in some regions ( the northern Johannesburg area , and Pietermaritzburg ) and decreases in others ( the southern Cape Town area ) . The house sparrow is reported decreasing in several urban areas , as it has in parts of Europe , declines which are attributed to factors including the increasing density of garden plantings and increases in predation . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Social behaviour = = = 
 The Cape sparrow is social , lives in flocks , and usually breeds in colonies . Away from humans it is nomadic , and forms flocks of up to 200 birds . In cultivated and built up areas , smaller flocks form where food is provided for livestock or birds . In such places , it associates with other seed @-@ eating birds , such as the house sparrow , the cape weaver , and <unk> weavers . Birds from urban areas form flocks seasonally and fly out to nearby countryside to feed on ripening grain , returning at night to roost . 
 Cape sparrows prefer to roost in nests , and while wandering when not breeding , birds in uncultivated areas roost socially in old nests or dense bushes . In farmland and towns , birds build special nests for roosting , lined more poorly than breeding nests , but made of more insulating material . 
 An unusual social behaviour has been described from Cape sparrows in Johannesburg . Groups of 20 – 30 birds separate from larger flocks and stand close together on the ground with tails on the ground and heads held high . These groups sometimes move in an <unk> fashion by hopping slowly . Often birds will fly up and hover 30 – 60 centimetres ( 12 – 24 in ) above the ground . During these gatherings birds are silent and are never antagonistic . This behaviour 's significance is unknown , and it is not reported in any other sparrow . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The Cape sparrow mostly eats seeds , foraging in trees and on the ground . The larger seeds of cereals , wild grasses , and other small plants are preferred , with wheat and <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) being favourites . Buds and soft fruits are also taken , causing considerable damage to agriculture . Insects are eaten , and nestlings seem to be fed exclusively on caterpillars . The Cape sparrow eats the soft shoots of plants , and probes in aloes for nectar , but these habits are not important sources of food . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 = = = = Courtship and colonies = = = = 
 The Cape sparrow usually breeds in loose colonies of 50 – 100 birds . 10 to 20 percent of the breeding birds in each population nest away from colonies , for unknown reasons . The Cape sparrow is usually monogamous , but some records of a male and two females nesting and raising young in one nest have been made in Western Cape . It seems pairs are formed in the non @-@ breeding flocks , but it is not known how pairs are formed , or if the pair bond is for life . Once ready to breed , newly mated pairs look for a suitable nesting site , spending mornings searching , and returning to their flock in the afternoon . Once a site has been selected , both birds begin to build their nest . Other pairs seeking a nest site join them , and in this matter a colony forms quickly . 
 The courtship display is poorly recorded . Ornithologist J. Denis Summers @-@ Smith observed a display in which the male hopped beside the female in a tree , drooping its wings and ruffling the chestnut @-@ coloured feathers on its back . Groups of two or more males have been observed chasing a female . In the house sparrow a similar display exists , in which a female who is not ready to copulate is chased by her mate , who is joined by other males . It is not known if the display in the Cape sparrow has a similar significance . When ready to mate , the female crouches in solicitation and is mounted by the male . Instances of hybridisation with the house sparrow , the southern grey @-@ headed sparrow , and the Sudan golden sparrow have been reported . 
 = = = = Nesting = = = = 
 The Cape sparrow utilises a variety of nesting sites , including holes as well as open locations . Bushes and trees , especially acacias , seem to be preferred . Many nests may be built in a single tree . Holes and other covered sites are chosen less frequently . Nests have been recorded from the eaves of buildings , on creepers on walls , in holes in earth banks , and in holes in haystacks . Sometimes the Cape sparrow nests in the disused nests of other birds , such as weavers and swallows . Pairs that nest away from colonies usually choose low bushes or utility poles as nesting sites . Nests are placed at least a metre above the ground , and can be only a few centimetres apart in colonies . Only the nest and its very close vicinity are defended as a territory . Males defend their territory with threatening postures , and sometimes by fighting with bills on the ground . 
 Nests built in the open are large and untidy domed structures . Nests are built mainly of dry grass and twigs , with a soft lining of plant down . Any leaves or thorns present in a nest tree are worked into the nest . In cavity nests , the hole is simply filled with a shapeless mass of grass with a cup of soft material containing the eggs on the inside . When the disused nests of weavers are utilised , they are simply given a soft lining . The nest entrance is in the side , and is sometimes extended into a funnel . The male and the female construct the nest together , keeping close when finding material and weaving it together . 
 = = = = Eggs and young = = = = 
 Clutches contain between two and six eggs , typically three or four . Variation in clutch size depending on the amount of food available for young birds . Presumably owing to the greater availability of food , clutches are larger during the peak of the breeding season , and in more southern latitudes of the Cape sparrow 's range . Both birds of a pair incubate the eggs during the day , switching every ten or fifteen minutes . At night , only the female incubates the eggs , while the male roosts outside or in the nest . In pairs breeding outside of colonies , birds leave the nest to make room for their mates upon hearing their mates approaching . Among colonial pairs , the incubating bird waits until its partner arrives in the nest , to prevent other birds from entering the nest . Incubation seems to begin before the clutch is complete , and lasts 12 – 24 days . 
 The young of a clutch hatch over two or three days and are brooded until their feathers develop and eyes open five days after hatching . The young are fed on insects until they fledge 16 to 25 , typically 17 , days after hatching . After this they are fed for one or two weeks . While feeding nestlings , the female is dominant over the male . Cape sparrows are among the main hosts of brood parasitism by the <unk> cuckoo , and have been recorded parasitising others of the same species . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 The Cape sparrow is an abundant and familiar bird of human habitations and cultivation in most of southern Africa . It is not believed to be threatened , and accordingly is listed as a least concern species on the IUCN Red List . It can be an agricultural pest , especially of grain cultivation and vineyards . 
 When vineyards in the south @-@ west Cape started letting weeds grow between vines to conserve moisture , around 1956 , the Cape sparrow moved in . Cape sparrows quickly exhausted the seeds and started eating the grapes . The Cape sparrow is now a serious pest in vineyards . However , vineyards are not optimal habitat : some populations have had such a low reproductive success that they could not be maintained without immigration . 
 The Cape sparrow was featured on the lowest @-@ denomination South African coin , from the farthing ( ¼ <unk> ) in 1923 to the cent that ceased to be minted in 2002 , with designs based on an original by George Kruger Gray . This was said to be because women interned at a concentration camp in <unk> during the Boer War adopted a biblical quotation ( from Matthew 10 ) as their motto : " Are not two sparrows sold for a farthing ? and one of them shall not fall on the ground without your Father . " Additionally , it has been featured on stamps from Lesotho and the Central African Republic . 
 = Royal Philharmonic Orchestra = 
 The Royal Philharmonic Orchestra ( RPO ) , based in London , was formed by Sir Thomas Beecham in 1946 . In its early days the orchestra secured profitable recording contracts and important engagements including the Glyndebourne Festival Opera and the concerts of the Royal Philharmonic Society . After Beecham 's death in 1961 the orchestra 's fortunes declined steeply ; it battled for survival until the mid @-@ 1960s , when its future was secured after an Arts Council report recommended that it should receive public subsidy ; a further crisis arose in the same era when it seemed that the orchestra 's right to call itself " Royal " could be withdrawn . 
 Since Beecham 's death the RPO has had seven chief conductors , including Rudolf Kempe , Antal Doráti , André Previn and Vladimir Ashkenazy ; from 2009 to the present ( at 2016 ) the incumbent has been Charles Dutoit . Others closely associated with the orchestra have included Sir Charles Groves , Sir Charles Mackerras , Peter Maxwell Davies , Yehudi Menuhin and Leopold Stokowski . 
 In 2004 the orchestra acquired its first permanent London base , at the new Cadogan Hall in Chelsea . The RPO also gives concerts at the Royal Festival Hall , the Royal Albert Hall and venues around the UK and other countries . From its earliest days the orchestra has been active in the recording studios , making film soundtracks and numerous gramophone recordings ; many of the LP recordings conducted by Beecham and others have been reissued on compact disc . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1932 the conductor Sir Thomas Beecham had founded the London Philharmonic Orchestra ( LPO ) , which , with the backing of rich supporters , he ran until 1940 , when finances dried up in wartime . Beecham left to conduct in Australia and then the US ; the orchestra continued without him after reorganising itself as a self @-@ governing body . On Beecham 's return to England in September 1944 the LPO welcomed him back , and in October they gave a concert together that drew superlatives from the critics . Over the next months Beecham and the orchestra gave further concerts with considerable success , but the LPO players , now their own employers , declined to give him the unfettered control he had exercised in the 1930s . If he were to become chief conductor again it would be as a paid employee of the orchestra . Beecham responded , " I emphatically refuse to be wagged by any orchestra ... I am going to found one more great orchestra to round off my career . " In 1945 he conducted the first concert of Walter Legge 's new Philharmonia Orchestra , but was not disposed to accept a salaried position from Legge , his former assistant , any more than from his former players in the LPO . His new orchestra to rival the Philharmonia would , he told Legge , be launched in " the most auspicious circumstances and <unk> " . 
 In 1946 Beecham reached an agreement with the Royal Philharmonic Society : his new orchestra would replace the LPO at all the Society 's concerts . He thus gained the right to name the new ensemble the " Royal Philharmonic Orchestra " , an arrangement approved by George VI . Beecham arranged with the Glyndebourne Festival that the RPO should be the resident orchestra at Glyndebourne seasons . He secured backing , including that of record companies in the US as well as Britain , with whom lucrative recording contracts were negotiated . The music critic Lyndon Jenkins writes : 
 Naturally , it quickly became known that he was planning another orchestra , at which the cry " He 'll never get the players ! " went up just as it had done in 1932 . Beecham was unmoved : " I always get the players , " he retorted . " Among other considerations , they are so good they refuse to play under anybody but me " . 
 = = = Beecham 's orchestra = = = 
 Beecham appointed Victor Olof as his orchestral manager , and they started recruiting . At the top of their list were leading musicians with whom Beecham had worked before the war . Four had been founder members of the LPO fifteen years previously : Reginald Kell ( clarinet ) , Gerald Jackson ( flute ) , James Bradshaw ( timpani ) and Jack Silvester ( double @-@ bass ) . From the current LPO they engaged the oboist Peter Newbury . Beecham persuaded the veteran bassoonist Archie Camden , who had been pursuing a solo career , to return to orchestral work . The cellos were led by Raymond Clark , enlisted from the BBC Symphony Orchestra . The principal horn player was Dennis Brain , who already held the same post in Legge 's Philharmonia , but managed to play for both orchestras . Jenkins speculates that as Beecham knew all Britain 's orchestral leaders at first hand he decided not to try to lure any of them away . His choice was John Pennington , who had been first violin of the London String Quartet from 1927 to 1934 , and had then had a career in the US as concertmaster , successively , of the San Francisco Symphony , Los Angeles Philharmonic and Paramount Pictures orchestras . 
 On 11 September 1946 the Royal Philharmonic assembled for its first rehearsal . Four days later it gave its first concert , at the Davis Theatre , Croydon . Beecham telegraphed a colleague , " Press virtually unanimous in praise of orchestra . First Croydon concert huge success " . Beecham and the orchestra played a series of out @-@ of @-@ town engagements before venturing a first London concert on 26 October . The Times then spoke of " a hall filled with golden tone which enveloped the listener " . Before its London debut the orchestra made its first recording , and within two years had made more than 100 . 
 Within a few months Pennington was forced to resign when the British Musicians ' Union discovered that he was not one of its members . He was succeeded by his deputy Oscar Lampe , " a man who eschewed most social graces but played the violin divinely " , according to Jenkins . In the early days the orchestra comprised 72 players all on yearly contract to Beecham , giving him first call on their services , subject to reasonable notice , but not otherwise restricting their freedom to play for other ensembles . A review of the London orchestral scene of the late 1940s said of the RPO and its main rival : " The Philharmonia and Royal Philharmonic share a very serious disability : that neither is a permanently constituted orchestra . Both assemble and disperse more or less at random ... there is no style which is distinctively RPO or Philharmonia . " 
 Brain continued to play first horn for both orchestras ; otherwise , from the early 1950s , there was generally more stability of orchestral personnel . In particular the RPO became celebrated for its regular team of woodwind principals , in which Jackson was joined by Jack Brymer ( clarinet ) , Gwydion Brooke ( bassoon ) and Terence MacDonagh ( oboe ) . The Independent described them as " arguably the finest ever wind section ... [ they ] became known as ' The Royal Family ' . " 
 The RPO toured the United States in 1950 , the first British orchestra to visit America since the London Symphony Orchestra ( LSO ) in 1912 . This was a long @-@ cherished plan of Beecham 's , who had been unable to take the LPO to the US in the 1930s . He arranged 52 concerts in 45 cities in 64 days . The tour was described by Brain 's biographers Gamble and Lynch as a huge success . It began on 13 October in Hartford , Connecticut , and finished on 15 December in Bethlehem , Pennsylvania . The concerto soloists were the pianist Betty Humby Beecham ( the conductor 's second wife ) and orchestral principals : David McCallum ( violin ) , Anthony Pini ( cello ) , and the four members of the " Royal Family " . In The New York Times , Olin Downes wrote of " magnificent music @-@ making by Sir Thomas Beecham and the Royal Philharmonic " . The following year , assessing all the London orchestras , Frank Howes , music critic of The Times , concluded that the RPO " comes nearest in quality and in consistency of style to the great international orchestras " . 
 The orchestra 's first appearance at the Proms took place in August 1952 , conducted by Basil Cameron . Beecham made his Proms debut two years later , conducting the RPO in a programme of music by Berlioz , Schubert and Sibelius ; The Times commented on " an evening of magnificent playing " . In 1957 Beecham and the RPO made a European tour , beginning at the Salle Pleyel in Paris and ending at the Musikverein in Vienna . 
 Beecham conducted the RPO in his last concert , given at Portsmouth Guildhall on 7 May 1960 . The programme , all characteristic choices , comprised the Magic Flute Overture , Haydn 's Military Symphony , Beecham 's own Handel arrangement Love in Bath , Schubert 's Fifth Symphony , On the River by Delius , and the Bacchanale from Saint @-@ Saëns 's Samson and Delilah , with Delius 's Sleigh Ride as an encore . Beecham suffered a heart attack the following month , from which he did not recover ; he died in March 1961 . 
 = = = 1961 – 2000 = = = 
 Rudolf Kempe , who had been appointed associate conductor in 1960 , became principal conductor in 1961 and music director in 1962 . Beecham 's widow ran the affairs of the orchestra as best she could , but some senior players including Brymer and MacDonagh were unhappy with the management , and they left . The orchestra reorganised itself in 1963 as a self @-@ governing limited company , but almost immediately encountered difficulties . The Royal Philharmonic Society decided not to engage the RPO for its concerts ; Glyndebourne booked the LPO instead of the RPO from 1964 onwards . The RPO was also excluded from the London Orchestral Concert Board 's schedule of concerts , which meant that it was denied the use of London 's main concert venue , the Royal Festival Hall . Kempe resigned , although he returned shortly afterwards . Helped by strong support from Sir Malcolm Sargent , the orchestra successfully mounted its own concerts at a cinema in Swiss Cottage , 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) to the north @-@ west of the Festival Hall . A 1965 report to the Arts Council by a committee chaired by Alan Peacock recommended that all four independent London orchestras should receive adequate public subsidy . 
 The severance of the tie with the Royal Philharmonic Society in 1963 turned out to be temporary , but for three years it threatened to deprive the RPO of the " Royal " in its title . The matter was resolved in 1966 , when on the advice of Roy Jenkins , who as Home Secretary had responsibility for such matters , the Queen conferred the title unconditionally on the orchestra . 
 The RPO celebrated its silver jubilee in 1971 . On 15 September the orchestra returned to Croydon , where it had made its debut 25 years earlier . The theatre in which it had first played had been demolished , and the anniversary concert was therefore given at the Fairfield Halls . The programme consisted of the overture to The Marriage of Figaro , Beethoven 's Emperor Concerto , and Holst 's The Planets . Sir Adrian Boult conducted , and Clifford Curzon was the soloist . Five members of the original orchestra were still in the RPO for the jubilee concert : Leonard Brain ( brother of Dennis ) , principal cor anglais ; Lewis Pocock , co @-@ principal timpani ; Ernest <unk> , double bass ; John Myers , viola ; and Albert <unk> , violin . 
 The RPO gave Kempe the title of " Conductor for Life " in 1970 ; he stepped down from the orchestra in 1975 , the year before his death . He was succeeded as chief conductor by Antal Doráti , who held the post from 1975 to 1978 ; as in his earlier spells with the LSO and BBC Symphony Orchestra , he was not greatly liked by his players , but raised their standard of playing and imposed discipline . 
 In 1984 there was a new threat to the orchestra : a review carried out on behalf of the Arts Council by the journalist William Rees @-@ Mogg opined that England lacked " a great eastern symphony orchestra " : the suggestion was that the RPO should move to Nottingham . Another Arts Council report of the same period recommended that the RPO should supplement the LSO as resident orchestra at the Barbican Centre ; neither proposal came to fruition . During the 1980s the British government imposed strict constraints on public spending ; to make up for lost revenue , the RPO , in common with the other self @-@ governing London orchestras , was forced into increased reliance on business sponsorship as a primary source of funds . The Grove Dictionary of Music and Musicians , recording this , comments , " Such sponsorship is , however , subject to changing circumstances and thus less secure in the long term . " 
 Since 1993 the RPO has had a community and education programme , later given the title of " RPO Resound " . It aims to increase " access to and engagement with world @-@ class music @-@ making . " It has worked in venues including homeless shelters , hospices , youth clubs and prisons . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 The orchestra gives an annual series of concerts at the Festival Hall , and since 2004 has had a permanent home at Cadogan Hall , a former church in Chelsea , converted into a 900 @-@ seat concert hall and rehearsal space . At the Royal Albert Hall in London the RPO gives performances ranging from large @-@ scale choral and orchestral works to evenings of popular classics . 
 The orchestra maintains a regional touring programme , taking in venues throughout the UK , and has established residencies in Aylesbury , Crawley , Croydon , Dartford , High Wycombe , Ipswich , Lowestoft , Northampton and Reading . The RPO regularly tours overseas ; since 2010 it has played in Azerbaijan , Canada , China , Germany , Italy , Japan , Russia , Spain and the US . In 2010 – 11 and two subsequent seasons the RPO was the resident orchestra for a series of concerts in Montreux , Switzerland . In 2010 the orchestra toured England , with a repertoire preponderantly of Beethoven , including the Violin Concerto in which Pinchas Zuckerman was both soloist and conductor . In the same year , another tour featured Maxim Shostakovich conducting the music of his father , Dmitri Shostakovich . The RPO continues to feature at the Proms ; in the 2010 – 12 Proms seasons the orchestra played works by Bach , Copland , Delius , Saint @-@ Saëns , Tchaikovsky , Bax , Barber , Bartók and Prokofiev . 
 The orchestra 's community and education activities have continued into the 21st century . In May 2013 six youth ensembles from London boroughs and a 3 @,@ 500 @-@ strong choir of children from local primary schools were given the chance to perform alongside members of the RPO at the Albert Hall . They played a piece composed by participants from all six musical ensembles . 
 = = Players and conductors = = 
 Among the well @-@ known musicians who have been RPO principals in the mid @-@ 1950s and later , string players include Steven Staryk ( leader , 1957 – 59 ) , Raymond Cohen ( leader , 1959 – 66 ) , Alan Loveday ( leader , 1967 – 71 ) , Erich Gruenberg ( leader , 1972 – 76 ) , Barry Griffiths ( leader , 1976 – 89 ) , Jonathan Carney ( leader , 1991 – 94 ) and Frederick Riddle ( viola , 1953 – 77 ) . Among the woodwind principals have been Geoffrey Gilbert ( flute , 1957 – 61 ) , James Galway ( flute , 1967 – 69 ) , Antony Pay ( clarinet , 1968 – 78 ) and Michael Chapman ( bassoon , 1978 – 99 ) . Principals in the brass section have included Alan Civil ( horn , 1952 – 55 ) , Philip Jones ( trumpet , 1956 – 60 ) , Elgar Howarth ( trumpet , 1963 – 69 ) and Martin Owen ( horn , 1998 – 2008 ) . 
 Chief conductors since <unk> have been Walter Weller 1980 – 85 , André Previn 1985 – 92 , Vladimir Ashkenazy 1987 – 94 , Yuri <unk> 1992 – 98 and Daniele Gatti 1996 – 2009 . In 2009 Charles Dutoit was appointed artistic director and principal conductor . From 1992 to 2000 Peter Maxwell Davies was associate conductor and composer to the RPO . Other conductors with close ties to the orchestra have included Sir Charles Groves , Vernon Handley , Sir Charles Mackerras , Yehudi Menuhin , Gennady Rozhdestvensky and Leopold Stokowski . Grzegorz Nowak was appointed principal associate conductor in 2008 ; the following year Pinchas Zukerman became the RPO 's principal guest conductor . In 2015 Alexander Shelley joined Nowak as an associate conductor of the orchestra . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 From the RPO 's earliest days to the end of Beecham 's life , they made numerous recordings for His Master 's Voice , CBS and RCA . Among the works they recorded EMI chose several to be reissued at the end of the twentieth century in its " Great Recordings of the Century " series . They included a Delius programme ; a Grieg programme ; French ballet music ; short works by Bizet , Chabrier , Fauré and Saint @-@ Saëns ; Tchaikovsky 's Symphony No 4 and Nutcracker Suite ; Mozart 's Jupiter Symphony , Clarinet Concerto ( Brymer ) and Bassoon Concerto ( Brooke ) ; and Schubert 's 3rd , 5th and 6th Symphonies . 
 After Beecham 's death the orchestra made many recordings for Decca , sometimes under pseudonyms such as the " Beecham Symphony Orchestra " , the " London Festival Orchestra " and the " Metropolitan Symphony Orchestra " . Among the conductors with whom the RPO recorded in the 1960s were Sir John Barbirolli , Fritz Reiner , Charles Munch , Georges Prêtre , Kempe , Previn and Stokowski . Soloists included Earl Wild , Shura <unk> , Alan Civil and Luciano Pavarotti . 
 Igor Stravinsky recorded his opera The Rake 's Progress with the RPO in 1964 . Colin Davis made some of his earliest recordings with the orchestra , including Mozart and Rossini overtures , Beethoven 's Seventh Symphony , and Stravinsky 's Oedipus rex . From 1964 to 1979 the RPO was engaged by Decca to record Gilbert and Sullivan operas with the D ’ <unk> Carte Opera Company . The orchestra has also recorded for Deutsche Grammophon , Lyrita , Philips , Pye and Unicorn @-@ Kanchana . 
 In 1986 the orchestra launched RPO Records , claimed to be " the world 's first record label to be owned by a symphony orchestra " . Recordings available on the RPO label in 2013 ranged from core symphonic repertoire and Tchaikovsky ballet scores to film music by various composers , light music by Burt Bacharach and Richard Rodgers , and an album called " Symphonic Rock " , described as " Over 3 hours of classic rock anthems and pop tracks with an orchestral twist " . 
 = = Non @-@ classical work = = 
 As well as performing works from the classical repertoire , the RPO has recorded a number of film scores , including those for Powell and Pressburger 's The Red Shoes and The Tales of Hoffmann . Other scores recorded by the RPO are Olivier 's Richard III , The Bridge on the River Kwai , and The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes . 
 In 1987 the RPO established a sister ensemble , the Royal Philharmonic Concert Orchestra , which plays lighter classics . It succeeded a similar group , the Royal Philharmonic Pops Orchestra . 
 RPO players have been involved with many performances away from the classical repertory ; in the 1960s they pioneered the " mixed media " concert , appearing with The Nice rock band . Later non @-@ classical ventures included Yanni Live at the Acropolis , a concert held in Greece in 1993 , conducted by <unk> Rohani ; In 1992 UEFA commissioned the orchestra and the Academy of St Martin in the Fields chorus to record the UEFA Champions League Hymn . 
 = Britney Spears = 
 Britney Jean Spears ( born December 2 , 1981 ) is an American singer , dancer and actress . Born in McComb , Mississippi , and raised in Kentwood , Louisiana , she performed acting roles in stage productions and television shows as a child before signing with Jive Records in 1997 . Spears 's first and second studio albums , ... Baby One More Time ( 1999 ) and Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) , became international successes , with the former becoming the best @-@ selling album by a teenage solo artist . Title tracks " ... Baby One More Time " and " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " broke international sales records . In 2001 , Spears released her self @-@ titled third studio album , Britney , and played the starring role in the film Crossroads ( 2002 ) . She assumed creative control of her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) , which yielded the worldwide success of the " Toxic " single . 
 In 2007 , Spears 's much @-@ publicized personal issues sent her career into hiatus . Her fifth studio album , Blackout , was released later that year , and spawned singles such as " Gimme More " and " Piece of Me " . Her erratic behavior and hospitalizations continued through the following year , at which point she was placed under a still ongoing conservatorship . Spears 's sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) , included the international chart @-@ topping single " Womanizer " . Her seventh studio album , Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) , became her first to yield three top @-@ ten singles in the United States . She released her eighth studio album Britney Jean in 2013 . Later that year , Spears began the four @-@ year residency show , Britney : Piece of Me , at The AXIS at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas . 
 Spears is regarded as a pop icon and credited with influencing the revival of teen pop during the late 1990s . She became the ' best @-@ selling teenage artist of all time ' and garnered honorific titles including the " Princess of Pop " . Her work has earned her numerous awards and accolades , including a Grammy Award , six MTV Video Music Awards including the Lifetime Achievement Award , ten Billboard Music Awards including the Billboard Millennium Award and a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . In 2009 , Billboard ranked her as the 8th overall Artist of the Decade , and also recognized her as the best @-@ selling female artist of the 2000s , as well as the fifth overall . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) lists Spears as the eighth top @-@ selling female artist in the United States , with 34 million certified albums . She has sold 100 million albums worldwide and over 100 million <unk> making her one of the best @-@ selling music artists of all time . According to Billboard Spears has sold about 22 @.@ 38 million singles in digital downloads in US and is the fourth best @-@ selling female artist since Nielsen SoundScan began . 
 Rolling Stone recognized her instant success as one of the Top 25 Teen Idol Breakout Moments of all time , while VH1 ranked her eleventh on their " 100 Greatest Women in Music " list in 2012 , and Billboard named her the sexiest woman in music . Forbes reported that Spears was the highest paid female musician of 2012 , with earnings of $ 58 million , having last topped the list in 2002 . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1981 – 97 : Early life and career beginnings = = = 
 Spears was born in McComb , Mississippi , the second child of Lynne Irene Bridges and James Parnell Spears . Her maternal grandmother , Lillian <unk> , was English ( born in London ) , and one of Spears 's maternal great @-@ great @-@ grandfathers was Maltese . Her siblings are Bryan James and Jamie Lynn . At age three , she started attending dance lessons in her hometown of Kentwood , Louisiana , and was selected to perform as a solo artist at the annual recital . During her childhood , she also attended gymnastics and voice lessons , and won many state @-@ level competitions and children 's talent shows . Spears made her local stage debut at age five , singing " What Child Is This ? " at her kindergarten graduation . She said about her ambition as a child , " I was in my own world , [ ... ] I found out what I 'm supposed to do at an early age " . 
 At age eight , Spears and her mother Lynne traveled to Atlanta , Georgia for an audition in the 1990s revival of The Mickey Mouse Club . Casting director Matt Casella rejected her for being too young to join the series at the time , but introduced her to Nancy Carson , a New York City talent agent . Carson was impressed with Spears 's vocals and suggested enrolling her at the Professional Performing Arts School ; shortly after , Lynne and her daughters moved to a sublet apartment in New York . Spears was hired for her first professional role as the understudy for the lead role of Tina Denmark in the Off @-@ Broadway musical Ruthless ! . She also appeared as a contestant on the popular television show Star Search and was cast in a number of commercials . In December 1992 , she was finally cast in The Mickey Mouse Club alongside Christina Aguilera , Justin Timberlake , Ryan Gosling , and Keri Russell , but returned to Kentwood after the show was canceled in 1995 . She enrolled at <unk> Academy in McComb , Mississippi . Although she made friends with most of her classmates , she compared the school to " the opening scene in Clueless with all the cliques . [ ... ] I was so bored . I was the point guard on the basketball team . I had my boyfriend , and I went to homecoming and Christmas formal . But I wanted more . " 
 In June 1997 , Spears was in talks with manager Lou Pearlman to join the female pop group Innosense . Lynne asked family friend and entertainment lawyer Larry Rudolph for his opinion and submitted a tape of Spears singing over a Whitney Houston karaoke song along with some pictures . Rudolph decided he wanted to pitch her to record labels , therefore she needed a professional demo . He sent Spears an unused song of Toni Braxton ; she rehearsed for a week and recorded her vocals in a studio with a sound engineer . Spears traveled to New York with the demo and met with executives from four labels , returning to Kentwood the same day . Three of the labels rejected her , arguing that audiences wanted pop bands such as the Backstreet Boys and the Spice Girls , and " there wasn 't going to be another Madonna , another Debbie Gibson , or another Tiffany . " 
 Two weeks later , executives from Jive Records returned calls to Rudolph . Senior vice president of A & R Jeff Fenster stated about Spears 's audition that " it 's very rare to hear someone that age who can deliver emotional content and commercial appeal . [ ... ] For any artist , the motivation — the ' eye of the tiger ' — is extremely important . And Britney had that . " She then sang Houston 's " I Have Nothing " ( 1992 ) for the executives , and was signed to the label . They appointed her to work with producer Eric Foster White for a month , who reportedly shaped her voice from " lower and less poppy " delivery to " distinctively , unmistakably Britney . " After hearing the recorded material , president Clive Calder ordered a full album . Spears had originally envisioned " Sheryl Crow music , but younger more adult contemporary " but felt all right with her label 's appointment of producers , since " It made more sense to go pop , because I can dance to it — it 's more me . " She flew to Cheiron Studios in Stockholm , Sweden , where half of the album was recorded from March to April 1998 , with producers Max Martin , Denniz Pop and Rami Yacoub , among others . 
 = = = 1998 – 2000 : ... Baby One More Time and Oops ! ... I Did It Again = = = 
 After Spears returned to the United States , she embarked on a shopping mall promotional tour to promote her debut album . Her show was a four song set and she was accompanied by two back up dancers . Her first concert tour followed , as an opening act for NSYNC . Her debut studio album , ... Baby One More Time , was released on January 12 , 1999 . It debuted at number one on the U.S. Billboard 200 and was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America after a month . Worldwide , the album topped the charts in fifteen countries and sold over 10 million copies in a year . It became the biggest selling album ever by a teenage artist . 
 The title track was released as the lead single from the album . Originally , Jive Records wanted its music video to be animated ; however , Spears rejected it , and suggested the final idea of a Catholic schoolgirl . The single sold 500 @,@ 000 copies on its first day , and peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , topping the chart for two consecutive weeks . It has sold more than 10 million as of today , making it one of the best @-@ selling singles of all time . " ... Baby One More Time " later received a Grammy nomination for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance . The title track also topped the singles chart for two weeks in the United Kingdom , and became the fastest @-@ selling single ever by a female artist , shipping over 460 @,@ 000 copies . It would later become the 25th @-@ most successful song of all time in British chart history . Spears is also the youngest female artist to have a million seller in the country . " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " was released as the third single from the album . It became a top @-@ ten hit worldwide and propelled ... Baby One More Time to sell even more . As of today , it has sold 30 million copies worldwide , making it one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . It is also the best @-@ selling first album by any artist ever . 
 The April 1999 cover of Rolling Stone featured Spears lying on her bed , covered with a bra , shorts and an open top . The American Family Association ( AFA ) referred to the shoot as " a disturbing mix of childhood innocence and adult sexuality " and called to " God @-@ loving Americans to boycott stores selling Britney 's albums . " Spears responded to the outcry commenting , " What 's the big deal ? I have strong morals . [ ... ] I 'd do it again . I thought the pictures were fine . And I was tired of being compared to Debbie Gibson and all of this bubblegum pop all the time . " Shortly before , Spears had announced publicly she would remain a virgin until marriage . On June 28 , 1999 , Spears began her first headlining ... Baby One More Time Tour in North America , which was positively received by critics , but generated some controversy due to her racy outfits . An extension of the tour , titled Crazy 2k , followed in March 2000 . Spears premiered songs from her upcoming second album during the show . 
 Oops ! ... I Did It Again , her second studio album , was released in May 2000 . It debuted at number one in the US , selling 1 @.@ 3 million copies , breaking the SoundScan record for the highest debut sales by any solo artist . The album sold over 25 million copies worldwide to date , making one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone said that " the great thing about Oops ! – under the cheese surface , Britney 's demand for satisfaction is complex , fierce and downright scary , making her a true child of rock & roll tradition . " The album 's lead single , " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , peaked at the top of the charts in Australia , New Zealand , the United Kingdom and many other European nations . The album as well as the title track received Grammy nominations for Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance , respectively . 
 The same year , Spears embarked on the Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour , which grossed $ 40 @.@ 5 million ; she also released her first book , Britney Spears ' Heart @-@ to @-@ Heart , co @-@ written with her mother . On September 7 , 2000 , Spears performed at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards . Halfway through the performance , she ripped off her black suit to reveal a sequined flesh @-@ colored bodysuit , followed by heavy dance routine . It is noted by critics as the moment that Spears showed signs of becoming a more provocative performer . Amidst media speculation , Spears confirmed she was dating NSYNC member Justin Timberlake . She also bought a home in Destin , Florida . 
 = = = 2001 – 02 : Britney and acting debut = = = 
 In February 2001 , Spears signed a $ 7 – 8 million promotional deal with Pepsi , and released another book co @-@ written with her mother , titled A Mother 's Gift . Her self @-@ titled third studio album , Britney , was released in November 2001 . While on tour , she felt inspired by hip hop artists such as Jay @-@ Z and The Neptunes and wanted to create a record with a funkier sound . The album debuted at number one in the Billboard 200 and reached top five positions in Australia , the United Kingdom and mainland Europe and sold over 12 million copies worldwide . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic called Britney " the record where she strives to deepen her persona , making it more adult while still recognizably Britney . [ ... ] It does sound like the work of a star who has now found and refined her voice , resulting in her best record yet . " The album was honored with two Grammy nominations — Best Pop Vocal Album and Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for " Overprotected " — and was listed in 2008 as one of Entertainment Weekly 's " 100 Best Albums from the Past 25 Years " . The album 's first single , " I 'm a Slave 4 U " , became a top @-@ ten hit worldwide . 
 Spears 's performance of the single at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards featured a caged tiger and a large albino python draped over her shoulders . It was harshly received by animal rights organization PETA , who claimed the animals were mistreated and scrapped plans for an anti @-@ fur billboard that was to feature Spears . To support the album , Spears embarked on the Dream Within a Dream Tour . The show was critically praised for its technical innovations , the pièce de résistance being a water screen that pumped two tons of water into the stage . The tour grossed $ 43 @.@ 7 million , becoming the second highest grossing tour of 2002 by a female artist , behind Cher 's Farewell Tour . Her career success was highlighted by Forbes in 2002 , as Spears was ranked the world 's most powerful celebrity . Spears also landed her first starring role in Crossroads , released in February 2002 . Although the film was largely panned , some critics praised Spears 's acting . Crossroads , which had a $ 12 million budget , went on to gross over $ 61 @.@ 1 million worldwide . 
 In June 2002 , Spears opened her first restaurant , <unk> , in New York City , but terminated her relationship in November , citing mismanagement and " management 's failure to keep her fully apprised " . In July 2002 , Spears announced she would take a six @-@ month break from her career ; however , she went back into the studio in November to record her new album . Spears 's relationship with Justin Timberlake ended after three years . In December 2002 , Timberlake released the song " Cry Me a River " as the second single from his solo debut album . The music video featured a Spears look @-@ alike and fueled the rumors that she had been unfaithful to him . As a response , Spears wrote the ballad " Everytime " with her backing vocalist and friend Annet Artani . The same year , Limp Bizkit frontman Fred Durst said that he was in a relationship with Spears . However , Spears denied Durst 's claims . In a 2009 interview , he explained that " I just guess at the time it was taboo for a guy like me to be associated with a gal like her . " 
 = = = 2003 – 05 : In the Zone and marriages = = = 
 In 2003 Spears opened the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards with Christina Aguilera , performing " Like a Virgin " . Halfway through they were joined by Madonna , with whom they both kissed . The incident was highly publicized . Spears released her fourth studio album , In the Zone , in November 2003 . She assumed more creative control by writing and co @-@ producing most of the material . Vibe called it " A supremely confident dance record that also illustrates Spears 's development as a songwriter . " NPR listed the album as one of " The 50 Most Important Recording of the Decade " , adding that " the decade 's history of impeccably crafted pop is written on her body of work . " In the Zone sold over 609 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and debuted at the top of the charts , making Spears the first female artist in the SoundScan era to have her first four studio albums to debut at number one . It also debuted at the top of the charts in France and the top ten in Belgium , Denmark , Sweden and the Netherlands . In the Zone sold over 10 million copies worldwide . The album produced the hit singles : " Me Against the Music " , a collaboration with Madonna ; " Toxic " — which won Spears her only Grammy for Best Dance Recording ; " Everytime " and " Outrageous " . 
 In January 2004 , Spears married childhood friend Jason Allen Alexander at The Little White Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas , Nevada . The marriage was annulled 55 hours later , following a petition to the court that stated that Spears " lacked understanding of her actions " . In March 2004 , she embarked on The Onyx Hotel Tour in support of In the Zone . In June 2004 , Spears fell and injured her left knee during the music video shoot for " Outrageous " . Spears underwent arthroscopic surgery . She was forced to remain six weeks with a thigh brace , followed by eight to twelve weeks of rehabilitation , which caused The Onyx Hotel Tour to be canceled . During 2004 , Spears became involved in the Kabbalah Centre through her friendship with Madonna . 
 In July 2004 , Spears became engaged to American dancer Kevin Federline , whom she had met three months before . The romance received intense attention from the media , since Federline had recently broken up with actress Shar Jackson , who was still pregnant with their second child at the time . The stages of their relationship were chronicled in Spears 's first reality show Britney & Kevin : Chaotic . They held a wedding ceremony on September 18 , 2004 , but were not legally married until three weeks later on October 6 due to a delay finalizing the couple 's prenuptial agreement . Shortly after , she released her first fragrance with Elizabeth Arden , Curious , which broke the company 's first @-@ week gross for a perfume . In October 2004 , Spears took a career break to start a family . Greatest Hits : My Prerogative , her first greatest hits compilation album , was released in November 2004 . Spears 's cover version of Bobby Brown 's " My Prerogative " was released as the lead single from the album , reaching the top of the charts in Finland , Ireland , Italy and Norway . The second single , " Do Somethin ' " , was a top ten hit in Australia , the United Kingdom and other countries of mainland Europe . The greatest hits album sold over 5 million copies worldwide . In August 2005 , Spears released " Someday ( I Will Understand ) " , which was dedicated to her first child , a son , who was born the following month . In November 2005 , she released her first remix compilation , B in the Mix : The Remixes , which consists of eleven remixes . It has sold over 1 million copies worldwide . 
 = = = 2006 – 07 : Personal struggles and Blackout = = = 
 In February 2006 , pictures surfaced of Spears driving with her son Sean , on her lap instead of in a car seat . Child advocates were horrified by the photos of her holding the wheel with one hand and Sean with the other . Spears claimed that the situation happened because of a frightening encounter with paparazzi , and that it was a mistake on her part . The following month , she guest @-@ starred on the Will & Grace episode " Buy , Buy Baby " as closeted lesbian Amber Louise . She announced she no longer studied Kabbalah in June 2006 , explaining , " my baby is my religion . " Two months later , Spears posed nude for the cover of Harper 's Bazaar . The picture was heavily compared to Demi Moore 's August 1991 Vanity Fair cover . In September 2006 , she gave birth to her second child , a son . In November 2006 , Spears filed for divorce from Federline , citing irreconcilable differences . Their divorce was finalized in July 2007 , when the couple reached a global settlement and agreed to share joint custody of their children . 
 Spears 's aunt Sandra Bridges Covington , with whom she had been very close , died of ovarian cancer in January 2007 . In February , Spears stayed in a drug rehabilitation facility in Antigua for less than a day . The following night , she shaved her head with electric clippers at a hair salon in Tarzana , Los Angeles . She admitted herself to other treatment facilities during the following weeks . In May 2007 , she produced a series of promotional concerts at House of Blues venues , titled The M + M 's Tour . In October 2007 , Spears lost physical custody of her children to Federline . The reasons of the court ruling were not revealed to the public . Spears was also sued by Louis Vuitton over her 2005 music video " Do Somethin ' " for <unk> her Hummer interior in counterfeit Louis Vuitton cherry blossom fabric , which resulted in the video being banned on European TV stations . 
 In October 2007 , Spears released her fifth studio album , Blackout . The album debuted at the top of charts in Canada and Ireland , number two in the U.S. Billboard 200 , France , Japan , Mexico and the United Kingdom and the top ten in Australia , Korea , New Zealand and many European nations . In the United States , Spears became the only female artist to have her first five studio albums debut at the two top slots of the chart . The album received positive reviews from critics and has sold over 3 million copies worldwide . Blackout won Album of the Year at MTV Europe Music Awards 2008 and was listed as the fifth Best Pop Album of the Decade by The Times . Spears performed the lead single " Gimme More " at the 2007 MTV Video Music Awards . The performance was panned by many critics . Despite the backlash , the single rocketed to worldwide success , peaking at number one in Canada and the top ten in almost every country it charted . The second single " Piece of Me " reached the top of the charts in Ireland and reached the top five in Australia , Canada , Denmark , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . The third single " Break the Ice " was released the following year and had moderate success due to Spears not being able to promote it properly . In December 2007 , Spears began a relationship with paparazzo Adnan Ghalib . 
 = = = 2008 – 10 : Circus = = = 
 In January 2008 , Spears refused to relinquish custody of her sons to Federline 's representatives . She was hospitalized at Cedars @-@ Sinai Medical Center after police that arrived at her house noted she appeared to be under the influence of an illicit substance . The following day , Spears 's visitation rights were suspended at an emergency court hearing , and Federline was given sole physical and legal custody of the children . She was committed to the psychiatric ward of Ronald Reagan UCLA Medical Center and put on 5150 involuntary psychiatric hold . The court placed her under temporary , and later , permanent conservatorship of her father James Spears and attorney Andrew Wallet , giving them complete control of her assets . She was released five days later . 
 The following month , Spears guest @-@ starred on the How I Met Your Mother episode " Ten Sessions " as receptionist Abby . She received positive reviews for her performance , as well as bringing the series its highest ratings ever . In July 2008 , Spears regained some visitation rights after coming to an agreement with Federline and his counsel . In September 2008 , Spears opened the MTV Video Music Awards with a pre @-@ taped comedy sketch with Jonah Hill and an introduction speech . She won Best Female Video , Best Pop Video and Video of the Year for " Piece of Me " . A 60 @-@ minute introspective documentary , Britney : For the Record , was produced to chronicle Spears 's return to the recording industry . Directed by Phil Griffin , For the Record was shot in Beverly Hills , Hollywood , and New York City during the third quarter of 2008 . The documentary was broadcast on MTV to 5 @.@ 6 million viewers for the two airings on the premiere night . It was the highest rating in its Sunday night timeslot and in the network 's history . 
 In December 2008 , Spears 's sixth studio album Circus was released . It received positive reviews from critics and debuted at number one in Canada , Czech Republic and the United States , and inside the top ten in many European nations . In the United States , Spears became the youngest female artist to have five albums debut at number one , earning a place in Guinness World Records . She also became the only act in the Soundscan era to have four albums debut with 500 @,@ 000 or more copies sold . The album was one of the fastest @-@ selling albums of the year , and has sold 4 million copies worldwide . Its lead single , " Womanizer " , became Spears 's first number one in the Billboard Hot 100 since " ... Baby One More Time " . The single also topped the charts in Belgium , Canada , Denmark , Finland , France , Norway and Sweden . It was also nominated for a Grammy in the category of Best Dance Recording . 
 In January 2009 , Spears and her father James obtained a restraining order against her former manager Sam Lutfi , ex @-@ boyfriend Adnan Ghalib and attorney Jon Eardley — all of whom , court documents claim , had been conspiring to gain control of Spears 's affairs . The restraining order forbids Lutfi and Ghalib from contacting Spears or coming within 250 yards of her , her property or family members . Spears embarked on The Circus Starring Britney Spears in March 2009 . With a gross of U.S. $ 131 @.@ 8 million , it became the fifth highest grossing tour of the year . 
 In November 2009 , Spears released her second greatest hits album , The Singles Collection . The album 's lead and only single , " 3 " became her third number one single in the U.S. In May 2010 , Spears 's representatives confirmed she was dating her agent Jason Trawick , and that they had decided to end their professional relationship to focus on their personal relationship . Spears designed a limited edition clothing line for Candie 's , which was released in stores in July 2010 . In September 2010 , she made a cameo appearance on a Spears @-@ themed tribute episode of American TV show Glee , titled " Britney / Brittany " . The episode drew Glee 's highest ratings ever . 
 = = = 2011 – 12 : Femme Fatale and The X Factor = = = 
 In March 2011 , Spears released her seventh studio album Femme Fatale . The album peaked at number one in the United States , Canada , and Australia , and peaked inside the top ten on nearly every other chart . Its peak in the United States ties Britney with Mariah Carey and Janet Jackson for the third @-@ most number ones among women . It has sold 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and 2 @.@ 2 million worldwide , and has been certified platinum by the RIAA . 
 The album 's lead single " Hold It Against Me " debuted at number @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming Spears 's fourth number @-@ one single on the chart and making her the second artist in history to have two consecutive singles debut at number one , after Mariah Carey . The second single " Till the World Ends " reached peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 in May , while the third single " I Wanna Go " reached number seven in August . Femme Fatale became Spears 's first album in which three of its songs reached the top ten of the chart . The fourth and final single " Criminal " was released in September 2011 . The music video caused controversy when British politicians criticized Spears for using replica guns while filming the video in an area of London that had been badly affected by the 2011 England riots . Spears 's management briefly responded , stating , " The video is a fantasy story featuring Britney 's boyfriend , Jason Trawick , which literally plays out the lyrics of a song written three years before the riots ever happened . " In April 2011 , Spears appeared in a remix of Rihanna 's song " S & M " . It reached number one in the US later in the month , giving Spears her fifth number one on the chart . On Billboard 's 2011 Year @-@ End list , Spears was ranked number fourteen on the Artists of the Year , thirty @-@ two on Billboard 200 artists and ten on Billboard Hot 100 artists . 
 In June 2011 , Spears embarked on the Femme Fatale Tour . The first ten dates of the tour grossed $ 6 @.@ 2 million , landing the fifty @-@ fifth spot on Pollstar 's Top 100 North American Tours list for the half @-@ way point of the year . The tour ended on December 10 , 2011 in Puerto Rico after 79 performances . A DVD of the tour was released in November 2011 . In August 2011 , Spears received the MTV Video Vanguard Award at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards . The next month , she released her second remix album , B in the Mix : The Remixes Vol . 2 . In December , Spears became engaged to her long @-@ time boyfriend Jason Trawick , who had formerly been her agent . Trawick became a co @-@ conservator of Spears , alongside her father , in April 2012 . In January 2013 , Spears and Trawick ended their engagement . Trawick was also removed as Spears 's co @-@ conservator , restoring her father as the sole conservator . 
 In May 2012 , Spears was hired to replace Nicole Scherzinger as a judge for the second season of the U.S. version of The X Factor , joining Simon Cowell , L.A. Reid and fellow new judge Demi Lovato , who replaced Paula Abdul . With a reported salary of $ 15 million , she became the highest @-@ paid judge on a singing competition series in television history . She mentored the Teens category ; her final act , Carly Rose <unk> , was named the runner @-@ up of the season . Spears did not return for the show 's third season and her spot was filled by Kelly Rowland . Spears was featured on will.i.am 's " Scream & Shout " , which was released as a single from his fourth studio album , # willpower ( 2013 ) . The song later became Spears 's sixth number one single on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at # 3 on US Billboard Hot 100 . Scream & Shout was among the best selling songs of 2012 and 2013 with denoting sales of over 8 @.@ 1 million worldwide , the accompanying music video was the third @-@ most viewed video in 2013 on VEVO despite the video being released in 2012 . In December , Forbes magazine named her music 's top @-@ earning woman of 2012 , with estimated earnings of $ 58 million . 
 = = = 2013 – 15 : Britney Jean and Britney : Piece of Me = = = 
 Spears began work on her eighth studio album , Britney Jean , in December 2012 , and enlisted will.i.am as its executive producer in May 2013 . On September 17 , 2013 , she appeared on Good Morning America to announce her two @-@ year residency show at Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino in Las Vegas , titled Britney : Piece of Me . It began on December 27 , 2013 , and will include a total of 100 shows throughout 2014 and 2015 . During the same appearance , Spears announced that Britney Jean would be released on December 3 , 2013 , in the United States . It was released through RCA Records due to the disbandment of Jive Records in 2011 . Britney Jean became Spears 's final project under her original recording contract with RCA , which had guaranteed the release of eight studio albums . The record received a low amount of promotion and had little commercial impact , reportedly due to contractual obligations for Britney : Piece of Me . Upon its release , the record debuted at number four on the U.S. Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 107 @,@ 000 copies , becoming her lowest @-@ peaking and lowest @-@ selling album in the United States . Britney Jean debuted at number 34 on the UK Albums Chart , selling 12 @,@ 959 copies in its first week . In doing so , it became Spears 's lowest @-@ charting and lowest @-@ selling album in the country . 
 " Work Bitch " was released as the lead single from Britney Jean on September 16 , 2013 , one day earlier than expected after being leaked online . It debuted and peaked at number 12 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 marking Spears 's 31st song on the chart and the fifth highest debut of her career on the chart , and her seventh in the top 20 . It also marked Spears 's 19th top 20 hit and overall her 23rd top 40 hit . It also entered the top 10 on the U.S Billboard Hot Digital Songs chart at number 6 and debuted at number 2 on both the U.S. Billboard chart 's Hot Dance Club Songs and Hot Dance / Electronic Songs . Also its debut on the U.S. Billboard Pop Songs chart at number 25 , marks Spears 's 31st chart entry , pushing her past Mariah Carey ( 30 ) for the second @-@ most entries to the chart 's October 3 , 1992 , launch . The song marked Spears 's highest sales debut since her 2011 number one hit " Hold It Against Me " . " Work Bitch " also had commercial success in the UK debuting and peaking at number 7 on the UK Singles Chart and also peaked at number 2 on the UK Dance Chart . The song also charted well in several other countries , peaking within the top ten of the charts in Brazil , Canada , France , Italy , Mexico , Spain and South Korea . 
 The second single " Perfume " premiered on November 3 , 2013 , two days earlier than originally announced . It debuted and peaked at number 76 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . " Perfume " also charted on the U.S. Billboard Pop Songs chart , it debuted at number 37 , reaching number 22 weeks later . During the production of Britney Jean , Spears recorded the song " Ooh La La " for the soundtrack of The Smurfs 2 earlier in 2013 . In October 2013 , she was featured as a guest vocalist on Miley Cyrus 's track " SMS ( Bangerz ) " , taken from her fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . It debuted in the Billboard charts at number 10 in U.S. Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles , number 29 in the U.S. Pop Digital Singles , and number 70 in the U.S. Hot Digital Songs . On January 8 , 2014 , Spears won Favorite Pop Artist at the 40th People 's Choice Awards at the Microsoft Theater in Los Angeles . For the week of July 26 , 2014 , " Alien " debuted and peaked at number 8 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles despite not being released as a single from Britney Jean . In August 2014 , Spears confirmed she had renewed her contract with RCA , and that she is writing and recording new music for her next album . Spears announced through her Twitter account in August 2014 that she would be releasing an intimate apparel titled " The Intimate Britney Spears " . It was available to be purchased on September 9 , 2014 in the United States and Canada through Spears 's Intimate Collection website . It was later available on September 25 for purchase in Europe . The company now ships to over 200 countries including Australia and New Zealand . On September 25 , 2014 , Spears confirmed on Good Morning Britain that she had extended her contract with The AXIS and Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino , to continue Britney : Piece Of Me for two additional years . 
 In March 2015 , it was confirmed by People magazine that Spears would release a new single , " Pretty Girls " , with Iggy Azalea , on May 4 , 2015 . The song debuted and peaked at number 29 on the Billboard Hot 100 and charted moderately in international territories . Spears and Azalea performed the track live at the 2015 Billboard Music Awards from The AXIS , the home of Spears 's residency , to positive critical response . Entertainment Weekly praised the performance , noting " Spears gave one of her most energetic televised performances in years . " On June 16 , 2015 , Giorgio Moroder released his album , Deja Vu , that featured Spears on " Tom 's Diner " . In an interview , Moroder praised Spears 's vocals and said that she did a " good job " with the song . Moroder also stated that Spears " sounds so good that you would hardly recognize her . " At the 2015 Teen Choice Awards , Spears received the Candie 's Style Icon Award , her ninth Teen Choice Award . On October 9 , Italian DJ Giorgio Moroder released " Tom 's Diner " , featured Spears 's vocals , as the fourth single from Déjà Vu . In November , Spears guest starred as a fictionalized version of herself on The CW series , Jane the Virgin . On the show , she danced to " Toxic " with Gina Rodriguez 's character . 
 = = = 2016 : Upcoming ninth studio album = = = 
 In 2016 , Spears confirmed she had begun recording her ninth studio album via social media . On March 1 , 2016 , V magazine announced that Spears would appear on the cover of its 100th issue , dated March 8 , 2016 , in addition to revealing three different covers shot by photographer Mario Testino for the milestone publication . Editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the magazine , Stephen Gan , revealed that Spears was selected for the " <unk> " issue because of her status as an icon in the industry . On the decision , Gan stated , “ who in our world did not grow up listening to her music ? " In May 2016 , Spears launched a casual role @-@ play gaming application titled Britney Spears : American Dream . The app , created by Glu Mobile , was made available through both iOS and Google Play . On May 22 , 2016 , Spears performed a medley of her past singles at the 2016 Billboard Music Awards . In addition to opening the show , Spears was honored with the Billboard Millennium Award . 
 On July 14 , 2016 , Spears released the lead single , " Make Me " , from her upcoming ninth studio album . The single features guest vocals from American rapper G @-@ Eazy . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Musical style = = = 
 Following her debut , Spears was credited with leading the revival of teen pop in the late 1990s . The Daily Yomiuri reported that " [ m ] <unk> critics have hailed her as the most gifted teenage pop idol for many years , but Spears has set her sights a little higher @-@ she is aiming for the level of superstardom that has been achieved by Madonna and Janet Jackson . " Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone wrote : " Britney Spears carries on the classic archetype of the rock & roll teen queen , the <unk> doll , the angel baby who just has to make a scene . " Following the release of her debut album , Chuck Taylor of Billboard observed , " Spears has become a consummate performer , with snappy dance moves , a clearly real @-@ albeit young @-@ and <unk> voice ... " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " , her third single ... demonstrates Spears 's own development , proving that the 17 @-@ year @-@ old is finding her own vocal personality after so many months of steadfast practice . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic referred to her music as a " blend of infectious , rap @-@ inflected dance @-@ pop and smooth balladry . " 
 Oops ! ... I Did It Again and subsequent albums saw Spears working with several contemporary R & B producers , leading to " a combination of bubblegum , urban soul , and raga . " Her third studio album , Britney derived from the teen pop niche , " [ r ] <unk> and melodically ... sharper , tougher than what came before . What used to be unabashedly frothy has some disco grit , underpinned by Spears ' spunky self @-@ determination that helps sell hooks that are already catchier , by and large , than those that populated her previous two albums . " 
 Since In the Zone , Spears has explored and heavily incorporated the genres of electropop and dance music in her albums , as well as influences of urban and hip hop music which are most present in In the Zone and Blackout . She has also experimented with genres such as dubstep , first on Blackout 's " Freakshow " and again on " Hold It Against Me " from Femme Fatale . 
 = = = Vocals = = = 
 Spears possesses a soprano vocal range of three octaves and two notes . Prior to her breakthrough success , she is described as having sung " much deeper than her highly recognizable trademark voice of today " , with Eric Foster White , who worked with Spears for her debut album ... Baby One More Time , being cited as " [ shaping ] her voice over the course of a month " upon being signed to Jive Records " to where it is today — distinctively , unmistakably Britney " . Rami Yacoub who co @-@ produced Spears 's debut album with lyricist Max Martin , commented , " I know from Denniz Pop and Max 's previous productions , when we do songs , there 's kind of a nasal thing . With N ' Sync and the Backstreet Boys , we had to push for that mid @-@ nasal voice . When Britney did that , she got this kind of raspy , sexy voice . " 
 Guy Blackman of The Age wrote that " [ t ] he thing about Spears , though , is that her biggest songs , no matter how committee @-@ created or impossibly polished , have always been convincing because of her delivery , her commitment and her presence . [ ... ] Spears expresses perfectly the conflicting urges of adolescence , the tension between chastity and sexual experience , between hedonism and responsibility , between confidence and vulnerability . " Producer William Orbit , who collaborated with Spears on her album Britney Jean , stated regarding her vocals : " [ Britney ] didn 't get so big just because [ she ] put on great shows ; [ she ] got to be that way because [ her voice is ] unique : you hear two words and you know who is singing " . On the other hand , she has been highly criticized by some for her vocal ability as well as her use of Auto @-@ Tune throughout her career . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Spears has cited her major influences in her career as being Madonna , Janet Jackson , and Whitney Houston , her " three favorite artists " as a child whom she would " sing along to [ ... ] day and night in [ her ] living room " ; Houston 's " I Have Nothing " was the song she auditioned to that landed her record deal with Jive Records . Throughout her career , Spears has drawn frequent comparisons to Madonna and Jackson in particular , in terms of vocals , choreography and stage presence . According to Spears : " I know when I was younger , I looked up to people ... like , you know , Janet Jackson and Madonna . And they were major inspirations for me . But I also had my own identity and I knew who I was . " In the 2002 book Madonnastyle by Carol Clerk , she is quoted saying : " I have been a huge fan of Madonna since I was a little girl . She 's the person that I 've really looked up to . I would really , really like to be a legend like Madonna . " 
 After meeting Spears face to face , Janet Jackson stated : " she said to me , ' I 'm such a big fan ; I really admire you . ' That 's so flattering . Everyone gets inspiration from some place . And it 's awesome to see someone else coming up who 's dancing and singing , and seeing how all these kids relate to her . A lot of people put it down , but what she does is a positive thing . " Madonna said of Spears in the documentary Britney : For the Record : " I admire her talent as an artist [ ... ] There are aspects about her that I recognize in myself when I first started out in my career " . She has also named Michael Jackson , Mariah Carey , Sheryl Crow , Otis Redding , Shania Twain , Brandy , Natalie Imbruglia , Justin Timberlake , Bruno Mars , Beyoncé , Prince , and Lorde as sources of inspiration . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Spears became an international pop culture icon immediately after launching her recording career . Rolling Stone magazine wrote : " One of the most controversial and successful female vocalists of the 21st century , " she " spearheaded the rise of post @-@ millennial teen pop ... Spears early on cultivated a mixture of innocence and experience that broke the bank " . She is listed by the Guinness World Records as having the " Best @-@ selling album by a teenage solo artist " for her debut album ... Baby One More Time which sold over thirteen million copies in the United States . Melissa Ruggieri of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch reported : " She 's also marked for being the best @-@ selling teenage artist . Before she turned 20 in 2001 , Spears sold more than 37 million albums worldwide " . 
 As of 2011 , she has sold over 100 million records worldwide , making her one of the best @-@ selling music artists of all time based on album sales alone . She was also ranked as the fourth VH1 's " 50 Greatest Women of the Video Era " show list , ahead of most of her contemporaries and only behind veterans Madonna , Janet Jackson , and Whitney Houston . Spears is also recognized as the best @-@ selling female artist of the first decade of the 21st century , as well as the fifth overall . In December 2009 , Billboard magazine ranked Spears the 8th Artist of the 2000s decade in the United States . 
 Spears is known for her iconic performances and music videos . The music video for her debut single , " ... Baby One More Time " , was ranked number one on TRL 's Final Countdown of the most iconic music videos . At the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards , before performing " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " , the singer appeared behind a backlit screen , and descended a spiral staircase and started performing " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " , while wearing a tuxedo . After performing a shortened version of the track , she tore the tuxedo off , revealing a skin @-@ tight flesh @-@ coloured outfit . The following year , Spears performed her single " I 'm a Slave 4 U " . Jocelyn Vena of MTV summarized the performance , saying , " draping herself in a white python and slithering around a steamy garden setting – surrounded by dancers in zebra and tiger outfits – Spears created one of the most striking visuals in the 27 @-@ year history of the show . " 
 She also duetted " The Way You Make Me Feel " with pop singer Michael Jackson at his 30th anniversary concert a few days earlier . During the opening of the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards on August 28 , 2003 , Spears joined Madonna , Christina Aguilera , and Missy Elliott . Halfway through the performance , Madonna kissed Spears and Aguilera on the lips . The kiss between Spears and Madonna generated strong reaction from the media . This performance was listed by Blender magazine as one of the twenty @-@ five sexiest music moments on television history . MTV listed the performance as the number @-@ one opening moments in the history of MTV Video Music Awards . 
 Barbara Ellen of The Observer wrote : " Spears is famously one of the ' oldest ' teenagers pop has ever produced , almost middle aged in terms of focus and determination . Many 19 @-@ year @-@ olds haven 't even started working by that age , whereas Britney , a former Mouseketeer , was that most unusual and volatile of American phenomena — a child with a full @-@ time career . While other little girls were putting posters on their walls , Britney was wanting to be the poster on the wall . Whereas other children develop at their own pace , Britney was developing at a pace set by the ferociously competitive American entertainment industry " . 
 In 2011 , Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly commented on the cultural significance of Spears 's voice and music : " We don 't ask a whole lot from Britney Spears as an entertainer ... we 'll still send her straight up the charts simply because she 's Britney . She 's an American institution , as deeply sacred and messed up as pro wrestling or the filibuster . Musically , though , Spears will always have to measure up to her own gold standards of pop euphony : the operatic slither of 2004 's ' Toxic ' and the candied funk of 2000 's ' Oops ! ... I Did It Again . ' Spears is no technical singer , that 's for sure . But backed by Martin and Dr. Luke 's wall of pound , her vocals melt into a mix of <unk> coo and coital panting that is , in its own <unk> way , just as iconic and propulsive as Michael Jackson 's <unk> or Eminem 's snarls . " ' Britney Spears ' was Yahoo ! ' s most popular search term between 2005 and 2008 , and has been in a total of seven different years . Spears was named as Most Searched Person in the Guinness World Records book edition 2007 and 2009 . She was later named as the most searched person of the decade 2000 – 2009 . 
 Spears has been cited as a musical inspiration by contemporary artists . Gwyneth Paltrow 's character in 2010 drama film Country Strong was inspired on the singer 's public meltdown . According to film director Shana Fest , " that 's where this movie came from . I mean , I was seeing what was happening in the media to Britney Spears . I think it 's tragic how we treat people who give us so much , and we love to see them knocked down to build them back up again , to knock them down again . " Nicki Minaj has cited Spears as a major influence on her career , and commented , " the fact that she came back out with just so much fire inspires me , and it inspires young women and people all over the world . It just inspires you . A lot of my fans feel like they are the underdog and feel like they are the people who aren 't ever accepted for themselves , or who are laughed at or poked fun at forever . It just goes to show that once you keep at whatever it is you 're doing , people may not like you , people may not love you , but they will have to respect you at the end of the day . And that respect is all that matters . " 
 Lana Del Rey said : " I 'm not really interested in a ton of female musicians but there is something about Britney that compelled me – the way she sings and just the way she looks . " Del Rey also said that the music video for " Toxic " inspires her . During the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , Lady Gaga said that Spears " taught us all how to be fearless , and the industry wouldn 't be the same without her . " Gaga has also cited Spears as an influence , calling her " the most provocative performer of my time " . Miley Cyrus credits Spears as her biggest inspiration , and has referenced the singer in her hit song " Party in the U.S.A. " ( 2009 ) . Spears 's personal breakdown was also cited as an inspiration for Barry Manilow 's album 15 Minutes . 
 Spears has also become a major influence on many other contemporary artists , including Meghan Trainor , Demi Lovato , Katy Perry , Kelly Key , <unk> DeBarge , Little Boots , Charli XCX , Marina and the Diamonds , Tegan and Sara , Pixie Lott , Girls ' Generation , Selena Gomez , Tinashe , Victoria Justice , and The Saturdays . Fergie of The Black Eyed Peas revealed to The Hollywood Reporter that she was happy with Spears 's return to the music industry , and continued , " It 's amazing . For this many years being in the business , and everything she 's been through , it 's wonderful to see her make this huge of a comeback . Really , it 's a beautiful thing . " Simon Cowell explained that he is " fascinated by [ Britney ] . The fact that she 's one of the most talked about – not just pop stars – but people in the world today , means that you 've got this star power . [ ... ] She 's still hot , she 's still having hit records and she 's still controversial , there 's a reason for that . " Jessica Jung and Hyoyeon of the Korean girl group Girls ' Generation have also been compared to Spears , due to their blonde hair and the latter 's abilities as a dancer . 
 Marina and the Diamonds named Spears as the main influence behind her album Electra Heart , stating that , " I think people thought I was joking about that for a long time . But when I was a teenager there was a genuine connection with this sweet girl who also had this very sexual side that people didn 't really want to accept [ ... ] Britney is really smart . And in the way that she inspired Electra Heart , if you step back from all the cynical stuff , it actually focuses on the idea of innocence being mixed with darkness . For some reason I really like that combination . I suppose because you don 't really connect innocence with darkness . " Diamandis has also stated that Spears is her main influence when it comes to popular culture and that Spears is one she aspired to being growing up . 
 Spears has had a direct influence on singer Porcelain Black 's work after growing up around her music as a child . Black describes her music as a " love child between " Marilyn Manson and Spears , with Spears 's work being one of the main inspirations for Black 's debut album Mannequin Factory . Bebo Norman wrote a song about Spears , called " Britney " , which was released as a single . Boy band Busted also wrote a song about Spears called " Britney " , which was on their debut album . South Korean singer , BoA has also spoken of love and Spears 's influence on her . First meeting in 2003 while Spears was promoting In The Zone – Britney would later provide a writing credit to the song " Look Who 's Talking " on BoA 's eponymous debut English album . Spears 's version of the song leaked in 2012 . 
 People magazine and MTV reported that October 1 , 2008 , the Bronx 's John Philip Sousa Middle School , named their music studio in honor of Britney Spears . Spears herself was present during the ceremony and donated $ 10 @,@ 000 to the school 's music program . 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 = = = Product and endorsements = = = 
 In 2000 , the singer released a limited edition of glasses titled Shades of Britney . In 2001 , Spears signed a deal with shoe company Skechers , and a $ 7 – 8 million promotional deal with Pepsi , their biggest entertainment deal at the time . Aside from numerous commercials with the latter during that year , she also appeared in a 2004 Pepsi television commercial in the theme of " Gladiators " with singers Beyoncé , Pink , and Enrique Iglesias . On June 19 , 2002 , she released her first multi @-@ platform video game , Britney 's Dance Beat , which received positive reviews . In March 2009 , Spears was announced as the new face of clothing brand Candie 's . Dari Marder , chief marketing officer for the brand , explained why they choose the singer , saying , " everybody loves a comeback and nobody 's doing it better than Britney . She 's just poised for even greater success . " In 2010 , Spears designed a limited edition line for the brand , which was released in stores in July 2010 . In 2011 , she teamed up with Sony , Make Up For Ever and <unk> to release her music video for " Hold It Against Me " , earning her $ 500 @,@ 000 for the product placement . Spears also teamed up with Hasbro in 2012 to release an exclusive version of Twister Dance , which includes a remix of " Till the World Ends " . The singer was also featured on a commercial , which was directed by Ray Kay , to promote the game . Spears was also featured on the commercial of " Twister Rave " and the game included a Twister remix of " Circus " . 
 Spears 's range of commercial deals and products also includes beauty care products and perfumes . She released her first fragrance with Elizabeth Arden , Curious in 2004 , which broke the company 's first @-@ week gross for a perfume . By 2009 , she had released seven more fragrances including the popular perfume Fantasy , which earned her the recognition of the best @-@ selling celebrity fragrance line on the market . The singer 's Elizabeth Arden scents make up 34 % of celebrity fragrance sales . In 2010 , Spears released her eighth fragrance , Radiance . In March 2011 , company Brand Sense filed a lawsuit against Spears and Elizabeth Arden seeking $ 10 million in damages , claiming that the singer and her father , Jamie , stopped paying their thirty @-@ five percent commission that was agreed as part of the contract terms . In July 2011 , a Los Angeles judge denied the request by the company lawyers , claiming the fact that Spears is still under conservatorship . Brand Sense , however , stated that they would appeal the decision . In 2011 , Radiance was re @-@ issued in a new fragrance titled Cosmic Radiance . Worldwide , Spears sold over one million bottles in the first five years , with gross receipts of $ 1 @.@ 5 billion . As of July 2014 , Spears has released 16 fragrances through Elizabeth Arden . In 2016 , Spears teamed up with Glu Mobile to create her own role @-@ playing game , Britney Spears : American Dream . The app officially launched in May 2016 and is compatible with IOS and Google Play . On June 17 , 2016 , Spears announced the release of her twentieth fragrance , Private Show . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 The singer founded The Britney Spears Foundation , a charitable entity set up to help children in need . The philosophy behind the Foundation was that music and entertainment has a healing quality that can benefit children . The Foundation also supported the annual Britney Spears Camp for the Performing Arts , where campers had the opportunity to explore and develop their talents . In April 2002 , through the efforts of Spears and The Britney Spears Foundation , a grant of $ 1 million was made to the Twin Towers Fund to support the children of uniformed service heroes affected by the terrorist attacks of September 11 , 2001 , including New York City Fire Department and its Emergency Medical Services Command , the New York City Police Department , the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey , the New York State Office of court Administration and other government offices . However , it was reported in 2008 that the Foundation had a deficit of $ 200 @,@ 000 . After the singer went through conservatorship , her father and lawyer Andrew Wallet zeroed out the effort , leading to its closure in 2011 . 
 On October 30 , 2001 , Spears , alongside Bono and other popular recording artists under the name " Artists Against AIDS Worldwide " , released a single titled " What 's Going On " , with the intention to benefit AIDS programs in Africa and other impoverished regions . In the wake of Hurricane Katrina in 2006 , Spears donated $ 350 @,@ 000 to Music Rising . Later in 2011 , the singer raised $ 200 @,@ 000 during An Evening of Southern Style at a private residence in Beverly Hills to benefit the St. Bernard Project , with the help of several celebrities , including Hilary Duff , Selena Gomez , Kelly Osbourne , Kellan Lutz and Kim Kardashian . Spears has also helped several charities during her career , including Madonna 's Kabbalah @-@ based Spirituality for Kids , cancer charity Gilda 's Club Worldwide , Promises Foundation , and United Way , with the latter two focused on giving families from various disadvantaged situations new hope and stable foundations for the future . 
 On October 24 , 2015 , Spears donated $ 120 @,@ 000 to the Nevada Childhood Cancer Foundation . In addition , $ 1 of each ticket sale for her Las Vegas residency show , " Britney : Piece of Me " , was donated to the nonprofit organization . Spears also fundraised for the charity through social media , in addition to selling limited edition merchandise , with all proceeds going to the <unk> . 
 = = Discography = = 
 ... Baby One More Time ( 1999 ) 
 Oops ! ... I Did It Again ( 2000 ) 
 Britney ( 2001 ) 
 In the Zone ( 2003 ) 
 Blackout ( 2007 ) 
 Circus ( 2008 ) 
 Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) 
 Britney Jean ( 2013 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Longshot ( 2001 ) 
 Crossroads ( 2002 ) 
 Austin Powers in Goldmember ( 2002 ) 
 Pauly Shore Is Dead ( 2003 ) 
 Fahrenheit 9 / 11 ( 2004 ) 
 = = Tours and concerts = = 
 Tours 
 ... Baby One More Time Tour ( 1999 – 2000 ) 
 Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour ( 2000 – 01 ) 
 Dream Within a Dream Tour ( 2001 – 02 ) 
 The Onyx Hotel Tour ( 2004 ) 
 The M + M 's Tour ( 2007 ) 
 The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) 
 Femme Fatale Tour ( 2011 ) 
 Residency concerts 
 Britney : Piece of Me ( 2013 – 17 ) 
 = German submarine U @-@ 42 ( 1939 ) = 
 German submarine U @-@ 42 was a Type IXA U @-@ boat of Nazi Germany 's Kriegsmarine that operated during World War II . 
 U @-@ 42 was ordered by Kriegsmarine in November 1936 . Her keel was laid down in December 1937 ; she was launched in February 1939 and commissioned in July 1939 . 
 U @-@ 42 had a very short career , being sunk while still on her first war patrol . During her service with Kriegsmarine , the boat conducted only one training patrol and one war patrol . Over the latter she damaged one enemy vessel of 4 @,@ 803 gross register tons ( GRT ) . Both her patrols were as part of the 6th U @-@ boat Flotilla . 
 U @-@ 42 was sunk southwest of Ireland on 13 October 1939 . Out of a crew of 46 , 20 survived and 26 went down with the submarine . 
 = = Construction = = 
 U @-@ 42 was ordered by Kriegsmarine on 21 November 1936 ( as part of Plan Z ) . Her keel was laid down on 21 December 1937 by DeSchiMAG AG Weser of Bremen as yard <unk> . She was launched on 16 February 1939 and commissioned on 15 July of that same year under the command of Kapitänleutnant Rolf Dau . 
 = = Design = = 
 As one of the eight original German Type IX submarines , later designated IXA , U @-@ 42 had a displacement of 1 @,@ 032 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 016 long tons ) when at the surface and 1 @,@ 153 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 135 long tons ) while submerged . The U @-@ boat had a total length of 76 @.@ 50 m ( 251 ft ) , a pressure hull length of 58 @.@ 75 m ( 192 ft 9 in ) , a beam of 6 @.@ 51 m ( 21 ft 4 in ) , a height of 9 @.@ 40 m ( 30 ft 10 in ) , and a draught of 4 @.@ 70 m ( 15 ft 5 in ) . The submarine was powered by two MAN M 9 V 40 / 46 supercharged four @-@ stroke , nine @-@ cylinder diesel engines producing a total of 4 @,@ 400 metric horsepower ( 3 @,@ 240 kW ; 4 @,@ 340 shp ) for use while surfaced , two Siemens @-@ Schuckert 2 GU 345 / 34 double @-@ acting electric motors producing a total of 1 @,@ 000 metric horsepower ( 740 kW ; 990 shp ) for use while submerged . She had two shafts and two 1 @.@ 92 m ( 6 ft ) propellers . The boat was capable of operating at depths of up to 230 metres ( 750 ft ) . 
 The submarine had a maximum surface speed of 18 @.@ 2 knots ( 33 @.@ 7 km / h ; 20 @.@ 9 mph ) and a maximum submerged speed of 7 @.@ 7 knots ( 14 @.@ 3 km / h ; 8 @.@ 9 mph ) . When submerged , the boat could operate for 65 – 78 nautical miles ( 120 – 144 km ; 75 – 90 mi ) at 4 knots ( 7 @.@ 4 km / h ; 4 @.@ 6 mph ) ; when surfaced , she could travel 10 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 19 @,@ 400 km ; 12 @,@ 100 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . U @-@ 42 was fitted with six 53 @.@ 3 cm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes ( four fitted at the bow and two at the stern ) , 22 torpedoes , one 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) SK C / 32 naval gun , 180 rounds , and a 3 @.@ 7 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) as well as a 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) anti @-@ aircraft gun . The boat had a complement of forty @-@ eight . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Patrol = = = 
 Following training exercises with the 6th Flotilla from 16 July 1939 to 1 October 1939 , U @-@ 42 was moved into active service with the 6th Flotilla , ready for operations . The day after her training exercises ended , she left Wilhelmshaven on 2 October . On a 12 @-@ day journey , U @-@ 42 traveled into the North Sea and circumnavigated the British Isles . She then entered the North Atlantic in search of any Allied convoys . During this operation , one enemy ship was damaged , the 4 @,@ 803 ton British steam freighter SS <unk> , which had become separated from Convoy OB 17 while sailing from Liverpool , England to North America . This was to be the boat 's first and only attack on any Allied merchant vessel . While still on her first war patrol , U @-@ 42 was sunk on 13 October 1939 by depth charges from the British destroyers HMS Imogen and HMS Ilex . This attack took place off the southwest coast of neutral Ireland . Of the 46 man crew , 26 were killed in the depth charge attack , 20 crew members survived and were made prisoners of war by the British . The youngest crew member aboard U @-@ 42 was Rudolf <unk> who was born on 22 December 1919 and was among the 26 dead . He was 19 years old with his 20th birthday just over two months away . The captain , Rolf Dau , was the oldest known crew member of U @-@ 42 . He was born on 1 April 1906 and was 33 years old at the time of the boat 's sinking ; he survived . U @-@ 42 was the fifth U @-@ boat to be lost in World War II . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 While still on her first war patrol , U @-@ 42 was sunk on 13 October 1939 by depth charges from the British destroyers HMS Imogen and HMS Ilex . This attack took place off the southwest coast of neutral Ireland . Of the 46 man crew , 26 were killed in the depth charge attack , 20 crew members survived and were made prisoners of war by the British . The youngest crew member aboard U @-@ 42 was Rudolf <unk> who was born on 22 December 1919 and was among the 26 dead . He was 19 years old with his 20th birthday just over two months away . The captain , Rolf Dau , was the oldest known crew member of U @-@ 42 . He was born on 1 April 1906 and was 33 years old at the time of the boat 's sinking ; he survived . U @-@ 42 was the fifth U @-@ boat to be lost in World War II . 
 = = Summary of raiding history = = 
 = SMS Fürst Bismarck ( 1897 ) = 
 SMS Fürst Bismarck ( Prince Bismarck ) was Germany 's first armored cruiser , built for the Kaiserliche Marine before the turn of the 20th century . The ship was named for the German statesman Otto von Bismarck . The design for Fürst Bismarck was an improvement over the previous Victoria Louise @-@ class protected cruiser — Fürst Bismarck was significantly larger and better armed than her predecessors . 
 The ship was primarily intended for colonial duties , and she served in this capacity as part of the East Asia Squadron until she was relieved in 1909 , at which point she returned to Germany . The ship was rebuilt between 1910 and 1914 , and after the start of World War I , she was briefly used as a coastal defense ship . She proved inadequate to this task , and so she was withdrawn from active duty and served as a training ship for engineers until the end of the war . Fürst Bismarck was decommissioned in 1919 and sold for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Fürst Bismarck was designed before the naval arms race between Germany and the United Kingdom . Admiral Hollmann was the State Secretary of the Naval Office at the time . Given the dominance of the British Royal Navy and the impossibility , as he saw it , of competing with it , Hollmann envisaged a small fleet consisting of torpedo boats and coastal defense ships to be based in German waters . This would be supplemented by a number of cruisers for overseas duties , including trade protection . 
 The first armored cruiser to be designed by the German navy , Fürst Bismarck was an enlarged version of the Victoria Louise @-@ class cruisers , at nearly twice the displacement and with a significantly more powerful armament . The ship was intended for overseas use , particularly in support of German colonies in Asia and the Pacific . Despite heavy political opposition , the new ship was approved by the Reichstag , and was laid down as Ersatz Leipzig in April 1896 at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel . Fürst Bismarck , named after the famous German chancellor Otto von Bismarck , was completed on 1 April 1900 , at a cost of 18 @,@ 945 @,@ 000 Marks . 
 = = = Dimensions = = = 
 Fürst Bismarck was 125 @.@ 70 m ( 412 @.@ 4 ft ) at the waterline , with an overall length of 127 m ( 417 ft ) and a beam of 20 @.@ 40 m ( 66 @.@ 9 ft ) . She had a draft of 7 @.@ 80 m ( 25 @.@ 6 ft ) forward and 8 @.@ 46 m ( 27 @.@ 8 ft ) aft . She displaced 10 @,@ 690 tonnes ( 10 @,@ 520 long tons ) at the designed load , and 11 @,@ 461 tonnes ( 11 @,@ 280 long tons ) at full load . Fürst Bismarck was described as being a very good sea @-@ boat , and was highly responsive to commands from the helm . However , the ship suffered from serious roll problems and heavy vibration at higher speeds . Her metacentric height was <unk> m . 
 The ship was of transverse and longitudinal steel frame construction ; the hull was a single layer of wooden planks covered by a Muntz metal sheath that extended up to .95 m ( 3 @.@ 1 ft ) above the waterline . The lower portions of the ship , including the stem and the stern , were covered with bronze plating . The ship had 13 watertight compartments and a double bottom that ran for 59 % of the length of the hull . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 Fürst Bismarck was propelled by three vertical four @-@ cylinder , triple @-@ expansion reciprocating engines . The engines were powered by four Thornycroft boilers — which had been built by AG Germania — and 8 cylindrical boilers . The Thornycroft boilers had two fire boxes apiece , for a total of eight , while the cylindrical boilers each had four fire boxes , for a total of 32 . Each of the three engines drove a three @-@ bladed screw . The center propeller was 4 @.@ 40 m ( 14 @.@ 4 ft ) in diameter , while the two outer screws were slightly larger , at 4 @.@ 80 m ( 15 @.@ 7 ft ) in diameter . The engines produced 13 @,@ 500 ihp ( 10 @,@ 100 kW ) and a top speed of 18 @.@ 7 knots ( 34 @.@ 6 km / h ) . On trials , the engines were pushed to 13 @,@ 622 ihp ( 10 @,@ 158 kW ) , but still only provided a top speed of 18 @.@ 7 knots ( 34 @.@ 6 km / h ) . Electrical power was supplied by five generators that provided 325 kilowatts at 110 volts . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Fürst Bismarck was protected with Krupp armor , which was in some cases thicker than that of subsequent designs . The armor belt was 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick in the central portion of the ship , and tapered down to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) towards either end of the ship . Set behind the armored belt were 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick shields for critical areas of the ship . The main armored deck was 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick , with 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick slopes . The forward conning tower had 20 cm @-@ thick sides and a 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick roof , while the aft conning tower had 10 cm sides and a 3 cm roof . The main battery turret sides were 20 cm thick and the roofs were 4 cm thick . The 15 cm turrets had 10 cm sides and 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) gun shields . The casemated guns had 10 cm shields . 
 By contrast , the following armored cruiser design , Prinz Heinrich , had only had a 10 cm @-@ thick armor belt and 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) of armor on the turret sides . Even Blücher , Germany 's last armored cruiser , only had a 18 @.@ 0 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) armored belt and 18 cm @-@ thick turret faces , though her overall scale of protection was much more comprehensive than Fürst Bismarck 's . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Fürst Bismarck 's main armament consisted of four 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) SK L / 40 quick @-@ firing guns in two Drh . L. C / 98 twin turrets , fore and aft of the main superstructure . These guns could depress to − 4 degrees and elevate to 30 degrees , for a maximum range of 16 @,@ 900 m ( 18 @,@ 482 yd ) . The guns fired 140 kg ( 309 lb ) armor @-@ piercing shells at a muzzle velocity of 690 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 300 ft / s ) . The propellant charge weighed 41 @.@ 35 kg ( 91 lb ) and was stored in a brass case . The ship stored 312 rounds , for a total of 78 shells per gun . 
 The secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 6 in ) SK L / 40 quick @-@ firing guns in MPL type casemates , and ten 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 30 guns in a combination of casemates and shielded mounts . The 15 cm guns could elevate to 20 degrees , and had a range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 14 @,@ 983 yd ) . The 15 cm guns could sustain a rate of fire of 4 to 5 rounds per minute , and stored 120 shells per gun . The 8 @.@ 8 cm gun fired a 10 kg ( 22 lb ) projectile at a muzzle velocity of 590 m / s ( 1 @,@ 900 ft / s ) . Each gun was supplied with 250 shells . 
 Six 17 @.@ 7 in ( 450 mm ) torpedo tubes were also fitted , with a total of 16 torpedoes . One tube was fitted to a swivel mount on the stern of the ship , four were submerged on the broadside , and the sixth was placed in the bow , also submerged . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Upon commissioning , Fürst Bismarck was assigned to the German East Asia Squadron . She arrived at Tsingtao in August 1900 , under the command of Konteradmiral ( Rear Admiral ) Curt von <unk> und Gaffron , and participated in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion . The ship won the Kaiser 's gold challenge cup for heavy @-@ gun marksmanship in 1901 and 1903 . When the new armored cruiser SMS Scharnhorst arrived at Tsingtao in 1909 to replace Fürst Bismarck as flagship of the East Asia Squadron , she was ordered back to Germany . Upon arriving in Kiel in June 1909 , she was decommissioned and entered a lengthy modernization that lasted until 1914 . 
 At the outbreak of World War I , the ship was reactivated for coast defense duties , but was quickly withdrawn from active service . Fürst Bismarck spent the remainder of the war as a stationary accommodation and engineering training ship in Kiel . In 1919 , she was used for a short time as an office ship . Fürst Bismarck was struck from the navy register on 17 June 1919 , sold for scrap , and broken up the following year at Audorf @-@ Rendsburg . 
 = 2 / 10th Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 2 / 10th Battalion ( " The Adelaide Rifles " ) was an infantry battalion of the Australian Army that was raised for overseas service as part of the all volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) during World War II . Formed in October 1939 , it was the first 2nd AIF unit raised from the state of South Australia during the war ; after completing a period of training in Australia , the battalion embarked for overseas . Initially , it had been intended that the 2 / 10th and its parent brigade – the 18th Brigade – would be sent to the Middle East to join the other brigades of the 6th Division , but instead the 18th Brigade was sent to the United Kingdom , to help strengthen the garrison there after France capitulated in mid @-@ 1940 . Reassigned to the 9th Division , the 2 / 10th remained in the United Kingdom undertaking defensive duties until late 1940 when it finally arrived in the Middle East , where the 18th Brigade became part of the 7th Division . 
 The battalion 's first experience of combat came during an attack against the Italian garrison at Giarabub in March 1941 . This was followed by defensive actions during the Siege of Tobruk later in the year before the 2 / 10th joined the Allied garrison in Syria . In early 1942 , following Japan 's entry into the war , the 2 / 10th was withdrawn to Australia and in August 1942 , at the height of the Japanese advance in the Pacific , the battalion was committed to the fighting around Milne Bay , suffering heavy casualties in their debut in the Pacific . Further fighting came during the Battle of Buna – Gona before the 2 / 10th was brought back to Australia for reorganisation in March 1943 . In August 1943 , they returned to New Guinea , first undertaking jungle training near Port Moresby and then , in December 1943 , moving inland into the Finisterre Mountains where they later fought the Battle for Shaggy Ridge . After being withdrawn to Australia in mid @-@ 1944 , the battalion did not take part in further fighting until the final months of the war when they were committed to the fighting on Balikpapan in July 1945 . At the conclusion of hostilities , the 2 / 10th Battalion was disbanded in December 1945 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and training in Australia = = = 
 The 2 / 10th Battalion was established at the Wayville Showgrounds , in Adelaide , on 13 October 1939 , as part of the all volunteer Second Australian Imperial Force ( 2nd AIF ) , which was raised in Australia shortly after the outbreak of the war for overseas service . Organised into four rifle companies , designated ' A ' through to ' D ' , and a headquarters company , the 2 / 10th was the first 2nd AIF unit raised from the state of South Australia during the war , and was colloquially known as " The Adelaide Rifles " . The colours chosen for the battalion 's Unit Colour Patch ( UCP ) were the same as those of the 10th Battalion , a unit which had served during World War I before being raised as a Militia formation in 1921 . These colours were purple over light blue , in a horizontal rectangular shape , although a border of gray was added to the UCP to distinguish the battalion from its Militia counterpart . 
 Along with the 2 / 9th , 2 / 11th and 2 / 12th Battalions , the 2 / 10th was under the command of the 18th Brigade , which was recruited from the less populous states of Queensland , Western Australia , South Australia and Tasmania , and was initially allocated to the 6th Division , the first of the 2nd AIF 's four infantry divisions . Under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Verrier – a World War I veteran who had served in the 10th and 50th Battalions – after the battalion 's recruits had concentrated at Wayville , the 2 / 10th carried out initial training in the Adelaide Hills to the city 's east at Woodside Camp , before moving to New South Wales on the east coast of Australia where further training was completed at Greta Camp and then Ingleburn . In early May 1940 , the battalion was ready to deploy overseas , and embarked on the transport ship Mauretania , which departed Sydney on 5 May 1940 , bound for the Middle East . 
 = = = Garrison duties in United Kingdom = = = 
 On 10 May 1940 , after the 2 / 10th had departed Australia , the Germans launched a lightning assault across France and the Low Countries , which rapidly led to the capitulation of France and the evacuation of the British Expeditionary Force . Amidst concerns about a possible invasion of the United Kingdom , the Australian government decided to divert some of its troops from the Middle East . As a consequence , as the 18th Brigade was sailing towards the Middle East it was redirected to the United Kingdom . On 18 June 1940 , the Mauretania docked at the port of Gourock , in Scotland . The brigade was subsequently reallocated to the 9th Division and the Australians were transported to the south of England , eventually establishing themselves around <unk> Corner , on Salisbury Plain , in Wiltshire . While there , a number of the battalion 's personnel married local girls . 
 Amidst the backdrop of the Battle of Britain , while stationed on Salisbury Plain the battalion carried out garrison duties and undertook training to enable them to rapidly respond in the event that an invasion took place . They received a large amount of new equipment during this time to improve their mobility , including new Universal carriers , weapons and lightweight personal load carrying equipment . They also experienced German air attacks for the first time , and on 8 July 1940 , the battalion incurred its first casualty when one of its members was wounded in an air raid . In early October , the 2 / 10th undertook a large @-@ scale exercise near Tidworth , and then in the middle of the month , as winter set in they were moved to Colchester , where they replaced the tents they had been living in with the stone buildings and Nissen huts of Hyderabad Barracks . The battalion 's stay there was short @-@ lived , though , for the following month , after the threat of invasion had passed , the order arrived for the Australians to embark for the Middle East . The 2 / 10th subsequently entrained at Colchester in mid @-@ November and moved north to Scotland where , on 17 November , they boarded the <unk> . 
 = = = Fighting in the Middle East = = = 
 Having made the journey to Egypt travelling via South Africa and the Red Sea due to the threat of attack that was present in the Mediterranean , the battalion arrived just before New Years . The 18th Brigade was again reassigned in February 1941 , this time to the 7th Division , with whom they would see out the remainder of the war ; at the same time , the brigade was converted from a four @-@ battalion structure to three , and the 2 / 11th was transferred to help form the 19th Brigade . On 21 March 1941 , the battalion undertook its first ground action of the war , when one of its companies – ' D ' Company – supported the 2 / 9th Battalion in their attack on the Italian held fort at Giarabub . The battalion 's first major action as a complete unit did not come until April 1941 , though , when it undertook defensive actions during the Siege of Tobruk . During the Battle of the Salient , fought in early May , the 2 / 10th took over a position on the northern flank of the perimeter , relieving the 2 / 48th Battalion , coming under heavy air attack during the handover . 
 After the initial German and Italian assault , on the evening of 3 / 4 May the 18th Brigade counter @-@ attacked to retake positions lost ; the 2 / 10th was given a supporting role , tasked with carrying out raids deep into the opposing forces ' territory while the 2 / 9th and 2 / 12th Battalions attacked the shoulders of the salient . In the fighting that followed , the 2 / 10th 's casualties were six missing and 15 wounded , but they inflicted heavy casualties upon their enemy before withdrawing back to the " Blue Line " . After the fighting in early May , the 2 / 10th was withdrawn to <unk> for a brief respite and placed in reserve , but by the middle of May , they had returned to the salient , and on 16 May advanced the line over 1 @,@ 000 yards ( 910 m ) . The 2 / 10th carried out further raids in " no man 's land " as the siege continued , but in August the battalion was withdrawn to Palestine for training . In September 1941 , the 2 / 10th were sent to Syria where they were assigned to the Allied garrison that had occupied the country following the conclusion of the Syria – Lebanon campaign and the defeat of the Vichy French forces there , in order to defend against a possible German attack from the Caucasus towards the strategically important Middle Eastern oilfields . During this time , the 2 / 10th Battalion was stationed near Aleppo , where the battalion manned outposts near the Syrian – Turkish border across a frontage that was several hundred miles long . 
 = = = New Guinea campaigns = = = 
 The 2 / 10th remained in Syria until January 1942 when , after having endured a freezing cold winter that included snow , it was transported back to Palestine in preparation for a return to Australia . Following Japan 's entry into the war the previous December , and in light of Allied reverses in the Pacific , the Australian government had requested the return of some of its forces in order to bolster the defence of Australia due to concerns about a possible invasion . The 2 / 10th subsequently embarked on the Dutch passenger ship , Nieuw Amsterdam , bound for Australia in early February 1942 . Stopping over in Bombay , the battalion was transferred to the transport <unk> on which they continued the journey to Adelaide where they arrived in late March , after which a period of reorganisation and training followed around <unk> in Queensland , before the battalion was committed to its next campaign : New Guinea . Following Japanese landings on the north coast of New Guinea in July , Australian forces in the area had been fighting a desperate holding action , which had seen them being pushed inexorably towards Port Moresby . By early August 1942 , the situation for the Australians was critical . 
 On 5 August , the 2 / 10th embarked on the Dutch transport Both . A week later , on 12 August , the 2 / 10th , along with the other two infantry battalions of the 18th Brigade , landed at Milne Bay , in Papua where they reinforced the militiamen from the 7th Brigade who were defending the area ; a fortnight later the Japanese landed a force at Milne Bay in an attempt to secure the airfields that the Australians had built there . In the ensuing Battle of Milne Bay , the Australians eventually won a significant victory , but the 2 / 10th suffered heavily , losing 43 killed and 26 wounded . In October , the 2 / 10th was flown to Wanigela , near the Papuan coast , where they were tasked with carrying out patrols and defending the beach against a possible Japanese landing , and helping to construct an airfield . The battalion 's next major action came in late December 1942 during the Battle of Buna – Gona , after being transported by sea to the beachhead front , arriving just south of Cape Endaiadere . Heavily engaged around the disused Buna airstrip where the Japanese had constructed several bunkers , in a fortnight of fighting , the battalion suffered over 300 casualties , including 112 killed . Another attack was made around Sanananda in mid @-@ January 1943 , before the 2 / 10th was withdrawn from the fighting , flying to Port Moresby in February and then embarking upon the transport The Willis Van <unk> on 10 March to return to Australia , landing in Cairns on 12 March . 
 After establishing itself around Ravenshoe , Queensland , the next three months was a period of flux for the battalion , with many men taking leave or being discharged due to tropical diseases or injuries from the previous campaign . The battalion was brought up to strength with a large draft of volunteers from the 11th Motor Regiment , a motorised Militia light horse unit consisting largely of Queenslanders and New South Welshmen . A period of rest and reorganisation followed during which the units of the 2nd AIF were converted to the Jungle Division establishment . After this , large scale divisional manoeuvres took place in mid @-@ July , after which the battalion received orders to sail for overseas again . Embarking upon the transport Canberra from Townsville , they arrived in Port Moresby in early August . After a period in which the 18th Brigade was held back in reserve at Port Moresby to defend the approaches to Lae , in December 1943 the 2 / 10th was sent into the Finisterre Mountains , where they joined the rest of the 7th Division whose campaign through the Markham and Ramu Valleys had culminated in heavy fighting around Shaggy Ridge during the first months of 1944 . This proved to be the most significant action for the 2 / 10th and in May 1944 they withdrawn to Australia , being transported home on the Duntroon . 
 = = = Borneo and disbandment = = = 
 A period of leave followed , after which the battalion reconstituted in July 1944 and went into camp at around <unk> , near Brisbane . In August , they took part in a march through Brisbane , before travelling north to Cairns in September , from where they moved to Kairi , near Tolga . A large number of reinforcements arrived at this time , as the battalion was severely undermanned due to transfers or discharges from injuries or illnesses . After this , the 2 / 10th began a long period of training . As a result of indecision about the employment of Australian troops in the latter part of the war , they spent over a year waiting for their final campaign . This came in the final months of the war when they were committed to the fighting on Borneo . Staging out of Morotai Island , early on the morning of 1 July 1945 they came ashore at Balikpapan as part of Operation Oboe Two . After landing they fought to wrest control of the high ground to the west of the beachhead – dubbed " Parramatta Ridge " by the Australians – prior to fighting around the town of Balikpapan itself . On 6 July they were withdrawn from the fighting , and placed in brigade reserve ; the fighting for Parramatta cost the 2 / 10th fifteen killed and 41 wounded . 
 Although the battalion undertook a series of local patrols after this , the fighting around Parramatta constituted the last of the 2 / 10th 's major actions of the war . After the hostilities ended in mid @-@ August following Japan 's surrender , the battalion 's personnel were slowly repatriated back to Australia in drafts for demobilisation and discharge . Some chose to remain in the Army , with a group of about 70 being transferred to other units for subsequent service in the 34th Brigade , which had been formed to undertake occupation duties in Japan as part of the British Commonwealth Occupation Force . The battalion was finally disbanded on 29 December 1945 while still at Balikpapan ; upon disbandment there were only 42 members of the battalion left for the 2 / 10th 's final parade , during which the battalion flag was entrusted to the Militia 10th Battalion , which had served briefly in a garrison role in Australia during the war and which was subsequently re @-@ raised in South Australia after the war . 
 Throughout the course of the war , a total of 3 @,@ 008 men served with the 2 / 10th Battalion of whom 315 were killed or died on active service , and 525 wounded . Members of the battalion received the following decorations : two Distinguished Service Orders , one Member of the Order of the British Empire , seven Military Crosses , six Distinguished Conduct Medals , 14 Military Medals and 51 Mentions in Despatches . 
 = = Battle honours = = 
 The 2 / 10th was awarded the following battle honours : 
 North Africa , Defence of Tobruk , The Salient 1941 , South @-@ West Pacific 1942 – 1945 , Buna – Gona , Cape Endaiadere – Sinemi Creek , Sanananda – Cape Killerton , Milne Bay , and Liberation of Australian New Guinea . 
 These honours were subsequently entrusted to the 10th Battalion in 1961 , and through this link are maintained by the Royal South Australia Regiment . 
 = = Commanding officers = = 
 The following officers commanded the 2 / 10th during World War II : 
 Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Verrier ( 1939 – 41 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Lionel Bruer ( 1941 – 42 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel James Dobbs ( 1942 – 43 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Charles <unk> ( 1943 – 44 ) ; 
 Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Daly ( 1945 ) . 
 = No Mercy ( 2003 ) = 
 No Mercy ( 2003 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) and presented by Subway , which took place on October 19 , 2003 , at the 1st Mariner Arena in Baltimore , Maryland . It was the sixth event under the No Mercy chronology and starred wrestlers from the SmackDown ! brand . 
 Nine professional wrestling matches were scheduled on the event 's card . The main event saw WWE Champion Brock Lesnar defeat The Undertaker to retain his championship in a match where a chain was hung from a pole and the first man to reach it could use it as a legal weapon in what was called a Biker Chain match . Two featured bouts were scheduled on the undercard . In a standard match for the WWE United States Championship , the Big Show defeated Eddie Guerrero to win the title . The other was also a standard match , in which Kurt Angle defeated John Cena . 
 No Mercy had an attendance of approximately 8 @,@ 500 and received about 254 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys , more than the following year 's event . This event helped WWE increase its pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue by $ 6 @.@ 2 million from the previous year . When the event was released on DVD , it reached a peak position of seventh on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured nine professional wrestling matches with outcomes predetermined by WWE script writers . The matches featured wrestlers portraying their characters in planned storylines that took place before , during and after the event . All wrestlers were from the SmackDown brand , a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees . 
 The main event at No Mercy was a Biker Chain match for the WWE Championship . In this match , a chain was hung on a pole above the ring , and when it was retrieved it could be used as a legal weapon . The match was between WWE Champion Brock Lesnar , who defended against The Undertaker . This title match would mark the third pay per view between Lesnar and The Undertaker for the championship . The first being September 2002 at Unforgiven where Lesnar and Undertaker fought to a double disqualification then the second event being the following month at No Mercy where Lesnar successfully defended the WWE title over the Undertaker in a Hell in a Cell match . The buildup to the match began on the August 28 episode of SmackDown , when the Undertaker defeated Lesnar and The Big Show in a Triple Threat match , earning a title shot against then WWE Champion Kurt Angle . The following week on the September 4 episode of SmackDown , Angle defended the championship against the Undertaker , however , the match ended in a no contest after Lesnar interfered and attacked them both with a steel folding chair ; Angle retained the championship as a result of Lesnar 's interference . Two weeks later on SmackDown , Angle defended the title against Lesnar in a match in which the wrestler with the most scoring conditions by a set period of time would win the title in what is called an Iron Man match . Lesnar scored five falls , while Angle scored four in the encounter , thus , Lesnar won the match and became the new WWE Champion . The following week on SmackDown , legitimate WWE Chairman Vince McMahon held a ceremony to introduce the new WWE Champion Lesnar , but was interrupted by the Undertaker and SmackDown General Manager Stephanie McMahon , who announced that Lesnar would face the Undertaker at No Mercy for the WWE Championship . On the October 9 episode of SmackDown , Lesnar defended the title against Paul London . The match was interrupted by the Undertaker , who had a meeting with Stephanie earlier that night . He announced that his match with Lesnar at No Mercy would be a Biker Chain Match rather than a standard match . 
 One of the featured bouts on the undercard saw the WWE United States Champion Eddie Guerrero defending the championship against the Big Show . The events leading up to this match began on the October 9 episode of SmackDown , when it was announced that Guerrero would face the Big Show at No Mercy for the title . Later in the night , Chavo Guerrero ( Salvador Guerrero IV ) brought the Big Show out to the ring , followed by Eddie Guerrero bringing a sewage truck into the arena and spraying the Big Show with raw sewage . The next week on SmackDown , Guerrero defeated Rhyno ( Terry <unk> ) in a non @-@ title match . Afterwards , the Big Show attacked Guerrero by using his signature lowrider as a weapon . 
 Another featured bout on the undercard pitted Kurt Angle against John Cena . On the September 18 episode of SmackDown , Angle lost an Iron Man match to Brock Lesnar for the WWE Championship . The match marked the third time that Angle defended the title against Lesnar with the first being WrestleMania XIX where Lesnar won the title and the second being SummerSlam which Angle retained . The next week on SmackDown , Angle tried to call Lesnar out to the ring , demanding a rematch , but instead Cena came to the ring and attacked Angle . On the October 2 episode of SmackDown , two of the primary rivalries on SmackDown intertwined in a tag team match , where Lesnar and Cena faced the team of Angle and the Undertaker , which Cena and Lesnar won after Cena struck Angle with a chain . The next week on SmackDown , a rap battle took place between Cena and Angle , in which both men performed raps insulting each other . The battle ended with Angle attacking Cena and the two proceeding to fight in the ring . 
 Another prominent match on the card was an " I Quit " match between Vince McMahon and his daughter , Stephanie McMahon . At the No Mercy event , however , Vince announced that Stephanie could score a pinfall or submission to win the match . The match build up began on the September 25 episode of SmackDown , when Stephanie interrupted her father 's ceremony honoring the new WWE Champion Brock Lesnar to announce that the Undertaker would face Lesnar at No Mercy for the championship . Vince , angered by this , demanded that she retract the decision . When Stephanie did not , Vince announced that the two of them would face each other in an " I Quit " match at No Mercy . The next week on SmackDown , Vince offered Stephanie another chance to rescind the title match , which she refused and as a result Vince added the stipulation that if she lost , she would be forced to resign as the General Manager of SmackDown ! . The following week , Linda McMahon , Vince 's wife and Stephanie 's mother , made Vince agree that if he lost the match , he would resign as WWE Chairman . 
 = = Event = = 
 Before No Mercy began and aired live on pay @-@ per @-@ view , an episode of Sunday Night Heat , one of the secondary television programs for WWE , was taped live . The only scheduled match was a standard match between Billy Kidman and Shannon Moore , which Kidman won via pinfall after a spinebuster on Moore . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 After Sunday Night Heat , the event began with a standard match for the WWE Cruiserweight Championship where the champion , Tajiri defended his title against Rey Mysterio . Throughout the match both men performed many offensive maneuvers , but Mysterio gained the upper hand when he performed a 619 and West Coast Pop . Before Mysterio could cover Tajiri , however , two " fans " ( later revealed to be Ryan <unk> and James Yun ) interfered and distracted Mysterio . Following the distraction , Tajiri recovered and performed a <unk> kick on Mysterio , followed by a cover and a pinfall to retain his championship . 
 The following bout was Chris Benoit versus A @-@ Train in a standard match . Both men wrestled inconclusively in the early stages of the match , until Chris Benoit performed a dragon screw <unk> on A @-@ Train to the ground and then placed him a Sharpshooter forcing A @-@ Train to submit . 
 The third contest had Zach Gowen facing Matt Hardy in a standard match . Both men performed a variety of moves on one another until Gowen performed a springboard moonsault with one leg ( Gowen had lost his other leg to cancer at age 8 ) on Hardy and covered him for a pinfall . This was the first singles match that Gowen had won while in the WWE . 
 The next match was the Basham Brothers ( Doug and Danny Basham ) versus the Acolytes Protection Agency ( Bradshaw and Farooq ) in a standard match . After both teams performed a number of offensive maneuvers on each other , Shaniqua ( Linda Miles ) , the Basham Brothers ' valet , struck Bradshaw with a club and ( kayfabe ) knocked him out . Doug then covered Bradshaw for a pinfall . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The fifth contest was an " I Quit " match , where in order to win one competitor must force the other to say " I Quit " , between WWE Chairman Vince McMahon , escorted by Sable , and SmackDown General Manager Stephanie McMahon , his daughter . Stephanie was accompanied to the ring by her mother , Linda McMahon . Vince had altered the rules of the match , including the stipulation that Stephanie could defeat him by pinfall or submission , but he had to force her to quit . Furthermore , the loser of the match had to surrender their position in the company ( Chairman or General Manager for Vince and Stephanie , respectively ) . The match ended when Vince choked Stephanie with a lead pipe , and Linda McMahon quit the match for Stephanie . As a result , Stephanie was removed from the position of General Manager of SmackDown . 
 The first featured bout on the undercard was a standard match between Kurt Angle and John Cena . Angle began bleeding after Cena performed a swinging reverse DDT on the ring apron on him . Later in the match , Cena attempted a FU but Angle reversed it into an unsuccessful cover attempt . Following that , Angle attempted an Angle Slam but Cena countered the maneuver . Angle then countered Cena and placed him in an ankle lock , which led to Cena submitting . 
 The second featured bout on the undercard was a standard match for the WWE United States Championship where the champion , Eddie Guerrero , defended against The Big Show . Guerrero used a variety of tactics including forcing the Big Show 's head into an exposed steel turnbuckle , striking him with a trash can lid , punching him with brass knuckles and striking him with the United States Championship belt . After hitting the Big Show with the belt , Guerrero performed a frog splash onto the Big Show . Guerrero attempted a cover , but only received a count of two . The Big Show then performed a chokeslam and attempted to pin Guerrero , but he placed his foot on the rope , which voided the cover . The Big Show then performed another chokeslam on Guerrero and covered him for a pinfall , winning the WWE United States Championship . 
 The main event was a Biker Chain match for the WWE Championship , where WWE Champion Brock Lesnar defended his title against The Undertaker . During the match , a chain was hung on a pole above the ring , and once it was retrieved it could be used as a legal weapon . After enduring a series of punches from Lesnar , The Undertaker attempted to take the chain down , but the lights in the arena went out and he climbed back down to the ring . The Undertaker then Tombstone piledriver Lesnar onto the ring steps . The Undertaker put Lesnar in a dragon sleeper . After getting out of the sleeper hold , Lesnar F @-@ <unk> The Undertaker . Lesnar made an attempt to go for the chain , but the Undertaker performed a chokeslam on him off the top rope . Following this , The Full Blooded Italians interfered in the match , trying to attack the Undertaker . The Undertaker threw them out of the ring and did a suicide dive onto them . He then retrieved the chain off the pole and wrapped it around it his fist , planning to strike Lesnar with it . Vince McMahon interfered , however , and pushed the Undertaker off the top rope onto the mat . Lesnar then took the chain , wrapped it around his fist , and punched the Undertaker in the face , followed by a cover for a pinfall . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 As a result of losing her match against her father , Stephanie McMahon was forced to resign as SmackDown ! General Manager . On the SmackDown following No Mercy , Vince McMahon announced Paul Heyman as the new General Manager . Heyman booked a Handicap match , in which the Undertaker faced Brock Lesnar and the Big Show . Heyman stated that should Undertaker win , he could face anyone he wished at Survivor Series . During the match , there were several opportunities in which the Undertaker would have won the match , but Heyman restarted the contest three times . The Undertaker did , however , win the contest , and announced he wanted a Buried Alive match against Vince McMahon . McMahon would go on to win the match with the aid of the Undertaker 's half @-@ brother Kane . 
 The feud between Kurt Angle and Cena ended shortly after No Mercy . On the November 6 episode of SmackDown , John Cena was offered an opportunity to become the final member of Team Lesnar for the traditional five @-@ on @-@ five elimination tag match at Survivor Series . Cena rejected the offer , however , and was attacked by the other members of Team Lesnar . The members of Team Angle fought alongside Cena , and the following week on SmackDown , Cena turned into fan favorite and joined Kurt Angle 's Survivor Series team . The feud between the Big Show and Eddie Guerrero ended after No Mercy , with Guerrero going on to compete for the WWE Tag Team Championship with Chavo Guerrero . Guerrero went on to win a tag team title shot by defeating the Basham Brothers in a Handicap match , but he did not win the title . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The 1st Mariner Arena usually can accommodate 14 @,@ 000 , but the capacity was reduced for No Mercy . This event had an approximate attendance of 8 @,@ 500 and received 254 @,@ 000 pay @-@ per @-@ view buys . The promotion 's pay @-@ per @-@ view revenue was $ 24 @.@ 7 million . The professional wrestling section of the Canadian Online Explorer website rated the entire event a 4 out of 10 stars . The rating was lower than the 2004 event 's rating of 5 out of 10 stars . The encounter between Kurt Angle and John Cena was given the highest rating of any match on the card with a 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 stars , while the United States Championship match was rated a 3 out of 10 stars . The main event match for the WWE Championship was rated a 7 out of 10 stars . 
 The event was released on DVD on November 18 , 2003 by Sony Music Entertainment . The DVD reached seventh on Billboard 's DVD Sales Chart for recreational sports during the week of December 13 , 2003 , although falling thereafter . It remained on the chart until the week of December 20 , ranking twelfth . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Oh Mother = 
 " Oh Mother " is a song recorded by American singer Christina Aguilera for her fifth studio album , Back to Basics ( 2006 ) . The song was released on November 23 , 2007 by RCA Records as the fourth and final single from the album in European territories , while " Slow Down Baby " was serviced as the final single in Oceania . It was written by Aguilera , Derryck Thornton , Mark Rankin , Liz Thornton , Christophe <unk> , Bruno <unk> and Kara DioGuardi . Production was done by Big Tank and Q , with L <unk> credited as co @-@ producer and Aguilera serviced as additional producer . 
 " Oh Mother " is a downtempo piano ballad that talks about Aguilera 's abusive childhood . It incorporates various musical instruments , from strings to keyboards . It contains a sample from " Vois Sur Ton Chemin " , written by Bruno Coluais and Christopher Barratler . Upon its release , the song was met with mainly positive reviews from contemporary music critics . It also managed to enter charts in Europe with moderate success . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After releasing Stripped ( 2002 ) and collaborating with many different artists , Aguilera decided to record new old @-@ school style materials for her upcoming album . She later explained that the lengthy break allowed her to write a lot about what she had experienced during that time . Aguilera also explained that she wanted to bring something novel to her album , which has 24 songs on it . She wanted to try to evolve as an artist and a visionary . As a result , Back to Basics , Aguilera 's fifth studio album , is made up of two discs . On the first disc , she worked with " more beat @-@ driven " producers , such as DJ Premier and Mark Ronson , who included samples in the production . The second one was written and produced solely by longtime producer Linda Perry . Aguilera sent letters to different producers that she hoped could help her with the direction she was taking for the project , encouraging them to experiment , re @-@ invent and create a modern soul feel . She described the first disc as " kind of a throwback with elements of jazz , blues and soul music combined with a modern @-@ day twist , like hard @-@ hitting beats " . 
 " Oh Mother " was written by Aguilera , Derryck Thornton , Mark Rankin , Liz Thornton , Christophe <unk> , Bruno <unk> and Kara DioGuardi . Production was done by Big Tank and Q , with L <unk> credited as co @-@ producer and Aguilera serviced as additional producer . Piano and keyboards were provided by V. Young , while Rob Lewis served guitar and arranging . Lewis also played string instruments with <unk> <unk> , Daniel Seidenberg , <unk> <unk> , Ilana <unk> , Joel <unk> and Maia Jasper . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Oh Mother " is a piano ballad . Written in the key of C ♯ minor , it is a downtempo track with a moderate tempo of 88 beats per minute . " Oh Mother " has a chord progression of C ♯ m – A / C ♯ – F ♯ m – G ♯ 7 at the beginning . Aguilera 's vocal range on the track spans from the low @-@ note of F ♯ 3 to the high @-@ note of E5 . The track 's instrumentation comes from guitar , strings , piano and keyboards . It also features a sample of " Vois Sur Ton Chemin " , written by Bruno Coluais and Christopher Barratler . Spence D. for IGN called the track 's melody " lulling " and " lithe " . 
 According to Aguilera herself , " Oh Mother " talks about her abusive childhood . She revealed , " I think going through what I went through at a young age – the abuse that went on in my household – did affect me a lot . Domestic violence is a topic that is very hush @-@ hush in society " . Aguilera recalls the domestic violence of her childhood as she sings , " He took his anger out on her face , she kept all of her pain locked away " . Nick Levine for Digital Spy said that " Oh Mother " is a " retread " of " I 'm OK " , a song with the same topic from Aguilera 's 2002 album Stripped . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Release and commercial performance = = = 
 " Oh Mother " was serviced as the fourth and final single from Back to Basics in Europe : on September 28 , 2007 , it was available for digital downloads in Switzerland ; on October 8 , 2007 , it was available for CD single sales in the United Kingdom . In Germany , the song was purchased as a CD single and as a digital download single on November 23 , 2007 . In the United Kingdom , " Oh Mother " was available for digital download on December 31 , 2007 . The single also impacted radio stations of countries in Europe including Switzerland , Germany , Czech Republic , and Austria in late 2007 . 
 On the Austrian Singles Chart , the single debuted at number 26 on December 7 , 2007 and peaked at number 23 during the following week . There , the track remained for a total of nine weeks . In German , " Oh Mother " peaked at number 18 on the Media Control Charts . The single also peaked in the Netherlands and Switzerland at number 54 and 79 , respectively . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Upon its release , " Oh Mother " was met with mainly positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Lucy Davis from BBC Music wrote that the song " might mean a lot to some , those with the tiresome self defence lyrics should go – when she gets on with the singing , there 's nothing to prove " . Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani deemed " Oh Mother " a " lovely " piano and string melody " that we 're offered a reprieve " . Amanda Murray of Sputnikmusic was also positive toward " Oh Mother " , commenting that " another ode to her single mother and middle @-@ finger to her abusive father , is yet more proof that Aguilera works best when the subject matter actually means something to her , when the song is more than just something to sing " . Spence D. for IGN was positive toward the song 's meaning , writing that it " resonates with a bittersweet energy that helps it rise above the standard young pop queen fare of the day " . musicOMH 's John Murray was not impressed with the song , calling it " good " but saying that it would " just make the bad moments feel so much worse " . Digital Spy critic Nick Levine provided a negative review , giving it a two out of five stars rating and calling it " tremulous " with a " vibrato @-@ fuelled conclusion " . He also compared " Oh Mother " to Madonna 's song " Oh Father " ( 1989 ) for the same sad melody as well as the same theme of child abuse . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 To promote " Oh Mother " and Back to Basics , Aguilera performed the song on a number of occasions . On July 20 , 2006 , Aguilera performed the track at the Koko jazz club in London , which was held in front of 1 @,@ 500 fans and invited guests . The 40 @-@ minute concert comprised songs from the then @-@ upcoming Back to Basics and other songs , including " Lady Marmalade " ( 2001 ) and " Beautiful " ( 2002 ) . MTV UK was positive toward the performance , wrote , " The gig reflected the jazz club mood of Christina 's new album , with a swinging brass @-@ heavy backing band and fit dancers bounding sexily around the stage " . Later , " Oh Mother " was also performed during her worldwide Back to Basics Tour ( 2006 – 07 ) . As she performed the track , the clip of a man repeatedly punching a woman as blood dripped from her face appeared on the screen . The tour was preceded by newspaper headlines that flashed across a big screen , such as , " Christina goes from ' dirrty ' to demure " and " Christina cleans up her act " . The performance is included on the video release Back to Basics : Live and Down Under ( 2008 ) . A live video of the performance of " Oh Mother " during the tour , taken from the accompanying DVD , was premiered in late 2007 . Nick Levine for Digital Spy called it a " cheap @-@ looking " video . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 CD single and Germany digital download 
 " Oh Mother " – 3 : 44 
 " Oh Mother " ( instrumental ) – 3 : 47 
 Switzerland digital download 
 " Oh Mother " – 3 : 45 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Contains a sample from the song " Vois Sur Ton Chemin " , written by Bruno Coluais and Christopher Barratler . 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Back to Basics , RCA Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Operation Eagle Pull = 
 Operation Eagle Pull was the United States military evacuation by air of Phnom Penh , Cambodia , on 12 April 1975 . At the beginning of April 1975 , Phnom Penh , one of the last remaining strongholds of the Khmer Republic , was surrounded by the Khmer Rouge and totally dependent on aerial resupply through Pochentong Airport . With a Khmer Rouge victory imminent , the US government made contingency plans for the evacuation of US nationals and allied Cambodians by helicopter to ships in the Gulf of Thailand . Operation Eagle Pull took place on the morning of 12 April 1975 and was a tactical success carried out without any loss of life . Five days later the Khmer Republic collapsed and the Khmer Rouge occupied Phnom Penh . 
 = = <unk> of Phnom Penh = = 
 At the beginning of 1975 the Khmer Republic , a United States @-@ supported military government , controlled only the Phnom Penh area and a string of towns along the Mekong River that provided the crucial supply route for food and munitions coming upriver from South Vietnam . As part of their 1975 dry season offensive , rather than renewing their frontal attacks on Phnom Penh , the Khmer Rouge set out to cut off the crucial Mekong supply route . On 12 January 1975 the Khmer Rouge attacked <unk> Luong , a key Khmer National Armed Forces ( FANK ) defensive outpost on the Mekong . On 27 January , seven vessels limped into Phnom Penh , the survivors of a 16 @-@ ship convoy that had come under attack over the 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) journey from the South Vietnamese border . On 3 February a convoy heading downriver hit naval mines laid by the Khmer Rouge at Phu My approximately 74 kilometres ( 46 mi ) from Phnom Penh . The FANK naval branch , the Khmer National Navy ( <unk> ) , had mine @-@ sweeping capability , but due to the Khmer Rouge control of the riverbanks mine @-@ sweeping was impossible or at best extremely costly . The <unk> had lost a quarter of its ships , and 70 percent of its sailors had been killed or wounded . 
 By 17 February , the Khmer Republic abandoned attempts to reopen the Mekong supply line . In future , all supplies for Phnom Penh would have to come in by air to Pochentong Airport . The United States quickly mobilised an airlift of food , fuel and ammunition into Phnom Penh , but as US support for the Khmer Republic was limited by the Case – Church Amendment , <unk> , a company under contract to the US Government , controlled the airlift with a mixed fleet of C @-@ 130 and DC @-@ 8 planes , flying 20 times a day into Pochentong . 
 On 5 March , Khmer Rouge artillery at Toul Leap , north @-@ west of Phnom Penh , shelled Pochentong Airport , but FANK troops recaptured Toul Leap on 15 March and ended the shelling . Khmer Rouge forces continued to close in on the north and west of the city and were soon able to fire on Pochentong again . On 22 March rockets hit two supply aircraft , forcing the US Embassy to announce on 23 March a suspension of the airlift until the security situation improved . The Embassy , realizing that the Khmer Republic would soon collapse without supplies , reversed the suspension on 24 March and increased the number of aircraft available for the airlift . On 1 April the Khmer Rouge overran <unk> Luong and Ban @-@ am , the last remaining FANK positions on the Mekong . The Communists could now concentrate all their forces on Phnom Penh . Premier Lon Nol resigned that day and went into exile ; the final collapse of the Khmer Republic was imminent . 
 = = Planning = = 
 The evacuation plan was developed and refined by the US Military as Khmer Rouge forces closed in on Phnom Penh , starting as early as 1973 . On 27 June 1973 the Seventh Air Force published Contingency Plan <unk> " Eagle Pull " covering the evacuation of Phnom Penh . <unk> <unk> had three options : 
 Option 1 : the evacuation of Embassy personnel , US citizens and designated Cambodians by regular or chartered civilian airlift from Pochentong Airport . 
 Option 2 : if Khmer Rouge action forced the cancellation of civilian flights from Pochentong Airport , security police from the 56th Security Police Squadron at Nakhon Phanom Royal Thai Air Force Base would be flown in to provide security for the evacuation of approximately 600 Embassy personnel , US citizens and designated Cambodians by USAF fixed wing aircraft ( and CH @-@ 53 and HH @-@ 53 helicopters if needed ) . 
 Option 3 : if Pochentong was closed to traffic the 56th Security Police Squadron would be landed to secure landing zones ( LZs ) in central Phnom Penh ( and other towns if required ) for use by CH @-@ 53 helicopters of 21st Special Operations Squadron and HH @-@ 53 helicopters of the 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron with airborne mission command performed by C @-@ 130 King aircraft of the 56th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron . 
 Option 3 was later revised to provide for the use of USMC helicopters together with USAF helicopters and C @-@ 130 Airborne Mission Command based in Thailand , and for the ground security force to be made up of marines rather than air force security police . The LZs were to be adjacent to the US Embassy in Phnom Penh . 
 On 6 January 1975 , CINCPAC placed the 31st Marine Amphibious Unit on 96 @-@ hour alert to move the evacuation fleet into position off Kampong Som ( previously Sihanoukville ) in the Gulf of Thailand for the implementation of Operation Eagle Pull . On 6 February the reaction time was reduced to 48 hours , meaning that the evacuation fleet had to maintain a 48 @-@ hour cruising radius from Kampong Som . This was further reduced on 28 February to 24 hours , effectively meaning that the fleet had to remain within the Gulf of Thailand . 
 On 21 March the Embassy predicted there would be 3 @,@ 600 evacuees , far exceeding the original estimate of approximately 400 . This necessitated the development of a new evacuation plan whereby Marines would secure Pochentong Airport , while helicopters would ferry evacuees from central Phnom Penh to Pochentong from where they would be flown on C @-@ 130 planes to Thailand . However , this plan was quickly overtaken by events as the supply C @-@ 130s coming into Pochentong were used for evacuees on the return journey , quickly reducing the number of evacuees that would need to be moved in a final evacuation . 
 On 3 April , given the deterioration in the defences around Phnom Penh , Ambassador John Gunther Dean requested the deployment of the 10 @-@ man Operation Eagle Pull command element which landed at Pochentong on a <unk> C @-@ 130 plane . The command element supervised the ongoing fixed @-@ wing evacuation of more than 750 Cambodians over the next seven days in the face of 80 – 90 rounds of 105 mm artillery and 107 mm rocket fire each day . By 10 April Khmer Rouge fire had become so heavy that the fixed @-@ wing evacuation was ended . 
 The command group then turned its attention to the selection of helicopter landing zones for the evacuation . As the Khmer Rouge controlled the east bank of the Mekong opposite Phnom Penh , the command group selected LZ Hotel , a soccer field about 900 metres ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ) north @-@ east of the embassy . Masked from the river by a row of apartment buildings , this LZ could not be interdicted by direct fire weapons , making it the safest location . The embassy staff prepared to leave on 11 April , but the evacuation was delayed until the following day in order to allow the USS Hancock to join the evacuation fleet off Kampong Som . 
 = = Evacuation fleet = = 
 On 3 March 1975 Amphibious Ready Group Alpha ( Task Group 76 @.@ 4 ) , and the 31st Marine Amphibious Unit ( Task Group 79 @.@ 4 ) embarked and arrived at the designated station off Kampong Som in the Gulf of Thailand , the force comprised : 
 Task Group 76 @.@ 4 ( Movement Transport Group Alpha ) 
 USS Okinawa carrying HMH @-@ 462 comprising 14 CH @-@ 53 , 3 CH @-@ 46 , 4 AH @-@ 1J , and 2 UH @-@ 1E helicopters 
 USS Vancouver 
 USS Thomaston 
 Escort ships for naval gunfire , escort , and area defense : 
 USS Edson 
 USS Henry B. Wilson 
 USS Knox 
 USS Kirk 
 On 17 March the Joint Chiefs of Staff , concerned that one Marine helicopter squadron was insufficient for the evacuation , ordered that the USS Hancock offload its air wing and proceed to Pearl Harbor . On 26 March Marine Heavy Lift Helicopter Squadron HMH @-@ 463 comprising 25 CH @-@ 53 , CH @-@ 46 , AH @-@ 1J and UH @-@ 1E helicopters embarked on the USS Hancock and it proceeded to Subic Bay . After taking on more helicopters at Subic Bay , USS Hancock was temporarily assigned to Amphibious Ready Group Bravo , standing by off Vung Tau , South Vietnam , but on 11 April she joined Amphibious Ready Group Alpha in the Gulf of Thailand . The marine evacuation contingent comprised one battalion landing team , 2nd Battalion , 4th Marines ( 2 / 4 ) . 
 As the Khmer Rouge had no air force and only limited anti @-@ aircraft capability , no fleet air cover was necessary , but the evacuation was supported by USAF aircraft based in Thailand . It was suspected that the Khmer Rouge might possess SA @-@ 7 shoulder @-@ launched surface to air missiles and so the evacuation helicopters were painted with infra @-@ red low @-@ reflective paint and equipped with ALE @-@ 29 flare dispensers . 
 = = Evacuation = = 
 On the afternoon of 11 April 1975 , the 31st MAU received orders to execute Operation Eagle Pull . At 06 : 00 on 12 April , 12 CH @-@ 53s of HMH @-@ 462 launched from the deck of USS Okinawa and then at 10 @-@ minute intervals descended again to pick up their marines . Elements of Companies F and H , and the command group embarked from the USS Okinawa while elements of Company G boarded their helicopters on the USS Vancouver , giving a total ground security force of 360 Marines . As the helicopters completed loading they formed into groups of three orbiting the task force . 
 At 07 : 30 Ambassador Dean notified the acting Cambodian Chief of State , Prime Minister Long Boret and other Cambodian leaders including Prince Sisowath Sirik Matak , that the US personnel would officially leave the country within the next few hours and asked if any desired evacuation , in which case they should be at the embassy by 09 : 30 . All declined except for <unk> Khoy , successor to Lon Nol as President of the Khmer Republic , who left without telling his fellow leaders . Prince Sirik Matak , a former Prime Minister and a driving force behind the formation of the Khmer Republic rejected the offer of evacuation and said to Ambassador Dean that " I have committed this mistake of believing in you , the Americans . " 
 The 10 man command group proceeded to drive vehicles to LZ Hotel , purposely disabling them to block vehicle access from any part of the city , other than the road from the Embassy to the LZ . The command group then proceeded to make contact with King Bird , an orbiting HC @-@ 130 plane of the 56th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron , that would control the flow of the helicopters . 
 At 07 : 43 the first group of helicopters crossed the Cambodian coastline and about one hour later , after traversing 160 kilometres ( 99 mi ) of hostile territory , the initial wave set down on LZ Hotel and the Marines quickly established a defensive perimeter . Large crowds of Cambodians soon gathered , more out of curiosity rather than to interfere . Having established the perimeter defense , the marines began the process of moving the crowds back in order to keep the LZ clear and then began moving the evacuee groups to the waiting CH @-@ 53 helicopters . As LZ Hotel could only hold three CH @-@ 53s at any time , flights arriving after the initial build @-@ up had to be held at Point Oscar , some 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) south of Phnom Penh until called in by " King Bird " . The evacuation proceeded smoothly although the number of evacuees was substantially less than anticipated . The last estimate indicated there would be 590 evacuees , 146 US nationals and 444 Cambodians and third country nationals . HMH @-@ 462 evacuated 84 US nationals and 205 Cambodians and third country nationals . 
 At 09 : 45 , the US Embassy closed . There would be no diplomatic relations between the US and Cambodia again until 11 November 1991 . By 10 : 41 all the evacuees including Ambassador Dean and President <unk> Khoy had been lifted out by helicopters of HMH @-@ 462 . Helicopters of HMH @-@ 463 operating from the USS Hancock then began to land to extract the ground security force . 
 At approximately 10 : 50 , 107 mm rocket fire began impacting in the vicinity of LZ Hotel . Less than 10 minutes later , the LZ also received 82 mm mortar fire . As soon as the Khmer Rouge fire commenced , the controllers in the zone notified the Air Force forward air controllers ( <unk> ) flying overhead in 23d Tactical Air Support Squadron OV @-@ 10s . The <unk> immediately made low passes over the east bank of the Mekong , but could not spot any fire coming from known enemy positions in that location . At 10 : 59 , the last element of 2nd Battalion 4th Marines left the zone and the last marine helicopter landed on the USS Okinawa at 12 : 15 . 
 At 11 : 15 , two USAF HH @-@ 53 Super Jolly Green Giants , from the 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron , as scheduled , extracted the Eagle Pull command element . Small arms fire during the final extraction caused minimal damage to the first aircraft , but a 12 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) machine gun round hit the second helicopter 's tail rotor as it climbed out of the zone . Despite severe vibrations the helicopter made it safely back to Ubon Air Base in Thailand . At 14 : 50 an HMH @-@ 462 CH @-@ 53 launched from the USS Okinawa to carry Ambassador Dean to U @-@ Tapao Air Base in Thailand . 
 On 13 April , the evacuees were flown to U @-@ Tapao Air Base in Thailand on HMH @-@ 462 helicopters and Amphibious Ready Group Alpha proceeded to the South China Sea to rendezvous with Task Force 76 as it stood by to implement Operation Frequent Wind , the evacuation of Saigon . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Henry Kissinger observed in his Vietnam War memoir that the Ford Administration was astonished and shamed by the fact that top Cambodian officials refused to leave the country . These included Premier Long Boret and Lon Non , the Prime Minister 's brother , both of whom were on the Khmer Rouge 's advertised death list . 
 On 17 April 1975 the Khmer Rouge entered Phnom Penh bringing the Cambodian Civil War to an end . Long Boret , Lon Non and other top officials of the Khmer Republic Government were executed at the Cercle Sportif , while FANK troops in the city were disarmed , taken to the Olympic Stadium and executed . 
 For 2nd Battalion 4th Marines and Amphibious Ready Group Alpha , Operation Eagle Pull served as a small @-@ scale dress rehearsal for the more complex Operation Frequent Wind 17 days later . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Operation Eagle Pull is depicted in the film " The Killing Fields " . 
 = Pryor Mountain Mustang = 
 The Pryor Mountain Mustang is a <unk> of Mustang considered to be genetically unique and one of the few strains of horses verified by DNA analysis to be descended from the original Colonial Spanish Horses brought to the Americas by the Spanish . They live on the Pryor Mountains Wild Horse Range located in the Pryor Mountains of Montana and Wyoming in the United States , and are the only Mustang herd remaining in Montana . They are protected by the Wild and Free @-@ Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 ( WFRHBA ) and managed by the Bureau of Land Management ( BLM ) , who has set the optimum herd number at 120 animals . Genetic studies have revealed that the herd exhibits a high degree of genetic diversity and a low degree of inbreeding , and BLM has acknowledged the genetic uniqueness of the herd . Pryor Mountain Mustangs are relatively small horses , exhibit a natural ambling gait , and domesticated Pryor Mountain Mustangs are known for their strength , sure @-@ footedness and stamina . 
 Feral horses are documented as living in the Pryor Mountains by the early 1700s , although they may have been there since the late 1600s . By the late 1800s , thousands of feral horses inhabited the area . In the early 1900s , many of the unbranded horses were rounded up , to allow domesticated livestock to graze the range without competition , and by 1964 there were only around 200 horses left . In 1964 , the BLM announced that the horses would be removed altogether , to the outrage of the public . The controversy continued until 1968 , when the BLM was legally stopped from removing all of the horses , and the area declared a Wild Horse Refuge . After the 1971 signing of the WFRHBA , the BLM spent the 1980s and 1990s conducting population studies and developing management and adoption policies ; during this time , numerous genetic studies were also completed . 
 The BLM management of the herd has included improvements to the range to give the horses additional access to water , and numerous roundups that have resulted in the removal and adoption of hundreds of horses to private individuals , including over 50 horses in 2009 , and another 44 in 2012 . In 2015 , a plan was approved to gather 6 @-@ 12 one and two year old horses annually until the contraceptive vaccine the mares are given can lower birth rates more . This resulted in the most recent gather and removal of 17 horses and 1 foal . Once again , every horse captured was adopted . The Pryor Mountains Wild Horse Range is one of the most accessible areas to view feral horse herds in the United States and tourism to the area has increased in recent years . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 The Pryor Mountain Mustang has a very specific conformation type . The breed generally stands 13 to 15 hands ( 52 to 60 inches , 132 to 152 cm ) high , with an average of 14 to 14 @.@ 2 hands ( 56 to 58 inches , 142 to 147 cm ) . The horses weigh 700 to 800 pounds ( 320 to 360 kg ) on the range , and more if raised in captivity . They exhibit a wide range of solid colors , including bay , black , chestnut , dun , grullo , and blue or red roan . Buckskin coloring is rare but does occur , and pinto coloring can be minimally expressed . The dun @-@ colored horses on the range exhibit primitive markings such as dorsal stripes , transverse stripes across the withers , and horizontal " zebra " stripes on the back of the forelegs . The Pryor Mountains horse 's body is heavy , with strong bones . Manes and tails tend to be long , and the horse 's winter coat is very heavy and often curly . The head is convex ( sometimes called a " Roman nose ) or straight , with wide @-@ set eyes , hooked ears , and a broad forehead that tapers well to the muzzle . The front teeth meet evenly , the upper lip is usually longer than the lower , and the nostrils are small and crescent shaped . The neck is medium in length , and most of the animals have only five lumbar vertebrae ( an anatomical feature common in primitive horses ) — although some have a fifth and sixth vertebrae which are fused . The horse 's shoulders are long and sloping , the withers are prominent , and chests are medium to narrow in width . The croup is generally sloped , and tail @-@ set is low . The hooves are large and very hard . 
 Some Pryor Mountains Mustangs exhibit a natural ambling gait . They are generally intelligent , strong , and sure @-@ footed , and exhibit great stamina . Like all feral horses , they generally avoid human contact , are distrustful , and are easily spooked . However , once they are familiar with an individual , they can exhibit a strong social bond with that individual . Pryor Mountains horses can be broken and ridden , and trained to do any task a domesticated horse can perform . Trained Pryor Mountains horses have a calm temperament , and are alert on trails . 
 The horses form bands or " harems , " in which a single stallion mates and controls a group of about six mares . Another eight to 10 " bachelor " stallions accompany the band at a distance , hoping to win control of it from the stallion or mate with mares . 
 = = History = = 
 Historians and scientists speculate that feral horses have lived on and near Pryor Mountains since at least the late 1600s . Tradition of the Crow people maintains that the horses came to the area by about 1725 . The Eastern Shoshone also inhabited the region during the 1700s . Non @-@ Indian explorers found native people in possession of large numbers of horses as early as 1743 . 
 Thousands of feral horses lived in the area by the time American pioneers began settling near the Pryor Mountains in the late 1800s . Between then and the 1930s , many domesticated horses were turned loose on the range , accidentally or on purpose ; domesticated stallions were turned out to mate with mares on the range with the goal of producing cavalry remounts for the military . With passage of the Taylor Grazing Act of 1934 , cattle and other horses were allowed to graze in the area , and by 1946 , the BLM was formed . Through the 1940s , there were no protections for the wild horses on the range , and loose , unbranded horses were routinely rounded up so as to not compete with cattle for forage . Some were sold to slaughter , others kept for riding . However , with the passage of the Wild Horse Annie Act in 1959 , motor vehicles were prohibited from being used to capture , harass or chase wild horses . By 1964 , there were approximately 200 horses remaining in the area , which were seen as a " symbol of the Old West " by local citizens . That year , the BLM announced its decision to remove all horses from the Pryor Mountains and disperse the herd through public auctions , a move that was strongly opposed by the public . Public opposition to the plan succeeded in delaying any movement against the horses . 
 By 1968 , the wild herd were concentrated mostly on BLM lands owing to previous roundups and construction of boundary fences . That year , the BLM again stated its intention to remove the herds , this time with the possibility of returning a small number ( either 15 or 35 ) to the range . In response to the new announcement , the Pryor Mountain Wild Horse Association ( PMWHA ) was formed with the goal of preventing the roundup , and began working in concert with larger organizations such as the International Society for the Protection of Animals . The BLM argued that the horses were being removed because they were likely to starve , as they had overgrazed their environment , while the PMWHA argued the degradation of the range was not due to the horses and that in fact they were in no danger of starving . The organization further charged that the BLM was acting at the behest of other state and federal organizations who wished to see the horses removed , rather than acting in line with public opinion . The PMWHA was also concerned with the effect that the penning would have on the feral horses . 
 The battle over the Pryor Mountain herd moved to the national level on July 11 , 1968 , when ABC broadcast a special on the horses on the evening news . The public reacted with outrage , and the BLM responded that " no decision had yet been made regarding the horses . " However , by the end of August , a trap to collect the horses had been completed . At the same time , the BLM was unresponsive to efforts by members of the public , senators and officials from the Humane Society of the United States to ascertain final plans regarding the horses . Because of this , court proceedings were begun , and on August 27 , 1968 , a US District Court judge made a decision that had the result of barring the BLM from removing the horses from the range . On September 9 , 1968 , the Secretary of the Interior , Stewart L. Udall , declared the area inhabited by the Pryor Mountain Mustangs as the Pryor Mountain Wild Horse Refuge ( PMWHR ) , in a decision later noted in the Congressional Record . After the creation of the refuge the BLM appointed a committee to study the area and make recommendations regarding appropriate herd numbers . The committee , which met in late 1968 and early 1969 , was made up of range and wildlife experts , local citizens interested in the herds and representatives from several federal , state and private organizations . A boundary adjustment was made to the refuge , adding some land in Wyoming . The final report of the committee , submitted in June 1969 , was that the horses were not in danger of starvation , that overgrazing was likely due to domestic sheep who utilized the land decades earlier , and that horses were the most likely of any species to be able to survive and thrive in the Pryor Mountain environment . On December 18 , 1971 , the Wild and Free @-@ Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 ( WFRHBA ) was signed into law by President Richard M. Nixon . The Act made it a crime for anyone to harass or kill feral horses or burros on federal land , required the departments of the Interior and Agriculture to protect the animals , required studies of the animals ' habits and habitats , and permitted public land to be set aside for their use . The Bureau of Land Management and Forest Service were jointly charged with responsibility for administrating the Act . The National Park Service was also involved in the management of the land . These federal agencies were limited to managing horses only on public lands where " wild horses were documented as being ' presently found ' at the time of the passage of the Act in 1971 . " 
 = = Genetics = = 
 It was widely believed that the Pryor Mountains horses were direct descendants of the Barb horses brought to North America by Juan de Oñate 's expedition to explore America north of the Rio Grande in the early 1600s . Bloodlines may also include American Saddlebred , Canadian , Irish Hobby , and Tennessee Walking horses . In the early 1900s , stallions of Thoroughbred and Arabian ancestry were also turned out onto the range . However , the breeding of the Pryor Mountain herd was in dispute for many years . One horseman hired by the federal government during the 1920s to round up excess feral horses on the range stated , " The whole country around was overrun with thousands of homesteaders ' horses ... but this little band ... were , and are , the genuine Spanish horses and there were about 70 head . I did not try to get them and hoped that no one else ever would . " Other people claimed that the horses were nothing more than local domestic horses which had escaped to the wild . In 1992 , equine geneticist Dr. E. Gus Cothran conducted genetic studies on the herd , and concluded that their primary bloodlines did descend from Spanish Barbs . Since no genetic variants were observed not also seen in domestic horse breeds , in 2010 Cothran also concluded the horses were not a unique species which had survived in North America from prehistoric times . Rather , they were linear descendants of the Spanish Barb , with some evidence of genetic similarity to light racing and riding breeds . The genetic tests also revealed that the Pryor Mountains horses carried a rare allele variant known as " <unk> " that only Spanish horses brought to the Americas also carried . Dr. D. Phillip Sponenberg of the Virginia – Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine , an expert on horse breeds , observed that , physically , the horses conform to the Colonial Spanish Horse type . 
 Genetic studies have also revealed that the herd exhibits a high degree of genetic diversity , and BLM has acknowledged the genetic uniqueness of the herd . Because of the unique genetic makeup of the Pryor Mountains Mustang herd , Cothran concluded in 1992 that " the Pryor herd may be the most significant wild @-@ horse herd remaining in the United States . " Sponenberg agreed , noting , " [ These animals ] don 't exist anywhere else . " This herd was the subject of the 1995 documentary film Cloud : Wild Stallion of the Rockies and its sequel , the 2003 documentary film Cloud 's Legacy : The Wild Stallion Returns . 
 Management of the Pryor Mountains horse herd has focused on fulfilling the Free @-@ Roaming Wild Horse and Burro Act 's requirement that BLM maintain a " thriving natural ecological balance " . In general , BLM initially focused on how many horses the range could support and in maintaining conformity to the Pryor Mountains standard . However , with the development of DNA testing in the mid 1980s , the focus changed to include maintaining the herd 's genetic viability . In 1988 , researchers at Washington State University authored a paper which raised concern that the herd exhibited a lack of genetic diversity , and could be suffering from genetic drift and / or a population bottleneck . BLM contracted with Cothran ( then at the College of Veterinary Medicine at the University of Kentucky , but now at the Texas A & M College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences ) to take random genetic samples of the herd in 1994 , 1997 , and 2001 . Cothran 's analysis found " no evidence of a bottleneck " . Genetic diversity was actually above the mean for feral horse herds in the United States , and just below the mean for domesticated breeds . The BLM , however , interpreted these studies in 2009 to indicate that the genetic diversity of the Pryor Mountains herd is " well above " the mean for domestic breeds . Cothran considered the herd to be in genetic equilibrium , although he cautioned that a minimum of 120 breeding @-@ age animals should be kept on the range to maintain the genetic health of the herd . Research by biologists and veterinarians at Colorado State University , the University of Kentucky , and other colleges found that there is little inbreeding in bands , as the stallions tend to drive off colts when they are about two years old . 
 = = Management = = 
 BLM counts the herd visually about every four years by flying over the range , reporting on each animal found , and using statistical methods to correct for historic <unk> and other problems . In 1984 , BLM set the maximum carrying capacity of the Pryor Mountains Wild Horse Range at 121 adult animals , and revised this to 95 adult animals in 1992 . 
 For years , BLM had also allowed any horse to be adopted from the range . Since adopters favored " pretty " horses , the color genetics of the herd altered so that mostly bays and blacks were left on the range . Adoption procedures changed in 1994 so that now the original colors and patterns of the herd are returning . In 1992 , a private group , the Pryor Mountains Mustang Breeders Association was formed to preserve the gene pool of the herd and establish a registry for Pryor Mountains horses in private hands . In order to be placed on the register , the horse must have a registered sire and dam , have a title issued either by BLM or the Tillett ranch , and have a certificate of blood typing from the Gluck Equine Research Center at the University of Kentucky . As of 2008 , 209 horses in 16 U.S. states and one Canadian province were on the registry . BLM undertook a roundup of the horse herd in 1997 to reduce its numbers , and officials expected to do another in late 2000 when the herd size reached 200 . By August 1999 , there were 180 adult horses and colts on the range . 
 = = = Policy changes and post @-@ 2000 roundups = = = 
 In May 2009 , after several long @-@ term studies of the rangeland , the BLM determined that the range 's maximum carrying capacity was 179 feral horses . This assumed that all BLM land , as well as lands leased from other owners ( public and private ) , would continue to be available to the animals , and that the BLM would be able to manage the horses by using artificial watering sites to encourage the horses to utilize <unk> portions of the range . The BLM also said it would implement other range management techniques , and proposed purchasing 1 @,@ 467 acres ( 594 ha ) of land from the state of Montana , and another 632 acres ( 256 ha ) of private land , to add to the range . 
 At the same time , BLM said it would reduce the herd from its existing 195 adults to 120 . The stated goal was to temporarily remove horses from the refuge to allow the range to recover from the historic overgrazing caused by livestock , not because BLM believed there were too many horses on the range . Sixty percent of the remaining horses would be males , to reduce the rate of population growth . The agency said it would remove 30 horses a year from the herd and stable them at a yearly cost of $ 18 @,@ 000 to $ 21 @,@ 000 until the correct herd size and sex ratios had been reached . Horses to be removed from the herd included those which did not closely fit the conformity type ; which were genetically well represented ; which were 11 to 15 years of age , had sired or foaled , and were not band stallions ; and were between five and 10 years of age or 16 to 20 years of age . Genetic diversity would be measured by visual observation of the herd 's conformity to type using a visual system developed by Dr. Sponenberg , and measures taken to improve genetic diversity if signs of inbreeding occurred . The Cloud Foundation and Front Range Equine Rescue , both feral horse advocacy groups , challenged the roundup in federal court . A federal district court judge delayed the roundup three days to consider their request , but on September 2 , 2009 , rejected the injunction and allowed the roundup to proceed . 
 BLM began its roundup of feral horses on the Pryor Mountains range in early September 2009 . After several days , 130 of 188 feral horses were rounded up . Forty @-@ six horses were put up for adoption , while the freed mares were given a contraceptive vaccine to help keep the herd population down . Also in 2009 , BLM also placed " guzzlers " on the range . A guzzler is a precipitation ( usually rainwater ) collection device which traps water in a storage tank ranging in size from a few to several thousand gallons . The storage tank can be above @-@ ground , partially buried , or below @-@ ground . A mechanical valve releases water into a drinking trough from the storage tanks , allowing animals access to the water . When the valve senses that the water level in the trough is low , it opens and allows more water into the drinking area . Five guzzlers were placed in <unk> areas to encourage the horses to better utilize this forage . 
 In August 2012 , another roundup was completed , resulting in a further 45 horses being removed and adopted out to the public through an auction . In this gather , 38 adults and 7 foals were removed , and the public paid an average price of $ 225 for each horses ; the maximum paid was $ 2 @,@ 300 for a mare and foal combination . During the roundup , 63 mares were treated with contraceptives , and the post @-@ gather herd population was estimated at 133 horses . The price paid for these horses is higher than that paid for horses from most other Mustang herds ; horses removed from unnamed herds in Oregon can be adopted for a walk @-@ up fee of $ 125 . However , it is lower than the price paid for horses from some other popular herds ; horses from the Kiger Mustang herds sometimes sell for over $ 7 @,@ 000 each . As of 2013 , the BLM estimated there to be 145 horses in the Pryor Mountain Wild Horse Range ( PMWHR ) , a number above the " Appropriate Management Level " , which has continued to be set at 120 . The PMWHR is the only Herd Management Area ( a BLM area managed for feral horses and / or burros ) in Montana . There are six additional Herd Areas ( BLM areas that currently have or have had in the past populations of wild horses , but are deemed not suitable for horses ) in the state , but none currently contain horses , leaving the Pryor Mountain Mustangs the only free @-@ roaming mustangs remaining in Montana . 
 In the fall of 2010 , BLM issued a set of draft strategy documents for operating its wild horse programs , and solicited public comment on the plans . After receiving numerous comments , BLM said in February 2011 it would quicken the pace at which it made revisions to its roundup procedures , use of fertility control drugs , and wild horse and burro range land management . The agency also commissioned a study from the National Academies of Science ( NAS ) on wild @-@ horse management . In September 2011 , BLM announced it would begin working with the Humane Society of the United States to develop new practices in herd management and roundup , and increase its emphasis on adoptions and the use of drugs as fertility control to help better manage its wild horse herds . The results of the study by the NAS were released in June 2013 , and covered a wide variety of issues , including the carrying capacity of wild horse and burro ranges , wild horse and burro population growth , and best practices in fertility control . Overall , the NAS was critical of the BLM , saying that herd populations were increasing at an " unsustainable rate " and that the " BLM fails to effectively use contraception tools " , criticizing the methods used for estimating populations and available forage , and stating that the agency has failed to communicate appropriately with the public . This report applied to all BLM @-@ managed equine populations , and was not specific to the PMWHR . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 The Pryor Mountains feral horse herd is one of the most accessible feral horse herds in the United States . Tourism to the range increased steadily in the mid to late 2000s . The range can be easily accessed via a paved road which parallels Bighorn Canyon , and which provides excellent viewing of the horses . The range can also be accessed from Laurel , Montana , by traveling south on U.S. Route 310 and then taking the Forest Service gravel road to <unk> Overlook . Some of the range may be accessed via the Crow Indian Reservation . A trespass permit from the Crow Nation is required to cross tribal land or exit a vehicle while on tribal land . Hiking on the Pryor Mountains Wild Horse range is good , but there are no maintained or marked trails and ( as of 2000 ) no guidebooks to the area . 
 = Can 't B Good = 
 " Can 't B Good " is a song by American recording artist Janet Jackson , taken from her tenth studio album Discipline ( 2008 ) . The song was written and produced by D. DoRohn Gough and Ne @-@ Yo , and was released as the fourth and final single from Discipline on March 18 , 2008 . The song is a soulful , " jazzy " R & B track about Jackson 's relationship with Jermaine Dupri . 
 The song received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who praised it for being smooth , tender and lovely , and picked the song as one of the best tracks on Discipline , with some others comparing the song to " Human Nature " ( 1983 ) , performed by her brother Michael Jackson . Commercially , the song only managed to reach number 76 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Can 't B Good " was written and produced by D. DoRohn Gough and Ne @-@ Yo . It was recorded between 2007 and 2008 at <unk> Studios , in Atlanta , Georgia . Although Jackson didn 't write the song , Jackson described " Can 't B Good " as a song reflecting her seven @-@ year relationship with songwriter / producer Jermaine Dupri , saying , " I 'd been hurt before , and I was trying to protect myself . I 'm glad I allowed myself to accept it . He 's very attentive and affectionate , a beautiful soul " . 
 Princess P. from MWZA described the lyrics as " standard falling @-@ in @-@ love @-@ too @-@ deep far " , with the <unk> of the snare contrasting heavily with the layers of cooing vocals . Musically , the song is a midtempo " smooth and jazzy " R & B ballad , featuring thundering bass , piano , with eighties keyboard sounds and cooing harmonies . Princess P. from MWZA wrote the song resembles " Aaliyah 's " Rock the Boat " with a more " punishing " beat , Michael Jackson 's " Butterflies " ( 2001 ) and Janet Jackson 's own track " Spending Time With You " from Damita Jo ( 2004 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Can 't B Good " received mostly positive reviews from music critics . Andy Kellman from AllMusic picked the song as one of the album 's best tracks , highlighting that " it 's a descendent of her brother Michael 's ' Can 't Help It , ' with that gentle and affecting self @-@ examination that only a Jackson can do so well . " Chuck Taylor of Billboard magazine wrote that " ' Can 't B Good ' serves up a smooth , jazzy groove and Jackson 's soft , supple vocal , fluffed with multiple background layers that duly merit adult R & B love . " Princess P. from MWZA saw that , " The layers pile and pile so that by the bridge , the song is virtually dizzying " , calling it " extremely well @-@ produced . " The Boston Globe writer Joan Anderman perceived the song is " eerily reminiscent of ' Human Nature ' , one of brother Michael 's most elegant records . " Margeaux Watson of Entertainment Weekly agreed , calling a " tender " throwback to the same song . 
 Los Angeles Times ' Ann Powers called it " a waterfall of mixed emotions enfolding a sunlit morning @-@ after , " and " the most emotionally vulnerable ballad Jackson 's recorded in years . " Dan Gennoe of Yahoo ! Music wrote that the song " proves that ballads don 't have to be inane and that she doesn 't have to spell out exactly where she wants it and how to be sexy . " Glenn Gamboa from Newsday praised the track , writing that it could be one of her best songs ever . Caroline Sullivan , writing for The Guardian , simply wrote that " Can 't B Good " is completely lovely . Andy Battaglia of The A.V. Club called it a " majestic " song produced by Ne @-@ Yo . Tom Young of BBC Music called it " a potential diamond . " For Nick Levine from Digital Spy , the song was created to recall classic Jackson ballads like " Come Back to Me " ( 1990 ) and " Let 's Wait Awhile " ( 1987 ) , but failed to do so , due to its lack of melody . Chad Grischow of IGN was less favorable , calling it " cheesy late @-@ eighties ballad , featuring wafer @-@ thin breathy vocals that sounds like someone calling you to their hospital bed rather than the bedroom . " 
 = = Remix and chart performance = = 
 A remix of the song was released , featuring Jamaican rapper Red Rat , and produced by <unk> . " Can 't B Good " was the fifth most added song on Radio & Records 's Urban AC panel , where it debuted at number 40 on R & R 's Urban AC Chart for the chart week dated March 28 , 2008 . The song debuted and peaked at number 40 on the Billboard Hot Adult R & B Airplay chart the week ending April 5 , 2008 . It peaked at number 76 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Janet Jackson – vocals 
 David DoRohn Gough - songwriter , producer 
 Shaffer Smith - songwriter , producer 
 Jermaine Dupri - vocals production 
 Manuel Seal - vocals production 
 Ian Cross - vocals production , mixing assistant 
 Phil Tan - mixing 
 John Houghkirk - engineer 
 Carlos Oyanedel – assistant 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Discipline album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = SMS Ägir = 
 SMS Ägir was the second and final member of the Odin class of coastal defense ships ( Küstenpanzerschiffe ) built for the Imperial German Navy . She had one sister ship , Odin . Ägir was named for the <unk> god , and was built by the Kaiserliche Werft Danzig shipyard between 1893 and 1896 . She was armed with a main battery of three 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) guns . She served in the German fleet throughout the 1890s and was rebuilt in 1901 – 1903 . She served in the VI Battle Squadron after the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but saw no action . Ägir was demobilized in 1915 and used as a tender thereafter . After the war , she was rebuilt as a merchant ship and served in this capacity until December 1929 , when she was wrecked on the island of Gotland . 
 = = Design = = 
 Ägir was 79 meters ( 259 ft 2 in ) long overall and had a beam of 15 @.@ 20 m ( 49 ft 10 in ) and a maximum draft of 5 @.@ 61 m ( 18 ft 5 in ) . She displaced 3 @,@ 754 tonnes ( 3 @,@ 695 long tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two vertical 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines . Steam for the engines was provided by eight coal @-@ fired Thornycroft boilers . The ship 's propulsion system provided a top speed of 15 @.@ 1 knots ( 28 @.@ 0 km / h ; 17 @.@ 4 mph ) . She carried 370 t ( 360 long tons ; 410 short tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of approximately 1 @,@ 490 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 760 km ; 1 @,@ 710 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Because she had twice the number of electrical generators as her sister , Ägir was nicknamed " <unk> Anna " ( Electric Anna ) . The ship had a crew of 20 officers and 256 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with three 24 cm K L / 35 guns mounted in three single gun turrets . Two were placed side by side forward , and the third was located aft of the main superstructure . They were supplied with a total of 204 rounds of ammunition . The ship was also equipped with ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns in single mounts . Ägir also carried three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , two in swivel mounts on the deck amidships and one in the bow , submerged below the waterline . The ship was protected by an armored belt that was 240 mm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships , and an armored deck that was 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick . The conning tower had 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Ägir was laid down at the Kaiserliche Werft shipyard in Kiel in 1892 . She was launched on 3 April 1895 and completed on 15 January 1896 , after which she underwent a somewhat lengthy period of sea trials . The ship was commissioned into the German fleet on 15 October 1896 , where she served on active duty for the entirety of her peacetime career . During the 1900 summer maneuvers , Ägir served in the simulated hostile squadron , alongside Heimdall , Hildebrand , and Siegfried . The maneuvers lasted from 15 August to 15 September . 
 In 1901 , Ägir was taken in hand at the Kaiserliche Werft in Danzig for an extensive reconstruction . Her old boilers were replaced with eight new Marine type boilers and her length was increased to 86 @.@ 15 m ( 282 @.@ 6 ft ) . This increased her displacement to 4 @,@ 376 t ( 4 @,@ 307 long tons ; 4 @,@ 824 short tons ) at full load . The lengthened hull , which improved her hydrodynamic shape , and the improved boilers increased her speed by a full knot , to 15 @.@ 5 knots ( 28 @.@ 7 km / h ; 17 @.@ 8 mph ) . Her coal storage was increased to 580 t ( 570 long tons ; 640 short tons ) , which allowed her to steam for an additional 800 nmi ( 1 @,@ 500 km ; 920 mi ) . The modernization work was completed by 1903 , at which point she returned to active service . 
 At the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , Ägir was assigned to the VI Battle Squadron , along with her sister Odin and the six Siegfried @-@ class coastal defense ships . The Squadron was disbanded on 31 August 1915 to free up the ships ' crews for more important tasks . Ägir was thereafter used as a barracks ship in Wilhelmshaven through to the end of the war . She was stricken from the naval register on 17 June 1919 and sold . In 1922 , she was rebuilt as a merchant ship at the Deutsche Werke shipyard in Rüstringen . She was operated by A. Bernstein Co . , out of Hamburg . She continued in this role until she was wrecked on the island of Gotland off the Karlsö lighthouse on 8 December 1929 . Her bow ornament is preserved at the Laboe Naval Memorial . 
 = Architecture of Madagascar = 
 The architecture of Madagascar is unique in Africa , bearing strong resemblance to the construction norms and methods of Southern Borneo from which the earliest inhabitants of Madagascar are believed to have immigrated . Throughout Madagascar and the Kalimantan region of Borneo , most traditional houses follow a rectangular rather than round form , and feature a steeply sloped , peaked roof supported by a central pillar . 
 Differences in the predominant traditional construction materials used serve as the basis for much of the diversity in Malagasy architecture . Locally available plant materials were the earliest materials used and remain the most common among traditional communities . In intermediary zones between the central highlands and humid coastal areas , hybrid variations have developed that use cob and sticks . Wood construction , once common across the island , declined as a growing human population destroyed greater swaths of virgin rainforest for slash and burn agriculture and zebu cattle pasture . The Zafimaniry communities of the central highland montane forests are the only Malagasy ethnic group who have preserved the island 's original wooden architectural traditions ; their craft was added to the UNESCO list of Intangible Cultural Heritage in 2003 . As wood became scarce over time , wooden houses became the privilege of the noble class in certain communities , as exemplified by the homes of the Merina nobility in the 19th century Kingdom of Madagascar . The use of stone as a building material was traditionally limited to the construction of tombs , a significant feature of the cultural landscape in Madagascar due to the prominent position occupied by ancestors in Malagasy cosmology . The island has produced several distinct traditions in tomb architecture : among the Mahafaly of the southwest coast , the top of tombs may be stacked with the skulls of sacrificed zebu and spiked with aloalo , decoratively carved tomb posts , while among the Merina , aristocrats historically constructed a small wooden house on top of the tomb to symbolize their andriana status and provide an earthly space to house their ancestors ' spirits . 
 Traditional styles of architecture in Madagascar have been impacted over the past two hundred years by the increasing influence of European styles . A shift toward brick construction in the Highlands began during the reign of Queen Ranavalona II ( 1868 – 1883 ) based on models introduced by missionaries of the London Missionary Society and contacts with other foreigners . Foreign influence further expanded following the collapse of the monarchy and French colonization of the island in 1896 . Modernization over the past several decades has increasingly led to the abandonment of certain traditional norms related to the external orientation and internal layout of houses and the use of certain customary building materials , particularly in the Highlands . Among those with means , foreign construction materials and techniques – namely imported concrete , glass and wrought iron features – have gained in popularity , to the detriment of traditional practices . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The architecture of Madagascar is unique in Africa , bearing strong resemblance to the architecture of southern Borneo from which the earliest inhabitants of Madagascar are believed to have emigrated . Traditional construction in this part of Borneo , also known as South Kalimantan , is distinguished by rectangular houses raised on piles . The roof , which is supported by a central pillar , is steeply sloped ; the gable beams cross to form roof horns that may be decoratively carved . The central Highlands of Madagascar are populated by the Merina , peoples who bear strong physiological and cultural resemblance to their Kalimantan ancestors ; here , the traditional wooden houses of the aristocracy feature a central pillar ( andry ) supporting a steeply sloped roof decorated with roof horns ( <unk> @-@ trano ) . In the southeast of Madagascar , actual zebu horns were traditionally affixed to the gable peak . Throughout Madagascar , houses are rectangular with a gabled roof as in Kalimantan , central pillars are widespread , and in all but a handful of regions , traditional homes are built on piles in a manner handed down from generation to generation , regardless of whether the feature is suited to local conditions . 
 Certain cosmological and symbolic elements are common across Indonesian and Malagasy architecture as well . The central house pillar is sacred in Kalimantan and Madagascar alike , and in both places , upon constructing a new house this pillar was often traditionally anointed with blood . The features of the building or its dimensions ( length , size , and particularly the height ) are often symbolically indicative of the status of its occupants or the importance of its purpose on both islands . Likewise , both Madagascar and Borneo have a tradition of partially above @-@ ground tomb construction and the inhabitants of both islands practice the carving of decorative wooden funerary posts , called aloalo in western Madagascar and <unk> in the <unk> dialect of Borneo . 
 = = Plant @-@ based construction = = 
 Dwellings made of plant material are common in the coastal regions and were once commonly used throughout the Highlands as well . The types of plants available in a given locality determine the building material and style of construction . The vast majority of homes made of plant material are rectangular , low ( one @-@ story ) houses with a peaked roof and are often built on low stilts . These architectural features are nearly identical to those found in parts of Indonesia . Materials used for construction include reeds ( near rivers ) , rushes ( in the southwest around Toliara ) , endemic succulents ( as fencing in the south ) , wood ( in the south and among the Zafimaniry , and formerly common in the Highlands ) , bamboo ( especially in the eastern rain forests ) , papyrus ( formerly in the Highlands around Lake Alaotra ) , grasses ( ubiquitous ) , palms ( ubiquitous but prevalent in the west around Mahajanga ) and raffia ( especially in the north and northeast ) . For much of the length of the eastern coast of Madagascar bordering the Indian Ocean , architecture is highly uniform : nearly all traditional homes in this region are built on low stilts and are roofed with thatch made of the fronds of the traveler 's palm ( ravinala madagascariensis ) . 
 The stilts , floor and walls are commonly made of the trunk of this same plant , typically after pounding it flat to make wide planks ( for floors and roofing ) or narrow strips ( for walls ) . These strips are affixed vertically to the frame ; the raffia plant is often used in the same way , in place of the traveler 's palm , in the north . When bamboo is used in place of ravinala , the long pounded sheets are often woven together to create walls with a checker @-@ like pattern . 
 These traditional homes have no chimney . Their floor is covered in a woven mat with stones heaped in one corner where wood fires can be burnt to cook food ; the smoke that accumulates blackens the ceiling and interior walls over time . The doorways of these homes were traditionally left open or could be shut by a woven screen held closed with a leather strap ; today the entryway is frequently hung with a fabric curtain . Variations on this basic template can be found in all coastal regions using locally available material . The largest of the traditional coastal houses are found in the southeast among the Antemoro , Tanala and <unk> peoples , where homes can reach 18 ' long , 9 ' wide and 15 ' high . Elsewhere along the coast homes are much smaller , averaging 10 ' long , 8 ' wide and 9 ' high . 
 = = Wood @-@ based construction = = 
 It is believed that wood construction was formerly common in many parts of Madagascar but it has all but disappeared due to deforestation . This is especially true in the Highlands where , until recently , wood had been a building material reserved for the aristocratic class due to its increasing rarity , leaving the lower classes to construct in other locally available materials such as reeds and grasses ; sticks and branches are occasionally used where available , creating sporadic villages of wood typically within proximity to forest reserves . While the wooden architectural tradition among the aristocracy of the Merina has died out , at least two ethnic groups can be said to have a continuing tradition of plank wood architecture : the Zafimaniry in the central Highlands , and the Antandroy in the far south . Each of these three traditions is described below . 
 = = = Merina aristocratic tradition = = = 
 Among the Merina of the central Highlands , the <unk> ( <unk> ) people of the southeastern <unk> region , and several other ethnic groups , deforestation rendered wood a valuable construction material only to be used by aristocrats . Indeed , its traditional association with the royal andriana class led King Andrianampoinimerina ( 1787 – 1810 ) to issue a royal edict forbidding construction in stone , brick or earth within the limits of Antananarivo and codifying a tradition in which only the houses of nobles were constructed from wood , while those of peasants were made from local plant materials . This tradition historically existed among a number of ethnic groups in Madagascar , particularly along the eastern coast where the preservation of rainforests continues to facilitate access to wood for construction . 
 Traditional peasants ' houses throughout Imerina featured a thick central pillar ( andry ) that supported the roof beam and a smaller upright beam at each corner extending into the ground to stabilize the structure . Unlike most coastal houses , Highland homes have never been raised on stilts but have always sat flush to the ground . To the south of the central pillar , in the area designated for sleeping and cooking , wooden or bamboo planks were occasionally installed for flooring , or woven mats were laid on the packed earth floor , which extended north past the pillar . Traditionally , the bed of the head of the family was in the southeast corner of the house . The northern area was distinguished by the hearth , delineated by three oblong stones set vertically into the ground . Houses and tombs were aligned on a north @-@ south axis with the entrance on the west face . The north portion of the house was reserved for males and guests , while the south was for women , children and those of inferior rank . The northeast corner was sacred , reserved for prayer and offerings of tribute to the ancestors . 
 The houses of the nobles were constructed according to these same cultural norms , with several additions . They were distinguishable from the outside by their walls made of upright wooden planks and the long wooden horns ( tandrotrano ) formed by the crossing of the roof beams at each end of the roof peak . The length of the tandrotrano was indicative of rank : the longer the length , the higher the status of the noble family that lived within . The interior of the building was also somewhat modified , often featuring three central pillars rather than one and occasionally a wooden platform bed raised high off the ground . 
 After Andrianampoinimerina 's edicts regarding construction materials in the capital were revoked in the late 1860s , wooden construction was all but abandoned in Imerina and older wooden houses were rapidly replaced with new brick homes inspired by LMS missionaries ' British @-@ style dwellings . The tandrotrano horns were gradually replaced by a simple decorative finial installed at the two ends of the roof peak . Other architectural norms such as the north @-@ south orientation , central pillar and interior layout of homes were abandoned , and the presence of finials on roof peaks is no longer indicative of a particular social class . Classic examples of Highland wooden architecture of the aristocratic class were preserved in the buildings of the Rova compound of Antananarivo ( destroyed in a fire in 1995 but under reconstruction ) and the walled compound at Ambohimanga , location of the wooden palaces of King Andrianampoinimerina and Queen Ranavalona I. Ambohimanga , arguably the most culturally significant remaining example of the wooden architecture of the Highlands aristocracy , was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2001 . 
 = = = Zafimaniry traditions = = = 
 The Zafimaniry inhabit the heavily forested , rainy and temperate region of the Highlands to the east of <unk> . Their homes are rectangular and large ( 15 ' long , 12 ' wide and 18 ' high ) with a peaked roof , overhanging eaves , and wooden windows and doors . Many of the same standards found in the aristocratic architectural traditions of Imerina are present in the Zafimaniry structures , including the central wooden pillar supporting the roof beam , exclusive use of a tongue and groove joining technique and the orientation of building features such as windows , doors and the interior layout . Zafimaniry houses are often elaborately decorated with carved , symmetrical , abstract patterns that are rich in complex spiritual and mythological symbolism . The architecture of the houses found in this region are considered to be representative of the architectural style that predominated throughout the Highlands prior to deforestation , and as such , they represent the last vestiges of a historic tradition and a significant element of Malagasy cultural heritage . For this reason , the <unk> knowledge of the Zafimaniry was added in 2003 to the UNESCO list of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity . 
 = = = Antandroy traditions = = = 
 By contrast , the Antandroy inhabit the Madagascar spiny thickets , an extremely dry and hot region in the south of Madagascar where unique forms of drought @-@ resistant plants have evolved and thrived . Their homes are traditionally square ( not rectangular ) , raised on low stilts , topped with a peaked roof and constructed of vertically @-@ hung planks of wood affixed to a wooden frame . These homes traditionally had no windows and featured three wooden doors : the front door was the women 's entrance , the door at the rear of the house was for children , and the third door was used by the men . Fences are often constructed around Antandroy houses using prickly @-@ pear cactus ( <unk> ) or lengths of indigenous succulents from the surrounding spiny forests . 
 = = Earth @-@ based construction = = 
 In the central Highlands , power struggles between the Merina and <unk> principalities and later amongst Merina principalities over the centuries inspired the development of the fortified town in Imerina , the central region of the Highlands of Madagascar . The first of these , the ancient Imerina capital of Alasora , was fortified by 16th @-@ century king Andriamanelo , who surrounded the town with thick cob walls ( <unk> , made from the mud and dry rice stalks gathered from nearby paddies ) and deep trenches ( hadivory ) to protect the dwellings inside . The entryway through the town wall was protected by an enormous stone disk ( vavahady ) – five feet in diameter or more – shaded by fig trees ( <unk> ) symbolic of royalty . The town gate was opened by laboriously rolling the vavahady away from the entryway each morning and back into place again in the evening , a task that required a team of men to accomplish it . This fortified town model was adopted throughout Imerina and is well represented at the historic village of Ambohimanga . 
 = = = Foreign influences = = = 
 Protestant Missionary James Cameron of the London Missionary Society is believed to have been the first in Madagascar to demonstrate how local cob building material could be used to create sun @-@ dried bricks in 1826 . In 1831 , Jean Laborde introduced brick roof tiles that soon began replacing rice stalk thatch in Antananarivo and the surrounding areas , and disseminated the technique of using a kiln to bake bricks . 
 Foreigners were responsible for several architectural innovations that blended the traditions of Highlands architecture with European sensibilities . In 1819 , Louis Gros designed the Tranovola for Radama I in the Rova complex , introducing the wraparound veranda supported by exterior columns . Jean Laborde designed the Queen 's Palace in the Rova ( built 1839 – 1841 ) using this same model on an even grander scale by enlarging the building and adding a third @-@ story veranda . The new wooden buildings constructed by Gros and Laborde transformed the tandrotrano of traditional aristocratic Merina homes into the a decoratively carved post affixed at each end of the gable peak . 
 = = = Local innovations = = = 
 In 1867 , restrictions were relaxed on the aristocracy 's use of stone and brick as building materials , before all restrictions on construction were abolished in 1869 by Queen Ranavalona II , who had already commissioned Jean Laborde in 1860 to encase the exterior of her wooden palace at the Rova in stone . The building took its final form in 1872 after James Cameron added stone towers to each corner of the palace . The queen converted to Christianity in 1869 and that same year the London Missionary Society commissioned James Cameron to construct a private home for its missionaries . He drew his inspiration from the work of Gros and Laborde to develop a multi @-@ story wooden house with veranda and columns . This model exploded in popularity throughout Antananarivo and surrounding areas as an architectural style for the aristocracy , who had to that point continued to inhabit simple homes similar to the wooden palace of Andrianampoinimerina at Ambohimanga . These newly favored brick houses often featured shortened tandrotrano and elaborately carved verandas . These homes can naturally range in color from deep red to almost white depending on the characteristics of the earth used in its construction . 
 Over time , and particularly with the colonization of Madagascar by the French , these earthen houses ( known as trano gasy – " Malagasy house " ) underwent constant evolution . The simplest form of earthen house is one or more stories tall , rectangular , and features a thatched roof with slightly overhanging eaves to direct rain away from the foundation and thereby prevent its erosion . Wealthier families replace the thatch with clay roofing tiles and construct a veranda on the west face of the building supported by four slender equidistant columns ; this design is even more effective at protecting the building 's foundations from the eroding effects of rainfall . Further expansion often entails the enclosure of the western veranda in wood and the construction of an open veranda on the eastern face of the building , and so forth , leading to wrap @-@ around verandas , the connection of two separate buildings with a covered passage , the incorporation of French wrought @-@ iron grills or glass panels into verandas , the application of painted concrete over the brick surface and other innovations . In suburban and rural zones , the ground floor of the trano gasy is often reserved as a pen for livestock , while the family inhabits the upper floors . The entrance typically faces west ; the kitchen is often to the south , while the family sleeps in the northern part of the building . This configuration is consistent with that seen in the traditional Zafimaniry houses and reflects traditional cosmology . 
 = = Mixed cob construction = = 
 On the eastern side of Madagascar , there is virtually no zone of transition between the earthen houses of the Highlands and the dwellings made of plant materials common to the coastal regions . In the vast and sparsely populated expanses between the Highlands and the western coastal areas , however , inhabitants utilize locally available materials to construct dwellings that bear features of both regions . Most often houses are small – one room and only one story high – constructed of a skeleton of horizontally arranged sticks affixed to the wooden house frame as pictured in the preceding section on wooden construction . But unlike coastal homes where this stick skeleton would serve as a base for affixing plant material to form walls , earthen cob may be packed into the framework instead . The roof is thatched to complete the dwelling . These intermediary houses are also often distinguished by the presence of shortened Highlands @-@ style wooden columns on the western face to support the elongated eave of the peaked roof , much as they support the verandas of the larger homes of Imerina . The floor is typically packed dirt and may be covered with woven mats of grasses or raffia . 
 = = Tomb construction = = 
 According to the traditional beliefs of many Malagasy ethnic groups , one attains the status of " ancestor " after death . It is often believed that ancestors continue to watch over and shape events on Earth and can intervene on behalf of ( or interfere with ) the living . As a consequence , ancestors are to be revered : prayers and sacrifices to honor or appease them are common , as well as the observation of the local fady ( taboos ) the ancestors may have established in life . Gestures of respect , such as throwing the first <unk> of a new bottle of rum into the northeast corner of the room to share it with the ancestors , are practiced throughout the island . The most visible emblem of the respect due to ancestors is the construction of the elaborate family tombs that dot the countryside in much of Madagascar . 
 = = = Earliest burial practices = = = 
 Traditionally , the majority of Malagasy ethnic groups did not construct solid tombs for their dead . Rather , the bodies of the deceased were left in a designated natural area to decompose . Among the Bara people of the southern arid plains , for instance , tombs may be built into natural features such as rock outcroppings or hillsides by placing the bodies within and partially or entirely sealing the space with stacked stones or zebu skulls . Alternately , among the Tanala , the deceased may be placed in coffins made from hollowed @-@ out logs and left in caves or a sacred grove of trees , sometimes covered over by wooden planks held down by small piles of stones . It is said the Vazimba , the earliest inhabitants of Madagascar , submerged their dead in the waters of a designated bog , river , lake or estuary , which was thereby considered sacred for that purpose . The practice also existed among the earliest Merina , who submerged their dead chiefs in canoes into Highland bogs or other designated waters . Where tombs were built , minor variation in form and placement from one ethnic group to the next is overshadowed by common features : the structure is partially or fully subterranean , typically rectangular in design and made of stone that is either stacked loosely or cemented with masonry . Among the Merina and Betsileo , some early stone tombs and burial sites were indicated by upright , unmarked standing stones . 
 = = = Islamic origins of tomb construction = = = 
 The earliest known rectangular stone tombs on Madagascar were most likely built by Arab settlers around the 14th century in the northwestern part of the island . Similar models emerged later among western ( i.e. Sakalava , Mahafaly ) and highlands ( i.e. Merina , Betsileo ) peoples , first using <unk> stones and heaped or packed earth before transitioning toward masonry . In the Highlands , the transition to masonry was preceded by the construction of tombs from massive stone slabs collectively hauled by community members to the tomb site . Late 18th century Merina king Andrianampoinimerina is said to have encouraged the construction of such tombs , observing " A house is for a lifetime but a tomb is for eternity . " 
 = = = Highlands traditions = = = 
 In the Highlands of Imerina , the above @-@ ground entrances of ancient tombs were originally marked by standing stones and the walls were formed of loosely stacked flat stones . Examples of these ancient tombs can be found at some of the twelve sacred hills of Imerina . Where a body was not able to be retrieved for burial ( as in times of war ) , a tall , unmarked standing stone ( <unk> , or " male stone " ) was sometimes traditionally erected in memory of the deceased . Andrianampoinimerina promoted more elaborate and costly tomb construction as a worthy expense for honoring one 's ancestors . He also declared that the highest Merina andriana ( noble ) sub @-@ castes would enjoy the privilege of constructing a small house on top of a tomb to distinguish them from the tombs of lower castes . The two highest andriana sub @-@ castes , the <unk> and the Zazamarolahy , built tomb houses called trano masina ( " sacred house " ) , while the tomb houses of the Andriamasinavalona were called trano <unk> ( " cold house " ) . These houses were identical to standard wooden nobles ' houses except for the fact that they had no windows and no hearth . While the lamba @-@ wrapped remains were laid to rest on stone slabs in the tomb below , the deceased 's valuable possessions such as gold and silver coins , elegant silk lambas , decorative objects and more were placed in the trano masina or trano <unk> , which was often decorated much like a regular room with comfortable furniture and refreshments such as rum and water for the deceased 's spirit to enjoy . The trano masina of King Radama I , which burned with other structures in the 1995 fire at the Rova palace compound in Antananarivo , was said to be the richest known . 
 Today , tombs may be constructed using traditional methods and materials or incorporate modern innovations such as concrete . Inside , superimposed slabs of stone or concrete line the walls . The bodies of the ancestors of an individual family are wrapped in silk shrouds and laid to sleep on these slabs . Among the Merina , Betsileo and <unk> , the remains are periodically removed for the famadihana , a celebration in honor of the ancestors , wherein the remains are re @-@ wrapped in fresh shrouds amid extravagant communal festivities before being once again laid to rest in the tomb . The significant expense associated with tomb construction , funerals and reburial ceremonies honors the ancestors even as it counters the emergence of unequal wealth distribution in traditional communities . 
 = = = Southern and western traditions = = = 
 The tombs found in the southwest of Madagascar are among the most striking and distinctive . Like those in the Highlands they are generally rectangular and partially subterranean ; modern tombs may incorporate concrete in addition to ( or in place of ) traditional stone . They are distinguished from Highlands tombs by their elaborate decoration : images may be painted on the exterior of the tomb , recalling events in an ancestor 's life . The roof of the tomb may be stacked with the horns of zebu sacrificed in the ancestor 's honor at their funeral , and numerous aloalo — wooden funerary posts carved with symbolic patterns or images representing events in the life of the deceased — may be planted on top . The tombs of the Mahafaly people are especially famed for this type of construction . Among the Sakalava of the western coast , aloalo may be topped with erotic carvings evocative of the cycle of birth , life and death . 
 = = Modern architecture = = 
 Foreign architectural influences , having arisen through increased European contact over the course of the 19th century , intensified dramatically with the advent of French colonization in 1896 . Over the past several decades , the increasing availability of relatively inexpensive modern construction materials imported from China and elsewhere has further reinforced a growing trend in urban areas away from traditional architectural styles in favor of more durable but generic structures using industrially produced materials such as concrete and sheet metal . Certain modern innovations may be more highly esteemed than others . In the <unk> region , for instance , corrugated sheet metal roofing was typically the least expensive and prestigious and most common addition to a traditional house . The replacement of locally sourced wood frames with factory @-@ milled lumber was the next most common house modification , followed by the laying of a concrete foundation . Houses built entirely of concrete with glass windows and imported decorative balcony railings and window bars implied great wealth and the highest social status . Although low income levels have served to preserve traditional construction among the majority of the population of Madagascar , due to the prestige associated with modern architectural innovations , traditional construction is often abandoned as income increases . 
 A limited number of recently constructed homes in Antananarivo attempt to blend Malagasy architectural traditions with the comforts of modern house construction . These hybrids resemble traditional brick Highlands houses from the exterior , but use modern materials and construction techniques to efficiently incorporate electricity , plumbing , air conditioning and current kitchen features in a fully contemporary interior . This innovation is exemplified in the recent residential development at " Tana Water Front " in the <unk> district of downtown Antananarivo . 
 = Olympus scandal = 
 The Olympus scandal was precipitated on 14 October 2011 when British @-@ born Michael Woodford was suddenly ousted as chief executive of international optical equipment manufacturer , Olympus Corporation . He had been company president for six months , and two weeks prior had been promoted to chief executive officer , when he exposed " one of the biggest and longest @-@ running loss @-@ hiding arrangements in Japanese corporate history " , according to the Wall Street Journal . Tsuyoshi Kikukawa , the board chairman , who had appointed Woodford to these positions , again assumed the title of CEO and president . The incident raised concern about the endurance of tobashi schemes , and the strength of corporate governance in Japan . 
 Apparently irregular payments for acquisitions had resulted in very significant asset impairment charges in the company 's accounts , and this was exposed in an article in the Japanese financial magazine FACTA and had come to Woodford 's attention . Japanese press speculated on a connection to Yakuza ( Japanese organised crime syndicates ) . Olympus defended itself against allegations of impropriety . 
 Despite Olympus ' denials , the matter quickly snowballed into a corporate corruption scandal over concealment ( called tobashi ) of more than 117 @.@ 7 billion yen ( $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ) of investment losses and other dubious fees and other payments dating back to the late 1980s and suspicion of covert payments to criminal organisations . On 26 October , Kikukawa was replaced by Shuichi Takayama as chairman , president , and CEO . On 8 November 2011 , the company admitted that the company 's accounting practice was " inappropriate " and that money had been used to cover losses on investments dating to the 1990s . The company blamed the inappropriate accounting on former president Tsuyoshi Kikukawa , auditor Hideo Yamada and executive vice @-@ president Hisashi Mori . 
 By 2012 the scandal had developed into one of the biggest and longest @-@ lived loss @-@ concealing financial scandals in the history of corporate Japan ; it had wiped 75 – 80 % off the company 's stock market valuation , led to the resignation of much of the board , investigations across Japan , the UK and US , the arrest of 11 past or present Japanese directors , senior managers , auditors and bankers of Olympus for alleged criminal activities or cover @-@ up , and raised considerable turmoil and concern over Japan 's prevailing corporate governance and transparency and the Japanese financial markets . Woodford received a reported £ 10 million ( $ 16 m ) in damages from Olympus for defamation and wrongful dismissal in 2012 ; around the same time , Olympus also announced it would shed 2 @,@ 700 jobs ( 7 % of its workforce ) and around 40 percent of its 30 manufacturing plants by 2015 to reduce its cost base . 
 = = Background = = 
 Olympus Corporation , a major Japanese manufacturer of optical equipment listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange had , according to its accounts for the year ended 31 March 2011 , consolidated net sales of ¥ 847 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 10 @.@ 6 billion ) in the year , and total shareholders ' equity of ¥ 262 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 3 @.@ 3 billion ) . The group employs close to 40 @,@ 000 people around the world . Its assets of ¥ 1 trillion ( US $ 13 @.@ 3 billion ) as at 31 March 2011 included ¥ 175 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 2 billion ) of goodwill , an intangible asset . Under the leadership of Tsuyoshi Kikukawa , who became president in 2001 , the company 's revenues increased from ¥ 467 billion to ¥ 847 billion while the profits were a relatively constant ¥ 35 billion . 
 During the 1980s , many Japanese corporations relied on investments to bolster dwindling profits , particularly in its exports which had been eroded by a strong yen . Toshiro Shimoyama , Olympus president from 1984 to 1993 , admitted to the Nikkei industrial daily newspaper in 1986 : " When the main business is struggling , we need to earn through <unk> " ( meaning financial engineering ) . Olympus invested in financial derivatives and other risky investments to boost profits . However , Shimoyama said he " does not remember " any attempt to conceal losses ( tobashi ) during his tenure as president : " As president it wasn 't the case where all financial reports would come to me , so I have no memory . During that time Masatoshi Kishimoto was the treasurer ... I wouldn 't have heard financial details . " Kishimoto , Olympus president from 1993 to 2001 , in turn denied involvement in tobashi , and instead suggested possible implication of Hideo Yamada , whom he said he supervised poorly . 
 In 1991 Olympus had to take losses of ¥ 2 @.@ 1 billion on the value of its investments after the investment bonanza ended . In June 1998 , Olympus was subject of market rumours that it had suffered sizeable trading losses on derivatives which caused its shares to plunge by 11 percent . The rumours were emphatically denied by Olympus , which subsequently announced record profits . In September 2011 , Olympus announced that it had written off part of a ¥ 45 billion investment in emerging market bonds . The company further disclosed during its interim results in October 1999 , that it had lost nearly ¥ 17 billion from interest rate and currency swaps . The company also reported that it had lost ¥ 2 @.@ 9 billion in the Princeton Economics International Ponzi scheme . According to Bloomberg , the annual report of Olympus Corporation for the year ended 31 March 2010 showed a ¥ 15 @.@ 5 billion ( $ 201 million ) prior period adjustment for " loss related to the purchase of preference shares from [ an unnamed ] third party " ; goodwill on its balance sheet also increased by ¥ 13 @.@ 5 billion yen to account for the purchase . BusinessWeek noted that ratio of a company 's debt relative to its equity ranks Olympus among the top 2 percent most highly geared of Japan 's largest companies , while The Financial Times commented that its capital base – an equity ratio in 2011 of below 14 percent – is the weakest among its peer group . Olympus is the only Nikkei 225 constituent whose intangible assets – principally goodwill of around ¥ 168 billion – exceeds net assets ( ¥ 151 billion ) . 
 = = = External growth = = = 
 Having spent some US $ 4 billion during this period under the stewardship of Kikukawa , the company 's aggressive strategy of external growth was not without criticism . According to an Olympus employee , the acquisitions process and funds movements were under the tight control of a small circle of executives in the ' Financial Affairs Group ' . Japanese business daily is quoted as saying more than a hundred businesses were acquired during Kikukawa 's tenure , and that the majority were unlisted and loss @-@ making . The investments were in diverse sectors such as pet care and DVD production , and often had little connection with the core Olympus business . The most significant acquisition was the British medical equipment maker Gyrus Group , acquired in 2008 at a cost of $ 2 billion – the equivalent of almost 5 times turnover and 27 times EBITDA . In the same year , Olympus also paid out ¥ 73 @.@ 5 billion ( $ 965 million ) when it acquired three " small venture firms " – Altis , Humalabo , and <unk> . By contrast , in 2009 Olympus sold the profitable diagnostics unit it had built up over 40 years to Beckman Coulter for $ 1 billion – approximately two times turnover – to free up capital . 
 = = Exposure of the scandal = = 
 = = = Woodford 's background and inquiries = = = 
 British @-@ born Michael Woodford was an Olympus veteran of 30 years , and previously executive managing director of Olympus Medical Systems Europa . As European Director in 2008 , Woodford had noticed the " strange goings @-@ on at the company " such as the Gyrus acquisition , which should have been within his scope but was instead handled from Tokyo . ( Woodford had set out to resign over the matter but stayed with Olympus after being reassured on the acquisition and being promoted to oversee Olympus ' European businesses and appointed to the main Olympus board ) . However , on 30 July 2011 , the matter surfaced again , when Woodford 's attention as President was drawn by German colleagues to an article in FACTA that alleged Olympus had made undisclosed payments for a series of acquisitions some of which were outside its " core " camera and endoscope business , most notably a sum of $ 687 million apparently paid to advisers as part of the Gyrus acquisition . 
 Woodford said that he asked Hisashi Mori and some confidants about the FACTA report , and stated also that at a lunch meeting in August with Kikukawa and Hisashi Mori , Olympus ' compliance officer , Kikukawa revealed he ordered staff not to tell Woodford about the allegations because Woodford was " too busy " dealing with other matters . Kikukawa dismissed the article as " tabloid , sensationalist journalism " . Upon learning about a second article referring to payments by Olympus to " anti @-@ social forces " , a euphemism for yakuza ( Japanese criminal organizations ) , The Japan Times notes that from the start , FACTA remained the lone Japanese journal to scoop the Olympus accounting irregularities until the scandal broke in Western media sources after Woodford exposed the matter . Woodford began to write a series of six letters to Mori and / or Kikukawa regarding his concerns as to governance issues " relating to the company 's M & A ( acquisitions ) activities " . Woodford copied later letters to the company 's auditors , and threatened to resign if he did not receive satisfactory responses about the 2008 Gyrus acquisition costs , and the goodwill impairment of around $ 600 million made that year for the other acquisitions . 
 On 1 April 2011 , Woodford was promoted to the post of president and chief operating officer , replacing Tsuyoshi Kikukawa and becoming the first ever non @-@ Japanese chairman of Olympus . 
 = = = Woodford 's appointment as CEO = = = 
 Six months after Woodford 's appointment as COO and President , on 1 October , Olympus elevated him to its chief executive officer , stating that since his appointment as president / COO , " the Board have been extremely pleased with the progress made under Mr. Woodford 's leadership in this role , which has exceeded the expectations at the time of his appointment " . At the time of Woodford 's appointment , he was regarded as an unlikely choice . Reuters reports there were rumours that he only got the job because he would be " easy to control " ; some Japanese observers saw Woodford , who speaks no Japanese , as the chairman Kikukawa 's new pet . An article in FACTA underlined the sceptics ' views , saying " The fact that the company picked a bottom @-@ ranking foreign executive director with virtually no significant responsibilities from amongst a total pool of 25 potential candidates , including the vice @-@ president who was responsible for medical instruments ... set tongues a @-@ wagging . " 
 Woodford 's promotion was announced through a press statement without calling a news conference . The press release , which was full of praise for Woodford , mentioned his success in cutting costs and presented him as the " new global face of Olympus " . According to Woodford , Kikukawa had reminded him privately upon appointing him president : " I am the one who has the authority to hire and fire , and to decide remuneration for board members and the next tier down of management , " thus signalling Woodford was " little more than his puppet " . The New York Times similarly suggested that the promotion may have been intended to instill Woodford with a greater sense of loyalty to the board , and Woodford suggested it was done to reduce his motivation to resign . Nikkei Business noted that the announcement was made only in its English web page and after talking to Olympus , it commented : " Woodford 's title had changed from COO to CEO , but it did not signify any real change in the company 's leadership . Woodford himself was soon to realise that his appointment to CEO was in name only . " 
 = = = Woodford 's removal as CEO = = = 
 If the intention of the promotion was to deter Woodford 's questions , it did not have the intended effect . Following his appointment , Woodford persisted in pressing the issue of the questionable transactions , and , based on his belief that an internal probe would not get all the necessary answers , he also engaged accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers ( PwC ) to give substance to his suspicions . Woodford copied his final two letters to senior members of the Ernst & Young organisation ( auditors to Olympus ) in Japan , Europe and the United States , as well as their global chairman and CEO . PwC 's report highlighted that as part of the deals , a " success fee " – an intermediary 's fee for closing an acquisition deal – of $ 687 million for the Gyrus acquisition was paid to two small firms , US @-@ based Axes America LLC and Cayman Islands @-@ based Axam Investments Ltd . PwC also examined the transactions resulting in the $ 600 million write @-@ down . 
 Kikukawa convened an emergency board meeting on 14 October , and then , arriving late , cancelled the circulated agenda and asked the board to consider removing Woodford from his post of chief executive . Woodford was not allowed to speak or vote ; the motion was carried unanimously , although he retained his seat on the board of directors . Kikukawa circulated a staff email the same day , stating that the departure was due to differences in management style , and that Woodford had " ignored established decision @-@ making processes and created many wedges among the managers and within the organization ... vastly different to what we had expected of him , which was to accelerate decision @-@ making and speed up the management . " 
 After Woodford 's removal , Kikukawa was re @-@ appointed president and CEO of Olympus . One week later , he accused Woodford of having created " a gang " of direct reports that circumvented Mori , his supposed immediate subordinate . Kikukawa resigned on 26 October " to restore confidence in the company under the new management " . At the press conference , he declared Olympus to be clean , continued to accuse Woodford of attempting to seize power , and maintained Woodford was " autocratic " , and that his alleged offences " included intimidation of my own staff . " By contrast , Woodford alleged that his forced departure was linked to several prior acquisitions and payments he questioned , particularly the US $ 2 @.@ 2 billion deal in 2008 to acquire British medical equipment maker Gyrus Group , and said on Bloomberg Television : " The board has to go , they 're all toxic , they are all contaminated . " On 30 November , Woodford announced that he would resign from the Olympus board , saying that his decision was unrelated to the official investigations in Japan , the UK and the USA . He added that his resignation was necessary in the context , and that he was " committed to ensuring that Olympus has the best possible opportunity to succeed going forward , starting with a new and untainted board of directors . " 
 = = = Company 's initial announcements following Woodford 's departure = = = 
 During a conference call with investors on 17 October ( reported in a Morgan Stanley research note ) , Olympus Executive Vice @-@ President Hisashi Mori said the company might sue Woodford for releasing internal information to news media . Olympus issued statements on 19 October defending the acquisitions of Altis , News Chef and Humalabo , saying that they " were determined to have great potential in the medical and health care industries . " Press reported that although the three companies had " minuscule capital funds " , their combined business value was estimated at between ¥ 96 @.@ 9 – 124 @.@ 6 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 6 billion ) . Olympus denied that the acquisitions were unrelated to the core business . The description given of the companies on 19 October , and how they fit into the group 's strategy , were contradicted by the later statement : initially , Altis was described as being engaged in " environmental solutions business proposing resources recycling and CO2 reduction focused on petrochemical plants . " In a 27 October disclosure , the unit was " mainly engaged in recycling business for medical waste . " Humalabo was described initially said to undertake " research and development / sale of skin improving substances using [ a fungus known as ] <unk> , " but in the later statement was said to be " mainly engaged in development of [ health ] supplements with ingredients extracted from shiitake mushroom mycelium . " While the basic description of News Chef as a maker of cookware for microwave ovens was not changed , Olympus added that " disease prevention and prognosis through foods " was one of its objects . 
 " We wish to make a profound apology for all of the distress and trouble caused due to the recent series of media reports and fall in the stock prices triggered by our recent change in President ... We shall provide updates in a timely manner through the Tokyo Stock Exchange 's disclosure network and our website ... We sincerely hope to conclude this situation as quickly as possible to restore society 's trust in us and to bring reassurance to our customers , business partners , shareholders and employees ... 
 The past acquisitions mentioned in the media were handled with the appropriate evaluation and procedures ... These transactions were in no way improper and we are setting up an external panel of experts to examine and report on this acquisitions activity . " 
 Olympus said on 19 October that the value of the stakes in the three companies had been impaired by ¥ 55 @.@ 7 billion – more than three @-@ quarters of the acquisition cost , blaming it on " worsened external environment following the 2008 recession . " However , it later admitted that " the business prospect diverged from the assumption we had at the time of the investment . " 
 At a press conference in Tokyo on 27 October , the president Takayama blamed Woodford for the decline in the company 's share price , saying " If this secret information had not been leaked , there would have been no change in our corporate value . " Takayama said the amounts paid for Gyrus " will pay off considering what value we will gain from the Gyrus acquisition in the future . " He further justified the purchase of the three small Japanese companies as part of a strategy " to find new growth areas to reduce our over @-@ reliance on the endoscope business . " However , Mori , who was the main speaker , and Takayama were criticised by impatient journalists for their responses that meandered without addressing the issues . 
 = = = Olympus ' internal investigation = = = 
 Olympus delegated the task of selecting members to its third @-@ party panel to investigate the allegations to two men who were appointed to the board in June – Yasuo Hayashida , physician who is visiting professor at <unk> University , and Hiroshi Kuruma , a former executive at the Nikkei business daily . On 1 November , Olympus announced the composition of its third @-@ party panel , headed lawyer and former Supreme Court justice , Tatsuo <unk> . The panel would include four lawyers and one certified public accountant . 
 In the week of 6 November , Olympus announced that Hisashi Mori had been dismissed ; auditor Hideo Yamada had resigned . At a press conference , Takayama revealed he had known " absolutely nothing " about the scheme until Mori informed him earlier in the week . He said <unk> , Mori and Yamada were not responsible for the initial investments , but had covered up the losses " with the company 's best interests at heart " . 
 At the news conference , Takayama bowed as he apologised for the " highly inappropriate disposal " of the losses . The Financial Times said Takayama had not addressed " the size and origin of Olympus ' past losses ; the identity of the executives who approved the initial cover @-@ up ; the exact means by which it was executed ; and the reason it took so long to dispose of the bad assets . " 
 Ahead of the much @-@ awaited board meeting on 25 November , to be attended by Woodford , two directors – Kikukawa and Mori – announced their resignation ; Yamada , who enjoyed observer status on the board , also resigned . Separately , current president Shuichi Takayama said the board members would resign once " the path to Olympus ' revival became clear . " However , Woodford said : " If they have an iota of care for the company then they should ... resign in the near future . " 
 According to Olympus , eight executives including Takayama were to take pay cuts of between 30 and 50 percent starting December , to take responsibility for the accounting scandal ; Takayama 's salary would be halved . 
 In mid @-@ January 2012 , Olympus published its panel 's report . It decided that five individuals were responsible : auditors Minoru Ota and Katsuo Komatsu , outside auditors Makoto Shimada and Yasuo Nakamura , and standing auditor Tadao Imai . Ota was held responsible for 3 @.@ 7 billion Yen , having been the head of the accounting division at the time the losses were made in the 1990s , the others were held jointly responsible for around 4 @.@ 7 billion Yen for overlooking the illegal activities . The report cleared KPMG and Ernst & Young of any responsibility for the accounting fraud at the company and concluded that the scheme had been too well concealed . The report said : " The masterminds of this case were hiding the illegal acts by artfully manipulating experts ' opinions . " 
 = = Regulator and law enforcement action = = 
 Following his dismissal , Woodford quickly travelled back to London , where he passed on a file of information to the British Serious Fraud Office , and requested police protection . He hinted that the payments may have been linked to " forces behind " the Olympus board ; Japanese newspaper Sankei went further , to suggest that the payments could be linked to the Yakuza . The Financial Times reported that relevant authorities in several jurisdictions were investigating the case . The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) , which had also been given files about the suspicious transactions by Woodford , opened its case in mid @-@ October ; other federal law enforcement agencies , including federal prosecutors in Manhattan , had also taken an interest . The SEC was said to be examining Axes America . Experts speculated that US investigators were assessing whether there were kickbacks to Olympus officials or whether money laundering or other illicit acts were involved . The British Serious Fraud Office and the FBI were said to be working with the Japanese Financial Services Agency . Olympus disclosed that they were being investigated by the Tokyo Metropolitan Police , while unnamed sources said that a unit of the Tokyo police dealing with organised crime may also be involved in the investigation . The Japanese Securities and Exchange Surveillance Commission ( <unk> ) and the Tokyo Stock Exchange are also reported to have taken an interest in the case . 
 The New York Times published details of an official investigators ' memorandum prepared for the <unk> , the Tokyo prosecutor 's office and the Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department which stated the true magnitude of losses was ¥ 481 billion ( $ 6 @.@ 25 billion ) . It said that of the " questionable acquisition payments , investments and advisory fees " made between 2000 and 2009 , only ¥ 105 billion has been accounted for in some way . Investigators named Tsubasa Net , a software maker acquired by Olympus through ITX in 2005 , as " a front company " with known affiliations with the Yamaguchi Gumi , the largest of Japan 's yakuza organizations . Altis , Humalabo and News Chef – acquisitions advised by Global Company – were also identified as front companies with links to organised crime . The headquarters of Olympus Corp. was visited by Japanese prosecutors on 21 December 2011 as part its investigation ; NHK TV said the home of Tsuyoshi Kikukawa , former Olympus president , was also targeted by authorities looking into wrongdoing . 
 Japanese authorities arrested seven individuals in connection with the case on 16 February 2012 . These were former Olympus president Kikukawa , the former executive vice @-@ president Hisashi Mori , former internal auditor Hideo Yamada . Also arrested were bankers Akio Nakagawa , Nobumasa Yokoo , and their associates Taku Hada and Hiroshi Ono . 
 = = Other external responses and actions = = 
 = = = Auditors = = = 
 The accounts of Olympus were audited in the 1990s by the Japanese affiliate of then ' big five ' accounting firm Arthur Andersen until the latter collapsed in 2002 , when KPMG <unk> became its auditor . KPMG remained the auditor up until 2009 , after which the Ernst & Young <unk> ( E & Y ) took over . At no point were any major issues signalled by the company 's auditors ; The Financial Times ( FT ) reported that KPMG had raised some questions when the firm audited Olympus , but audit reports were always unqualified , and E & Y signed off on " clean " audit reports in 2010 and 2011 . According to an email sent by former chairman Tsuyoshi Kikukawa that Michael Woodford made public , Olympus had replaced KPMG with E & Y after the former expressed disagreement with the accounting treatment of the Gyrus acquisition . The FT queried why , this being the case , KPMG had signed off on the 2009 accounts . Tsutomu Okubo raised a question in the upper house of the Diet as to why the auditors apparently failed to stop the cover @-@ up ; the Japanese Institute of Certified Accountants said that it would look into the auditors ' role . 
 According to a letter filed with the UK Registrar of Companies , the auditors to Gyrus resigned " partly because of its client 's accounting for the securities " . KPMG qualified Gyrus ' accounts because they could not ascertain that Axam was not a related party . The auditors also took issue with the accounting treatment of the preference shares . In its audit letter to Gyrus Group dated 26 April 2010 , KPMG considered that there were " circumstances connected with our ceasing to hold office that should be brought to the attention of the company 's members or creditors . " Ernst & Young , the firm that succeeded KPMG , also expressed reservations about the 2010 Gyrus accounts for uncertainty , due to the lack of information about Axam . Bloomberg noted that both Gyrus annual reports were filed late : instead of filing within the nine @-@ month statutory limit , the accounts were filed more than a year from the company 's year end . In late November 2011 Michael Andrew , KPMG International global chairman , said his firm had complied with its legal obligations to pass on information related to Olympus 's 2008 acquisition of Gyrus , and were removed as auditors for so doing . Andrew said : " It 's pretty evident to me there was very , very significant fraud and that a number of parties had been complicit . " However , the while the Japanese firm forced a ¥ 71 billion restatement of dubious valuation of certain acquired assets , the firm signed off on the financial statements in the same year that contained questionable figures other members of its global network in UK and elsewhere had apparently expressed grave reservations over . 
 Although the Olympus inquiry had questioned the auditors ' signing off on the accounting treatment of preferred shares , and whether the handover from KPMG to Ernst & Young in 2009 was thorough , E & Y 's own review in turn questioned " the thoroughness and accuracy " of the Olympus inquiry 's findings . The E & Y concluded there were " no problems with the handover in terms of the guidelines , " but were looking into what more could have been done . It further said that its powers of investigation were limited by their inability to question the outgoing audit firm . 
 = = = Stock market and stakeholder reactions = = = 
 Olympus had a market capitalisation of ¥ 673 billion on 13 October 2011 , immediately before Woodford was sacked . By the end of the next day , the valuation had fallen to ¥ 422 billion ( $ 5 @.@ 5 billion ) . Analysts at Goldman Sachs , Deutsche Bank and Nomura Securities , concerned about corporate governance issues at the company as well as its balance sheet , all immediately downgraded their stock ratings . Goldman Sachs , who had only upgraded its rating in a report dated 12 October , suspended its coverage after Woodford was removed from office . Nomura and JPMorgan announced on 20 October that their coverage of the company was halted . It was reported that Government of Singapore Investment Corp. , the Singapore sovereign wealth fund which was one of the principal shareholders , immediately disposed of its 2 percent stake on the first hint of scandal . The share price plunged several days running upon market fears that the shares would be delisted as the company could not meet its reporting mandatory deadline for its quarterly results ; in the week to 18 November Nippon Life announced that its stake had been reduced by one @-@ third , from 8 @.@ 18 percent to 5 @.@ 11 percent , because of the uncertainty ; Mitsubishi reduced its stake from 10 percent to 7 @.@ 6 percent . 
 Some major foreign institutional investors have pushed to bring back ousted chief executive Michael Woodford : UK fund manager Baillie Gifford , Harris Associates , and Southeastern Asset Management , owning respectively 4 percent , 5 percent and 5 percent stake , all believed he was the best candidate to lead the clean @-@ up . Other investors have demanded more disclosures from the company about the state of its affairs . Domestic investors , including Nippon Life Insurance ( 8 @.@ 4 percent stake ) , demanded " prompt action " . 
 On 2 November , a shareholder from Nara Prefecture was reported to have asked the company 's auditor to bring a case against former executives of Olympus to court to reimburse ¥ 140 billion ( $ 1 @.@ 79 billion ) to the company , failing which he will sue them through another rights group , Lawyers for Shareholders ' Rights . Two American law firms announced that they were initiating ' investigations ' of Olympus Corporation and some of its directors and were seeking investors who purchased Olympus <unk> between 7 November 2006 and 7 November 2011 on the grounds that the company 's share price had been inflated through false accounting and that directors had hidden substantial losses by " false statements and material omissions " . 
 The quotation price of Olympus shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange ( TSE ) on 15 November had fallen by some 75 percent since the scandal erupted . The price continued to be volatile : trading was halted as its price hit the upper limit for price falls . On 14 and 15 November , after the threat of delisting ebbed , trading in its shares was once again halted when buy orders heavily outnumbered sell orders ; the price rose by the upper limit of ¥ 100 . Trading only took place after hours as there was a glut of unsatisfied buy orders . The share price rose in four straight trading sessions , reaching 834 yen at one point on 16 November . 
 Many long @-@ time employees of Olympus Corp were shocked and angry , and felt betrayed by the executives who were responsible for bringing public humiliation onto the company . Former director Koji Miyata started a web site , called Olympus Grassroots , demanding clean @-@ up at the company they say they love . Miyata also circulated a petition targeted at employees calling on the reinstatement of Woodford . As Olympus has a 70 @-@ percent market share in endoscopy , the scandal caused anxiety and concern among the medical profession , which sees Olympus <unk> as irreplaceable . 
 While foreign shareholders supported Woodford 's proxy fight to replace the Olympus board , he failed to gain support from Japanese institutions ; Sumitomo Mitsui bank , identified as the company 's main creditor , warned Woodford that he would fail . Woodford was disappointed by their silence , but acknowledged that even had he won a shareholder vote to become chief executive , the antipathy towards him of major shareholders and creditors , and the within the company about his decision to publicly disclose the accounting irregularities , would have made running the company difficult . On 6 January 2012 , on failing to secure support from Japanese institutional shareholders , Woodford said that the 12 @-@ week public scandal had taken an enormous emotional toll on him and his family , and announced that he would abandon his proxy fight to take control of the Olympus board . Instead , his lawyers had initiated legal proceedings in London seeking unspecified damages for dismissal from his four @-@ year contract . 
 Olympus convened an extraordinary shareholders ' meeting for 20 April 2012 to vote on its proposal for the new board and to approve the restated accounts . The board slate consisted of 11 candidates , the majority of whom were " completely independent " of Olympus . The company controversially sought to promote its executive officer , Hiroyuki Sasa , to president ; its candidate for chairman was Yasuyuki <unk> , a former senior executive of Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corp. – the largest creditor of Olympus . Another proposed director is Hideaki <unk> , formerly with the Bank of Tokyo @-@ Mitsubishi . While the company argued the candidates were well @-@ qualified , a shareholder advisory firm urged investors to vote down the proposed president citing his lack of experience as a corporate manager of a turnaround situation ; it also expressed concern that the ex @-@ bankers may put banks ' interests ahead of shareholders ' . ISS also recommended shareholders not to approve the accounts on grounds that it could undermine any legal recourse they may want to pursue in future . Foreign shareholders oppose the nominations , citing " undue influence " of the creditor banks . 
 = = = Corporate governance concerns = = = 
 Masaki Shizuka of the TSE expressed the concern that " investor confidence in information provided by the company may decline . " Tsutomu Okubo , who is to chair a new working team to discuss reforms to the company act to strengthen corporate governance , questioned whether the corporate auditor system was functioning properly , and whether the company 's accountants were acting as a proper check on management . Toshio Oguchi , representative director of Governance for Owners in Tokyo , argued that the affair pointed to a dysfunctional board : " Even if they didn 't know about the tobashi , the fact that the board approved the payment cannot have been a correct decision . ” 
 The acquisition price tag was justified using sales forecast for the three companies – Altis , Humalabo and News Chef – of ¥ 88 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 1 @.@ 2 billion ) for the fiscal year ending March 2013 – which CFO Asia said was " practically impossible to achieve " . It further noted that the combined sales targets for the three companies for the fiscal year to March 2012 were subsequently reduced by 93 percent to a combined ¥ 6 @.@ 5 billion ( US $ 85 @.@ 7 million ) . Despite the suspicions of wrongdoing , Olympus strongly denied suggestions that the transactions were " something illegal or unauthorized " . CFO Asia said that if there was truly no corporate malfeasance , there are " uncomfortable questions about the competence of the internal and external teams that evaluated the three acquisitions , as well as the capabilities of the senior managers and board members that accepted the sky @-@ high valuations and approved the deals . " Nikkei Business said similarly that the size of the losses " could very well call management responsibility into question " . 
 In a commentary in the Financial Times entitled " Olympus 's deceit was dishonourable " , John Gapper noted that " It is still possible to believe that the accused trio of directors ... thought they were behaving honourably ... [ in hiding ] failure discreetly and not to make their predecessors lose face . " He noted that accounting scandals were not uniquely Japanese , but that it was " a nice piece of corporate satire to conceal losses by exploiting the widespread habit of paying too much for acquisitions and writing them down – the ' advisory fee ' was especially creative " . Gapper criticised the weakness in governance , particularly how 12 out of 15 directors were either executives or former executives of the company , and that Hideo Yamada , head of the Audit Board , was complicit in the scam . He also noted that auditors KPMG and Ernst & Young would have to answer tough questions about why the manipulation was never discovered or properly questioned . 
 Bloomberg View columnist William <unk> said : " Japan 's corporate culture of denial , of ignoring problems and letting them fester , keeps running up against a globalized world that values agility , innovation and transparency . Olympus demonstrates all too painfully how much Old Japan tolerates a lack of accountability among senior executives ; inadequate disclosure ; a disinclination to challenge authority and absolute deference to corporate boards regardless of share performance . " While he also observed that the independence of the directors was inadequate , he said Japanese executives were much more moderately paid compared to American ones . " Shareholders assume directors are smart , devoted people working for the good of Japan Inc . Tough questions are rarely asked . " Errol Oh of The Star said a company apology for a fall in the share price " <unk> the possible wrongdoings and <unk> emphasis on an effect rather than the cause ... Takayama 's remark on the ' inconvenience ' of a fall in share price reflects a common flaw in the mindset of the people who run listed companies . Somehow , they lose sight of the fact that they manage businesses , not share prices . " 
 During a press conference in early November , Financial Services minister <unk> Jimi said the market should not call into question the standards of corporate governance of other listed companies just because of Olympus . However , some journals linked the case of <unk> Paper Corp , also subject of a scandal involving diversion of funds by its chairman . 
 = = = Other commentary = = = 
 Floyd Norris of The New York Times said the cause of the losses was rooted in the Plaza Accord that caused the value of the dollar to slide from 250 yen in 1984 , to 121 yen by the end of 1987 , heavily penalising Japanese exports . " It turns out that it was an effort to make the company 's [ balance sheet ] accurate ... It now appears the chairman reacted with righteous indignation . He had not stolen ; he had only tried to clean up a mess without damaging the reputation of generations of Olympus executives . " Floyd says that the third @-@ party investigation report commissioned by Olympus infers " there had been no need to tell Mr. Woodford about what had happened because the fraud was finally behind the company when Mr. Woodford took the job . " 
 Financial Times questioned why the Japanese auditor firm signed off on the financial statements in the same year when other members of its global network apparently refused to give clean bills of financial heath to Olympus subsidiaries such as Gyrus in the UK , and elsewhere . One analyst suggests the poor performance of Japanese auditors may be due to low pay , and overwork due to the shortage of certified public accountants : audit fees are up to one @-@ fifth of that of comparable US companies ; there are 17 @,@ 000 <unk> in Japan , compared with 330 @,@ 000 in the US . 
 The Economist said that the Olympus scandal " is not an accounting <unk> — it is a mindset . Olympus , and the response of Japanese officialdom , is less about a single sad incident as it is a view about the malleability of rules , and the subjectivity of their enforcement . Until Japan 's institutions of governance — those internal to the corporations , as well external regulators and prosecutors — change , Japan cannot change . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Woodford after scandal = = = 
 During 2011 and 2012 , Woodford was recognised as " <unk> of the Year " for bravery and whistleblowing by The Sunday Times , The Independent and The Sun , and " Person of the Year " at the Financial Times ArcelorMittal " Boldness in Business Awards " in March 2012 . He consults on corporate governance worldwide , speaks on human rights , whistleblower laws , and road safety , and states he had given several millions of pounds to charities . Woodford , who stated he had received death threats over his exposing of the cover @-@ up , was reported to have been awarded £ 10 million ( $ 16 m ) in damages from Olympus for defamation and wrongful dismissal in 2012 . A book and film were also undertaken . Woodford stated his concerns that , far from learning from the scandal , Japan 's response was to become even more secretive and unsupportive of change in areas highlighted by the scandal . 
 = = = Olympus and wider aftermath after the scandal = = = 
 In 2012 , Olympus also announced it would shed 2 @,@ 700 jobs ( 7 % of its workforce ) and around 40 percent of its 30 manufacturing plants by 2015 to reduce its cost base . In July 2013 , <unk> and Mori were both sentenced to 3 years in prison , 5 years suspended . The auditor who had been party to the fraud was sentenced to 2 @.@ 5 years in prison , 4 years suspended . Olympus was fined 700 million yen ( $ 7 million USD ) . In April 2014 , six banks filed a civil suit against Olympus over the fraud , seeking an additional 28 billion yen in damages . 
 The corporate culture exposed by the scandal is seen as the inspiration for the record @-@ breaking drama <unk> Naoki . 
 = = Details of the suspect transactions = = 
 In the early 1990s , <unk> Securities was Olympus ' main broker , but went bankrupt after accumulating ¥ 260 billion in tobashi investment losses . In 1998 , Nomura succeeded as Olympus ' main broker . Prompted by the <unk> collapse , new " mark to market " accounting rules were made mandatory in 1999 , from which time companies were obliged to disclose losses on their securities investments in a timely manner . 
 Thomson Reuters reported that a fee of US $ 687 million , equal to 31 percent of the Gyrus acquisition price , was paid to a middle @-@ man , whereas this is usually 1 – 2 percent . As part of his proof , Woodford released the report from PwC which showed that the sum of $ 670 million of the advisory payments was paid over to AXAM Investments Ltd . , a Cayman Islands company . In June 2010 , three months after receiving its final fees from Olympus , it was struck off by local company registry for non @-@ payment of license fees . Olympus revealed that the Axes fee included fees paid to Perella Weinberg Partners UK , who acted as financial advisor , and US law firm Weil , <unk> & <unk> , who acted as legal advisers . 
 The Telegraph said it has seen documents indicating a " Mr Sagawa " was a director of Axam Investments and Axes America that received a $ 687 million advisory fee for the Gyrus acquisition . The Financial Times said its principals were former Nomura employees . The link to the scam caused Nomura shares to fall , though the bank denied involvement , claiming it was " based on speculation and not on fact " . Akio Nakagawa and Hajime Sagawa , both of whom started their careers at Nomura Securities and were also colleagues at Drexel Burnham Lambert and PaineWebber , were behind Axes , according to Reuters . Nakagawa , who was once head of equities at PaineWebber in Japan in the early 1990s , had long @-@ standing relationship with Olympus . A former Paine Webber banker attested that Nakagawa and Sagawa were handlers for Olympus , and they made use of Bermuda @-@ based funds valued at " hundreds of millions of dollars " to manage its balance sheet using Japanese accounting loopholes . Axes America , having negotiated the success fee for Gyrus in a combination of cash and stock , then transferred the stock component to AXAM Investments , an affiliate registered in the Cayman Islands . In 2010 , the stock was sold back to Olympus for $ 620 million . 
 Nobumasa Yokoo , former banker who had dealt with Olympus when he worked for Nomura , is also cited as being behind certain other of the transactions under the spotlight . Having founded Global Company in the late 1990s , he persuaded Olympus to invest ¥ 30 billion in their venture capital fund in 2000 . In 2003 , Olympus made a piecemeal acquisition of an information technology group , ITX . <unk> Yokoo , Yokoo 's older brother , was chief financial officer for ITX . The elder Yokoo became a group executive officer after Olympus became majority owners . Nobumasa Yokoo also introduced three small , unprofitable companies in which he was shareholder and executive that Olympus acquired for ¥ 73 @.@ 4 billion – News Chef , a maker of microwave cookware , Altis and Humalabo . According to The Wall Street Journal ( WSJ ) , Olympus acquired the companies from Cayman Island @-@ based funds between 2007 and 2010 . Nikkei Business reported informed sources deriding these as " shell companies " . Part of the transaction took place on 25 April 2008 , when Olympus paid the equivalent of 7 million to funds named Dynamic Dragons II and Global Targets . Seventeen Cayman and <unk> special purpose vehicles were used to make payments ; funds flowed through Commerzbank AG , Societe Generale SA and LGT Bank . The WSJ noted that there were a large number of frequent and complex corporate changes ( name and ownership ) but determined from the paper trail that Dynamic Dragons II " was part of a network of elusive Japanese firms and financiers that often invested together , and whose ties and identities were constantly shifting . " Kenji Takasago , associate professor at Kobe University suggested the complexity of the scheme was to obscure the money trail . 
 Jake Adelstein , former crime reporter for the Yomiuri Shimbun , said these three acquired companies " shared addresses and office space with several other companies with different names but sometimes the same employees , creating a web of real and paper companies that make tracking the money very difficult . " He also alleged that Japanese authorities considered one of the auditors involved " a corporate blood brother ... to the Yamaguchi @-@ <unk> . " Sankei Shimbun said there were perhaps 10 brokers involved in the acquisition schemes , and that while they " are not members of crime syndicates themselves ... [ some ] ... conduct economic activities together with antisocial forces ... There is the possibility that Olympus has supplied cash ( to organised crime ) as a result . " However , the investigatory panel set up by Olympus rejected reports the allegations that the acquisition funds could found their way to organised crime . Panel chairman Tatsuo <unk> said " Our committee has confirmed no such facts in its investigations so far . " 
 = = = Structure of Gyrus commission = = = 
 In mid June 2006 Olympus paid US @-@ registered Axes America the sum of $ 3 million in " basic fees " , and agreed to pay a " completion fee of 1 percent of the acquisition price in addition to the basic fee for advisory work relating to acquisitions . " One year later , the agreed rate of " completion fee " to Axes was increased to 5 percent , payable in a mixture of cash , share options and warrants ; it disbursed a further $ 2 million . When the Gyrus acquisition was announced , Olympus paid over $ 12 million , being the cash portion of the agreed " completion fee " . In September 2008 , to top up the cash part of the advisors ' success fee , Gyrus issued ¥ 176 @.@ 98 million of preferred stock to the AXAM against the advice of company auditors , according to Nikkei Business Daily . Olympus paid over a further $ 50 million , nominally as cash settlement for warrants . Regulatory disclosures in the UK show that the preferred stock was allotted on 30 September by Tsuyoshi Kikukawa , Hisashi Mori and Akihiro Nambu ( the latter being head of investor relations for Olympus ) . The identity of the beneficiary – Axam Investments – was only made publicly known more than 18 months later . Three days after the preferred stock was allotted and without the benefit of professional advice , a " supplemental agreement " was signed by Olympus officers that gave AXAM power of veto over " any important decision in the Gyrus business " . 
 A buyback of preferred shares for $ 530 – 590 million was authorised by the Olympus board . Axam subsequently negotiated a further increase in the value of the shares , for which Olympus finally paid $ 620 million in March 2010 . According to a UK corporate filing for Gyrus , the value of the securities at the time was disclosed as $ 177 million . Bloomberg notes that executives Olympus had delayed accounting for the true cost of the ' success fees ' of Gyrus until March 2011 , by which time Axam Investments had been struck off by the Cayman Islands registrar for nine months . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Before 2011 
 1981 – Woodford joins Olympus as a surgical salesman , later becoming managing director of a British medical subsidiary 
 Late 1980s and 1990s – Olympus makes substantial losses in financial trading , believed to be an attempt to mitigate poor trading results , due in part to Japan 's weak currency . It conceals the losses using an unlawful but widespread practice known as a <unk> scheme , or <unk> . 
 Around 2008 – Olympus buys 3 companies paying far more than they are worth , the balance being unaccounted " fees " to a middle @-@ man of around 30 % , controlling the matter directly from Japan although the companies are in Europe , Woodford 's region . The deals are for over $ 2 billion . 
 2008 – Woodford , by now responsible for considerable business across Europe , attempts to tender his resignation over the " strange " European acquisitions that should have been within his oversight but were instead directly controlled by Tokyo officials . ( The same acquisitions later became part of the public scandal when he revisited them as COO and CEO in 2011 ) . He is given plausible reassurances and also promoted to run Olympus ' entire European business . He accepts 
 2011 
 1 April – Woodford appointed Olympus president and chief operating officer ( COO ) 
 10 July – Allegations of corporate irregularities surface in <unk> , a Japanese magazine 
 Three weeks 23 September to 11 October – 
 After hearing of the allegations by email " from German colleagues " and unable to find satisfactory answers internally , Woodford writes several times to the board as CEO seeking answers , but is rebuffed or unsatisfied . 
 Around end September – Woodford asks chief executive Tsuyoshi Kikukawa about the claims ; Kikukawa cedes his role as CEO 
 1 October – Woodford appointed Olympus chief executive officer ( CEO ) following a board vote the previous day ( 30 September ) . The company press release stated that since April 2011 's appointment as president / COO , " the Board have been extremely pleased with the progress made under Mr. Woodford 's leadership in this role , which has exceeded the expectations at the time of his appointment " . Kikukawa remains as chairman . 
 Around early October – Still lacking satisfactory responses , Woodford appoints outside audit practice PwC to investigate 
 14 October – Woodford dismissed at a short board meeting ; he leaves , and discloses his concerns publicly 
 8 November – Olympus makes admissions related to the scandal 
 24 November – Kikukawa and Mori resign from board ; remainder state they will also resign in 2012 
 1 to 14 December – Woodford unsuccessfully attempts to regain previous CEO role , but lacks sufficient support 
 20 December – Olympus reportedly makes plans to reduce Woodford 's allies ' ability to intervene by means of stock arrangements that would dilute their voting power 
 21 December – Olympus raided by law enforcement 
 2012 
 16 February – 7 arrests in Tokyo : ex @-@ president Tsuyoshi Kikukawa , former executive vice @-@ president Hisashi Mori , former auditor Hideo Yamada , former bankers Akio Nakagawa and Nobumasa Yokoo , and two others 
 29 May – Woodford and Olympus settle Woodford 's claim for damages for a reported £ 10 million ( subject to approval at 8 June board meeting , which was agreed ) 
 = Cyathus stercoreus = 
 Cyathus stercoreus , commonly known as the dung @-@ loving bird 's nest , is a species of fungus in the genus Cyathus , family Nidulariaceae . Like other species in the Nidulariaceae , the fruiting bodies of C. stercoreus resemble tiny bird 's nests filled with eggs . The fruiting bodies are referred to as splash cups , because they are designed to use the force of falling drops of water to dislodge and disperse their spores . The species has a worldwide distribution , and prefers growing on dung , or soil containing dung ; the specific epithet is derived from the Latin word <unk> , meaning " of dung " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruiting bodies , or <unk> , are <unk> or barrel @-@ shaped , 6 – 15 mm tall , 4 – 8 mm wide at the mouth , sometimes short @-@ stalked , golden brown to blackish brown in age . The outside wall of the peridium , the ectoperidium , is covered with tufts of fungal hyphae that resembles shaggy , untidy hair . However , in older specimens this outer layer of hair ( technically a tomentum ) may be completely worn off . The internal wall of the cup , the endoperidium , is smooth and grey to bluish @-@ black . The ' eggs ' of the bird 's nest – the peridioles – are blackish , 1 – 2 mm in diameter , and there are typically about 20 in the cup . Peridioles are often attached to the fruiting body by a funiculus , a structure of hyphae that is differentiated into three regions : the basal piece , which attaches it to the inner wall of the peridium , the middle piece , and an upper sheath , called the purse , connected to the lower surface of the peridiole . In the purse and middle piece is a coiled thread of interwoven hyphae called the funicular cord , attached at one end to the peridiole and at the other end to an entangled mass of hyphae called the hapteron . However , Brodie reports that sometimes C. stercoreus is found without a funiculus , which has led some authors to misidentify this species with the genus Nidula . 
 The spores of C. stercoreus are roughly spherical and relatively large , with typical dimensions of 20 – 35 x 20 – 25 µm , although great variability in spore size has been noted . The spores are sessile ( growing directly from the surface of the basidium , without attachment via a sterigmata ) , and are separated from the basidia after it collapses and gelatinizes . This is accompanied by the gelatinization of the inner walls of the peridiole . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Examination of fruiting bodies using scanning electron microscopy and transmission electron microscopy has revealed details about their ultrastructure — their microscopic architecture and arrangement . For example , the hyphae of the hapteron form a dense tangled network , while the hyphae of the funicular cord are arranged in a twisted form like a rope . Further , the funicular cord , known to be highly elastic and with a high tensile strength , is made of thicker hyphae than the rest of the funiculus . Also , the <unk> and endoperidium are made of thick @-@ walled , unbranched hyphae , known as skeletal hyphae . It has been proposed that these skeletal hyphae form a structural network that helps the fruiting body maintain the elasticity vital for proper functioning of the spore dispersal mechanism . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The life cycle of Cyathus stercoreus , which contains both haploid and diploid stages , is typical of taxa in the basidiomycetes that can reproduce both asexually ( via vegetative spores ) , or sexually ( with meiosis ) . Basidiospores produced in the peridioles each contain a single haploid nucleus . After dispersal , the spores germinate and grow into homokaryotic hyphae , with a single nucleus in each compartment . When two homokaryotic hyphae of different mating compatibility groups fuse with one another , they form a dikaryotic ( containing two nuclei ) mycelia in a process called plasmogamy . After a period of time ( approximately 40 days when grown from pure culture in the laboratory ) and under the appropriate environmental conditions , fruiting bodies may be formed from the dikaryotic mycelia . These fruiting bodies produce peridioles containing the basidia upon which new basidiospores are made . Young basidia contain a pair of haploid sexually compatible nuclei which fuse , and the resulting diploid fusion nucleus undergoes meiosis to produce haploid basidiospores . 
 = = Development = = 
 Extreme variability in fruiting body form and color has been noted for C. stercoreus . Brodie reported discovering a slender @-@ stemmed " twinned " form , with two fruiting bodies originating from the same stalk . As has been shown in laboratory @-@ grown specimens , the development and form of the fruiting bodies is at least partially dependent on the intensity of light it receives during development . For example , exposure of the <unk> mycelium to light is required for fruiting to occur , and furthermore , this light needs to be at a wavelength of less than 530 nm . Lu suggests that certain growing conditions – such as a shortage in available nutrients – shifts the fungus ' metabolism to produce a hypothetical " photoreceptive precursor " that enables the growth of the fruiting bodies to be stimulated and affected by light . The fungi is also positively phototrophic , that is , it will orient its fruiting bodies in the direction of the light source . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Being coprophilous , C. stercoreus grows on dung , in soil with dung , and bonfire sites ; it has also been recorded growing on sand dunes . The fungus is known to have a worldwide distribution , and Curtis Gates Lloyd , in his monograph on the Nidulariaceae , wrote that it " probably occurs in every country where manure occurs " . 
