 = = Spore dispersal = = 
 When a drop of water hits the interior of the cup at the appropriate angle and velocity , the peridioles are ejected into the air by the force of the drop . The force of ejection tears open the purse , and results in the expansion of the funicular cord , formerly coiled under pressure in the lower part of the purse . The peridioles , followed by the highly adhesive funicular cord and basal hapteron , may hit a nearby plant stem or stick . The hapteron sticks to it , and the funicular cord wraps around the stem or stick powered by the force of the still @-@ moving peridiole . After drying out , the peridiole remains attached to the vegetation , where it may be eaten by a grazing herbivorous animal , and later deposited in that animal 's dung to continue the life cycle . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 A number of polyketide @-@ type antioxidative compounds , <unk> A , B , and C , and <unk> have been isolated and identified from the liquid culture of Cyathus stercoreus . Furthermore , the polyketides known as <unk> A , B , and C ( isolated from liquid culture ) also have antioxidant activity , and have DNA protection activity . 
 = = Uses = = 
 = = = Traditional medicine = = = 
 In Traditional Chinese medicine , a decoction of this fungus is used to help relieve the symptoms of <unk> , or stomach ache . 
 = = = Agricultural and industrial = = = 
 Cyathus stercoreus has been investigated for its ability to break down lignin and cellulose in agricultural byproducts , like wheat straw or grasses . It selectively breaks down lignin , leaving much of the cellulose intact , which increases the amount of digestible carbohydrate for ruminant mammals , and enhances both its value as a food source and its <unk> . The enzymes responsible , laccase and manganese peroxidase , also have industrial applications for lignin degradation and removal in the pulp and paper industry . Liquid cultures of C. stercoreus have also been shown to biodegrade the explosive compound 2 @,@ 4 @,@ 6 @-@ <unk> ( TNT ) . 
 = NSB Di 6 = 
 NSB Di 6 , later designated ME 26 and DE 2700 , is a class of twelve diesel @-@ electric locomotives built by Siemens for the Norwegian State Railways ( NSB ) . The prime mover provides a power output of 2 @,@ 650 kilowatts ( 3 @,@ 550 hp ) , a starting traction effort of 400 kilonewtons ( 90 @,@ 000 lbf ) and a maximum speed of 160 kilometres per hour ( 99 mph ) . They have a Co 'Co ' wheel arrangement . The bidirectional locomotives were designed for use with both passenger and freight trains . 
 The units were ordered by NSB in 1992 as replacements for the aging Di 3 , and were particularly intended for use on the Nordland Line and to a lesser extent on the Røros Line . Construction was done by Maschinenbau Kiel ( MaK ) in Kiel , Germany , which was then part of Siemens <unk> . The class is largely based on the MaK @-@ built DB Class 240 , with each unit costing 32 million Norwegian krone ( NOK ) . The first units were delivered in March 1996 , one year after schedule , but were plagued with faults . By 1999 , the entire order was terminated and the locomotives returned to Germany . They were taken over by locomotive lessor Dispolok and were used by various Germany railway companies . Ownership was taken over by Vossloh in 2003 , after which most of the class were leased to German passenger train operator Nord @-@ Ostsee @-@ Bahn . In 2008 , three units returned to Norway and are used by Cargolink for freight trains . 
 = = History = = 
 During the late 1980s , the Norwegian State Railways sought a new locomotive type to replace its aging fleet of Di 3 diesel @-@ electric locomotives , which made up the back @-@ bone of the dieselized operations . The new locomotives were planned for use as freight and passenger trains on the Nordland Line , and to a lesser extent on the Røros Line . In 1980 , NSB had taken delivery of five Di 4 from Henschel . Originally there were plans to order additional Di 4 units , but this was discarded and instead a new class was pursued , as NSB wanted similar , but slightly more modern , locomotives . 
 A MaK @-@ built DB Class 240 locomotive was test @-@ run in Norway during 1990 . On 23 November 1992 , NSB 's board decided to order ten similar units . The order was later expanded with another two units because NSB was offered a lower price than originally stipulated . The Di 6 would have motors from Siemens , who had bought MaK , and would be optimized for Norwegian conditions and standards . The contract was worth NOK 380 million , or NOK 32 million per unit . At the same time , NSB also made an order for 20 smaller diesel @-@ electric locomotives from MaK , the Di 8 . Between the two new classes , they were to replace all the Di 3s . 
 The contract for the Di 6 called for the first delivery in February 1995 . Several components were to be manufactured by NSB , including the fuel tanks , sandboxes , engine frames , alternators and some components for the bogies . The first locomotive was delivered on 7 March 1996 , but quickly proved to not meet the specifications in the contract . In particular , the locomotives had too high fuel consumption and the bogies had faults , as they had too high track forces . Both of these issues were difficult to solve . The Di 6 also had problems with overheating , in particular in the main alternators , the oil cooler and the brakes . The on @-@ board computer failed when the outdoor temperature fell too low . 
 On 23 September 1996 , NSB 's administration recommended that the purchase be terminated . However , this was put on hold by the board . Instead , a renegotiated contract was signed , whereby Siemens was obliged to deliver the locomotives , as specified , by mid @-@ 1997 . If not , the two parties agreed that the contract would be terminated . By late 1996 , five locomotives had been delivered , and these were returned to Kiel for upgrades . The first returned to Norway on 30 November 1996 , after the ventilator motors had been upgraded , new oil coolers installed and other minor upgrades had been performed . From January 1997 , they were put into regular use with freight trains on the Nordland Line . In mid @-@ 1997 , number 664 was damaged in a fire caused by an incorrectly mounted exhaust system . In October 1997 , cracks were found in the wheels , and all units were taken out of service while they were being fixed . 
 On 17 December 1997 , NSB 's board decided to purchase eleven of the locomotives , excluding number 664 . This was based on an agreement whereby NSB would receive compensation for the incurred losses owing to late delivery and under @-@ performance . Siemens guaranteed that ten of eleven locomotives would be operational at any time . All units were again grounded in January 1998 , following two fires . Siemens had between 15 and 20 employees stationed in Trondheim to fix the issues . Regularity on the Nordland Line plummeted from 67 to 46 percent with the introduction of Di 6 . NSB was forced to keep 15 Di 3s , which were up to 42 years old , in operational condition to keep services running . The extra costs of keeping the Di 3s running were about NOK 50 million per year . These costs would continue until NSB could take delivery of new locomotives , which could take up to three years from the time of order . One contributing factor was a 25 percent extra wage for engineers for having above @-@ regulation noise levels in the Di 3 cabs . Two Di 3s were often run along with a Di 6 in a train as backup ; should the Di 6 fail , the Di 3 would continue hauling the train . 
 On 28 April 1998 , NSB officially announced to Siemens that they might terminate the purchase contract , describing the locomotives as having " fundamental construction faults " By July 1998 , nine of the eleven units were out of service and one was returned to Germany for repairs after a fire . When the only operational unit broke down , NSB 's board sent a bill for the purchase price plus interest to Siemens , stating that if it was not paid within a week , the issue would be brought to court . 
 Siemens stated that they would not be able to have the locomotives operational until mid @-@ 1999 . By February 1999 , Siemens had given up trying to fix the locomotives , although they had established that the main fault lay in the generators . The issue never reached the courts . On 5 May 1999 , the companies announcement that they had reached an agreement for the trains to be returned to Siemens , and NOK 485 million be compensated to NSB . This was in addition to NOK 80 million which had already been given as discount . In addition to the purchase price , the compensation included interest and coverage for NSB 's extra expenses . The locomotives were immediately dismounted of NSB @-@ owned equipment and on 20 May sent by ship to Hamburg . 
 A major contributor to the faults lay in <unk> 's 1992 take @-@ over of MaK , in which a large number of veteran employees , who had the necessary competence to build diesel @-@ locomotives , were retired . In 1998 , Siemens sold the Kiel facilities to Vossloh . Following the return to Germany , the locomotives were modified to meet German standards and designed ME 26 . They were made narrower by removing outside stairs and railings , and moving lights to meet International Union of Railways standards . There were also changes to the cab walls , with internal railings added and the toilets removed . The speed was also reduced to 140 km / h ( 87 mph ) , although this has later been reverted . Number 664 was rebuilt in Kiel , but because of the lack of capacity at MaK , the remaining units were rebuilt by DSB in Copenhagen . After the upgrades , ownership was transferred to Dispolok , a leasing pool originally owned by Siemens . 
 The first two units were leased to Denmark 's <unk> <unk> . Later lessees of one or more units included Cargolink , Chemins de Fer <unk> ( CFL ) , CTL Logistics , Hoyer <unk> , HSL @-@ Logistik , KEP Logistik , <unk> <unk> , Neuss @-@ Düsseldorfer <unk> , Norddeutsche <unk> , <unk> Eisenbahn , the Port of Kiel , <unk> Cargo , <unk> <unk> , Schneider & Schneider and <unk> <unk> @-@ Salzgitter . 
 Six units were leased by CFL between 2000 and 2004 . The Luxembourgian State Railways were in need of new diesel locomotives to overcome the three different electrification systems in use . Because of a three @-@ year waiting time for new locomotives , CFL leased the Di 6 units for freight trains between Esch @-@ sur @-@ Alzette , <unk> and <unk> . In November 2003 , the locomotives were sold to Vossloh and given the designation DE 2700 . Since 2006 , the main <unk> is the Veolia Verkehr @-@ owned Nord @-@ Ostsee @-@ Bahn , which operates passenger trains in Schleswig @-@ Holstein , Germany . Eight locomotives are used to haul six to ten @-@ car passengers trains on the route between Hamburg and Sylt . In 2008 , three locomotives returned to Norway , when Cargolink leased them for their new autorack freight operations . In 2009 , <unk> transferred its ninth unit to HSL Logistik . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The diesel @-@ electric locomotive has a MaK 12 @-@ cylinder <unk> diesel prime mover which provides a power output of 2 @,@ 650 kilowatts ( 3 @,@ 550 hp ) at 1000 revolutions per minute . Transmission of power is by Siemens @-@ built bogie @-@ mounted three phase asynchronous induction type double pole pair traction motors which power the wheels via reduction gear and a hollow quill drive connected to the wheels at both ends via resilient links . The six traction motors are supplied with three @-@ phase electrical power by gate turn @-@ off thyristor controlled inverters using pulse @-@ width modulation controlled by a Siemens ' <unk> @-@ 32 traction control electronics . The electronic inverters are cooled by evaporated fluid , the traction motors are air cooled by external fans . 
 The units have a starting traction effort of 400 kilonewtons ( 90 @,@ 000 lbf ) and a continuous traction effort of 283 kilonewtons ( 64 @,@ 000 lbf ) . Maximum operating speed is 160 kilometers per hour ( 99 mph ) . The locomotives each have two bogies , each with three powered standard gauge axles , giving a Co 'Co ' wheel arrangement . The bogies are equipped with two @-@ stage suspension . The bogies have a wheelbase between the outer wheels of 3 @.@ 940 meters ( 12 @.@ 93 ft ) and a distance between the bogie centers of 11 @.@ 750 meters ( 38 @.@ 55 ft ) . The wheels have a diameter of 1 @,@ 060 millimeters ( 41 @.@ 73 in ) when new . The locomotive has a minimum curve radius of 100 meters ( 328 ft ) . 
 The bidirectional locomotives are 20 @.@ 960 meters ( 68 ft 9 @.@ 2 in ) long , 3 @.@ 000 meters ( 9 ft 10 @.@ 1 in ) wide , 4 @.@ 385 meters ( 14 ft 4 @.@ 6 in ) tall and weigh 122 tonnes ( 120 long tons ; 134 short tons ) . The fuel capacity is 5 @,@ 000 liters ( 1 @,@ 100 imp gal ; 1 @,@ 300 U.S. gal ) . The units were originally equipped with a galley and toilet for the engineer . The locomotive has head end power , allowing it to haul passenger trains in addition to freight trains . NSB 's Di 3 , Di 4 , Di 6 and Di 8 can all be run with together with up to three locomotives in multiple . 
 = The Boat Race 1839 = 
 The 3rd Boat Race took place on the River Thames on 3 April 1839 . It was the second of the University Boat Races to be held on the River Thames , this time between Westminster and Putney . Cambridge had competed against Leander Club in 1837 and 1838 ; it had been three years since Oxford and Cambridge raced against one another . Representatives of both universities and an independent referee oversaw the proceedings . Cambridge won the race by 35 lengths , as of 2014 the largest winning margin in the history of the event . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and takes place on the River Thames in southwest London . No race between the two universities was held in 1837 or 1838 , instead Cambridge raced against Leander Club those years . The umpires for the race were C. B. Wollaston ( for Oxford ) and C. J. Selwyn ( for Cambridge ) , while W. H. Harrison acted as referee . 
 Cambridge 's boat was constructed by Searle of <unk> , while Oxford 's " beautifully constructed " vessel was built by King of Oxford . The race was scheduled to take place on a five @-@ and @-@ three @-@ quarter @-@ mile stretch between Westminster Bridge and Putney Bridge . Oxford were trained by a Thames waterman while Cambridge were guided by their cox , Thomas Selby Egan . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 11 st 10 @.@ 5 lb ( 74 @.@ 4 kg ) per rower , almost 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) more per man than their opponents . None of the Oxford crew from the 1836 featured in this year 's race ; however , both the stroke Edmund Stanley and cox Egan returned for Cambridge , the former being described by Bell 's Life as " really terrific , one of the severest we ever saw " . Oxford 's boat club president was Calverley <unk> who rowed at stroke for the Dark Blues , while Cambridge had a non @-@ rowing president in Augustus Granville . 
 = = Race = = 
 The umpires for the race were Charles <unk> and C. J. Selwyn , while W. Harrison Esq , the Commodore of the Royal Thames Yacht Club , fulfilled the position of referee . The race was held on a Wednesday , 3 April 1839 , the start time of " precisely " <unk> , in conditions described by MacMichael as " cold , cloudy and windy , and just the very worst sort of day for an aquatic expedition " . According to Bell 's Life , Cambridge were slight favourites . Oxford won the toss and elected to commence closest to the Middlesex shore of the river . After a close start , the Cambridge boat started to draw away and by Vauxhall Bridge were " several boats ' lengths " ahead . They increased their lead further by Battersea Bridge and shot Putney Bridge 1 minute 45 seconds ahead , and won by a margin of 35 lengths which remains , as of 2014 , the largest in the history of the event . Cambridge 's victory took them to an overall lead in the event of 2 – 1 . 
 = God of War III = 
 God of War III is a third @-@ person action @-@ adventure video game developed by Santa Monica Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment ( SCE ) . Released for the PlayStation 3 ( PS3 ) console on March 16 , 2010 , the game is the fifth installment in the God of War series , the seventh chronologically , and the sequel to 2007 's God of War II . Loosely based on Greek mythology , the game is set in ancient Greece with vengeance as its central motif . The player controls the protagonist and former God of War , Kratos , after his betrayal at the hands of his father Zeus , King of the Olympian Gods . Reigniting the Great War , Kratos ascends Mount Olympus until he is abandoned by the Titan Gaia . Guided by the spirit of Athena , Kratos battles monsters , gods , and Titans in a search for Pandora , without whom he cannot open Pandora 's Box , defeat Zeus , and end the reign of the Olympian Gods . 
 The gameplay is similar to previous installments , focusing on combo @-@ based combat with the player 's main weapon — the Blades of Exile — and secondary weapons acquired during the game . It uses quick time events , where the player acts in a timed sequence to defeat strong enemies and bosses . The player can use up to four magical attacks and a power @-@ enhancing ability as alternative combat options , and the game features puzzles and platforming elements . Compared with previous installments , God of War III offers a revamped magic system , more onscreen enemies , new camera angles , and downloadable content . 
 God of War III was critically acclaimed upon release , with a reviewer from IGN stating that it redefines the word " scale " in video games . It has been praised for its graphics , particularly of Kratos , which IGN called " perhaps the single most impressive @-@ looking character ever in video games " . The game received several awards , including " Most Anticipated Game of 2010 " and " Best PS3 Game " at the 2009 and 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , respectively , and the " Artistic Achievement " award at the 2011 British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Video Game Awards . The best @-@ selling game in the God of War series and the sixth best @-@ selling PlayStation 3 game of all time , it sold nearly 5 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide by June 2012 and was included in the God of War Saga released for PlayStation 3 on August 28 , 2012 . In celebration of the God of War franchise 's tenth anniversary , a remastered version of God of War III , titled God of War III Remastered , was released on the PlayStation 4 on July 14 , 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 God of War III is a third @-@ person , single @-@ player video game . As with previous installments , the player controls the character Kratos from a fixed @-@ camera perspective in combo @-@ based combat , platforming , and puzzle games . The enemies are an assortment of creatures drawn from Greek mythology , including centaurs , harpies , chimeras , cyclopes , satyrs , minotaurs , Sirens , cerberuses , and Gorgons . The player must also climb walls and ladders , jump across chasms , and swing on ropes to proceed through the game . The puzzles included vary in difficulty : some self @-@ contained puzzles only require objects to be placed in a specific position , while some require timing and precision , such as a puzzle with mechanics similar to Guitar Hero . In addition to finding Gorgon Eyes and Phoenix Feathers of the previous games , Minotaur Horns are a new item to be found . Where the eyes and feathers increase the player 's heath and magic meters , the horns increase the items meter , which allows further use of secondary weapons , called " Items " . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Kratos ' main weapon is the Blades of Exile , replacing the Blades of Athena used in previous installments and the opening moments of this game . The weapon is a pair of blades that are attached to chains wrapped around the character 's wrists and forearms , which can be swung in a number of maneuvers . During the game , Kratos acquires new weapons — the Claws of Hades , the Nemean Cestus , and the Nemesis Whip — with other combat options . The Nemean Cestus , a pair of gauntlets , and the Nemesis Whip , which is similar to the Blades of Exile , are required to advance in parts of the game ; for example , the Nemean Cestus is needed to break through objects composed of onyx . 
 Unlike in previous games , magical abilities are learned with the acquisition of a new weapon , giving each weapon its own magic attack ; for example , the Army of Sparta may only be used with the Blades of Exile . Magic gives Kratos a variety of ways to attack and kill enemies , such as the Claws of Hades ' Soul Summon ability , which conjures souls to attack enemies . Other magic includes the Nemean Cestus ' Nemean Roar and the Nemesis Whip 's Nemesis Rage . In addition to four primary weapons , three secondary ones , known as Items , are acquired : the Bow of Apollo , the Head of Helios , and the Boots of Hermes . All three are required to advance in certain stages of the game ; for example , the Head of Helios can be used as a lantern in dark areas and to reveal hidden doorways . 
 The relics Poseidon 's Trident , the Golden Fleece , and Icarus ' Wings acquired in previous games are retained and used to overcome environmental obstacles , with the Golden Fleece also used to deflect enemy attacks . Kratos acquires a new relic , Hades ' Soul , which allows him to safely swim in the River Styx . The Blade of Olympus , a primary weapon in God of War II , is used in this game with the special ability Rage of Sparta for temporary invulnerability and increased attack damage . 
 New additions to the gameplay include the combat grapple , a ranged @-@ grab maneuver which , depending on the weapon , can pull Kratos towards foes or force them away — necessary at certain points in the game , with Kratos riding harpies across chasms — and a simple grab @-@ with @-@ bare @-@ hands allowing him to use a weak foe as a battering ram . Kratos can now rapidly switch among the four primary weapons in battle , continuing the same attack combination . Other extra features include the addition of ten Godly Possessions , often hidden near defeated foes and providing additional abilities ( e.g. , unlimited magic ) during bonus play . The challenge mode in this game is called the Challenge of Olympus ( seven trials ) and is unlocked after the game 's completion . This mode requires players to complete a series of specific tasks — for example , killing all enemies without using weapons before time runs out . The player may unlock additional rewards , such as bonus costumes for Kratos , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos , and concept art of the characters and environments , by completing the game 's difficulty levels and the challenge mode . A new mode , the Combat Arena , allows players to set difficulty levels and choose opponents to hone playing skills . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 As with previous games , God of War III is set in an alternate version of ancient Greece populated by Olympian Gods , Titans , heroes , and other characters from Greek mythology . The game is set across several locations on the fictional Mount Olympus , including the Tomb of Ares , the ancient city of Olympia , the Path of Eos , the Labyrinth , several areas of the Palace of the Gods , such as the Forum and Hera 's Gardens , and the Underworld and Tartarus . 
 The Tomb of Ares — housing the former God of War 's remains — and the city of Olympia lie on the sides of Mount Olympus . Just beyond the city is the Path of Eos , a hidden cavern near the foot of Olympus . The Palace of the Gods is the home of the Olympians , and features the Forum ( a small coliseum ) , Hera 's Gardens , and the chambers of Aphrodite and Poseidon . The Labyrinth is a large aerial puzzle constructed by the architect Daedalus to imprison Pandora in the Caverns of Olympus , home of <unk> and its offspring . The Underworld , ruled by Hades and divided by the River Styx , is the realm of the dead . Hades ' palace contains the remains of his wife , Persephone , who was killed by Kratos in Chains of Olympus . The Underworld is also home to statues of the three Judges of the Underworld , who hold the Chain of Balance connecting the Underworld to Olympus . Tartarus is the prison of the dead where the Titan Cronos was banished after Kratos retrieved Pandora 's Box from Pandora 's Temple ( which is chained to the Titan 's back ) in God of War . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Kratos ( voiced by Terrence C. Carson ) , a Spartan warrior and demigod who became God of War after killing Ares and seeks revenge on Zeus for his betrayal , is the game 's protagonist . Other characters include Greek gods such as Athena ( Erin Torpey ) , the Goddess of Wisdom and Kratos ' mentor and ally ; Zeus ( Corey Burton ) , King of the Gods and the primary antagonist ; Poseidon ( Gideon Emery ) , God of the Sea ; Hades ( Clancy Brown ) , God of the Underworld ; Hephaestus ( Rip Torn ) , the Smith God ; Hermes ( Greg Ellis ) , Messenger of the Gods and the God of Speed and Commerce ; Helios ( Crispin Freeman ) , the Sun God ; Hera ( Adrienne Barbeau ) , Queen of the Gods who controls all plant life ; and Aphrodite ( April Stewart ) , Goddess of Love and Sexuality . Several Titans are featured , including Gaia ( Susan Blakeslee ) , Cronos ( George Ball ) , Epimetheus , Oceanus , and Perses . Other characters include Hercules ( Kevin Sorbo ) , a demigod and Kratos ' half @-@ brother ; the architect Daedalus ( Malcolm McDowell ) , father of Icarus ; and Pandora ( Natalie Lander ) , the created daughter of Hephaestus . Minor characters include the three Judges of the Underworld : King Minos ( Mark Moseley ) , King <unk> , and King Aeacus ; <unk> ( Simon Templeman ) , an Underworld prisoner in love with Persephone , and Kratos ' wife and daughter : Lysandra ( Gwendoline Yeo ) and Calliope ( Debi Derryberry ) , who appear in a plot sequence in which Kratos journeys through his own psyche . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Continuing immediately after God of War II , Kratos , Gaia , and the other Titans ascend Mount Olympus to destroy the Olympian Gods . Poseidon launches a counter @-@ assault against the Titans but is killed by Kratos and Gaia ; his death causes the oceans to flood the world . Reaching the peak of Olympus , they try to attack Zeus , but he drives them back and knocks them off the mountain . Gaia clings to the mountainside and refuses to save Kratos , calling him nothing more than a pawn for the Titans ' revenge . 
 Kratos falls into the River Styx , where he loses the Blade of Olympus ; the souls of the Underworld weaken him and ruin the Blades of Athena . Climbing from the river , he is confronted by the spirit of Athena , who had previously sacrificed herself to save Zeus from Kratos . She tells Kratos that her sacrifice has brought her to a higher existence , and she now sees truths she did not before . She states that as long as Zeus reigns , there is no hope for mankind . She gives him the Blades of Exile and says that to kill Zeus , he must quench the Flame of Olympus . After finding the three Judges of the Underworld and the Chain of Balance , Kratos encounters the spirit of Pandora , whom he mistakes for his dead daughter , Calliope . Refusing to help the child , he continues his quest . After encountering the Olympian blacksmith Hephaestus and recovering the Blade of Olympus , he kills Hades , which releases the souls of the Underworld . When he considers searching for the soul of Calliope , Athena reminds Kratos of his quest , and he leaves the Underworld , arriving at Olympia . There he finds the wounded Gaia , who calls for help . He severs her arm , causing her to fall from Mount Olympus to her apparent death . 
 Kratos continues his ascent , murdering powerful foes that include the Titan Perses and the god Helios , which causes the sun to disappear , plunging the world into eternal darkness . This leads to an encounter with Hermes , who mocks Kratos for his past sins . The Spartan chases the god , who leads him to the Chamber of the Flame . Kratos discovers that Pandora 's Box is in the Flame of Olympus and is key to the success of his quest , as it was in God of War . Athena appears , telling Kratos that the flames around the box can only be quelled by Pandora . Kratos then continues after the overconfident Hermes , whom he catches and kills , releasing a plague . At the Forum , he has an audience with the drunken Hera , who ignores his request for Pandora 's location and summons Hercules . After discussing his jealousy of his half @-@ brother , Hercules attacks Kratos and is killed . Kratos then encounters Aphrodite , who is indifferent to his war on Olympus . After seducing him , she leads him to her estranged husband Hephaestus through Hyperion 's Gate , a teleportation device . In an attempt to kill Kratos , the blacksmith sends him to Tartarus to retrieve the <unk> Stone so he can forge a new weapon for the Spartan . Kratos finds Cronos , kills the Titan and retrieves the stone from him , and returns to Hephaestus . After the god forges the weapon , he tries to kill Kratos himself . The Spartan kills Hephaestus , who claims that he was trying to protect his daughter Pandora , who was imprisoned in the Labyrinth after Kratos opened her box . Reusing the Hyperion Gate , the Spartan travels through Hera 's Gardens where he kills the taunting goddess , ending all plant life , and makes his way to the Labyrinth to find Pandora . 
 The imprisoned architect Daedalus tells Kratos to unite the Labyrinth . Completing this task , Kratos fights his way through the aerial puzzle and rescues Pandora , who tells him to break the Chain of Balance so the Labyrinth can be raised , and she can reach her box . Neutralizing the three judges and breaking the chain , Kratos raises the Labyrinth , and Pandora tries to enter the Flame of Olympus . Zeus intervenes and fights Kratos ; after a brief battle , Pandora sacrifices herself and quenches the flame , despite Kratos ' protests . Finding Pandora 's Box empty , Kratos attacks the mocking Zeus . Gaia returns and tries to kill them , but they escape through a gaping wound in her chest where they continue their battle . Gaia is killed when Kratos impales Zeus against her heart with the Blade of Olympus , which apparently also kills Zeus . When Kratos recovers the blade and tries to leave , he is attacked by Zeus ' spirit and loses all of his weapons in the process . Before Zeus can land a fatal blow , Kratos is saved by Pandora during a journey into his psyche . With help from the spirits of his wife Lysandra and daughter Calliope , Kratos forgives himself for his past sins . After discovering the power of hope , he regains consciousness and beats Zeus to death with his bare hands , thus ending the reign of the Olympian Gods . 
 Athena reappears , demanding that Kratos return what she thinks he took from Pandora 's Box . She refuses to believe the box was empty , explaining that when Zeus sealed the evils of the world in the box , she placed her power of hope in it , foreseeing that it would eventually be opened . Athena realizes that when Kratos opened the box to defeat Ares , the evils escaped and infected the gods while Kratos was imbued with hope , which enabled him to kill Ares . She tells Kratos to return her power , saying that she knows how to use it to rebuild the world . Distrusting Athena , Kratos refuses ; saying his vengeance has ended , he impales himself with the Blade of Olympus and releases hope for the world so that it can heal . An angry Athena pulls the sword from him , saying that he has disappointed her and leaves empty @-@ handed . Near death , Kratos collapses as Athena leaves . 
 In a post @-@ credits scene , a trail of blood leads away from an abandoned Blade of Olympus , with Kratos ' whereabouts unknown . 
 = = Development = = 
 In a 2007 interview with GameTrailers , God of War creator and game director David Jaffe explained his original intention for the series , which is different from the actual ending of God of War III , which was based on game director Stig Asmussen 's vision . Jaffe 's idea was that " God of War explains , or ultimately will explain , why there are no more Greek myths " . He said that it would have been " hell on earth " as the gods and Titans battled each other for domination . Other mythological pantheons would have become involved after Kratos killed Zeus and the other Greek gods , and the result would be that humankind no longer believed in the gods — according to Jaffe , the only way a god can truly die . God of War III was first mentioned by God of War II game director Cory Barlog at a God of War II launch event . Barlog said that the game would have full 1080p HD resolution ( changed to 720p in final release ) and support Sixaxis tilt and vibration functions . Announced before the DualShock 3 controller was introduced , this caused confusion since the Sixaxis controller does not support rumble . During the 2009 Game Developers Conference ( GDC ) , the creative team said that the Sixaxis tilt capability had been removed because they " could not find a suitable situation to use Sixaxis in the game effectively " . 
 After the first eight months of development , game director Cory Barlog left Santa Monica for unexplained reasons and Stig Asmussen ( lead environment artist and art director on God of War and God of War II , respectively ) became director . In an interview with IGN , Asmussen said that Barlog " had a major impact on the game " and although he had left the team , they spoke several times afterwards and " bounced a few ideas off him , " but there was no formal collaboration . He also said that David Jaffe " [ had ] been around the studio a few times " and they " [ had ] gone over some high @-@ level stuff with him to get his observations and feedback . " Early in development when Barlog was still with the team , he expressed interest in a cooperative mode " if we can do something unique with it " . In November 2009 , Asmussen told GamePro that although a multiplayer option had been discussed , it was unsuitable for God of War III : " There 's a story we want to tell and an experience we want to deliver , and multi @-@ player doesn 't fit into that . " By December 2009 , the game was in its final developmental stages . 
 In December 2008 , Sony reported that God of War III would be the last game in the series . However , in January 2010 John Hight told Joystiq : " While God of War III will conclude the trilogy , it won 't spell the end of the franchise ... We 're going to be really careful about what we do next " . Asmussen mentioned the possibility of downloadable content ; the game would be shipped with the regular challenge mode , and new challenge modes might be released as downloadable content to maintain the series . In March 2009 , it was reported that Sony was seeking opinions about a collector 's edition from PlayStation 3 owners . In October , an Ultimate Edition was unveiled for North America , and an Ultimate Trilogy Edition was announced soon afterwards for a limited European , Australian , and New Zealand release . A Trilogy Edition was announced for Japan , where the Computer Entertainment Rating Organization ( CERO ) gave the game an adults @-@ only Z rating after the previous two versions were considered suitable for players 17 and older . 
 = = = Technical = = = 
 Asmussen said that one of the greatest challenges in developing God of War III for the PlayStation 3 was the " complexity of everything " ; individual tasks , such as designing Helios ' decapitation , could take a year because the " level of detail [ that was ] expected [ was ] so high and intricate , it [ crossed ] multiple departments . " He said that the PlayStation 3 's hardware capabilities allowed more flexibility in character creation and interaction with the environment . The character model for Kratos in the PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) games used about 5 @,@ 000 polygons ; the PS3 model was about 20 @,@ 000 – a high number , but less than that used by other models such as Nathan Drake in Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves , who used 35 @,@ 000 . Ken Feldman , the art director , commented that the polygon count was not the only factor , and cited the increased texture detail as one of the reasons for Kratos 's realistic appearance . The developers used a new technique called blended normal mapping to add realism to the basic model and hugely enhance the range of animation available ( e.g. , muscle movement , including visible veins , and facial animations ) . All of the main protagonists were animated by hand because the animators produced more effective work than basic motion capture , though the voice actors ' facial movements were recorded by Image Metrics 's performance capture system . For animating things like hair , the animators created a secondary animation code , known as Dynamic Simulation , which allows the PS3 itself to mathematically calculate the way it should look ; it accurately generates motion that previously took the animators long hours to replicate . 
 The engine for God of War III was from the first two installments . Santa Monica senior producer Steve <unk> said that the development team ported God of War II 's engine to the PlayStation 3 and were able to quickly play the game . Everything that Kratos could do in previous games , he could do on the PlayStation 3 , which allowed the developers to immediately begin designing new content . As the game was being developed , the code department would swap out PlayStation 2 components with PlayStation 3 components . They replaced the renderer , the particle system , and the collision system . Feldman said that although they were re @-@ using the engine from God of War II , the core engine for God of War III was brand new . Between the 2009 Electronic Entertainment Expo ( E3 ) and the time the game shipped , morphological anti @-@ aliasing ( MLAA ) was added , which graphics engineer Ben Diamand said " improved edges dramatically and saved substantial amounts of frame @-@ rate . " MLAA is " now a popular edge @-@ detection process that can cost @-@ effectively remove jagged edges from each frame " , which helped Santa Monica free up the processing cycle and " allowed them to add to the spectacle in other ways . " Diamand also said that " depth @-@ of @-@ field , motion blur , crepuscular ' god ' rays and refraction were either added or improved in quality and speed " during that same time period . 
 Asmussen estimated overall game length to be 10 to 20 hours , " depending on how good of a gamer you are . " Santa Monica studio director John Hight reassured players that God of War III lasts longer than 10 hours : " We 've done a lot of play testing on it ... We know , for a really hardcore player , it 'll take them longer than it took them to play either of the previous God of War games . " The finished game script was about 120 pages long , and the number of onscreen enemies increased from 15 in the previous games to a maximum of 50 . To light the game , Turtle by Illuminate Labs was used . Head of development Christer Ericson of SCE Santa Monica Studio confirmed that God of War III has seamless loading ; no loading screens and no hard disk drive installation requirement . SCE America animator Bruno Velazquez said that while the first two God of War titles had computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) cinematics , there would be no true CGI in the third game : " all the cutscenes are created using our in @-@ game engine . " A God of War III game trailer debuted on Spike 's GameTrailers TV on February 11 , 2010 , and Asmussen confirmed that all footage is of gameplay . New camera angles were added ; during some major battles the player can still control Kratos while the camera pans away from the fight , and a first @-@ person camera view was used for the final portion of the Poseidon and Zeus boss fights . According to Sony Santa Monica director of technology Tim Moss , God of War III used 35 gigabytes ( GB ) of Blu @-@ ray Disc . God of War III 's budget was $ 44 million USD , and the game had a staff of 132 at the end of its development . 
 Several voice actors returned from previous installments , including Terrence C. Carson , Erin Torpey , Corey Burton , Debi Derryberry , and Gwendoline Yeo , voicing Kratos , Athena , Zeus , Calliope , and Lysandra , respectively . Susan Blakeslee , who voiced two characters in God of War , voiced Gaia . Narrator Linda Hunt , who previously voiced Gaia , only provided an introductory narration for the game . Rip Torn , Natalie Lander , and Malcolm McDowell joined the cast of voice actors . Lloyd Sherr and Nolan North , who had originally voiced Cronos and Hades , were replaced by George Ball and Clancy Brown , respectively . Kevin Sorbo was chosen to voice Hercules because of his portrayal of the character in the television series , Hercules : The Legendary Journeys . Elijah Wood had a minor voice role , and Josh Keaton and Fred Tatasciore , who voiced characters in previous games , also had minor roles . 
 = = Release = = 
 At E3 2009 , the God of War III demo was unveiled , with Kratos on the cliffs of Mount Olympus battling Olympian legionnaires , a centaur , a chimera , and a cyclops . He decapitates Helios , encounters Perses , rides harpies , and uses the Blades of Athena and new weapons ( the Nemean Cestus and Bow of Apollo ) . On October 28 , 2009 , SCE Europe sent emails to PlayStation Network members with an activation code for the demo . On October 30 , GameStop began providing voucher codes for customers who pre @-@ ordered the game , and early copies of God of War Collection had a voucher code to download the demo . The Blu @-@ ray version of District 9 included the God of War III demo and a " making of " featurette , and the demo was released to <unk> subscribers on February 4 , 2010 . On February 25 , Sony Computer Entertainment released the demo for download on the PlayStation Store in Europe and North America . Just before the game 's release , Eurogamer published an article comparing the graphics in the God of War III demo to those in the final game , reporting improved lighting and realistic motion blur in the final release . 
 God of War III was released in North America on March 16 , 2010 , on March 18 in Australia , March 19 in Europe , and March 25 in Japan . The game outsold its predecessor by nearly 400 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . According to retail tracker NPD Group , God of War III sold about 1 @.@ 1 million copies in the United States by the end of March 2010 , making it the best @-@ selling game of that month , and its opening @-@ month sales were 32 percent higher than those of God of War II . By June 2012 , God of War III had sold almost 5 @.@ 2 million copies worldwide — about 2 @.@ 8 million in North America , 2 million in PAL regions and 417 @,@ 866 in Japan and Asia — making it the best @-@ selling game in the series . The game is also part of PlayStation 3 's Greatest Hits lineup . On August 28 , 2012 , God of War III , God of War Collection , and God of War : Origins Collection were released in North America as the God of War Saga , part of Sony 's PlayStation Collections line . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 God of War III had an extensive marketing campaign before its release . This campaign began in early 2008 when a teaser for God of War III appeared as an image ( the original PlayStation 3 logo surrounded by the Greek omega ) at the end of the instruction manual for God of War : Chains of Olympus . This was soon followed by a teaser trailer screened at Sony 's 2008 E3 press conference . Another trailer premiered at the 2008 Spike Video Game Awards , and an " official " God of War III trailer was released in February 2009 . A new trailer debuted with the release of God of War III on March 16 , 2010 . 
 In October 2009 , SCE Santa Monica Studio announced the God of War III Ultimate Edition , available by pre @-@ order in North America . The package included a replica Pandora 's Box , a limited @-@ edition The Art of God of War III book , and downloadable content ( DLC ) from the PlayStation Network , which included the " Challenge of Exile " mode , Kratos ' " Dominus " costume , the God of War : Unearthing the Legend documentary , the God of War Trilogy Soundtrack , and the God of War : Blood & Metal EP . A limited Ultimate Trilogy Edition was released in Europe , Australia , and New Zealand and included the contents of the Ultimate Edition , as well as God of War Collection , four Kratos costumes , and God of War postcards . A God of War III PS3 bundle , with a 250GB PS3 and a copy of God of War III , was also available in Europe . A God of War III media kit with special packaging and content was distributed to journalists in the PAL regions , and several were given as prizes on PlayStation Europe 's website during the week of March 22 , 2010 . In Japan , God of War III was released in two packages : a standalone version and a God of War Trilogy Edition . The latter included God of War III , God of War Collection , an art book , and a Kratos skin . 
 For pre @-@ orders , some retailers included a premium costume for Kratos : the Apollo , Forgotten Warrior , and Phantom of Chaos skins from Amazon.com , Game Crazy and Play.com , and GameStop , respectively . GameStop pre @-@ orders also included a 17 @-@ by @-@ 24 @-@ inch ( 43 cm × 61 cm ) poster signed by God of War III concept artist Andy Park and an entry in its " Be the Envy of the Gods " sweepstakes . 7 @-@ Eleven issued a God of War III poster for pre @-@ orders and sold a Kratos ' Fury Slurpee in God of War III cups . The cups and their specially marked Mountain Dew bottles had codes usable on the Slurpee website for God of War III downloadable content , including a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video , wallpapers , PlayStation Home content , and an in @-@ game Kratos skin , the Morpheus Armor . 
 In December 2009 , Santa Monica accepted video submissions from players to determine the ultimate God of War fan . The top 18 submissions were included in the closing credits of God of War : Unearthing the Legend , and all winners received a copy of the God of War III Ultimate Edition signed by the development team . Sony and Spike TV sponsored a Last Titan Standing contest , in which fans over 21 could win a chance to play God of War III before its mainstream release . Spike 's GameTrailers TV presented God of War III : Last Titan Standing on March 15 , 2010 , and the winner received a custom @-@ made God of War III PS3 . A week before God of War III 's release , the developers released Kratos ' backstory on the God of War website , under the title " Path to Olympus " . 
 On March 20 , 2010 , a NASCAR car driven by Joey Logano during the Scotts Turf Builder 300 had a God of War III and GameStop @-@ themed paint design . In April , Machinima.com released five " Art of the Game " videos for God of War III on the PlayStation Store , featuring interviews with team developers . A God of War III action figure line was produced by DC Unlimited . To celebrate the game 's entrance into Sony 's Greatest Hits library , Santa Monica sponsored a sweepstakes from March 4 to April 1 , 2011 . Fans could submit an original design of an " Ultimate God of War Monster " for one of three prizes : a limited folio edition , a special edition , and a paperback edition of The Art of God of War III , signed by the development team . 
 The game has 36 trophies , awarded for player achievements ( for example , " Releasing the <unk> " for killing Poseidon ) . When players received the platinum trophy , they were linked to the website <unk> On May 4 , 2010 , the site became the official website for God of War : Ghost of Sparta , the next installment in the series and the second for the PlayStation Portable . Early copies of Ghost of Sparta included a voucher to download Kratos ' brother Deimos as a costume for use in God of War III . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 On November 2 , 2010 , the Dominus character skin and Challenge of Exile mode — previously exclusive to the Ultimate Edition and Ultimate Trilogy Edition — were released as a bundle on the PlayStation Store . The bundle is free for PlayStation Plus subscribers , who could receive the Phantom of Chaos and Forgotten Warrior skins when purchasing God of War and God of War II , respectively , for a limited time . All previous pre @-@ order bonus costumes — Apollo , Forgotten Warrior , and Phantom of Chaos — and the 7 @-@ Eleven promotional DLC — the Morpheus Armor — were also released on the PlayStation Store . 
 = = = God of War III Remastered = = = 
 In celebration of the God of War franchise 's tenth anniversary , Santa Monica 's Creative Director Cory Barlog announced God of War III Remastered , which was released on PlayStation 4 in North America on July 14 , 2015 , mainland Europe on July 15 , and the UK on July 17 . The remastered version has full 1080p support targeted at 60 frames per second and features a photo mode , allowing players to edit their photos and share their favorite moments . The game was ported by Wholesale Algorithms . All of the DLC that was released for God of War III is included with God of War III Remastered . By the end of its first week of release , God of War III Remastered was ninth in sales at retail in the UK . For the entire month of July 2015 , the downloadable version was the seventh best @-@ selling PlayStation 4 title from the PlayStation Store . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 In March and April 2010 , God of War III : Original Soundtrack from the Video Game , composed by Gerard K. Marino , Ron Fish , Mike Reagan , Jeff Rona , and Cris Velasco , was included as downloadable content in the God of War III Ultimate Edition and Ultimate Trilogy Edition . Its CD was released on March 30 by SCE and Sumthing Else . The soundtrack was recorded by the Skywalker Session Orchestra and the Czech National Symphony Chorus . Each composer provided a different aesthetic to the score : for example , Marino 's approach was brooding , rhythmic , and percussive , and Fish set hopeless and somber moods . In an interview with Game Music Online , Mike Reagan said that although the composers might have used each other 's themes , they did not collaborate with each other . Reagan said the real collaboration came from Clint Bajakian , Senior Music Supervisor at Sony , and his team . In scoring for God of War III , Reagan said that the composers were " able to explore more melodic development than we were on the first [ God of War ] . " The score was recorded under the new American Federation of Musicians video game agreement and because of Sony ’ s vision and support , the composers were able to record locally with some of the best musicians in the world . In an interview with PlayStation.Blog , Clint Bajakian described the different ensembles that recorded the score : the brass section is the " lead guitar " , the choir gives the game its epic feel , the strings are the body of the sound , and the percussion is the foundation . 
 A nine @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten review from Square Enix Music Online praised the soundtrack 's orchestration , calling it the best score in the series to date . G4 praised its quality , saying that the compositions were strong and it was " fantastic " as standalone music . A six @-@ out @-@ of @-@ ten review from Tracksounds said that although the score " lacks the intricacy and personality that could set it apart and give it a sense of uniqueness ... [ it ] delivers on its promise of a loud , wrathful bundle of tunes you can kill gods to ... for better or worse . " The reviewer said to " Enjoy in small doses . " At the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , the soundtrack was nominated for Best Original Score . 
 = = Reception = = 
 God of War III was critically acclaimed , receiving aggregate scores of 92 @.@ 84 % from GameRankings and 92 out of 100 from Metacritic , who describe their score as " universal acclaim " . Adam Sessler of X @-@ Play said that the game " finishes the trilogy on an exceptionally high note " , and it " blends all of its best attributes into a stellar experience . " IGN 's Chris Roper said that God of War III " practically redefines " scale in video games , singling out the size of the Titans as being " larger than entire levels in other games " . Mike Jackson of Official PlayStation Magazine UK called it the biggest God of War game yet ; if it was the series ' last game , " God of War III gives PlayStation 's toughest hero the send @-@ off he deserves . " 
 Matt Leone of 1UP said that the gameplay has " variety ... You seemingly see , acquire , and participate in something new around every corner " . According to Leone , each weapon " adds a lot of depth to the combat system . " Christian Donlan of Eurogamer said that the " combat system , level flow , and pacing of bosses and puzzles remains largely untouched . But everything 's bigger , grander and more elaborate . " He praised the weapons ' accessibility , saying that it is easy to quickly switch between them . According to Tom McShea of GameSpot , the combat and scale " have been pushed further than ever before ... creating an experience so focused and explosively fun that it 's hard to put down , and even harder to forget . " McShea said that regardless of repetition , " the brutality of combat is one of the most satisfying aspects of God of War III . " Joe Juba of Game Informer called God of War III " visceral " and " brutal " , and Kratos " the undisputed king of the genre . " Jackson , however , said the core gameplay 's familiarity " makes it feel less than the very , very best " , and according to Roper , two of the three additional weapons are similar to the main blades ; they " have unique powers and slightly different moves , but by and large they 're more of the same . " 
 Its plot received mixed reviews . GameTrailers said that God of War III 's storyline makes Greek mythology more interesting . GameFront 's Phil Hornshaw said it had an overly cruel antagonist , and the game assumed that the players reveled in the misery and violence as much as Kratos did . According to Donlan , the story is as simple as it can get . McShea said that although it does not pick up until near the end , it " becomes powerful and moving in unexpected ways , peaking in a thrilling conclusion that successfully touches on many different emotions and provides closure for this epic tale . " Juba , on the other hand , considered that the plot " doesn 't have any standout revelations or developments " . 
 Jackson called God of War III 's graphics as good as ( if not better than ) those in Killzone 2 and Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . According to Juba , the " cinematic camera work [ is ] even more impressive than Naughty Dog 's feats with Uncharted 2 . " Roper said , " God of War III presents some of the most impressive visuals that I 've ever seen in a game . Kratos in particular looks phenomenal , and is perhaps the single most impressive @-@ looking character ever in videogames . " According to GameTrailers , " the levels are expertly designed " and the game 's scale is the most outstanding visual achievement . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 God of War III was awarded the " Most Anticipated Game of 2010 " at the 2009 Spike Video Game Awards . At the 2010 Spike Video Game Awards , it was awarded " Best PS3 Game " and " Best Graphics " , and Kratos received the " Biggest Badass " award . It was also a nominee for " Game of the Year " , " Best Action Adventure Game " , " Best Original Score " , and " Character of the Year " ( Kratos ) . Other individual awards include " Best Action / Adventure Game " ( Game Trailers ) , " Best Action Game " ( GameSpy ) , " Best PS3 Game " ( Game Revolution ) , and " Best PS3 Exclusive " ( Shacknews ) . At the 2011 British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Video Game Awards , God of War III received the " Artistic Achievement " award , and it was a nominee for the " Action " and " Gameplay " awards . 
 = = = Remastered = = = 
 Though the original release of God of War III was met with critical acclaim , God of War III Remastered only garnered generally favorable reviews , receiving aggregate scores of 80 @.@ 37 % and 81 out of 100 from GameRankings and Metacritic , respectively . Reviewers found it odd that Sony decided to remaster God of War III for PlayStation 4 , as its story picks up immediately from the ending of God of War II , which may confuse newcomers who have never played the previous games . Praise was given to the smoother textures and improved frame rate , though because the original already had impressive graphics , the changes were not major , and reviewers said these changes were not a strong enough argument to rebuy the game for $ 40 USD . 
 = Elite Ice Hockey League = 
 The Elite Ice Hockey League ( EIHL ) is a professional ice hockey league in the United Kingdom . Formed in 2003 following the demise of the Ice Hockey Superleague , it is the highest level of ice hockey competition in the United Kingdom . Initial sponsorship was from Rapid Solicitors . 
 The league currently consists of ten teams , with representation from all four Home Nations – the only league in any sport to do so . In eight completed seasons the league has been won by four different teams . From the 2012 – 13 Season onwards the league features a northern conference ( Gardiner Conference , named after Scottish @-@ born former NHL goalie Charlie Gardiner ) featuring Braehead ( SCO ) , Dundee ( SCO ) , Edinburgh ( SCO ) , Fife ( SCO ) and Manchester Storm ( ENG ) and a Southern conference ( Erhardt Conference , named after 1936 English Olympic Hockey Gold Medalist Carl Erhardt ) featuring Belfast ( NIR ) , Cardiff ( <unk> ) , Coventry ( ENG ) , Nottingham ( ENG ) and Sheffield ( ENG ) . The top eight teams in the overall league standings qualify for the Elite League playoffs . The Elite League post @-@ season is considerably shorter than playoff tournaments in North America ; in the first round teams play a two @-@ leg game ( one home , one away ) and the semi @-@ finals and final take place over the course of a single weekend at the National Ice Centre in Nottingham . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Several competitions fall under the jurisdiction of the Elite League . In 2006 – 07 , the EIHL ran a total of four competitions : the league , playoffs , Challenge Cup and Knockout Cup . The league consists of a single division , each team playing three home games and three away games against the other teams in the league . Teams play each team in their conference four times at home and four times away from home , and each team in the other conference twice at home and twice away . Two points are awarded for a win and one for an overtime or penalty shootout defeat . Overtime consists of five minutes of four @-@ on @-@ four hockey and ends immediately if a goal is scored . The team that has most points after all fixtures are completed is declared champion . 
 After the regular season is complete , the teams with the best regular season records enter the playoffs , the winner of which receives the British Championship . The number of teams competing in the playoffs has varied , the first two seasons saw six teams qualify , while the demise of the London Racers in November 2005 saw all eight teams qualify . Prior to the 2006 – 07 season , the teams were divided into two groups , with the members of each group playing on a round @-@ robin basis . The top two teams in each group qualify for the semi @-@ finals , which are straight knockout matches . However , since the 2006 – 07 season , the top eight teams of the regular season have qualified for the quarter @-@ finals with the team finishing first playing the eighth @-@ placed team , second vs seventh , third vs sixth and fourth vs fifth , with all ties being played on a two @-@ legged , home and away game basis with the four winners qualifying for the semi @-@ finals . Both the semi @-@ finals and the final take place over a single weekend in April at the National Ice Centre in Nottingham . Some Elite League games may also count as Challenge Cup games and points count for both . 
 The Challenge Cup has taken a number of different formats , ranging from a table formed from the results of designated league fixtures to four team groups played on a round @-@ robin basis at the beginning of the season . The semi finals and final are two @-@ legged games , the winner being the team with the highest aggregate score at the end of the second game . 
 The Knockout Cup was created in 2005 after the London Racers withdrew from the league . The Cup is a knockout tournament in which teams are randomly drawn to face one another in two @-@ legged games , with aggregate scoreline determining the winner of each tie . 
 The Elite League is governed by a board of twelve directors : the owners of the ten participating teams , plus the owners of the London Racers and Milton Keynes Lightning , who maintain the right to join the league without making an application . The day @-@ to @-@ day operation of the league is overseen by chairman Eamon Convery and Director of Hockey Andy French . Disciplinary matters are handled by Director of Discipline and former referee Simon Kirkham . The level below the Elite League is the English Premier Ice Hockey League . A system of promotion and relegation is not operated by the Elite League ; teams enter the league on the basis of a decision by the board of directors . In 2006 the Hull Stingrays , the club which finished eighth in the <unk> during the 2005 – 06 season , were elected into the Elite League . 
 = = History = = 
 British ice hockey 's structure underwent major reorganisation in 1996 . The British Hockey League ( the highest senior competition since 1982 , featuring the top two divisions of the sport ) was disbanded and replaced by the Ice Hockey Superleague ( top tier ) and British National League ( second tier ) . 
 The loss of the Cardiff Devils and the Newcastle Jesters in 2001 reduced the membership of the Superleague to seven ; and when the Manchester Storm and the Scottish Eagles folded within a week of one another at the beginning of the 2002 – 03 season , there were just five remaining teams . In December 2002 , the Bracknell Bees announced their intention to resign from the league to join the BNL at the end of the season ; and uncertainty surrounded the future of the London Knights and their London Arena home ; which ultimately led to the Knights folding in 2003 . Owing a large debt to Ice Hockey UK and facing the prospect of having only three members , the league placed itself into liquidation on 30 April 2003 . 
 The three remaining clubs ( Belfast Giants , Nottingham Panthers , and Sheffield Steelers ) began considering the formation of a new league with a lower wage cap and larger commitment to British players to attract other clubs into joining them . In the weeks that followed they were joined by Basingstoke Bison , Cardiff Devils , and Coventry Blaze of the British National League and two new organisations from London and Manchester . A team based in Glasgow was also planned , but did not come to fruition . The new league met considerable opposition from the British National League and the governing body Ice Hockey UK . <unk> wished the remaining Superleague clubs to integrate themselves into the BNL and initially refused to grant the new league affiliation . The Superleague clubs were reluctant to join the predominantly British trained league after several years of playing in an import @-@ dominated league where British players were seldom able to step up to the standard of their North American and European counterparts . The Elite League instead preferred a twelve import limit with the rest of the team comprising British @-@ trained players . 
 The refusal to grant affiliation caused a bitter row to ensue that showed little sign of being resolved . Despite not having the support of the governing body , the new league continued their plans regardless . No affiliation would have meant that the clubs would have problems attaining work permits for their signings and finding officials to referee their matches . The row also threatened the future of the Nottingham Panthers , as the National Ice Centre were reluctant to allow a team from an unaffiliated league hire their arena . The issue was resolved in August 2003 when the Panthers and the NIC announced an <unk> agreement . The EIHL finally agreed affiliation in August 2003 , with only weeks to go before the beginning of the new season . 
 The new league began on 12 September 2003 when Sheffield Steelers , who went on to become the inaugural league champions , defeated the newly formed London Racers 6 – 1 at Alexandra Palace . The Racers endured a difficult first season , moving to a different rink only weeks into the season and having to wait 40 games to record a win , a 3 – 0 victory over Cardiff Devils . The Racers finished the season with 10 points , 38 points behind second bottom Basingstoke . The other new team , Manchester Phoenix fared slightly better , qualifying for the playoff finals after finishing sixth in the league , where they were defeated 6 – 1 by Nottingham in the semi final . The club played at the 17 @,@ 500 capacity MEN Arena which had been home to Manchester Storm , but Phoenix crowds averaged 2 @,@ 250 , well below the break @-@ even mark of 3 @,@ 000 . Late in the season , Phoenix choose to play a game at <unk> rather than pay the considerable cost of hiring the arena for a mid @-@ week game ( which usually had lower attendances ) . In the close season they allowed fans to vote on the option of either suspending playing operations while a new rink was constructed or playing in exile away from Manchester while a new rink was built . Supporters opted to suspend playing operations pending the construction of a new facility . 
 The second season of the EIHL saw a series of games between the EIHL clubs and the members of the BNL . In addition to three home games and three away games against their Elite opponents , each club also played one home game and one away game against the BNL clubs in crossover match @-@ ups . Results in these crossover games would count towards a team 's points tally . The NHL lock @-@ out also saw a number of NHL players join British clubs . Coventry won a Grand Slam of all three titles , winning the Championship with an overtime victory over the Nottingham Panthers . 
 The crossover games with the BNL clubs were seen by many to be the first stage towards the amalgamation of the two organisations into one league ; essentially reforming the original <unk> . However , early in the season it was revealed that two teams from the BNL , Edinburgh Capitals and Newcastle Vipers , were seeking to resign from the BNL and join the EIHL ; preferring the standard of hockey that the EIHL had to offer . A withdrawal of these clubs would leave the BNL with only five remaining participating teams . This situation led to the resigning teams temporarily withdrawing their Elite League applications and entering into collective discussions on the entire BNL joining the EIHL instead . The Elite League offered the BNL clubs invitations to join the EIHL structure , which were declined by the remaining teams due to unfavourable terms . Subsequently Capitals and Vipers both resubmitted individual applications to the Elite League ; both of which were accepted . This ultimately led to the dissolution of the BNL , with the five remaining teams joining the next tier of British hockey ( which consisted of the English Premier Ice Hockey League in England and Scottish National League in Scotland respectively ) . 
 With Edinburgh Capitals and Newcastle Vipers becoming the ninth and tenth members of the league , the 2005 – 06 season began with nine clubs ( Manchester had opted to take another season out with no rink yet constructed ) . However , in November 2005 London Racers withdrew their team from competition and immediately ceased operations . From their formation the Racers had suffered problems finding a rink with comparable facilities to those of their rivals and they had maintained only a very small fan base . The club had made the Lee Valley Ice Centre their home after playing only a small number of games at the Alexandra Palace in their first season . The facilities were very basic , seating only 900 people with an overall capacity of barely 1000 . In November 2005 , during a game against Nottingham Panthers ; Panthers player Blaž <unk> suffered a serious facial injury after colliding with a protruding object in the boardings . Further concerns were raised when a game against the Sheffield Steelers was abandoned after a piece of plexiglas shattered in an irregular manner , injuring a spectator . When a similar event took place during practice a few days later ; the Racers management began to question seriously the safety of the rink . With the Ice Centre unable to ensure the safety of players and spectators at Elite League games , the Racers were forced to suspend team operations with immediate effect . 
 In January 2006 , Manchester Phoenix were granted planning permission to construct a new rink in Altrincham . A few weeks later Cardiff Devils also received planning permission for the construction of a new rink . The Wales National Ice Rink was earmarked for demolition and a campaign for the council to provide a new facility proved successful . With both clubs confirming their intent to take part the following season , speculation began about the possible inclusion of a tenth team to replace London Racers . After the season was over , rumours about the possible admission of either Hull or Dundee became more and more widespread . On 22 June 2006 , Hull Stingrays were formally elected into the Elite Ice Hockey League as the tenth active member . 
 In June 2006 the EIHL announced the adoption of the ' zero tolerance ' interpretation of the rules with regard to holding , hooking and interference implemented in the National Hockey League during the 2005 – 06 season . These rules had proved highly successful in the NHL , increasing the pace of the game and leading to a rise in spectator numbers . 
 On 25 August 2006 , the Elite League announced a sponsorship deal with the low cost airline <unk> . The agreement saw the company 's name incorporated into the league 's title and the airline 's branding at each of the league 's ten arenas . The deal was intended to last for seven seasons , but ended prematurely during the 2008 – 09 season . 
 On 30 April 2009 , Manchester Phoenix announced that they would withdraw from the league , and play instead in the English Premier Ice Hockey League , due to cost issues . This news followed the announcement that Basingstoke Bison were also leaving to play in the EPL for the 2009 – 10 season . 
 After losing two teams at the end of the 2008 – 09 season the Elite League was boosted by a new franchise joining the league . Braehead Clan were announced as the ninth team from the 2010 – 11 season . On 27 April 2010 , Dundee Stars were unanimously accepted into the League by the EIHL board as the tenth team . 
 Hull Stingrays withdrew from the League on 11 August 2010 , announced via the club 's official website , and later confirmed on the BBC 's site . However , after a takeover from Coventry Blaze on 17 August 2010 , the Hull Stingrays confirmed that they would indeed be participating in the League for the 2010 / 11 season . The Stingrays again withdrew on 24 June 2015 , as the club announced on its official website that it has been placed into liquidation . 
 From the 2013 – 14 season onwards , the league has consisted of two conferences ; each consisting of five teams . These are the Erhardt Conference and the Gardiner Conference . These can roughly be split into north and south , with the Erhardt featuring the teams from Belfast , Cardiff , Coventry , Nottingham , and Sheffield ; and the Gardiner featuring the teams from Braehead , Dundee , Edinburgh , and Fife , along with Hull Stingrays until 2015 , and their replacements Manchester Storm from 2015 onwards . 
 = = Clubs = = 
 = = = Former clubs = = = 
 = = = Potential future clubs = = = 
 On 29 March 2016 it was announced that Milton Keynes Lightning ( currently playing in the second @-@ tier English Premier League ) would be joining the Elite League for the 2017 – 18 season . This will take the number of teams up to 11 , which has fuelled speculation that another team may also be added for 2017 – 18 in order to balance out the conferences . 
 Aberdeen Lynx ( currently competing in the Scottish National League ) have stated that their ambition is to establish an Elite League team in the city in the future . 
 Nottingham Panthers and Braehead Clan owner Neil Black is rumoured to be setting up a new EIHL franchise in London , playing out of the Wembley Arena . Black has also stated in the past that he would like to see franchises in Manchester ( which has now been achieved ) and Dublin . 
 Wayne Scholes , owner of the Telford Tigers ( currently in the English Premier League ) has stated that his organisation doesn 't have any immediate plans to make the step up , but has not ruled out the possibility of joining the EIHL in the future , saying that “ We have had conversations with the Elite League before but they have to invite you . You can ’ t approach them . It is one of those things where they want to see that you have got two or three years of really good solid success . They want to see that it is sustainable and that you are up to a certain standard , and then they will reach out . At that point , it ’ s a discussion that we will have but right now we are pretty happy where we are . " 
 = = Players = = 
 Elite League teams rely heavily on players from outside the United Kingdom ( termed imports ) . The majority of these players are from North America , and typically played in the minor North American leagues such as the ECHL and AHL before coming to Britain . For example , of the 21 players to play for champions Belfast Giants in the 2005 – 06 season , 10 were Canadian , 8 were British and 3 were American . The league restricts the number of import players which can be dressed for a game , with a current limit of 11 imports . Player turnover is high , with a large proportion of players spending a single season at a team before moving on , and multi @-@ year contracts are uncommon . 
 As would be expected in a league dominated by North American players , the style of ice hockey in Britain is similar to that played in North America , and has a more physical style than that played in other , technically natured European countries . This was demonstrated during the 2004 – 05 NHL lock @-@ out . Of the NHL players to join Elite League teams , the majority were players noted for physical strength rather than puck @-@ handling skills , such as Wade Belak and Eric Cairns . 
 While British players account for a minority of Elite League players , the league supplies the majority of players for the Great Britain team . 18 of the 22 players in the Great Britain squad for the 2015 World Championships played for Elite League teams in the preceding season . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 Ice hockey receives little national media coverage in the United Kingdom . Some national newspapers list results and provide short summaries of the league 's news but more extensive coverage remains minimal . There was a small surge in interest during the 2004 – 05 season when newspapers such as The Times reported on the NHL players playing the Elite League as a result of the lock @-@ out but since the lock @-@ out ended , coverage has returned to its previous levels . 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , Sky Sports and the BBC 's Grandstand programme covered the British Hockey League and Superleague and their important games and competitions regularly . However , in 2001 the Superleague sold its broadcasting rights to ' Premium TV Ltd ' who planned to set up a new sports channel , which never materialised . British ice hockey was left without coverage from any television network . This situation continued through the final seasons of the Superleague and into the first seasons of the Elite League . In 2005 , Elite League officials concluded an agreement with the North American Sports Network to provide a weekly highlights and news programme . These usually provide highlights from a game recorded the previous weekend and are an hour in length . In September 2007 the Elite League announced a deal with Sky Sports for a weekly show of Elite League highlights . In 2010 Sky Sports showed the playoff final between the Belfast Giants and Cardiff Devils live , this was the first time sky had shown a live game for several years . Sky Sports have recently announced plans to show 8 live games along with a weekly highlight show during the 2010 – 11 season . In season 2013 – 14 Premier Sports acquired the rights to film and broadcast 23 games from the Elite League with a live game shown every Saturday night from 23 November onwards . Live coverage will also include the playoffs and playoff final . 
 Of the national newspapers only the Daily Star has a regular ice hockey column which appears on Tuesday and Sunday . 
 Coverage in the towns and cities where Elite League clubs are based is more extensive , and local newspapers have dedicated ice hockey reporters who cover the local team . Local radio stations such as BBC Coventry & Warwickshire , BBC Radio Nottingham and BBC Radio Sheffield all provide live commentary of matches . These are either broadcast live on the stations themselves or are webcast through the stations ' websites . Radio Sheffield also provides a weekly ice hockey programme <unk> while Radio Nottingham has broadcast a similar programme , Powerplay since the later stages of the 2005 – 06 season , and has a 15 @-@ minute weekly preview of games on a Saturday evening during the ice hockey season after the station 's coverage of the local football teams is completed . BBC Coventry & Warwickshire have also followed suit with Faceoff , a program broadcast on the first Thursday of the month during the season . Video footage can also be viewed from the website . 
 Cardiff Devils are given weekly highlights coverage on Local TV station , " Made in Cardiff " , which is available on Freeview <unk> , Sky Guide Ch 134 and Virgin Ch 159 . 
 Most of the teams also provide webcasts on match nights . 
 = = Champions = = 
 = = = Most titles = = = 
 = = Comparison to other leagues = = 
 In attendance , the EIHL ranks 8th among the European top leagues with an 2 @,@ 719 average . Three teams are among the top 100 of the continent , 2016 challenge cup champions Nottingham Panthers at 40th ( 5 @,@ 713 average ) , 2012 league champions Belfast Giants at 80th ( 4 @,@ 544 ) and 2016 league champions Sheffield Steelers at 83rd ( 4 @,@ 489 ) 
 Previously , the EIHL champions were invited to play in the Continental Cup , Europe 's 2nd level club competition . For the 2009 – 10 tournament , the <unk> entrants entered the tournament in the penultimate ( 3rd ) group stage . However , with the introduction of the Champions Hockey League , this has changed . From the 2015 – 16 season , the top 2 teams in the EIHL will participate in the CHL , with either the team who wins the post @-@ season playoffs , or the team finishing third if the playoffs winner is one of the top two , entering the Continental Cup . 
 During the 2012 – 13 NHL Lockout , several NHL players plied their trade in the Elite League , including ; Matt <unk> , Paul Bissonnette , Drew Miller , Tom Sestito & Anthony Stewart . The league is currently home to several ex @-@ NHLers , including Dustin Kohn of the Sheffield Steelers , Kevin <unk> of the Belfast Giants , Cam Janssen of the Nottingham Panthers and Ryan O <unk> of the Coventry Blaze . 
 = = Criticism of the EIHL = = 
 The main criticism levelled at the EIHL is that the league is too expensive , an accusation given credence by the collapse of the London Racers mid season in 2005 , and the continued financial problems experienced by a number of other member clubs ( most notably Basingstoke Bison and Manchester Phoenix in 2008 – 09 ) . Both the Edinburgh Capitals and Newcastle Vipers have made public statements about their potentially perilous financial situations , casting further doubt over both their own , and the league 's sustained viability . This perceived problem with expenditure was given further credence when the Hull Stingrays announced on 11 August 2010 that they were ceasing operations immediately due to insufficient funds from sponsorship to guarantee completing the season . They were , however , taken over on 17 August 2010 by Coventry Blaze and therefore Hull Stingrays continued to operate . In 2011 the Newcastle Vipers announced that they would not be able to compete in the 2011 – 12 season due to financial difficulties and lack of a permanent home stadium . Newcastle had , up to this point , been playing their home games at Whitley Bay ice rink . A proposed new stadium in the Newcastle area did not materialise . 
 = = Expansion = = 
 Despite there being a limited number of suitable venues for league expansion , there have been various attempts during the <unk> short lifespan to expand the league . After the successful addition of the Braehead Clan and the Dundee Stars for the 2010 – 11 season , the EIHL reported that it had entered discussions with the Fife Flyers formerly of the defunct BNL , and then resident in the SNL . On 24 June 2011 , it was confirmed that the Fife Flyers had been admitted to the EIHL in time for the commencement of the 2011 – 12 season . 
 Further to this , Neil Black , owner of the Nottingham Panthers and Braehead Clan has expressed the desire to see a Manchester team back in the EIHL by 2015 , along with teams in Dublin and London , subject to there being suitable venues available . 
 In mid @-@ 2013 , stories began to circulate that the <unk> had approached AEG with the intention of placing a London @-@ based franchise into Wembley Arena . League chairman Tony Smith confirmed that a franchise had been awarded to a London @-@ based group for a franchise located within the capital 
 = = Records = = 
 Most Regular Season Titles : Sheffield Steelers ( 5 ) 
 Most Play @-@ off Championship Titles : Nottingham Panthers ( 5 ) 
 Most Challenge Cup Titles ( EIHL era ) : Nottingham Panthers ( 8 ) 
 Most Knockout Cup Titles : Belfast Giants , Cardiff Devils , Coventry Blaze , Sheffield Steelers ( 1 ) 
 Most 20 – 20 Titles : Sheffield Steelers and Braehead Clan ( 1 ) 
 Most Wins in Regular Season : Belfast Giants ( 46 ) ( 2011 – 12 , 54 Game Season ) 
 Most Ties in Regular Season : London Racers ( 9 ) ( 2004 – 05 , 50 Game Season ) 
 Most Losses in Regular Season ( inc . Overtime ) : London Racers ( 51 ) ( 2003 – 04 , 56 Game Season ) 
 Most Goals Scored in Regular Season : Cardiff Devils ( 269 ) ( 2010 – 11 , 54 Game Season ) 
 Most Goals <unk> in Regular Season : Edinburgh Capitals ( 418 ) ( 2010 – 11 , 54 Game Season ) 
 Most Points in Regular Season : Belfast Giants ( 95 ) ( 2011 – 12 , 54 Game Season ) 
 Most Shutouts in Regular Season : <unk> <unk> ( Sheffield Steelers ) 10 ( 2010 – 11 ) 
 Highest Attendance ( Regular Season ) : 9 @,@ 203 ( Sheffield Steelers <unk> Nottingham Panthers , 19th March 2016 ) 
 Most Goals in a Single Game ( Team ) ( Regular Season ) : Sheffield Steelers ( 18 ) ( Sheffield Steelers 18 – 1 Edinburgh Capitals , 15 January 2011 ) 
 Largest Winning Margin ( Regular Season ) : Sheffield Steelers ( 17 ) ( Sheffield Steelers 18 – 1 Edinburgh Capitals , 15 January 2011 ) 
 = Kyle Critchell = 
 Kyle Adrian Ross Critchell ( born 18 January 1987 ) is a footballer who plays for Dorchester Town as a defender . 
 Critchell progressed through the youth and reserve teams at Southampton and had a loan period at Torquay United . He left for Chesterfield and was released by them after half a season , when he moved to Weymouth . A move to Wrexham followed and following an injury he was loaned out to York City and Weymouth . He re @-@ signed for Weymouth following their relegation to the Conference South and later joined league rivals Dorchester Town in 2009 . He returned to Weymouth in 2012 . 
 Critchell has represented Wales at various levels . He gained five caps for the under @-@ 17 team , before making three appearances for the under @-@ 21 team from 2005 to 2006 . He has made four appearances for the semi @-@ professional team , making his debut against England C in 2008 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 Born in Dorchester , Dorset , Critchell joined Southampton as a trainee in July 2003 after being spotted playing for Weymouth 's reserve team . He played in both legs of the FA Youth Cup semi @-@ final in 2005 , and suffered from a broken ankle in the second leg , which Southampton won in a penalty shoot @-@ out . In the 2005 pre @-@ season he made his first appearance in the Southampton first team during pre @-@ season and signed a professional contract with the club on 4 August 2005 , but spent most of the 2005 – 06 season out with a cruciate ligament injury . 
 He joined League Two side Torquay United on a two @-@ month loan in October 2006 . He made his league debut on 28 October 2006 in Torquay 's 0 – 0 draw at home to Shrewsbury Town and finished the loan period with 10 appearances . He moved to Chesterfield of League One on a free transfer on 19 January 2007 , signing a contract taking him to the end of the 2006 – 07 season . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 defeat to Brighton & Hove Albion on 20 January . During a game against Crewe Alexandra on 7 April he picked up a groin strain , which resulted in him undergoing a scan . He also suffered from a virus while at the club and was released in May 2007 , after making 10 appearances as Chesterfield were relegated to League Two . 
 Critchell trained with Conference Premier side Weymouth and signed a two @-@ year contract on 20 June 2007 . He made his debut on 11 August , the opening day of the 2007 – 08 season , in a 2 – 1 victory over Halifax Town . Following a 3 – 1 defeat to Stafford Rangers for Weymouth , manager Jason Tindall singled out Critchell for praise , saying ; " The only one out there today who deserves any credit for their performance was Kyle Critchell but overall it was not good enough " . He was sent off against Altrincham on the final day of the season after clashing with Gary Scott and he finished the season with 42 appearances . 
 Critchell signed a two @-@ year contract with newly relegated Conference Premier side Wrexham on 24 June 2008 . He made his debut in a 2 – 0 victory over Oxford United , where he played in right midfield . After making a further appearance for Wrexham he suffered from an ankle injury during a training session . He underwent surgery on this ankle in October , which had been delayed due to illness . After recovering from this injury four months later , he said he was looking to be loaned out to help improve his first team chances at Wrexham . He eventually joined fellow Conference Premier side York City on a one @-@ month loan on 5 January 2009 . He was due to make his debut a day later against former club Weymouth , but the match was postponed . He eventually made his first appearance after playing in the 2 – 1 victory over Oxford on 13 January in the second round of the FA Trophy . This was followed by his league debut on 17 January in a 3 – 0 victory over Lewes . The loan was extended for a second month on 4 February and finished his time at York with 11 appearances . 
 He rejoined Weymouth on loan in March until 24 April and made his debut in a 2 – 0 defeat to Kettering Town . He finished the season with eight appearances for Weymouth , while the club was relegated to the Conference South . After making two appearances for Wrexham , he was released on 8 June , after agreeing a deal for his contract to be cancelled . He then re @-@ signed for Weymouth for the 2009 – 10 season on a permanent contract in June . Critchell left Weymouth in November to join local rivals and hometown club Dorchester Town . He finished the season with 20 appearances for Dorchester . Critchell made 40 appearances and scored three goals in the 2010 – 11 season . 
 Critchell re @-@ signed for Weymouth on a two @-@ year contract for an undisclosed fee on 9 August 2012 , with the club now in the Southern League Premier Division . He explained the transfer by saying " The biggest reason why I have come back is seeing everyone smiling and being positive again . The right atmosphere seems to be back at the club and that can only bode well for the future " . 
 = = International career = = 
 Despite being born in England , he has represented Wales at under @-@ 17 level , with whom he gained five caps . He made his debut for the Wales under @-@ 21 team in a 1 – 0 victory against Austria on 25 March 2005 . He was named in the squad to face Turkey in September 2006 , which proved to be his final appearance for the team . He was forced into withdrawing from the squad in February 2007 for a friendly against Northern Ireland due to injury . 
 He was called into the Wales Semi @-@ Pro team for their match against England C in February 2008 and made his debut in this match , with Wales being defeated 2 – 1 . He was named in the squad for the Four Nations tournament in May . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Described as " an extremely versatile player with boundless energy " , Critchell has a preference for playing at right back , although he can also play on the left or in midfield . While in the Weymouth youth system , he played as a striker . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 23 February 2013 . 
 = Żydokomuna = 
 Żydokomuna ( Polish pronunciation : [ <unk> ] , " Judeo @-@ Communism " ) is a term , usually regarded as pejorative and an antisemitic stereotype , referring to alleged Jewish – Soviet collaboration in importing communism into Poland , where communism was sometimes identified as part of a wider Jewish @-@ led conspiracy to seize power . Most historians dispute the claims of Żydokomuna . 
 The idea of Żydokomuna continued to endure to a certain extent in postwar Poland ( 1944 – 1956 ) , because Polish anti @-@ communists saw the Soviet @-@ controlled Communist regime as the fruition of prewar anti @-@ Polish agitation ; with it came the implication of Jewish responsibility . The Soviet appointments of Jews to positions responsible for oppressing the populace further fueled this perception . Some 37 @,@ 1 % of post @-@ war management of UB employees and members of the communist authorities in Poland were of Jewish origin . They were described in intelligence reports as most loyal to the Soviets ( <unk> ) . That some Polish historians have impugned the loyalty of Jews returning to Poland from the USSR after the Soviet takeover has raised the specter of Żydokomuna in the minds of other scholars . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 According to some sources , the concept of a Jewish conspiracy threatening Polish social order dates in print to the pamphlet Rok <unk> czyli sen <unk> ( The Year <unk> , or the Incredible Dream ) by Polish Enlightenment author and political activist Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz , written in 1817 and published posthumously in 1858 . Called " the first Polish work to develop on a large scale the concept of an organized Jewish conspiracy directly threatening the existing social structure , " it describes a Warsaw of the future renamed <unk> after its Jewish ruler . ( See " <unk> " article for more . ) 
 At the end of the 19th century , Roman Dmowski 's National Democratic party characterized Poland 's Jews and other opponents of Dmowski 's party as internal enemies who were behind international conspiracies inimical to Poland and who were agents of disorder , disruption and socialism . Historian Antony Polonsky writes that before World War I " The National Democrats brought to Poland a new and dangerous ideological fanaticism , dividing society into ' friends ' and ' enemies ' and resorting constantly to conspiratorial theories ( " Jewish @-@ Masonic plot " ; " Żydokomuna " — " Jew @-@ communism " ) to explain Poland 's difficulties . " Meanwhile , Jews played into National Democratic rhetoric by affirming themselves as alien through their participation in exclusively Jewish organizations such as the Bund and the Zionist movement . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The term Żydokomuna originated in connection with the Russian Bolshevik Revolution and targeted Jewish communists during the Polish @-@ Soviet War . The emergence of the Soviet state was seen by many Poles as Russian imperialism in a new guise . The visibility of Jews in both the Soviet leadership and in the Polish Communist Party further heightened such fears . In some circles , Żydokomuna came to be seen as a prominent antisemitic stereotype expressing political paranoia . 
 Accusations of Żydokomuna accompanied the incidents of anti @-@ Jewish violence in Poland during Polish – Soviet War of 1920 , legitimized as self @-@ defense against a people who were oppressors of the Polish nation . Some soldiers and officers in the Polish eastern territories shared the conviction that Jews were enemies of the Polish nation @-@ state and were collaborators with Poland 's enemies . Some of these troops treated all Jews as Bolsheviks . According to some sources , anticommunist sentiment was implicated in anti @-@ Jewish violence and killings in a number of towns , including the Pinsk massacre , in which 35 Jews , taken as hostages , were murdered , and the Lwów pogrom during the Polish @-@ Ukrainian War , in which 72 Jews were killed . Occasional instances of Jewish support for Bolshevism during the Polish @-@ Soviet War served to heighten anti @-@ Jewish sentiment . 
 The concept of Żydokomuna was widely illustrated in Polish interwar politics , including publications by the National Democrats and the Catholic Church that expressed anti @-@ Jewish views . During World War II , the term Żydokomuna was made to resemble the Jewish @-@ Bolshevism rhetoric of Nazi Germany , wartime Romania and other war @-@ torn countries of Central and Eastern Europe . 
 = = Interbellum = = 
 The National Democrats ( Endeks ) emerged from the 1930 Polish elections to Sejm as the main opposition party to the Piłsudski government . Piłsudski had a liberal attitude towards minorities , and was respected by much of the Polish Jewish minority . In the midst of the Great Depression and in a climate of widespread nationalist and antisemitic sentiment , the Endeks expressed anti @-@ Jewish sentiment to show their dissatisfaction with the government . The Endeks called for reducing the numbers of Jews in the country and for an economic boycott ( launched in 1931 ) ; subsequently , outbreaks of violence occurred against Jews , particularly at universities . Following the death of Piłsudski in 1935 , the Endeks moved towards seizing power in Poland , and began to focus more fully on the Jews . While there was a limited audience for <unk> rhetoric , it was supplemented by the much larger circulation enjoyed by Catholic Church publications , which increasingly referred to the communist threat and the alleged " <unk> " of the Jews . One such Church publication , the newspaper Samoobrona Narodu ( " Self @-@ Defense of the Nation , " which meant defense against Jews ) , had a circulation of over one million . 
 In the period between the two world wars , Żydokomuna sentiment grew concurrently in Poland with the notion of the " criminal Jew . " Statistics from the 1920s had indicated a Jewish crime rate that was well below the percentage of Jews in the population . However , a subsequent reclassification of how crime was recorded — which now included minor offenses — succeeded in reversing the trend , and Jewish criminal statistics showed an increase relative to the Jewish population by the 1930s . These statistics were seen by some Poles , particularly within the right @-@ wing press , to confirm the image of the " criminal Jew " ; additionally , political crimes by Jews were more closely scrutinized , enhancing fears of a criminal Żydokomuna . 
 Another important factor was the dominance of Jews in the leadership of the Communist Party of Poland ( KPP ) . According to multiple sources , Jews were well represented in the Polish Communist Party . Notably , the party had strong Jewish representation at higher levels . Out of fifteen leaders of the KPP central administration in 1936 , eight were Jews . Jews constituted 53 % of the " active members " of the KPP , 75 % of its " publication apparatus , " 90 % of the " international department for help to revolutionaries " and 100 % of the " technical apparatus " of the Home Secretariat . In Polish court proceedings against communists between 1927 and 1936 , 90 % of the accused were Jews . In terms of membership , before its dissolution in 1938 , 25 % of KPP members were Jews ; most urban KPP members were Jews — a substantial number , given an 8 @.@ 7 % Jewish minority in prewar Poland . Some historians , including Joseph Marcus , qualify these statistics , alleging that the KPP should not be considered a " Jewish party , " as it was in fact in opposition to traditional Jewish economic and national interests . The Jews supporting KPP saw themselves as international communists and rejected much of the Jewish culture and tradition . Nonetheless , the KPP , along with the Polish Socialist Party , was notable for its decisive stand against antisemitism . According to <unk> Schatz 's summary of Jewish participation in the prewar Polish communist movement : 
 Throughout the whole interwar period , Jews constituted a very important segment of the Communist movement . According to Polish sources and to Western estimates , the proportion of Jews in the KPP [ the Communist Party of Poland ] was never lower than 22 percent . In the larger cities , the percentage of Jews in the KPP often exceeded 50 percent and in smaller cities , frequently over 60 percent . Given this background , a respondent 's statement that " in small cities like ours , almost all Communists were Jews , " does not appear to be a gross exaggeration . 
 According to some bodies of research , voting patterns in Poland 's parliamentary elections in the 1920s revealed that Jewish support for the communists was proportionally less than their representation in the total population . In this view , most support for Poland 's communist and pro @-@ Soviet parties came not from Jews , but rather from Ukrainian and Orthodox Belarusian voters , though some of these may have been of Jewish ancestry . Schatz notes that even if post @-@ war claims by Jewish communists that 40 % of the 266 @,@ 528 communist votes on several lists of front organizations at the 1928 Sejm election came from the Jewish community were true ( a claim that one source describes as " almost certainly an exaggeration " ) , this would amount to no more than 5 % of Jewish votes for the communists , indicating the Jewish population at large was " far from sympathetic to communism . " " Even if Jews were prominent in the Communist Party leadership , this prominence did not translate into support at the mass level " wrote Jeffrey <unk> and Jason Wittenberg , who analyzed the communist vote in interwar Poland . Only 7 % of Jewish voters supported communists at the polls in 1928 , while 93 % of them supported non @-@ communists ( with 49 % voting for Piłsudski ) . The pro @-@ Soviet communist party received most of its support from Belarusians whose separatism was backed by the Soviet Union . In <unk> , the CPP received 4 % of the vote ( of which 35 % was Jewish ) , in Warsaw 14 % ( 33 % Jewish ) , and in Wilno 0 @.@ 02 % ( 36 % Jewish ) . However , in terms of overall numbers , CPP was " the Jews ' least favorite political grouping " during the 1928 elections . It was the disproportionately large representation of Jews in the communist leadership that led to Żydokomuna sentiment being widely expressed in contemporary Polish politics . 
 = = Invasion of Poland and the Soviet occupation zone = = 
 Following the 1939 Soviet invasion of Poland , resulting in the partition of Polish territory between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union ( USSR ) , Jewish communities in eastern Poland welcomed with some relief the Soviet occupation , which they saw as a " lesser of two evils " than openly antisemitic Nazi Germany . The image of Jews among the Belorussian and Ukrainian minorities waving red flags to welcome Soviet troops had great symbolic meaning in Polish memory of the period . Young Jews joined or organized communist militias , others organized a new , communist , temporary self @-@ government . Such militias often disarmed and arrested Polish soldiers , policemen and other authority figures ; often , Poles and the Polish states were mocked . In the days and weeks following the events of September 1939 , the Soviets engaged in a harsh policy of Sovietization . Polish schools and other institutions were closed , Poles were dismissed from jobs of authority , often arrested and deported , and replaced with non @-@ Polish personnel . 
 According to some sources , the Poles resented their change of fortunes because , before the war , Poles had a privileged position . Then , in the space of a few days , Jews and other minorities from within Poland occupied positions in the Soviet occupation government — such as teachers , civil servants and engineers — that they allegedly had trouble achieving under the Polish government . What to the majority of Poles was occupation and betrayal was , to some Jews — especially Polish communists of Jewish descent who emerged from the underground — an opportunity for revolution and retribution . There were even some extreme cases of Jewish participation in massacres of ethnic Poles such as Massacre of <unk> <unk> . Such behavior affronted non @-@ Jewish Poles . 
 Such events implanted in the Polish collective memory the image of Jewish crowds greeting the invading Red Army as liberators , and willing collaborators , further strengthening Żydokomuna sentiment that held Jews responsible for collaboration with the Soviet authorities in importing communism into divided Poland . After the German invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941 , widespread notion of Judeo @-@ Communism , combined with the German Nazi encouragement for expression of antisemitic attitudes , may have been a principal cause of massacres of Jews by gentile Poles in Poland 's northeastern Łomża province in the summer of 1941 , including the massacre at <unk> according to Joanna B. Michlic . However , the responsibility of the gentile Poles for the <unk> pogrom has been highly disputed , with some sources stating that the Germans were the principal authors of the massacre . 
 Though some Jews had initially benefited from the effects of the Soviet invasion , this occupation soon began to strike at the Jewish population as well ; independent Jewish organizations were abolished and Jewish activists were arrested . Hundreds of thousands of Jews who had fled to the Soviet sector were given a choice of Soviet citizenship or returning to the German occupied zone . The majority chose the latter , and instead found themselves deported to the Soviet Union , where , ironically , 300 @,@ 000 would escape the Holocaust . While there was Polish Jewish representation in the London @-@ based Polish government in exile , relations between the Jews in Poland and Polish resistance in occupied Poland were strained , and Jewish armed groups had difficulty joining the official Polish resistance umbrella organization , the Home Army ( in Polish , Armia Krajowa or AK ) . Some Jewish groups ( such as the Bielski partisans ) were forced to rob local Polish peasants for food ; in turn , the Polish underground often labeled those armed Jewish groups fighting for survival in the forests as " bandits " and " robbers . " Jewish partisans instead more often joined the Armia Ludowa of the communist Polish Workers ' Party and Soviet guerrilla groups , which increasingly clashed with Polish guerillas , contributing to yet another perception of Jews working with the Soviets against the Poles . 
 = = Communist takeover of Poland in the aftermath of World War II = = 
 The Soviet @-@ backed communist government was as harsh towards non @-@ communist Jewish cultural , political and social institutions as they were towards Polish , banning all alternative parties . Thousands of Jews returned from exile in the Soviet Union , but as their number decreased with legalized aliyah to Israel , the PZPR members formed a much larger percentage of the remaining Jewish population . Among them were a number of Jewish communists who played a highly visible role in the unpopular communist government and its security apparatus . 
 Hilary Minc , the third in command in Bolesław Bierut 's political triumvirate of Stalinist leaders , became the Deputy Prime Minister , Minister of Industry , Industry and Commerce , and the Economic Affairs . He was personally assigned by Stalin first to Industry and than to Transportation ministries of Poland . His wife , Julia , became the Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief of the monopolized Polish Press Agency . Minister Jakub Berman – Stalin 's right hand in Poland until 1953 – held the Political propaganda and Ideology portfolios . He was responsible for the largest and most notorious secret police in the history of the People 's Republic of Poland , the Ministry of Public Security ( UB ) , employing 33 @,@ 200 permanent security officers , one for every 800 Polish citizens . 
 The new government 's hostility to the wartime Polish Government in Exile and its World War II underground resistance – accused by the media of being nationalist , reactionary and antisemitic , and persecuted by Berman – further strengthened Żydokomuna sentiment to the point where in the popular consciousness Jewish Bolshevism was seen as having conquered Poland . It was in this context , reinforced by the immediate post @-@ war lawlessness , that Poland experienced an unprecedented wave of anti @-@ Jewish violence ( of which most notable was the Kielce pogrom ) . 
 The Polish @-@ American historian Marek Jan Chodakiewicz stressed that after the Soviet takeover of Poland in 1945 violence had developed amid postwar retribution and counter @-@ retribution , exacerbated by the breakdown of law and order and a Polish anti @-@ Communist insurgency . According to Chodakiewicz , some Jewish " <unk> " endeavored to extract justice from the Poles who harmed Jews during the War and in some cases Jews attempted to reclaim property confiscated by the Nazis . These phenomena further reinforced Żydokomuna sentiment . Chodakiewicz noted that after World War II , the Jews were not only victims , but also aggressors . He describes cases in which Jews cooperated with the Polish secret police , denouncing Poles and members of the Home Army . Chodakiewicz noted that some 3 @,@ 500 to 6 @,@ 500 Poles died in late 1940s because of Jewish denunciations or were killed by Jews themselves . Encouraged by their Soviet advisors , many Jewish functionaries and government officials adopted new Polish @-@ sounding names hoping to find less acrimony among their adversaries . " This practice often backfired and led to widespread speculation about ' hidden Jews ' for decades to come . " 
 The combination of the effects of the Holocaust and postwar antisemitism led to a dramatic mass emigration of Polish Jewry in the immediate postwar years . Of the estimated 240 @,@ 000 Jews in Poland in 1946 ( of whom 136 @,@ 000 were refugees from the Soviet Union , most on their way to the West ) , only 90 @,@ 000 remained a year later . The surviving Jews of Poland found themselves victims of the explosive postwar political situation . The image of the Jew as a threatening outsider took on a new form as antisemitism was now linked to the imposition of communist rule in Poland , including rumors of massive collaboration of Jews with the unpopular new regime and the Soviet Union . Of the fewer than 80 @,@ 000 Jews who remained in Poland , many had political reasons for doing so . Consequently – as noted by historian Michael C. <unk> – " their group profile ever more closely resembled the Żydokomuna . " Regarding this period , Andre <unk> wrote in his study of Żydokomuna , that even though for the first time in history they had entered the top echelons of power in considerable numbers , " The first post @-@ war decade was a mixed experience for the Jews of East Central Europe . The new communist order offered unprecedented opportunities as well as unforeseen dangers . " 
 = = Stalinist abuses = = 
 During Stalinism , the preferred Soviet policy was to keep sensitive posts in the hands of non @-@ Poles . As a result " all or nearly all of the directors ( of the widely despised Ministry of Public Security of Poland ) were Jewish " as noted by Polish journalist Teresa <unk> among others . A recent study by the Polish Institute of National Remembrance showed that out of 450 people in director positions in the Ministry between 1944 and 1954 , 167 ( 37 @.@ 1 % ) were of Jewish ethnicity , while Jews made up only 1 % of the post @-@ war Polish population . While Jews were overrepresented in various Polish communist organizations , including the security apparatus , relative to their percentage of the general population , the vast majority of Jews did not participate in the Stalinist apparatus , and indeed most were not supportive of communism . Krzysztof <unk> has quoted Jan T. Gross , who argued that many Jews who worked for the communist party cut their ties with their culture – Jewish , Polish or Russian – and tried to represent the interests of international communism only , or at least that of the local communist government . 
 It is difficult to assess when the Polish Jews who had volunteered to serve or remain in the postwar communist security forces began to realize , however , what Soviet Jews had realized earlier , that under Stalin , as Arkady <unk> put it : " if someone named Rabinovich was in charge of a mass execution , he was perceived not simply as a Cheka boss but as a Jew ... " 
 Among the notable Jewish officials of the Polish secret police and security services were Minister Jakub Berman , Joseph Stalin 's right hand in the PRL ; Vice @-@ minister Roman Romkowski ( head of MBP ) , Dir . Julia <unk> ( 5th Dept . ) , Dir . Anatol Fejgin ( 10th Dept. or the notorious Special Bureau ) , deputy Dir . Józef Światło ( 10th Dept . ) , Col. Józef Różański among others . Światło – " a torture master " – defected to the West in 1953 , while Romkowski and Różański would find themselves among the Jewish scapegoats for Polish Stalinism in the political upheavals following Stalin 's death , both sentenced to 15 years in prison on 11 November 1957 for gross violations of human rights law and abuse of power . 
 In 1956 , over 9 @,@ 000 socialist and populist politicians were released from prison . A few Jewish functionaries of the security forces were brought to court in the process of de @-@ Stalinization . According to Heather Laskey , it was not a coincidence that the high ranking Stalinist security officers put on trial by Gomułka were Jews . Władysław Gomułka was captured by Światło , imprisoned by Romkowski in 1951 and interrogated by both , him and Fejgin . Gomułka escaped physical torture only as a close associate of Joseph Stalin , and was released three years later . According to some sources , the categorization of the security forces as a Jewish institution — as disseminated in the post @-@ war anticommunist press at various times — was rooted in Żydokomuna : the belief that the secret police was predominantly Jewish became one of the factors contributing to the post @-@ war view of Jews as agents of the security forces . 
 The Żydokomuna sentiment reappeared at times of severe political and socioeconomic crises in Stalinist Poland . After the death of Polish United Workers ' Party leader Bolesław Bierut in 1956 , a de @-@ Stalinization and a subsequent battle among rival factions looked to lay blame for the excesses of the Stalin era . According to L.W. <unk> : " Poland ’ s communists had grown accustomed to placing the burden of their own failures to gain sufficient legitimacy among the Polish population during the entire communist period on the shoulders of Jews in the party . " ( See : above . ) As described in one historical account , the party hardline Natolin faction " used anti @-@ Semitism as a political weapon and found an echo both in the party apparatus and in society at large , where traditional stereotypes of an insidious Jewish cobweb of political influence and economic gain resurfaced , but now in the context of ' Judeo @-@ communism , ' the Żydokomuna . " " Natolin " leader Zenon Nowak entered the concept of " Judeo @-@ Stalinization " and placed the blame for the party 's failures , errors and repression on " the Jewish apparatchiks . " Documents from this period chronicle antisemitic attitudes within Polish society , including beatings of Jews , loss of employment , and persecution . These outbursts of antisemitic sentiment from both Polish society and within the rank and file of the ruling party spurred the exodus of some 40 @,@ 000 Polish Jews between 1956 and 1958 . 
 = = 1968 expulsions = = 
 Żydokomuna sentiment was reignited by Polish state propaganda as part of the 1968 Polish political crisis . Political turmoil of the late 1960s — exemplified in the West by increasingly violent protests against the Vietnam War — was closely associated in Poland with the events of the Prague spring which began on 5 January 1968 , raising hopes of democratic reforms among the intelligentsia . The crisis culminated in the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia on 20 August 1968 . The repressive government of Władysław Gomułka responded to student protests and strike actions across Poland ( Warsaw , Kraków ) with mass arrests , and by launching an anti @-@ Zionist campaign within the communist party on the initiative of Interior Minister Mieczysław Moczar ( aka Mikołaj <unk> , known for his xenophobic and antisemitic attitude ) . The officials of Jewish descent were blamed " for a major part , if not all , of the crimes and horrors of the Stalinist period . " 
 The campaign , which began in 1967 , was a well @-@ guided response to the Six @-@ Day War and the subsequent break @-@ off by the Soviets of all diplomatic relations with Israel . Polish factory workers were forced to publicly denounce Zionism . As the interior minister Mieczysław Moczar 's nationalist " Partisan " faction became increasingly influential in the communist party , infighting within the Polish communist party led one faction to again make scapegoats of the remaining Polish Jews , attempting to redirect public anger at them . After Israel 's victory in the war , the Polish government , following the Soviet lead , launched an antisemitic campaign under the guise of " anti @-@ Zionism , " with both Moczar 's and Party Secretary Władysław Gomułka 's factions playing leading roles . However , the campaign did not resonate with the general public , because most Poles saw similarities between Israel 's fight for survival and Poland 's past struggles for independence . Many Poles felt pride in the success of the Israeli military , which was dominated by Polish Jews . The slogan , " Our Jews beat the Soviet Arabs " was very popular among the Poles , but contrary to the desire of the communist government . 
 The government 's antisemitic policy yielded more successes the next year . In March 1968 , a wave of unrest among students and intellectuals , unrelated to the Arab @-@ Israeli War , swept Poland ( the events became known as the March 1968 events ) . The campaign served multiple purposes , most notably the suppression of protests , which were branded as inspired by a " fifth column " of Zionists ; it was also used as a tactic in a political struggle between Gomułka and Moczar , both of whom played the Jewish card in a nationalist appeal . The campaign resulted in an actual expulsion from Poland in two years , of thousands of Jewish professionals , party officials and state security functionaries . Ironically , the Moczar 's faction failed to topple Gomułka with their propaganda efforts . 
 As historian Dariusz Stola notes , the anti @-@ Jewish campaign combined century @-@ old conspiracy theories , recycled antisemitic claims and classic communist propaganda . Regarding the tailoring of the Żydokomuna sentiment to communist Poland , Stola suggested : 
 Paradoxically , probably the most powerful slogan of the communist propaganda in March was the accusation that the Jews were zealous communists . They were blamed for a major part , if not all , of the crimes and horrors of the Stalinist period . The myth of Judeo @-@ Bolshevism had been well known in Poland since the Russian revolution and the Polish @-@ Bolshevik war of 1920 , yet its 1968 model deserves interest as a tool of communist propaganda . This accusation exploited and developed the popular stereotype of Jewish communism to purify communism : the Jews were the dark side of communism ; what was wrong in communism was due to them . 
 The communist elites used the " Jews as Zionists " allegations to push for a purge of Jews from scientific and cultural institutions , publishing houses , and national television and radio stations . Ultimately , the communist government sponsored an antisemitic campaign that resulted in most remaining Jews being forced to leave Poland . Moczar 's " Partisan " faction promulgated an ideology that has been described as an " eerie reincarnation " of the views of the pre @-@ World War II National Democracy Party , and even at times exploiting Żydokomuna sentiment . 
 Stola also notes that one of the effects of the 1968 antisemitic campaign was to thoroughly discredit the communist government in the eyes of the public . As a result , when the concept of the Jew as a " threatening other " was employed in the 1970s and 1980s in Poland by the communist government in its attacks on the political opposition , including the Solidarity trade @-@ union movement and the Workers ' Defence Committee ( Komitet Obrony Robotników , or KOR ) , it was completely unsuccessful . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Historiography of Żydokomuna remains controversial . Works such as those by Jan T. Gross have polarized debate over anti @-@ Jewish violence in Poland , with Gross and his supporters characterizing Żydokomuna as an antisemitic cliché while to some of his critics Żydokomuna was a fact of history . According to Gross 's supporters , the strength of the Żydokomuna belief stemmed from age @-@ old Polish fears of Russia and from anti @-@ communist and antisemitic attitudes . Schatz writes that " because antisemitism was one of the main forces that drew Jews to the Communist movement , Żydokomuna meant turning the effects of antisemitism into a cause of its further increase . " Żydokomuna boosted antisemitism by amplifying ideas about an alleged " Jewish world conspiracy . " According to this thinking , Bolshevism and communism became " the modern means to the long @-@ attempted Jewish political conquest of Poland ; the Żydokomuna conspirators would finally succeed in establishing a ' Judeo @-@ Polonia . ' " Subscribers to this theory maintain that there was a strong tradition of antisemitism which provided a base for Żydokomuna to feed upon . These sources claim that many Poles likely exaggerated Jewish participation in the Soviet occupation because a Jewish presence in the government apparatus was a novel phenomenon in pre @-@ war Poland . Critics of these sources , such as Niall Ferguson , claim that much of the anti @-@ Jewish sentiment was justified due to the disproportionate influence of Jewish communists in carrying out Soviet policies . According to Ferguson , " The entire Polish population adopted a negative attitude towards the Jews because of their blatant cooperation with the Bolsheviks and their hostility against non @-@ Jews . " 
 Historian Omer Bartov has written that " recent writings and pronouncements seem to indicate that the myth of the Żydokomuna ( Jews as communists ) has not gone away " as evidenced by the writings of younger Polish scholars such as Marek Chodakiewicz , contending Jewish disloyalty to Poland during the Soviet occupation . Historians Joanna B. Michlic and Laurence Weinbaum charge that post @-@ 1989 Polish historiography has seen a revival of " an ethnonationalist historical approach " . According to Michlic , among some Polish historians , " [ myth of <unk> ] served the purpose of rationalizing and explaining the participation of ethnic Poles in killing their Jewish neighbors and , thus , in minimizing the criminal nature of the murder . " 
 = Ohio State Route 293 = 
 State Route 293 ( SR 293 ) is a 6 @.@ 277 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 10 @.@ 102 km ) north – south state highway in the northwestern portion of the U.S. state of Ohio . The southern terminus of SR 293 is at SR 53 nearly one @-@ half mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) south of the village limits of Kirby . Its northern terminus is at the intersection of Sandusky Street and Cass Street in Wharton . The route was designated in 1932 , and was extended south in 1997 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 All of SR 293 exists within the western part of Wyandot County . SR 293 starts at the intersection of SR 53 , and becomes concurrent with County Highway 95 ( CH 95 ) . There it travels into the village of Kirby , and crosses over a CSX railroad line , as it continues moving north . SR 293 then leaves Kirby and overpasses U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) . Less than a mile later , SR 293 turns west and becomes concurrent with Lincoln Highway ( CH 330 ) , as CH 95 continues to head north . After a bit more than one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , SR 293 leaves Lincoln Highway and turns north toward Wharton . SR 293 then crosses a bridge over Potato Run , followed by a turn west to downtown Wharton . The route ends at Cass Street , and the road continues as Sandusky Street . Nearly all of the route is in farmland . 
 = = History = = 
 SR 293 was established in 1932 . The highway originally existed along its northernmost present stretch , connecting the village of Wharton with Lincoln Highway , which at one time was a part of US 30 , and prior to that US <unk> . In 1997 , SR 293 was extended to its present southern terminus by following Lincoln Highway ( then a part of US 30 ) east for two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) . From that point , it replaced what was previously designated as SR 699 south to SR 53 just south of Kirby . About ten years later , US 30 was moved to a new alignment south of the Lincoln Highway , no longer having direct access to SR 293 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Wyandot County . 
 = Jænberht = 
 Jænberht ( also <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Jaenberht or <unk> ; died 792 ) was a medieval monk , and later the abbot , of St Augustine 's Abbey , Canterbury who was named Archbishop of Canterbury in 765 . As archbishop , he had a difficult relationship with King Offa of Mercia , who at one point confiscated lands from the archbishopric . By 787 , some of the bishoprics under Canterbury 's supervision were transferred to the control of the newly created Archbishopric of Lichfield , although it is not clear if Jænberht ever recognised its legitimacy . Besides the issue with Lichfield , Jænberht also presided over church councils in England . He died in 792 and was considered a saint after his death . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jænberht was a monk at St Augustine 's Abbey , Canterbury before being selected as abbot of that monastic house . He came from a prominent family in the kingdom of Kent , and a kinsman of his , <unk> , was the reeve of King Egbert II of Kent . Jænberht himself was on good terms with Egbert . 
 = = Archbishop of Canterbury = = 
 Jænberht was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury on 2 February 765 , at the court of King Offa of Mercia ; this location implies that his election was acceptable to the king . In 766 , he received a pallium , the symbol of an archbishop 's authority given by the papacy . At this time , Kent had been subjected by Offa ; in 776 , perhaps at the urging of Jænberht , Kent rebelled and secured its freedom . In 780 and 781 , Jænberht attended church councils at Brentford that were led by King Offa . Although initially on good terms with Offa , Jænberht 's ties to Egbert were also strong : after the Battle of Otford , Egbert granted a number of estates to Christ Church . When Offa reasserted control over Kent , which occurred by 785 at the latest , he confiscated these lands and regranted to some of his thegns . 
 = = Elevation of Lichfield = = 
 During Jænberht 's term of office , a dispute arose between the see of Canterbury and Offa which led in 787 to the creation of the rival Archdiocese of Lichfield under Hygberht . Originally , Offa attempted to bring the southern archbishopric of Canterbury to London , but when the papacy refused permission , Offa secured the creation of a third archbishopric in the British Isles . Lichfield was the main Mercian bishopric , and thus the new archbishopric was under Offa 's control . There were several reasons for the conflict between Jænberht and Offa . Jænberht 's opposed Offa 's deposition of the Kentish dynasty . They conflicted over land which they both claimed as theirs , and Jænberht refused to crown Offa 's son Ecgfrith . Problems were also caused by the archbishop minting his own coins at Canterbury . Matthew Paris , writing in the thirteenth century , stated that Jænberht conspired to admit Charlemagne to Canterbury if he invaded Britain . This story may reflect a genuine tradition recorded at St Albans Abbey , where Paris was based , or it may be a fabrication to fill in details of Jænberht 's life where Paris had no other information . A rumour during Jænberht 's reign also falsely claimed that Offa was plotting with Charlemagne to depose Pope Hadrian I ; at least one modern historian , Simon Keynes , believes it possible Jænberht was behind the rumour . Offa 's eventual successor later admitted to the papacy that Offa 's actions had been motivated by hatred of Jænberht and the Kentish people . 
 In 787 , Pope Hadrian sent a pallium to Hygberht of Lichfield , elevating Lichfield to an archbishopric , and Ecgfrith was crowned . There is no extant contemporary evidence , however , that Jænberht ever recognised Hygberht as an archbishop . Canterbury retained as suffragans the bishops of Winchester , Sherborne , Selsey , Rochester , and London . The dioceses of Worcester , Hereford , Leicester , Lindsey , Dommoc and Elmham were transferred to Lichfield . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Jænberht presided at a council held at London , sometime after the elevation of Lichfield , attended by most of the bishops from southern Britain . Jænberht died on 12 August 792 . Jænberht was buried in the abbey church of St Augustine 's Abbey in Canterbury . Jænberht has since been revered as a saint , with a feast day of 12 August . 
 = Bruno Mars = 
 Peter Gene Hernandez ( born October 8 , 1985 ) , known professionally as Bruno Mars ( / <unk> / ) , is an American singer @-@ songwriter , multi @-@ instrumentalist , record producer , and choreographer . Born and raised in Honolulu , Hawaii , by a family of musicians , Mars began making music at a young age and performed in various musical venues in his hometown throughout his childhood . He graduated from high school and moved to Los Angeles to pursue a musical career . After being dropped by Motown Records , Mars signed a recording contract with Atlantic in 2009 . Mars began composing songs for other artists since the Motown stint . 
 Mars , in 2009 , co @-@ founded the production team The Smeezingtons , which helped him becoming recognized as a solo artist , responsible for the songs " Nothin ' on You " by B.o.B and " Billionaire " by Travie McCoy , for which he was featured on their hooks . His debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) , was anchored by the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart @-@ topping singles " Just the Way You Are " and " Grenade " , as well as the number @-@ four single " The Lazy Song " . His second album , Unorthodox Jukebox , released in 2012 , peaked at number one in the United States . The album spawned the international singles " Locked Out of Heaven " , " When I Was Your Man " and " Treasure " . In 2015 , Mars lent his vocals to Mark Ronson 's " Uptown Funk " . Throughout his singing career , he has sold over 100 million singles and albums worldwide , making him one of the best @-@ selling artists of all time . Mars has landed six number @-@ one singles on the Billboard Hot 100 since his career launched in 2010 attaining his first five faster than any male artist since Elvis Presley . 
 Mars has received many awards and nominations , including four Grammy Awards , and was named one of Time 's 100 most influential people in the world in 2011 . In December 2013 , he ranked number one on the Forbes 30 under 30 list . Mars is known for his stage performances and retro showmanship . He is accompanied by his band , The Hooligans , playing a variety of instruments such as electric guitar , bass , piano , keyboards , drums and horns , also serving as dancers and background singers . On stage , Mars is able to sing , dance and play in a wide range of musical styles . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1985 – 2003 : Early life and musical beginnings = = = 
 Bruno Mars was born Peter Gene Hernandez on October 8 , 1985 , in Honolulu , Hawaii , and was raised in the Waikiki neighborhood of Honolulu . He is the son of Peter Hernandez and Bernadette " Bernie " San Pedro <unk> ( b . August 14 , 1957 , Manila , d . June 1 , 2013 , Honolulu ) . His father is of half Puerto Rican and half Ashkenazi Jewish descent , and is originally from Brooklyn , New York . Mars ' mother emigrated from the Philippines to Hawaii as a child , and was of Filipino , and some Spanish , ancestry . His parents met while performing in a show , where his mother was a hula dancer and his father played percussion . At the age of two , he was nicknamed " Bruno " by his father , because of his resemblance to professional wrestler Bruno Sammartino . 
 Mars is one of six children and came from a musical family who exposed him to a diverse mix of reggae , rock , hip hop , and R & B. In addition to being a dancer , his mother was a singer and his father used his musical ability to perform Little Richard rock and roll music . Mars ' uncle was an Elvis impersonator , and encouraged three @-@ year @-@ old Mars to perform on stage as well . Mars also performed songs by artists such as Michael Jackson , The Isley Brothers , and The Temptations . At age four , Mars began performing five days a week with his family 's band , The Love Notes , in which he became known on the island for his impersonation of Presley . In 1990 , Mars was featured in <unk> as " Little Elvis " , going on to have a cameo in the film Honeymoon in Vegas in 1992 . 
 His time spent impersonating Presley had a major impact on Mars ' musical evolution and performing techniques . He later began playing guitar after drawing inspiration from Jimi Hendrix . In 2010 , he also acknowledged his Hawaiian roots and musical family as an influence , explaining , " Growing up in Hawaii made me the man I am . I used to do a lot of shows in Hawaii with my father 's band . Everybody in my family sings , everyone plays instruments ... I 've just been surrounded by it . " When he attended President Theodore Roosevelt High School he performed in a group called The School Boys . In 2003 , shortly after graduating from President Theodore Roosevelt High School at the age of 17 , Mars moved to Los Angeles , California , to pursue a musical career . He adopted his stage name from the nickname his father gave him , adding " Mars " at the end because " I felt like I didn 't have [ any ] pizzazz , and a lot of girls say I ’ m out of this world , so I was like I guess I 'm from Mars . " 
 = = = 2004 – 10 : Production work and It 's Better If You Don 't Understand = = = 
 Shortly after moving to Los Angeles , Mars signed to Motown Records in 2004 , in a deal that " went nowhere " and a conversation with Will.i.am 's management which turned out fruitless . However , Mars ' experience with Motown proved to be beneficial to his career when he met songwriter and producer Philip Lawrence , who was also signed to the label . After Mars was dropped by Universal Motown , less than a year of being signed , he stayed in Los Angeles and landed a music publishing deal in 2005 with Steve Lindsey and Cameron Strang at Westside Independent . 
 During Mars ' career beginnings , Lindsey , who showed Jeff Bhasker and Mars the ins and outs of writing pop music , acted as a mentor to Mars and helped him to hone his craft . Bhasker , who had met Mars through Mike Lynn ( the A & R at Dr Dre 's Aftermath Entertainment who first heard Mars ' demo tape through his sister and flew him to LA ) , explained : " He ’ d mentor us , and kind of give us lectures as to what a hit pop song is , because you can have talent and music ability , but understanding what makes a hit pop song is a whole other discipline . " Steve Lindsey was responsible for " [ holding ] Bruno Mars back for five years while they learned an extensive catalog of hit music . " Meanwhile , Mars played cover songs in a band , around Los Angeles , with Bhasker and Eric Hernandez , Mars ' brother , who is now the drummer of " The Hooligans " . 
 When Lawrence was first told he should meet Mars he was reluctant to do so , since he didn 't even have money for bus fare . Keith Harris , drummer for The Black Eyed Peas , told him , " Whatever it costs you to get out here , I ’ ll reimburse you . " Lawrence responded , " Just give me five dollars back for the bus . " The pair began collaborating , writing songs for Mars , but they received many rejections from labels . On the verge of giving up , they received a call from Brandon Creed , then seeking songs for a reunited Menudo . He liked their song " Lost " , which was written for Mars . The duo didn 't want to give the song away , but when they were offered $ 20 @,@ 000 for the song they agreed . The sale of this song allowed them to continue working , and Mars and Lawrence decided that they would write and produce songs together for other artists . 
 In 2006 , Lawrence introduced Mars to his future A & R manager at Atlantic Records , Aaron Bay @-@ Schuck . After hearing him play a couple of songs on the guitar , Bay @-@ Schuck wanted to sign him immediately , but it took about three years for Atlantic records to finally sign Mars to the label , because Atlantic felt that it was too early and that Mars still needed development as an artist . 
 Before becoming a successful solo artist , Mars was an acknowledged music producer , writing songs for Alexandra Burke , Travie McCoy , Adam Levine , Brandy , Sean Kingston , and Flo Rida . He also co @-@ wrote the Sugababes ' hit song " Get Sexy " and provided backing vocals on their album Sweet 7 . His first musical appearance as a singer was in Far East Movement 's second studio album Animal , featured on the track " 3D " . He was also featured on pastor and hip hop artist <unk> Ma 's debut single " Love " in August 2009 . He reached prominence as a solo artist after being featured on and co @-@ writing B.o.B 's " Nothin ' on You " and Travie McCoy 's " Billionaire " ; both songs peaked within the top ten of many charts worldwide . He spoken of them , " I think those songs weren 't meant to be full @-@ sung songs . If I 'd sung all of " Nothin ' on You " , it might 've sounded like some ' 90s R & B. " Following this success , Mars released his debut extended play ( EP ) , titled It 's Better If You Don 't Understand , on May 11 , 2010 . The EP peaked at the 99th position on the Billboard 200 and a music video was released for the song , " The Other Side " , featuring singers Cee Lo Green and B.o.B. Mars collaborated with Green once more in August 2010 by co @-@ writing his single " Fuck You " . 
 = = = 2010 – 12 : Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans = = = 
 After serving as guest vocalist on B.o.B 's and <unk> McCoy 's singles , Mars released " Just the Way You Are " on July 19 , 2010 . The song was the lead single from his debut studio album , Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , and reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 in September as well as several other charts worldwide . The song holds the record of the longest @-@ reigning debut format , spending twenty weeks atop Adult Contemporary . He also released two digital singles — " Liquor Store Blues " featuring Damian Marley and " Grenade " to promote the album , before confirming " Grenade " as the album 's second single , in October 21 , 2010 . " Grenade " reached number one on Billboard in December and has also seen successful international chart performance . Released digitally on October 4 and physically on October 5 , 2010 , the album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , selling 55 @,@ 000 copies . It received generally positive reviews from music critics , and has since sold six million copies globally . In February 2012 , " The Lazy Song " was released as the album 's third single . It became the album 's third consecutive top five on the Hot 100 , peaking on number four on October 23 , 2010 . 
 " Marry You " followed as the fourth single from Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans on August 22 , 2011 . Although it wasn 't released as a single in the United States , it peaked at number 85 on the Hot 100 on January 15 , 2011 due to strong digital sales , since then it has sold 2 @.@ 2 million digital copies . In November , " Count On Me " was released as the album 's fifth single in Australia and New Zealand . Additionally , it was announced on Mars ' website , he recorded and co @-@ wrote a new song titled " It Will Rain " for The Twilight Saga : Breaking Dawn – Part 1 Original Motion Picture Soundtrack . The song was released for purchase via iTunes on September 27 , 2011 . It peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 . During this period , he appeared on a number of collaborative singles , including " Lighters " , a duet with Bad Meets Evil released on July 5 , 2011 . " Mirror " , released on September 13 , 2011 , with Lil Wayne and " Young , Wild & Free " with Wiz Khalifa and Snoop Dogg , from the Mac & Devin Go to High School soundtrack , was available for purchase on October 11 , 2011 . The songs peaked at number four , sixteen and seven at the Billboard Hot 100 , respectively . 
 On September 19 , 2010 , Mars was arrested in Las Vegas at the Hard Rock Casino for possession of cocaine . When talking to a police officer , Mars reportedly declared that what he did was " foolish " and that " he has never used drugs before " . Mars pleaded guilty to felony drug possession , and in return for his plea , he was told that the charges would be erased from his criminal record as long as he stayed out of trouble for a year , paid a $ 2 @,@ 000 fine , did 200 hours of community service and completed a drug counseling course . Nevertheless , during a cover story for GQ magazine in 2013 , Mars said " I was young , man ! I was in <unk> Vegas ... I wasn 't thinking " , he further added " I was given a number one record and I 'm out doing dumb sh-- " . Mars confessed that he lied to the authorities about having done cocaine before , saying " I don 't know where that came from " , adding " I was really intoxicated . I was really drunk . So a lot of that is a big blur , and I try every day to forget and keep pushing . " 
 He opened for Maroon 5 on the fall leg of the Hands All Over Tour starting October 6 , 2010 and co @-@ headlined with McCoy on a European tour starting October 18 , 2010 . From November 16 , 2010 , to January 28 , 2012 , Mars embarked on the The Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans Tour in support of Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , after turning down multiple offers to open for famous pop artists on arena tours , since the goal was to build a fan base by performing gigs at smaller , more intimate venues . 
 On February 13 , 2011 , Mars won his first Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance , having received six nominations ; Best Rap Song and Best Rap / Sung Collaboration for " Nothin ' on You " , Record of the Year for " Nothin ' on You " and " Fuck You " , Song of the Year for " Fuck You " , and Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical at the 53rd Grammy Awards . At the 54th Grammy Awards , Mars was nominated in six different categories ; Album of the Year and Best Pop Vocal Album for Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , Record of the Year , Song of the Year and Best Pop Solo Performance for " Grenade " , and Producer of the Year , Non @-@ Classical . However , Adele won all the categories he was nominated and ended up by losing to Paul Epworth for Producer of the Year . 
 = = = 2012 – 14 : Unorthodox Jukebox and Super Bowl XLVIII Halftime Show = = = 
 On March 22 , 2012 , it was announced that Mars had signed a worldwide publishing deal with BMG Chrysalis US . In September 2012 , when interviewed by Billboard , Mars stated that the album would be more musically varied and refused to " pick a lane " , adding " I listen to a lot of music , and I want to have the freedom and luxury to walk into a studio and say , ' Today I want to do a hip @-@ hop , R & B , soul or rock record . ' " He announced the album title Unorthodox Jukebox along with the ten songs which would make the final cut of the album and the title of the first single , " Locked out of Heaven " , which was released on October 1 , 2012 . The lead single from Unorthodox Jukebox reached number one on the Billboard Hot 100 and Canada and charted in the top ten in several countries worldwide . 
 Unorthodox Jukebox was released on December 11 , 2012 , and debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 with sales of 192 @,@ 000 . The album eventually peaked at number one on the Billboard 200 , almost three months after its release . The album also charted number one in Switzerland and in United Kingdom , becoming the fastest selling album by a solo artist in 2012 in the UK . " When I Was Your Man " , was released as the second single from Unorthodox Jukebox on January 15 , 2013 , and peaked at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 , making Elvis Presley the only male who has reached five number one singles on the Hot 100 more quickly than Mars , and reached the top ten of fifteen countries . The third single " Treasure " peaked at number 5 in the United States and had less commercial success worldwide than the previous two . On May 24 , 2013 , Major Lazer released " Bubble Butt " as the fourth single from their album Free the Universe which featured Tyga , Mystic and Mars on the vocals , becoming Major Lazer 's most successful single to date in the US . In late 2013 , " Gorilla " and " Young Girls " followed as the album 's fourth and fifth singles , and reached the top 35 on the Hot 100 . 
 Mars began his second headlining tour , The Moonshine Jungle Tour , on June 22 , 2013 . It started in North America , and continued through Europe and Oceania , before concluding it in North America on October 18 , 2014 , as part of the eight shows at the Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas to perform between December 2013 and October 2014 . On September 8 , 2013 , NFL announced that Mars would headline the performance at the Super Bowl XLVIII halftime show on February 2 , 2014 . During the performance he was joined by Red Hot Chili Peppers as a musical guest on the platform . It was the first Super Bowl halftime headlined by a performer under 30 and of Puerto Rican descent . The show is the second most watched halftime show in the history of the Super Bowl , drawing a record rating of 115 @.@ 3 million viewers , only surpassed by Katy Perry 's halftime show that had 3 @.@ 2 million more viewers . 
 At the 56th Grammy Awards , Mars won the award of Best Pop Vocal Album for Unorthodox Jukebox and his single " Locked out of Heaven " was nominated for Record of the Year and Song of the Year , while " When I Was Your Man " earned a nomination for Best Pop Solo Performance . Aside from his music career , Mars reprised his role as Roberto in Rio 2 , which was released in theaters on March 20 , 2014 . Like its predecessor , Rio 2 was a financial success and panned by critics . In October 2014 , Mark Ronson announced that he would release a new single on November 10 , 2014 , titled " Uptown Funk " , featuring Mars ' vocals . The song was a commercial success reaching number one in Australia , Canada , New Zealand , the UK and Billboard Hot 100 along with several other countries . According to Billboard Mars was the twelfth richest musician of 2013 , with earnings of $ 18 @,@ 839 @,@ 681 . In December 2013 , he was named " Artist of the Year " by Billboard and ranked number one on the 2014 Forbes list " 30 under 30 " , a tally of the brightest stars in 15 different fields under the age of 30 . In addition , he was thirteenth on the 2014 list for " The World 's Most Powerful Celebrities " with estimated earnings of $ 60 million . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Third studio album and Super Bowl 50 Halftime Show = = = 
 After ending the Moonshine Jungle Tour , Mars began working on his third studio album . He wrote on his Facebook " Now it 's time to start writing chapter 3 " . The artist hadn 't come up with a date for the release , stating " Until it 's done " , adding " It 's gotta be just as good if not better " . Previously , the singer @-@ songwriter was interviewed by that 's Shanghai and gave some details of the new album , confirming Mark Ronson and Jeff Bhasker as producers . He further added , " I want to write better songs , I want to put on better shows , I want to make better music videos . I want my next album to be better than the first and the second " , explaining the writing process of his songs " I don 't sit down and think , ' I 'm going to write a song ' , Inspiration hits me always unexpectedly : on a plane , when I 'm out or just before I go to bed . An idea will suddenly come to my mind , and sometimes I manage to turn it into lyrics the next day . Sometimes it 'll take me one year to get something real out of it . You can ’ t force creativeness " . Ronson , in an interview granted to Digital Spy , confessed he and Mars have not reunited in the studio since working on " Uptown Funk " . It is known that engineer Charles Moniz , who had previously worked on Unorthodox Jukebox , has been working on the third studio album . The same engineer confirmed that the album is close to being finished and that Mars has made an evolution in his sound , calling it " the next movement of Bruno " . Rolling Stone ranked Mars ' third album as one of the 20 most anticipated of 2016 . Mars ' dad confirmed that his son 's album was to due in March , but because of his appearance at the Super Bowl halftime show , it was postponed several months . He has also confirmed that seven songs have already been recorded . Mars has been in the studio with Skrillex . The latter said " we 're doing is so <unk> different , awesome and next level and sounds like nothing else that 's happened before " . 
 Mars worked with British singer @-@ songwriter Adele as a co @-@ writer on " All I Ask " , the tenth track from her third studio album , 25 . 
 On December 2 , 2015 , it was announced that Coldplay would be headlining the performance in the halftime show for Super Bowl 50 on February 7 , 2016 . The invitation of Mars and Beyoncé as guest acts to the show makes them the fourth artist to have held the Super Bowl halftime show twice , along with Justin Timberlake and Nelly , and only surpassed by Gloria Estefan ( three times ) . Nielsen ratings confirmed that the show was watched by 111 @.@ 9 million viewers , thus becoming the third most watched halftime show in the history after Katy Perry and Mars as headline performer . The 2016 Grammy Awards saw Mars ' featured single with Mark Ronson , " Uptown Funk " , win the Grammy Award for Best Pop Solo Collaboration and Record of the Year , bringing his total wins to four . On May 10 , 2016 , Billboard reported that Mars and his manager , Brendon Creed , split after nine years working together . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 As a child , Mars spent time impersonating Elvis Presley . This <unk> had a major impact on his musical evolution ; he later reflected : " I watch the best . I 'm a big fan of Elvis . I 'm a big fan of 1950s Elvis when he would go on stage and scare people because he was a force and girls would go nuts ! You can say the same thing for Prince or The Police . It 's just guys who know that people are here to see a show , so I watch those guys and I love studying them because I 'm a fan . " He also impersonated Michael Jackson and Little Richard who played a lead role as inspiration . Afterwards , Mars was raised on his father ’ s doo @-@ wop collection — “ simple four @-@ chord songs that got straight to the point ” and on Little Richard , Jerry Lee Lewis , Frankie Lymon . During his youth , the hip @-@ hop productions by The Neptunes and Timbaland , that were played on the radio constantly , influenced him . 
 Mars ' musical style initially gravitated towards R & B since he was influenced by artists such as Keith Sweat , Jodeci and R. Kelly . During the same time , he also listened to 1950s rock ' n ' roll , doo @-@ wop music and Motown . In high school , he listened to classic rock groups such as The Police , Led Zeppelin , and The Beatles , whose repercussions are notable on Mars ' work . While growing up , Mars listened to singers with high voices , like Stevie Wonder and Freddie Mercury , and some others already mentioned above . Bob Marley , the heavy influence of local bands in Hawaii , was a major account for him and his reggae roots . Hip @-@ hop acts like Jay @-@ Z , The Roots and Cody Chesnutt were among some of Mars ' favourites , and have contributed to his composition skills . All of these genres of music have influenced Mars ' musical style ; he observed that " It 's not easy to [ create ] songs with that mixture of rock and soul and hip @-@ hop , and there 's only a handful of them " . Mars also admires classical music . 
 Mars has listed multiple artists as having inspired his work , among them Michael Jackson , Elvis Presley , Jimi Hendrix , Sly Stone , Carlos Santana , George Clinton , Coldplay , Prince and Usher . Mars also stated that he is a fan of Alicia Keys , Jessie J , Jack White , The Saturdays , and Kings of Leon . 
 = = = Musical style and themes = = = 
 Mars ' music has been noted for displaying a wide variety of styles , musical genres and influences , including pop , rock , reggae , R & B , soul , and hip hop . The debut album Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans features influences of the former five genres , being ultimately a pop record . His subsequent release , Unorthodox Jukebox , as on his debut album , infuses with different genres in each song , including not only dance , rock reggae and soul but also balladry . Lyrically , the album shows some differences towards the former , addressing traditional notions of romance , male chauvinist sentiments , and a more sexual direction . The later caused him a serious controversy due to the explicit content on the song " Gorilla " . Many of his songs , particularly on Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans , reflect on " feel @-@ good " , carefree , and optimistic sentiments . However , darker subjects are addressed in his songs , detailing failed relationships and self @-@ destructive behaviour . 
 Mars claims that his work with other artists has influenced his musical style : " ' Nothin ' on You ' had a motown vibe , ' Billionaire ' was a reggae acoustic guitar @-@ driven song , though one of my favourites is the CeeLo Green song . I don 't think anyone else could 've sung that song . And there 's ' Just the Way You Are . ' If you know my story , you know I love all different genres of music " and maintains doo @-@ wop as a major influence on his music . In addition , Mars states that growing up in Hawaii influenced his music , giving the songs a reggae sound . He explains , " In Hawaii some of the biggest radio stations are reggae . That music brings people together . It 's not urban music or pop music . It 's just songs . That 's what makes it cross over so well . The song comes first . " One of his music partners of The Smeezingtons , Philip Lawrence , stated " What people don 't know is there 's a darker underbelly to Bruno Mars " . Nevertheless , most of his music is romantic and Mars himself says , " I blame that on me singing to girls back in high school . " 
 Mars possesses a three octave tenor vocal range . His singing has received nothing but praise . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times commented that he is one of the most " versatile and accessible singers in pop , with a light , soul @-@ influenced voice that 's an easy fit in a range of styles , a universal donor " , while Tim Sendra from AllMusic described Mars ' vocals on Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans as " the kind of smooth instrument that slips into your ear like honey " . Jody Rosen from Rolling Stone called Mars a " nimble , soulful vocalist " on Unorthodox Jukebox . Conversely , Jim Farber of Daily News praised Mars ' voice due to " the purity , cream and range of mid @-@ period Michael Jackson " in a review of a concert promoting Unorthodox Jukebox . Mars is also able to play drums , guitar , keyboard , bass and piano . Mars usually plays the instrumentation or part of it , on his albums and the songs he composes for other artists . 
 = = = Showmanship = = = 
 Mars is known for his retro showmanship that is widely acclaimed by tour critics and reviewers . Journalist Monique from Mirrors Magazine says that " the showmanship on Bruno ’ s stage was like none other that I ’ ve ever seen " comparing him to the King of Pop , Michael Jackson . Kevin C. Johnson for St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch called Mars a " consummate performer " . Boston Globe music critique , Sarah Rodman , said that Mars shows an " indefatigable ecstatic approach to performing " and a " classic showmanship " . In the same vein , Jim Farber for Daily News stated that Mars " brings old @-@ school showmanship to dynamic performance " , regarding the Super Bowl XLVIII Halftime Show . 
 Rolling Stone magazine placed Mars at number 35 on their list of " 50 Best Live Acts Right Now " in 2013 ; he 's the youngest act besides Janelle <unk> and Lady Gaga to enter the list . They wrote : " Anyone from the age of 5 to 95 can walk out of a Bruno Mars concert feeling like the show was designed just for them . Mars walks the old @-@ school walk and talks the sexy talk , but he also nails the hits , leads a super @-@ energetic nine @-@ piece soul band , and rips a mean drum solo " , praising the " spectacular version " of " Gorilla " . Jason Lipshutz from Billboard described Mars ' performance as " lifeblood is entertaining and keeping smiles plastered on the faces of his onlookers , and he does a better job at it than almost anyone working in music right now . " NFL executives Sarah Moll and Tracy Perlman stated that " If you go to his concerts , it 's 11 @-@ year @-@ old girls to 65 @-@ year @-@ old women — it 's everyone " , after seeing The Moonshine Jungle tour several times during the summer of 2013 . 
 On his concerts Mars is , most of the time , accompanied by The Hooligans , a band that includes several musicians : a guitarist , bassist , drummer , keyboardist , and horn section . They also serve as dancers and background singers . Mars shows feature all @-@ band choreographed dancing arrangements , which include " fancy , slick and fantastic " footwork that is inspired by James Brown and splits . His shows are heavily influenced by the disco era with a soul revue @-@ inspired set sufficed . In addition , long , mellow and soft interludes that echo the smooth Contemporary R & B style which was popular during the 1990s are also part of the show . His setlist blends several genres of music such as pop , doo @-@ wop , funk , R & B , soul and reggae . Mars ' shows usually feature pyrotechnics , strobe and laser lighting and he typically plays the drums and guitar . 
 = = The Hooligans – Band members = = 
 = = Other ventures = = 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 On May 12 , 2013 , Mars tweeted a picture of himself using an electronic cigarette . On May 30 , 2013 , a press release was published reporting Mars investment in the <unk> Electronic Cigarette Company , " in order to quit smoking for his mother " , since the singer " believes in the product and the company 's mission " . 
 Mars decided to invest in <unk> , which makes digital versions of sheet music for the web and iPad . Mars said " I love that <unk> will bring better music education into schools " , he added " And I 'm happy to be a part of it " . 
 In 2014 , Bruno Mars teamed up with three partners to launch the " Selvarey Rum " brand which includes Selvarey White , made of blended three and five @-@ year aged Panamanian <unk> and the aged " natural cacao rum " Selvarey Cacao . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 On February 26 , It was announced that Mars had partnered with the Hawai 'i Community Foundation and the <unk> Foundation to establish a <unk> Camp Scholarship Fund , in order to support the next generation of music makers with funds to provide financial assistance for qualified needs @-@ based applicants from Hawaii . 
 Mars ' donated 100 @,@ 000 dollars to the kids of <unk> Bata , who were among the victims of Typhoon Haiyan , in order to bring back the esteem and morale of the orphans who lost their families and homes . Bruno Mars will perform at the Make It Right gala , whose campaign goal is to " help build homes for people in need " . Mars is also set to perform at the Robin Hood Foundation 's annual benefit in New York , whose goal is to " fight poverty in New York City by supporting more than 200 nonprofits with financial and technical assistance " . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 Bruno Mars has earned numerous awards and honors throughout his career , including four Grammy Awards , three Brit Awards and three MTV Europe Music Awards . In 2011 , Mars made the Time 100 list and in 2013 the artists was considered the sixth best songwriter of that year by Billboard . The Smeezingtons , Mars ' songwriting and record producing team , have earned several accolades . In 2014 , Mars became the artist with most top five entries on the Billboard Hot 100 since his first week in the chart . Along with Adele and John Legend , Mars is the only artist who has a song that only features piano and vocals to top the Hot 100 . Besides this , he is the first male artist to place two titles as a lead act in the Hot 100 's top 10 simultaneously . Mars was the most played artist at pop radio in 2013 according to Mediabase and became the first solo men artist whose first 13 Top 40 hits all reached the Top 10 of American Top 40 . In total , he has had six number @-@ one singles on the Hot 100 chart . 
 According to International Federation of Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , " Just the Way You Are " and " Grenade " are two of the most sold singles digitally of all time , with sales of 12 @.@ 5 million and 10 @.@ 2 million , respectively , contributing for Mars to become the biggest selling artist of 2012 . His songs " Just The Way You Are " , " Grenade " , " Locked Out Of Heaven " and " When I Was Your Man " have each sold over 4 million digital copies , making him the first male artist to do so as a lead singer . Five of his singles are counted among the best @-@ selling singles of all time . As of 2014 , Mars has sold over 100 million singles and albums worldwide . Nevertheless , as a singer , featured artist , producer and songwriter his sales surpass 130 million records worldwide . 
 Due to the tickets reselling activities that occurred during the week after the Super Bowl , and in order to limit that kind of profiteering , Hawaii Senate President Donna Mercado Kim introduced Senate Resolution 12 , also known as the " Bruno Mars Act " . The " Bruno Mars Act " limits all ticket purchases within 48 hours of the on @-@ sale to the physical box office . It ensures that anyone who comes all the way to the box office to buy tickets for their favorite should would almost certainly be guaranteed to leave with a ticket in hand , dissuade ticket scalping . The State Senate in Hawaii passed the law . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Mars began dating model Jessica Caban in 2011 . 
 = = = Mother 's death = = = 
 On June 2 , 2013 , a publicist for Atlantic Records confirmed to the Associated Press , on condition of anonymity since it was not allowed to speak on record , that Mars ' mother had suffered a brain aneurysm . She died on Saturday , June 1 , 2013 , at age 55 at Queens Medical Center in Honolulu , Hawaii . Later , on June 7 , 2013 , the singer broke the silence regarding the loss of his mother , via Twitter , showing his sorrow and gratitude to the fans for the support , he wrote " So thankful for all the love during the most difficult time in my life . I 'll be back on my feet again soon . Thats what mom wants , she told me " . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 On January 28 , 2014 , Demetrius <unk> Proctor filed a lawsuit , claiming he holds the copyright for the Travie McCoy and Mars ' track " Billionaire " . Proctor claims he owned the copyright to the music and lyrics of the track since March 31 , 2011 , though the song was released a year before . As evidence , Proctor has submitted a United States Copyright Office registration certificate for " Frisky Vol . 1 to 30 ( Tapes ) " , made in 2000 . Proctor accused the defendants of " willful and intentional " copyright infringement , seeking destruction of all copies of the recording . Proctor claims he has exclusive rights to reproduce and distribute the song . His only request : " Defendant shall destroy all copies of Plaintiffs ' Recording that Defendants have downloaded onto any computer hard drive or server without Plaintiffs ' authorization and shall destroy all copies of that downloaded recording transferred onto any [ other ] physical medium or device " . 
 In April 2015 , it was revealed that a settlement had been reached with The Gap Band 's publishing company , Minder Music , to add The Gap Band and producer Lonnie Simmons as co @-@ writers , with subsequently 17 % of the royalties from Mark and Mars hit " Uptown Funk " . The claim on behalf of The Gap Band and Lonnie Simmons was made into YouTube ’ s content management system , which prevented publishers to receive their payment . Later , on August 12 , Serbian pop artist <unk> has also argued that " Uptown Funk " infringed on her track " <unk> <unk> <unk> Za <unk> " . <unk> , she stated that she had no hurry to sue them , since " these processes take a long time , and my life and career does not depend on lawsuits " . She further added , " for these lawsuits , there should be a lot of money , the lawyers are working on a percentage . If I still decide to sue them and I win , I have to figure out what to do with that money " . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Stereotypes = = = 
 In the cover story for Entertainment Weekly , Mars stated that the song " Nothin ' on You " was rejected because of his race by a " music industry decision @-@ maker – a guy he won 't name " . That experience made him feel like a " mutant " , and he says that was his lowest point . " Even with that song in my back pocket to seal the deal , things like that are coming out of people 's mouths . It made me feel like I wasn 't even in the room . " On April , 2013 during a cover story for GQ magazine , Mars confessed that he changed his last name due to people from the music industry who took him as another Latino artist , and even convince him to sing in Spanish . Mars said " Your last name 's Hernandez , maybe you should do the Latin music , this Spanish music ... Enrique [ Iglesias ] is so hot right now ” . Nevertheless , Mars used his childhood nickname Bruno and changed his surname to Mars , in an effort to “ avoid being stereotyped ” . 
 = = = Tyler , The Creator = = = 
 In the song " Yonkers " , Tyler , The Creator disparages numerous artists , including Bruno Mars . Tyler also disparages Mars in The Game 's song " Martians vs. Goblins " , in which he and Lil Wayne are featured artists . Bruno Mars , in response to the verse " stab Bruno Mars in his goddamn esophagus , " affirmed , " [ Tyler ] has to wait in line if he wants to stab me ... [ Tyler 's ] definitely not the first guy that 's said something like that to me and he 's not going to be the last . " On April 24 , 2015 Tyler admitted to be wrong regarding Mars ' talent and pointed out Mars performance of " Gorilla " on the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards as evidence . 
 = = = Kanye West = = = 
 During a performance on November 21 , 2013 , Kanye West gave his opinion regarding the MTV Video Music Awards , that were held on August 25 , 2013 . West said , " Bruno Mars won all the motherfucking awards and shit . " he continued , " What I care about is if you ’ re an artist and you work hard as fuck and the streets say that you deserve that shit . Then can ’ t no motherfucking networks try to gas everybody up so they can sell some product with the prettiest motherfucker out . " Nevertheless , on February 26 , 2015 , he publicly apologized to Bruno Mars on Twitter while asking him to sing a hook on a song that he co @-@ produced . West asked Tyler , the Creator to direct the music video , who previously had a dispute with Mars . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Doo @-@ Wops & Hooligans ( 2010 ) 
 Unorthodox Jukebox ( 2012 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Honeymoon in Vegas ( 1992 ) 
 Rio 2 ( 2014 ) 
 = = Tours and residency shows = = 
 = Asser = 
 Asser ( died c . 909 ) was a Welsh monk from St David 's , Dyfed , who became Bishop of Sherborne in the 890s . About 885 he was asked by Alfred the Great to leave St David 's and join the circle of learned men whom Alfred was recruiting for his court . After spending a year at Caerwent because of illness , Asser accepted . 
 In 893 Asser wrote a biography of Alfred , called the Life of King Alfred . The manuscript survived to modern times in only one copy , which was part of the Cotton library . That copy was destroyed in a fire in 1731 , but transcriptions that had been made earlier , together with material from Asser 's work which was included by other early writers , have enabled the work to be reconstructed . The biography is the main source of information about Alfred 's life and provides far more information about Alfred than is known about any other early English ruler . Asser assisted Alfred in his translation of Gregory the Great 's Pastoral Care , and possibly with other works . 
 Asser is sometimes cited as a source for the legend about Alfred 's having founded the University of Oxford , which is now known to be false . A short passage making this claim was interpolated by William Camden into his 1603 edition of Asser 's Life . Doubts have also been raised periodically about whether the entire Life is a forgery , written by a slightly later writer , but it is now almost universally accepted as genuine . 
 = = Name and early life = = 
 Asser ( also known as John Asser or <unk> <unk> ) was a Welsh monk who lived in the late 9th century . Almost nothing is known of Asser 's early life . The name Asser is likely to have been taken from <unk> , or Asher , the eighth son of Jacob in Genesis . Old Testament names were common in Wales at the time , but it has been suggested that this name may have been adopted at the time Asser entered the church . Asser may have been familiar with a work by St Jerome on the meaning of Hebrew names ( Jerome 's given meaning for " Asser " was " blessed " ) , so it is possible that Asser 's birth name was " Gwyn " ( or " Guinn " ) , which is Welsh for " blessed " ( or " blessedness " ) . 
 According to his Life of King Alfred , Asser was a monk at St David 's in what was then the kingdom of Dyfed , in southwest Wales . Asser makes it clear that he was brought up in the area , and was tonsured , trained and ordained there . He also mentions Nobis , a bishop of St David 's who died about 873 or 874 , as being a kinsman of his . 
 = = Recruitment by Alfred and time at court = = 
 Much of what is known about Asser comes from his biography of Alfred , in particular a short section in which Asser recounts how Alfred recruited him as a scholar for his court . Alfred held a high opinion of the value of learning and recruited men from around Britain and from continental Europe to establish a scholarly centre at his court . It is not known how Alfred heard of Asser , but one possibility relates to Alfred 's overlordship of south Wales . Several kings , including Hywel ap Rhys of Glywysing and Hyfaidd of Dyfed ( where Asser 's monastery was ) , had submitted to Alfred 's overlordship in 885 . Asser gives a fairly detailed account of the events . There is a charter of Hywel 's which has been dated to c . 885 ; amongst the witnesses is one " Asser " , which may be the same person . Hence it is possible that Alfred 's relationship with the southern Welsh kings led him to hear of Asser . 
 Asser recounts meeting Alfred first at the royal estate at Dean , Sussex ( now East and West Dean , West Sussex ) . Asser provides only one datable event in his history : on St Martin 's Day , 11 November 887 , Alfred decided to learn to read Latin . Working backwards from this , it appears most likely that Asser was recruited by Alfred in early 885 . 
 Asser 's response to Alfred 's request was to ask for time to consider the offer , as he felt it would be unfair to abandon his current position in favour of worldly recognition . Alfred agreed but also suggested that he should spend half his time at St David 's and half with Alfred . Asser again asked for time to consider , but ultimately agreed to return to Alfred with an answer in six months . On his return to Wales , however , Asser fell ill with a fever and was confined to the monastery of Caerwent for twelve months and a week . Alfred wrote to find out the cause of the delay , and Asser responded that he would keep his promise when he recovered . When he did recover , in 886 , he agreed to divide his time between Wales and Alfred 's court , as Alfred had suggested . Others at St David 's supported this , since they hoped Asser 's influence with Alfred would avoid " damaging afflictions and injuries at the hands of King Hyfaidd ( who often assaulted that monastery and the jurisdiction of St David ) " . 
 Asser joined several other noted scholars at Alfred 's court , including Grimbald , and John the Old Saxon ; all three probably reached Alfred 's court within a year of each other . His first extended stay with Alfred was at the royal estate at <unk> , probably from about April through December 886 . It is not known where <unk> was ; a case has been made for <unk> , in Wiltshire . Asser records that he read aloud to the king from the books at hand . On Christmas Eve , 886 , after Asser had for some time failed to obtain permission to return to Wales , Alfred gave Asser the monasteries of Congresbury and Banwell , along with a silk cloak and a quantity of incense " weighing as much as a stout man . " He allowed Asser to visit his new possessions and thence to return to St David 's . 
 Thereafter Asser seems to have divided his time between Wales and Alfred 's court . Asser gives no information about his time in Wales , but mentions various places that he visited in England , including the battlefield at Ashdown , <unk> ( which he calls <unk> ) , and Athelney . It is evident from Asser 's account that he spent a good deal of time with Alfred : he recounts meeting Alfred 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , Eadburh ( who is not the same Eadburh who died as a beggar in Pavia ) , on many occasions ; and says that he has often seen Alfred hunting . 
 = = Bishop of Sherborne = = 
 Sometime between 887 and 892 , Alfred gave Asser the monastery of Exeter . Asser subsequently became Bishop of Sherborne , though the year of succession is unknown . Asser 's predecessor as Bishop of Sherborne , Wulfsige , is known to have attested a charter sometime between 890 and 896 . Asser 's first appearance in the position is in 900 , when he appears as a witness to a charter ; hence the succession can only be dated to the years 890 to 900 . In any event , Asser had already been a bishop prior to his appointment to the see of Sherborne , since Wulfsige is known to have received a copy of Alfred 's Pastoral Care in which Asser is described as a bishop . 
 It is possible that Asser was a suffragan bishop within the see of Sherborne , but he may instead have been a bishop of St David 's . He is listed as such in Giraldus Cambrensis 's Itinerarium Cambriae , though this was written three centuries later , in 1191 and thus may be unreliable . A contemporary clue is found in Asser 's own writing : he mentions that bishops of St David 's were sometimes expelled by King Hyfaidd and adds that " he even expelled me on occasion " . This may indicate that Asser was himself a bishop of St David 's . 
 = = The Life of King Alfred = = 
 In 893 , Asser wrote a biography of Alfred entitled The Life of King Alfred ; in the original Latin , the title is Vita <unk> regis Angul Saxonum . The date is known from Asser 's mention of the king 's age in the text . The work , which is less than twenty thousand words long , is one of the most important sources of information on Alfred the Great . 
 Asser drew on a variety of texts to write his Life . The style is similar to that of two biographies of Louis the Pious : Vita <unk> Imperatoris , written c . 840 by an unknown author usually called " the Astronomer " , and Vita <unk> Imperatoris by <unk> of Trier . It is possible that Asser may have known these works . He also knew Bede 's Historia ecclesiastica gentis Anglorum ; the Historia Brittonum , a Welsh source ; the Life of Alcuin ; and the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . It is also clear from the text that Asser was familiar with Virgil 's Aeneid , <unk> Sedulius 's Carmen Paschale , Aldhelm 's De Virginitate , and Einhard 's Vita Karoli Magni ( " Life of Charlemagne " ) . He quotes from Gregory the Great 's Regula Pastoralis , a work he and Alfred subsequently collaborated in translating , and from Augustine of Hippo 's Enchiridion . About half of the Life is little more than a translation of part of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle for the years 851 – 887 , though Asser adds personal opinions and interpolates information about Alfred 's life . Asser also adds material relating to the years after 887 and general opinions about Alfred 's character and reign . 
 Asser 's prose style has been criticised for weak syntax , stylistic pretensions , and garbled exposition . His frequent use of archaic and unusual words gives his prose a baroque flavour that is common in Insular Latin authors of the period . He uses several words that are peculiar to Frankish Latin sources . This has led to speculation that he was educated at least partly in Francia , but it is also possible that he acquired this vocabulary from Frankish scholars he associated with at court , such as Grimbald . 
 The Life ends abruptly with no concluding remarks and it is considered likely that the manuscript is an incomplete draft . Asser lived a further fifteen or sixteen years and Alfred a further six , but no events after 893 are recorded . 
 It is possible that the work was written principally for the benefit of a Welsh audience . Asser takes pains to explain local geography , so he was clearly considering an audience not familiar with the areas he described . More specifically , at several points he gives an English name and follows it with the Welsh equivalent , even in the case of Nottingham , which seems unlikely to have had a native Welsh name . As a result , and given that Alfred 's overlordship of south Wales was recent , it may be that Asser intended the work to acquaint a Welsh readership with Alfred 's personal qualities and reconcile them to his rule . However , it is also possible that Asser 's inclusion of Welsh placenames simply reflects an interest in etymology or the existence of a Welsh audience in his own household rather than in Wales . There are also sections such as the support for Alfred 's programme of fortification that give the impression of the book 's being aimed at an English audience . 
 Asser 's Life omits any mention of internal strife or dissent in Alfred 's own reign , though when he mentions that Alfred had to harshly punish those who were slow to obey Alfred 's commands to fortify the realm , he makes it clear that Alfred did have to enforce obedience . Asser 's life is a one @-@ sided treatment of Alfred , though since Alfred was alive when it was composed , it is unlikely to contain gross errors of fact . 
 In addition to being the primary source for Alfred 's life , Asser 's work is also a source for other historical periods , where he adds material to his translation of the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle . For example , he tells a story about Eadburh , the daughter of Offa . Eadburh married Beorhtric , king of the West Saxons . Asser describes her as behaving " like a tyrant " and ultimately accidentally poisoning Beorhtric in an attempt to murder someone else . He finishes by describing her death as a beggar in Pavia . This Eadburh is not the same as Alfred 's mother @-@ in @-@ law , also named Eadburh , whom Asser mentions elsewhere . 
 = = Manuscripts of The Life of King Alfred = = 
 The early manuscript of the Life does not appear to have been widely known in medieval times . Only one copy is known to have survived into modern times . It is known as Cotton MS Otho A xii , and was part of the Cotton library . It was written about 1000 and was destroyed in a fire in 1731 . The lack of distribution may be because Asser had not finished the manuscript and so did not have it copied . However , the material in the Life is recognizable in other works . There is some evidence from early writers of access to versions of Asser 's work , as follows : 
 Byrhtferth of Ramsey included large sections of it into Historia Regum , a historical work he wrote in the late tenth or early 11th century . He may have used the Cotton manuscript . ( The Historia Regum was until recently attributed to Symeon of Durham . ) 
 The anonymous author of the <unk> <unk> ( written in the early 1040s ) was apparently acquainted with the Life , though it is not known how he knew of it . The author was a monk of St Bertin 's in Flanders , but may have learned of the work in England . 
 The chronicler known as Florence of Worcester incorporated parts of Asser 's Life into his chronicle , in the early 12th century ; again , he may have also used the Cotton manuscript . 
 An anonymous chronicler at Bury St Edmunds , working in the second quarter of the 12th century , produced a compilation now known as The Annals of St Neots . He used material from a version of Asser 's work which differs in some places from the Cotton manuscript and in some places appears to be more accurate , so it is possible that the copy used was not the Cotton manuscript . 
 Giraldus Cambrensis wrote a Life of St Æthelberht , probably at Hereford during the 1190s . He quotes an incident from Asser that occurred during the reign of Offa of Mercia , who died in 796 . This incident is not in the surviving copies of the manuscript . It is possible that Giraldus had access to a different copy of Asser 's work . It is also possible that he is quoting a different work by Asser , which is otherwise unknown , or even that Giraldus is making up the reference to Asser to support his story . The latter is at least plausible , since Giraldus is not always regarded as a trustworthy writer . 
 The history of the Cotton manuscript itself is quite complex . The list of early writers above mentions that it may have been in the possession of at least two of them . It was owned by John Leland , the antiquary , in the 1540s . It probably became available after the dissolution of the monasteries , in which the property of many religious houses was confiscated and sold . Leland died in 1552 and it is known to have been in the possession of Matthew Parker from some time after that until his own death in 1575 . Although Parker bequeathed most of his library to Corpus Christi College , Cambridge , the Cotton manuscript was not included . By 1600 , it was in the library of Lord Lumley and by 1621 the manuscript was in the possession of Robert Cotton . The Cotton library was moved in 1712 from Cotton House in Westminster to Essex House in the Strand and then moved again in 1730 to Ashburnham House in Westminster . On the morning of Saturday , 23 October 1731 , a fire broke out and the Cotton manuscript was destroyed . 
 As a result , the text of Asser 's Life is known from a multitude of different sources . Various transcripts had been made of the Cotton manuscript and a facsimile of the first page of the manuscript had been made and published , giving more direct evidence for the hand of the scribe . In addition to these transcripts , the extracts mentioned above made by other early writers have been used to help assemble and assess the text . Because of the lack of the manuscript itself and because Parker 's annotations had been copied by some <unk> as if they were part of the text , scholarly editions have had a difficult burden . There have been multiple editions of The Life published , both in Latin and in translation . The 1904 critical edition by W. H. Stevenson , Asser 's Life of King Alfred , together with the Annals of Saint Neots erroneously ascribed to Asser , still provides the standard text . An important recent translation , with thorough notes on the scholarly problems and issues , is Alfred the Great : Asser 's Life of King Alfred and Other Contemporary Sources by Simon Keynes and Michael Lapidge . 
 = = Legend of the founding of Oxford = = 
 In 1603 the antiquarian William Camden published an edition of Asser 's Life in which there appears a story of a community of scholars at Oxford , who were visited by Grimbald : 
 In the year of our Lord 886 , the second year of the arrival of St Grimbald in England , the University of Oxford was begun ... John , monk of the church of St David , giving lectures in logic , music and arithmetic ; and John , the monk , colleague of St Grimbald , a man of great parts and a universal scholar , teaching geometry and astronomy before the most glorious and invincible King Alfred . 
 There is no support for this in any source known . Camden based his edition on Parker 's manuscript , other transcripts of which do not include any such material . It is now acknowledged that this is an interpolation of Camden 's , though the legend itself first surfaced in the 14th century . Older books about Alfred the Great include the legend : for example , Jacob Abbott 's 1849 Alfred the Great says that " One of the greatest and most important of the measures which Alfred adopted for the intellectual improvement of his people was the founding of the great University of Oxford . " 
 = = Claims of forgery = = 
 During the 19th and 20th centuries , several scholars asserted that Asser 's biography of King Alfred was not authentic , but a forgery . A prominent claim was made in 1964 by the respected historian <unk> Galbraith in his essay " Who Wrote Asser 's Life of Alfred ? " Galbraith argued that there were anachronisms in the text that meant it could not have been written during Asser 's lifetime . For example , Asser uses " rex Angul Saxonum " ( " king of the Anglo @-@ Saxons " ) to refer to Alfred . Galbraith asserted that this usage does not appear until the late 10th century . Galbraith also identified the use of " <unk> " to refer to Exeter as an anachronism , arguing that it should be translated as " diocese " and hence that it referred to the bishopric of Exeter , which was not created until 1050 . Galbraith identified the true author as Leofric , who became Bishop of Devon and Cornwall in 1046 . Leofric 's motive , according to Galbraith , was to justify the re @-@ establishment of his see at Exeter by demonstrating a precedent for the arrangement . 
 The title " king of the Anglo @-@ Saxons " does , however , in fact occur in royal charters that date to before 892 and " <unk> " does not necessarily mean " diocese " , but can sometimes refer just to the jurisdiction of a church or monastery . In addition , there are other arguments against Leofric 's having been the forger . Aside from the fact that Leofric would have known little about Asser and so would have been unlikely to construct a plausible forgery , there is strong evidence dating the Cotton manuscript to about 1000 . The apparent use of Asser 's material in other early works that predate Leofric also argues against Galbraith 's theory . Galbraith 's arguments were refuted to the satisfaction of most historians by Dorothy Whitelock in Genuine Asser , in 1967 . 
 More recently , in 1995 , Professor Alfred P. Smyth argued that the Life is a forgery by Byrhtferth ( who simply ' adopted ' the name of the obscure Asser from the references to him in other records ) , basing his case primarily on an analysis of Byrhtferth 's and Asser 's Latin vocabulary . Byrhtferth 's motive , according to Smyth , is to lend Alfred 's prestige to the Benedictine monastic reform movement of the late 10th century . The strongest arguments for forgery are that a ) there is actually no new information in ' Asser ' that cannot be found in the surviving Anglo Saxon Chronicles , so that it is not contemporary with Alfred as it claims ; b ) that the Latin translation is simply lifted from the Chronicles ' narrative and interspersed with padding of no importance ; c ) that writing in Latin a contemporary narrative was anachronistic ; d ) that much of the alleged illness of Alfred in ' Asser ' is lifted from standard hagiographic conventions and similarly so are ' Asser 's ' claims as to the educational development and attainments of Alfred ; and e ) that much of the dating in ' Asser ' uses the age of Alfred can be shown as incorrect and can be traced to the mis @-@ datings in later recensions of the Chronicles , so that ' Asser ' cannot have been a contemporary of Alfred . 
 Although a few other historians harbour doubts about the authenticity of the work , the majority of other Anglo @-@ Saxon scholars do not find these arguments persuasive . The stiffest opposition to Smyth 's work has come from former Cambridge Professor Michael Lapidge and Professor Simon Keynes , still an eminent Cambridge Saxonist , who themselves collaborated on a book about Alfred the Great . Both have argued that Smyth 's analysis of the Latin text , which relied heavily on the opinions of other academics who helped with the book , is fatally flawed . Professor Keynes felt strongly enough about the subject to place a copy of Smyth 's book in the fire @-@ grate of his chambers in Trinity College , and then photograph it for his personal website . A typed statement from department officials was also placed on the inside cover of a copy of the book that lives in the <unk> ( Anglo @-@ Saxon , Norse and Celtic ) library at Cambridge , to leave undergraduates in no doubt as to the department 's views . The debate caught the imagination of the popular press when Professor Smyth 's book was published , fuelled by the former University of Kent historian 's claim that the Cambridge <unk> department knew Asser 's life was a fake , but that they were happy to keep the myth going in order to avoid discrediting previous eminent historians from their university such as Frank Stenton and Dorothy Whitelock . 
 = = Other works and date of death = = 
 In addition to the Life of King Alfred , Asser is credited by Alfred as one of several scholars who assisted with Alfred 's translation of Gregory 's Regula Pastoralis ( Pastoral Care ) . The historian William of Malmesbury , writing in the 12th century , believed that Asser also assisted Alfred with his translation of Boethius . 
 The Annales Cambriae , a set of Welsh annals that were probably kept at St David 's , records Asser 's death in the year 908 . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle records the following entry as part of the entry for 909 or 910 ( in different versions of the chronicle ) : " Here <unk> succeeded to the bishopric in Winchester , and after that Asser , who was bishop at Sherborne , departed . " The year given by the chronicle was uncertain , because different chroniclers started the new year at different calendar dates , and Asser 's date of death is generally given as 908 / 909 . 
 = Isopogon anemonifolius = 
 Isopogon anemonifolius , commonly known as broad @-@ leaved drumsticks , is a shrub of the family Proteaceae that is found only in eastern New South Wales in Australia . It occurs naturally in woodland , open forest , and heathland on sandstone soils . I. anemonifolius usually ranges between 1 and 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 31 ⁄ 4 – 5 feet ) in height , generally being smaller in exposed heathland . Its leaves are divided and narrow , though broader than those of the related Isopogon anethifolius , and have a purplish tinge during the cooler months . The yellow flowers appear during late spring or early summer and are displayed prominently . They are followed by round grey cones , which give the plant its common name drumsticks . The small hairy seeds are found in the old flower parts . 
 A long @-@ lived plant reaching an age of up to 60 years , I. anemonifolius resprouts from its woody base , known as a lignotuber , after bushfire . Seedlings appear in the year following a fire . Although I. anemonifolius was collected by Daniel Solander in 1770 , it was not described until 1796 by Richard Salisbury . Several varieties have been named , though none are now recognised as distinct . It was first cultivated in the United Kingdom in 1791 . I. anemonifolius grows readily in the garden if located in a sunny or part @-@ shaded spot with sandy soil and good drainage . 
 = = Description = = 
 Isopogon anemonifolius grows as a woody shrub to 1 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 1 ⁄ 4 – 5 ft ) in height , but is restricted to around 50 cm ( 1 3 ⁄ 4 ft ) on exposed heaths and headlands . The leaves are 5 – 11 cm ( 2 – 4 1 ⁄ 4 in ) long and fork after 2 – 5 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 – 2 in ) into three segments , and then often fork a second time . The leaf tips are pointed . Leaves can vary markedly on single plants , though some leaves are undivided . Leaf surfaces are generally smooth , though occasionally covered with fine hair . Its flat leaves distinguish it from the terete ( round in cross section ) leaves of Isopogon anethifolius ; they are also broader , at 3 – 5 mm ( 1 ⁄ 8 – 3 ⁄ 16 in ) wide compared with the 1 mm ( 1 ⁄ 25 in ) wide leaves of the latter species . The new growth and leaves of I. anemonifolius may be flushed red to purple in colour , particularly in winter . The globular inflorescences appear any time from July to January , being most abundant in October . They are 3 – 4 cm ( 1 1 ⁄ 8 – 1 5 ⁄ 8 in ) in diameter , and grow terminally at the tips of branches , or occasionally axillary ( arising on short stems off branches ) . The individual flowers are around 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 1 ⁄ 2 in ) long . They are straight stalkless structures arising from a basal scale . The perianth , a tube that envelopes the flower 's sexual organs , splits into four segments , revealing a thin delicate style that is tipped with the stigma . At the ends of the four perianth segments are the male pollen @-@ bearing structures known as anthers . Arranged in a spiral pattern , the flowers open from the bottom of the flowerhead inwards . Flowering is followed by the development of the round fruiting cones , which have a diameter of 1 – 1 @.@ 6 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 – 5 ⁄ 8 in ) . The seed @-@ bearing nuts are small — up to 4 mm ( 3 ⁄ 16 in ) across — and lined with hairs . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Swedish naturalist Daniel Solander , after collecting a specimen at Botany Bay in 1770 on the first voyage of Captain James Cook , was the first to write of this species . He gave it the name <unk> <unk> , but never officially described it . The specific epithet referred to the similarity of its leaves to <unk> ( celery ) . 
 In 1796 English botanist Richard Salisbury published a formal description of the species , from a specimen collected in Port Jackson ( Sydney ) . He gave it the name Protea <unk> , the specific epithet derived from anemone and folium , the latter meaning " leaf " , highlighting the resemblance of its leaves to those of anemones . The common name drumsticks is derived from their globular cones . 
 In 1799 , the Spanish botanist Antonio José Cavanilles described Protea <unk> , later identified as a junior synonym by Salisbury and the English horticulturalist Joseph Knight . Salisbury founded the new genus Atylus in 1807 to remove this and other species from Protea , but did not make proper combinations for them in the new genus . It gained its current name in 1809 when it was redescribed as the anemone @-@ leaved <unk> ( Isopogon <unk> ) in the controversial work On the cultivation of the plants belonging to the natural order of Proteeae , published under Knight 's name but written by Salisbury . Scottish naturalist Robert Brown had written of the genus Isopogon but Salisbury and Knight had hurried out their work before Brown 's . Brown 's description appeared in his paper On the natural order of plants called Proteaceae , subsequently published as " On the Proteaceae of Jussieu " in the Transactions of the Linnean Society in 1810 . 
 In 1891 , German botanist Otto Kuntze published Revisio generum plantarum , his response to what he perceived as a lack of method in existing nomenclatural practice . He revived the genus Atylus on the grounds of priority , and correctly made the combination Atylus anemonifolius . However , Kuntze 's revisionary program was not accepted by the majority of botanists . Ultimately , the genus Isopogon was nomenclaturally conserved over Atylus by the International Botanical Congress of 1905 . 
 Several varieties have been described but have been synonymised with I. anemonifolius or recognised as distinct species . Brown described varieties glaber , identified by wholly smooth leaves and branches , and pubescens , with leaves and branches covered in fine pale grey hairs , in 1830 . English botanist George Bentham tentatively described variety <unk> in his 1870 work Flora Australiensis . He queried that it may have been from Sydney , and had a slightly hairy perianth . These are not regarded as distinct . Victorian Government botanist Ferdinand von Mueller described I. anemonifolius var. <unk> in 1870 , now recognised as I. <unk> . Australian botanist Edwin Cheel described forma <unk> in 1923 , from collections from Mount Victoria and Hornsby . He described it as having mostly <unk> ( simple ) leaves compared with the typical form . His variety <unk> is now a separate species , I. petiolaris . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 I. anemonifolius is found along the east coast of New South Wales , from near the Victorian border almost to ( and possibly reaching ) Queensland . It is most common between Smoky Cape and Ulladulla . There is an outlying population in the vicinity of Torrington in the New England region . Within the Sydney Basin , the annual rainfall is 800 to 1400 mm ( 30 – 50 in ) . It occurs naturally from sea level to 1200 m ( 4000 ft ) and is found on low @-@ nutrient sandstone soils in heathland and dry sclerophyll woodland , particularly along ridges or tops of hills . Typical woodland trees it is associated with include the scribbly gums Eucalyptus haemastoma and E. sclerophylla , <unk> ( E. <unk> ) , yellow bloodwood ( Corymbia eximia ) , red bloodwood ( C. gummifera ) and smooth @-@ barked apple ( Angophora costata ) , and heathland plants such as rusty banksia ( Banksia oblongifolia ) , swamp banksia ( B. paludosa ) , mountain devil ( Lambertia formosa ) , <unk> ( <unk> pulchella ) , tick bush ( Kunzea ambigua ) , forest oak ( Allocasuarina torulosa ) and Hakea <unk> . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 I. anemonifolius is a long @-@ lived plant , with a lifespan of 60 years . It resprouts from its woody base , known as a lignotuber , around two months after being burnt in a bushfire . The resultant new growth takes around two years to flower again , with older plants with larger lignotubers able to put on new growth more quickly . I. anemonifolius is slow @-@ growing ; a 1990 field study in Brisbane Water National Park found that the lignotuber grew at a rate of 0 @.@ 173 cm per existing cm of lignotuber per year , yielding a lignotuber of around 1 cm ( 3 ⁄ 8 in ) in diameter at 10 years of age and 5 cm ( 2 in ) diameter at 20 years of age . The largest lignotubers found had a diameter of 40 cm ( 16 in ) . 
 Plants need a lignotuber of around 2 cm ( 3 ⁄ 4 in ) diameter to survive low intensity fires . Plants are able to resprout after more intense fires at around 15 years of age . I. anemonifolius is also serotinous — the seeds are held on the plant as a canopy @-@ based seedbank and are released after fire . Most seedlings arise within a year of a bushfire , and very few are seen at other times . The seedbank is most productive between 25 and 35 years after a previous fire . However seedlings may be outcompeted by seedlings of obligate <unk> species . The seeds of I. anemonifolius fall directly to the ground or are blown a short distance by wind . Young plants flower about seven years after germinating from seed . Repeated bushfire intervals of less than 10 years ' duration are likely to result in both reduced survival of older plants and recruitment of seedlings , possibly leading to local extinction in 50 years . Intervals of at least 12 – 13 years for low intensity fires and 15 years for hotter fires are needed for population stability . 
 Leaf spotting is caused by the fungus <unk> . Flower buds may be damaged by weevils . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 I. anemonifolius was first cultivated in the United Kingdom in 1791 . Knight reported that it flowered and set seed there . With attractive foliage and prominently displayed flowers and cones , I. anemonifolius adapts readily to cultivation ; plants can be grown in rock gardens or as borders , or as a pot plant . Garden plants can be variable , with either upright or spreading habits ; and some maintaining a naturally compact habit without pruning . It grows readily in a sandy well @-@ drained soil in a sunny or part @-@ shaded position . The species is suited to USDA hardiness zones 9 to 11 . It is hardy in frosts and dry spells , but produces more flowers with extra moisture . It can be pruned heavily once established . 
 Propagation is by seed or cuttings of hardened growth less than a year old . The seed can be collected from the cones and stored ; they are best sown in spring or autumn . The stems and flowers are long @-@ lasting if put in water . The flowers , cones and foliage are used in the cut @-@ flower industry . 
 Isopogon ' <unk> 2000 ' is a selected dwarf form of I. anemonifolius , propagated by Bill Molyneux of <unk> Nursery in Victoria . It produces abundant flowerheads . Plant Breeders Rights were granted in Australia in 1997 and the cultivar became commercially available in 1999 . Another dwarf cultivar , ' Little <unk> ' , is also sold . 
 = Satoru Iwata = 
 Satoru Iwata ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Iwata Satoru , December 6 , 1959 – July 11 , 2015 ) was a Japanese video game programmer and businessman who served as the fourth president and chief executive officer ( CEO ) of Nintendo . He is widely regarded as a major contributor in broadening the appeal of video games to a wider audience by focusing on novel and entertaining games rather than top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ line hardware . 
 Born in Sapporo , Japan , Iwata expressed interest in video games from an early age and created his first simple game while in high school . He later majored in computer science at the Tokyo Institute of Technology . In 1980 , he joined the game developer HAL Laboratory while attending the university . During his early years at HAL Laboratory he worked as a programmer and closely collaborated with Nintendo , producing his first commercial game in 1983 . Notable titles to which he contributed at HAL include EarthBound and the Kirby series . Following a downturn and near @-@ bankruptcy , Iwata became the president of HAL Laboratory in 1993 at the insistence of Nintendo President Hiroshi Yamauchi and brought financial stability to the company . In the following years , he assisted in the development of the Pokémon and Super Smash Bros. series . Iwata joined Nintendo as the head of its corporate @-@ planning division in 2000 . 
 Nintendo soon saw notable growth with Iwata 's assistance and , as a result , he succeeded Yamauchi as the company 's president in May 2002 . Under Iwata 's direction , Nintendo developed the Nintendo DS and Wii video game consoles , helping the company to achieve financial success in the industry . As a self @-@ declared gamer , he focused on expanding the appeal of video games across all demographics through a " blue ocean " business strategy . The company attained record profits by 2009 , and Barron 's placed Iwata among the top 30 CEOs worldwide . Iwata subsequently expanded his blue ocean strategy by defining a quality of life product line for the Wii that later evolved into a ten @-@ year business strategy to create stand @-@ alone products . Later hardware releases like the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U proved far less profitable than the Wii , and Nintendo 's net sales fell by two @-@ thirds from 2009 to 2012 ; the company saw its first operating losses in 30 years during this time . Iwata voluntarily halved his salary as an apology in both 2011 and 2014 . In 2015 , after several years of refusal , Iwata put a portion of Nintendo 's focus into the rapidly growing mobile game market ; a landmark partnership with mobile provider DeNA was established that March . Throughout his career , Iwata built a strong relationship with Nintendo fans through social media and his regular appearances in Iwata Asks and Nintendo Direct ; he accordingly became the public face of the company . 
 In June 2014 , a tumor in his bile duct was discovered during a routine physical exam . It was removed , and Iwata returned to work in October of that year . The issue resurfaced in 2015 , and Iwata died at the age of 55 from its complications on July 11 . Members of the gaming industry and fans alike expressed their sadness over his death through public announcements and social media , and fans worldwide established temporary memorials . Iwata was posthumously granted the Lifetime Achievement Award at both the 2015 Golden Joystick Awards and the 2016 DICE Awards . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Satoru Iwata was born on December 6 , 1959 , and raised in Sapporo , Japan , where his father served as a prefectural official . Throughout middle and high school , Iwata displayed leadership skills through service as class president , student council president , and club president at various times . His first experience with computers was in middle school with a demo computer that used telephone lines . Iwata would frequent the Sapporo subway and play a simple numeric game , called Game 31 , until he mastered it . With money saved up from a dish @-@ washing job and some additional allowance from his father , Iwata purchased an HP @-@ 65 , the first programmable calculator , in 1974 . After entering Hokkaido Sapporo South High School in April 1975 , he began developing his own games during his junior year . The several simple number games Iwata produced , such as Volleyball and Missile Attack , made use of an electronic calculator he shared with his schoolmates . 
 Iwata obtained his first computer , a Commodore PET , in 1978 . He dismantled and studied the machine out of his desire to understand it . The computer coincidentally had a central processing unit ( MOS 6502 ) similar to the one used by Nintendo for the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) , a gaming console for which he would later develop games . Following high school , Iwata was admitted to the Tokyo Institute of Technology in April 1978 , where he majored in computer science . Tomohiko Uematsu , an engineering professor , noted Iwata 's proficiency with software programming and remarked that Iwata could write programs faster and more accurately than any of his other students . 
 While attending the school , he was one of several unpaid interns at Commodore Japan , assisting the subsidiary 's head engineer — Yash <unk> — with technical and software @-@ development tasks . One of his main reasons for taking the job was to spend more time around computers and learn of details not openly available to the public . <unk> would later serve as a mentor to Iwata , teaching him about hardware engineering to supplement Iwata 's already extensive software knowledge . Iwata and several of his friends rented an apartment in Akihabara and soon formed a club where they would create and code games . Classmates living in nearby apartments referred to Iwata 's room as " Game Center Iwata . " He would frequently show off his games to the Seibu department store 's computer department , and by 1980 a group of employees there invited him to join their company , HAL Laboratory , Inc . 
 = = HAL Laboratory = = 
 While attending university , Iwata worked for HAL Laboratory as a part @-@ time programmer in 1980 . Among their first creations was a peripheral device that enabled older computers to display graphics for video games . With this device , Iwata and members of HAL created multiple games that were " straight rip @-@ offs of Namco ’ s Rally @-@ X , Galaxian , and [ others ] " . Despite this , HAL became the first company to establish a license with Namco for developing games . He joined the company in a full @-@ time capacity after graduating in 1982 , becoming its fifth employee and only programmer . Around the same time , Iwata 's father was elected mayor of Muroran . Despite his passion , Iwata 's family did not approve of his career choice , and his father did not talk with him for six months after Iwata joined HAL . 
 Iwata became the company 's coordinator of software production in 1983 , during which time he helped HAL create a relationship with Nintendo so they would be able to produce games for its newly released Nintendo Entertainment System . He traveled to Kyoto himself to request permission to work on games for the NES , to which Nintendo obliged . His first commercially published game was Joust for the NES — a port of the 1982 arcade game . Other video games he worked on were Balloon Fight , NES Open Tournament Golf , EarthBound , and the Kirby games . Nintendo initially contacted several other developers to produce Open Tournament Golf ; however , all of them declined as they did not believe the large amount of data could be stored within an NES cartridge . Iwata seized this opportunity and " recklessly " stepped up to develop the game . It proved particularly taxing as Iwata had to create his own data compression method in order to fit all 18 courses into the game . Similarly , HAL had to program parallax scrolling for F @-@ 1 Race as the NES hardware did not initially support it . 
 Iwata 's proficiency with programming quickly placed him in high esteem among fellow programmers and gamers alike . He would often continue to work on weekends and holidays because of his passion . With the company on the verge of bankruptcy , Iwata was promoted to president of HAL in 1993 at the insistence of Nintendo 's then @-@ President , Hiroshi Yamauchi . With assistance from Nintendo , Iwata helped turn the company around from its ¥ 1 @.@ 5 billion debt and stabilize its finances within six years . Lacking experience in management , Iwata put a lot of effort into learning how to better himself , often reading books on the topic and seeking advice from others . 
 Although not part of Nintendo at the time , Iwata assisted in the development of Pokémon Gold and Silver , which were released for the Game Boy Color in November 1999 , by creating a set of compression tools utilized for graphics in the games . While working as a go @-@ between for Game Freak and Nintendo , he aided in the programming of Pokémon Stadium for the Nintendo 64 by reading the original coding in Pokémon Red and Green and porting the battle system into the new game in just one week . According to Tsunekazu Ishihara , the president of The Pokemon Company , Iwata was instrumental in bringing Pokémon to Western markets . While president of HAL , he developed the plan for localization after reviewing the code for Red / Green , which was then completed by <unk> <unk> , with the Western releases coming two years after their Japanese release . Additionally , he assisted Masahiro Sakurai in the development of Super Smash Bros. for the Nintendo 64 . 
 = = Nintendo = = 
 = = = Early years ( 2000 – 02 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , Iwata took a position at Nintendo as the head of its corporate planning division and took a seat on the board of directors . Over the next two years , he sought to reduce the cost and length of game development while preserving quality . During his first two years at Nintendo , the company saw profit increases of 20 and 41 percent , values which are at least partially attributable to his work . When Yamauchi , the company 's president since 1949 , retired on May 24 , 2002 , Iwata succeeded as Nintendo 's fourth president with Yamauchi 's blessing . He was the first Nintendo president unrelated to the Yamauchi family through blood or marriage since its founding in 1889 . Yamauchi left the company in Iwata 's hands with a final request : " that Nintendo give birth to wholly new ideas and create hardware which reflects that ideal . And make software that adheres to that same standard . " Iwata inherited a company that promoted individualism , with a policy established by Yamauchi to create new development positions as needed . However , this inhibited efficient collaboration between certain departments . 
 At the time of Iwata 's promotion , Nintendo , though still a profitable company , was not performing as well as other console makers . The recently released GameCube was performing poorly compared to competitors , with Sony 's PlayStation 2 and Microsoft 's Xbox outselling it . His presidency also came at the onset of the popularization of online gaming , and Nintendo had yet to move into this facet of the market . He took a cautious approach to the issue , stating : " We 're not negative toward the idea of going online . We 're just practical . " He also fostered a relationship between Nintendo and Capcom that improved the GameCube 's appeal . During an interview in 2002 , Iwata stated that he felt the gaming industry was becoming too exclusive , and he wanted to develop hardware and games that would appeal to all players rather than focusing on top of the line graphics . 
 One of his first actions as president was to meet directly with the company 's 40 department heads and 150 other employees . This contrasted starkly with Yamauchi 's practice of rarely meeting with employees and generally having a single , annual speech . Shigeru Miyamoto described the previous business atmosphere as " stuffy " and stated Iwata " improved the ventilation . " Iwata was acutely aware that his position as president would not ensure compliance from his employees and sought to communicate with them on a personal level . If employees disagreed with his view , Iwata would suggest they follow their idea instead of his own , stating " creators only improve themselves by taking risks . " Alongside the increased level of interaction , Iwata also brought more data and science into the business aspect of the company . Whereas Yamauchi made decisions based on intuition and experience , Iwata brought forth hypotheses loaded with data to convey his position . Iwata also promoted Miyamoto , Genyo Takeda , Yoshihiro Mori , and Shinji Hatano to representative directors on the company 's board of directors , equaling his own position . 
 = = = Revitalization of the company ( 2003 – 09 ) = = = 
 Following up on his 2002 interview , Iwata highlighted an urgency in the gaming market in his keynote speech at the 2003 Tokyo Game Show . During this speech , he reflected on the history of the industry and concluded with the declining interest in video games . A slump in sales in the Japanese market had begun at the end of the 1990s and continued into the early 2000s . Competition between Nintendo and Sony resulted in increasingly hardware @-@ heavy consoles ; however , the Nintendo 64 proved to be too cumbersome for developers and software suffered severely . After a year @-@ long analysis conducted at Iwata 's behest , Nintendo concluded that pushing hardware was not the most effective way to promote video games and decided to focus on software . A major internal reorganization of Nintendo took place in 2004 , with Iwata consolidating various departments established under Yamauchi . He sought to promote collaborative work throughout the company . He later established a " User Expansion Project " in 2005 whereby employees normally not associated with game development would submit ideas for new games . 
 In a March 2004 interview , Iwata stated : " Games have come to a dead end . " He stressed that developers wasted far too much time focusing on core gamers and would be unable to turn a profit if they did not tend to the average game player . Furthermore , he wished to prove that Nintendo , considered a " conservative " company at the time , would become a forefront innovator of entertainment . Iwata articulated a " blue ocean " strategy to help Nintendo successfully compete against the other console manufactures . Instead of competing on technical specifications , Iwata drew on his previous experience as a game developer to produce novel and entertaining hardware and games . 
 = = = = Nintendo DS = = = = 
 Iwata helped lead a revitalization of Nintendo 's handheld business by transitioning the company from the Game Boy Advance to the Nintendo DS , which sported a unique form factor and inclusion of a touchscreen that allowed for novel games . The idea for using two screens on a single device originated with Yamauchi before his retirement , while Miyamoto suggested the use of a touchscreen . Miyamoto subsequently spearheaded development of the device and its prototypes . The Nintendo DS proved to be a highly profitable system and went on to become the second @-@ best selling video game console of all time with more than 154 million units , inclusive of subsequent iterations , sold by September 2014 . In June 2004 , Iwata sought a conference with Dr. <unk> Kawashima about a game that could appeal to non @-@ gamers . This project would later become Brain Age : Train Your Brain in Minutes a Day ! , released in May 2005 . Iwata personally oversaw development of the Brain Age series , even foregoing a public appearance on the day of the Nintendo DS 's release in Japan on December 2 . Miyamoto supported Iwata 's work with the series and sent one of his protégés , Kouichi Kawamoto , to help develop the game . The Brain Age series is partially credited with launching the popularity of the Nintendo DS , and the series as a whole sold over 30 million copies by December 2008 . 
 Subsequent iterations of the Nintendo DS , the DS Lite and DSi , also saw positive sales . The DS Lite improved upon the original DS , featuring brighter screens and a slimmer design in accordance with consumer demand . Released in March 2006 in Japan and three months later worldwide , the DS Lite ultimately sold nearly 94 million units . Statistics showed that households often shared a single DS , and Iwata sought to expand this from one per household to one per person . The console 's third iteration , the DSi , embodies this idea with the " i " representing a single person . Despite concerns that the video game market was already over saturated by the DS and DS Lite , Iwata was confident that the DSi would sell , especially in European markets . The DSi built upon the success of the DS Lite by similarly meeting consumer demand . In addition to being slimmed further , the DSi featured two cameras , SD card support , an audio reader , and the " Nintendo DSi Shop . " The relatively quick succession of the DS Lite and DSi broke the conventional pattern for release of game systems , each being released roughly 18 months apart instead of 5 years . Iwata saw the gradual price drop in the five @-@ year cycle as a way of indirectly telling consumers to wait to purchase products and a punishment for those who bought it at launch . He sought to alleviate this issue with the quick releases . 
 = = = = Wii = = = = 
 Discussions between Iwata , Miyamoto , and Takeda about a new home console began in the first half of 2003 . With encouragement from Yamauchi , Iwata pushed for development of a revolutionary product that would later become the Wii . Iwata subsequently assigned Takeda to the project , " telling [ Takeda ] to go off the tech roadmap . " The overall premise was that " a Mom has to like it . " During the console 's development process Iwata challenged engineers to make the Wii no thicker than three DVD cases stacked together , a feat they ultimately accomplished . Takeda and his team focused on reducing power consumption while retaining or improving levels of performance shown with the GameCube . Alongside the internal hardware designed by Nintendo 's engineers , Iwata proposed that the console abandon use of a typical controller to make gaming more accessible to everyone . Miyamoto took the lead on developing a new controller while Takeda 's team provided the internal components . After six months and dozens of scrapped prototypes , Takeda procured a CMOS sensor that later became the core aspect of the remote . With the addition of accelerometers , they were able to effectively produce motion controls . 
 Initially codenamed " Revolution " during a teaser at E3 2004 , following Iwata 's goal of creating a gaming revolution , Iwata publicly revealed the Wii at E3 2005 , holding it above his head to emphasize its small size and light weight design . Reveal of the Wii 's signature Wii Remote controller was withheld until the Tokyo Game Show in September 2005 . During his speech at the conference , Iwata reiterated his stance on growing the gaming market but expanded upon it by emphasizing the need to make controls less complicated . The controller 's remote control design partially stemmed from Iwata 's desire to have a device that was " immediately accessible " to all . He also insisted that the Wii Remote be referred to as simply a " remote " rather than a controller to emphasize its accessibility to anyone . 
 The Wii ultimately popularized the use of motion control @-@ based video games and proved highly successful for Nintendo , helping to nearly double the company 's stock price . Tapping into the market of casual players , the Wii marked " a breakthrough moment in the history of video games " : a new genre of gaming was established for the family market . Iwata 's former experience as a programmer , a rarity for technology CEOs , was said to help contribute towards his leadership of the company . By the end of the 2009 fiscal year , Nintendo saw record net sales and profit of ¥ 1 @.@ 8 trillion ( US $ 18 @.@ 7 billion ) and ¥ 279 billion ( US $ 2 @.@ 8 billion ) , respectively . Due to his success , Barron 's included Iwata on their list of the 30 top CEOs worldwide from 2007 to 2009 . 
 = = = = Quality of life products = = = = 
 Starting with the introduction of the Wii in 2006 , Iwata placed focus on development of products that improved quality of life . The Wii Fit series , conceptualized by Miyamoto , epitomized this movement . At E3 2009 , Iwata revealed development of an add @-@ on product to the Wii : the Wii Vitality Sensor . The device measured autonomic nerve functions , namely pulse , and incorporate acquired data into relaxation products . Iwata saw the device as a continuation of the " blue ocean " strategy previously articulated . He indicated that the market of motion controls was turning into a " red ocean , " whereby too many companies would saturate the market and restrict profits . The Vitality Sensor was developed in hopes of providing a novel way to interact with video games and continue Nintendo 's history of innovation . However , testing of a prototype device yielded less than desirable results and Nintendo had postponed the release of the product indefinitely by 2013 . 
 In January 2014 , Iwata unveiled a ten @-@ year strategy for the company based on quality of life products . The target was a new market outside video games . Developed under partnerships with Dr. <unk> Watanabe and <unk> , the first device in this initiative was a fatigue and sleep deprivation sensor announced in October 2014 . Unlike the Vitality Sensor , the sleep sensor was to be a stand @-@ alone product that does not need to be worn . Following Iwata 's death in July 2015 , analysts questioned whether Nintendo would continue the quality of life initiative . Despite a planned United States release in March 2016 , some suggested the product had been temporarily shelved , while others believed the product had been indefinitely postponed like the Vitality Sensor before it . The device was formally discontinued by February 2016 ; however , Tatsumi <unk> stated that research into quality of life products would continue . 
 = = = Financial downturn ( 2010 – 14 ) = = = 
 Subsequent hardware units under Iwata 's tenure , including the Nintendo 3DS and Wii U , were not as successful as the DS and Wii , and Nintendo 's finances took a downward turn starting in 2010 . During the development phase of the 3DS , a handheld device featuring stereoscopic 3D without the need of accessories , Iwata stated that his background in technology helped keep Nintendo 's engineers in line . It was hoped that the successor to the Nintendo DS would reinvigorate the company after profits began declining . However , weak sales upon the release of the Nintendo 3DS caused the company 's stock to fall by 12 percent on July 29 , 2011 . The console 's poor sales prompted a price cut in August from its launch price of US $ 270 to US $ 170 . Sales of the 3DS continually fell below expectations . Iwata later admitted in 2014 that he misread the market and did not appropriately account for changing lifestyles since the launch of the Wii . He continually placed focus on family @-@ oriented games despite declining popularity . 
 The Wii U , released in November 2012 , was sold below its production cost as Nintendo hoped for stronger software sales to alleviate ongoing losses . The addition of HD graphics , a feature not present in the original Wii , placed unexpected strain on development teams and led to software delays . Compounding the frustration of consumers was Iwata 's disinterest in competitors such as Microsoft and Sony , both of which experienced similar issues during the releases of the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 respectively . Paul Tassi of Forbes magazine claimed that Nintendo could have handled the change more efficiently by drawing lessons from Microsoft and Sony 's transition to HD graphics . The console ultimately failed to meet sales expectations and became the slowest @-@ selling Nintendo platform , with 9 @.@ 5 million units sold by June 2015 . Miyamoto attributed the lackluster sales to public misunderstandings of the console 's concept and functionality . Iwata later admitted the console to be a failure as a successor to the Wii , with games being unable to showcase notable originality in the Wii U. The back @-@ to @-@ back failures of the 3DS and Wii U prompted <unk> Akino of <unk> Asset Management Co. to suggest that Iwata should resign from his position . 
 Nintendo 's overall net sales declined from its peak of ¥ 1 @.@ 8 trillion ( US $ 18 @.@ 7 billion ) in 2009 to ¥ 549 billion ( US $ 4 @.@ 6 billion ) in 2015 . Net income losses were incurred in 2012 and 2014 . In 2010 , Nintendo revealed that Iwata earned a modest salary of ¥ 68 million ( US $ 770 @,@ 000 ) , which increased to ¥ 187 million ( US $ 2 @.@ 11 million ) with performance based bonuses . In comparison , Miyamoto earned a salary of ¥ 100 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 13 million ) . Iwata voluntarily halved his salary in 2011 and 2014 as apologies for the poor sales while other members of the Nintendo board of directors had pay cuts of 20 – 30 percent . This also served to ensure the job security of Nintendo 's employees , preventing workers from being laid off in order to improve short @-@ term finances . In 2012 , the company experienced its first operating loss since entering the video game market more than 30 years earlier . Losses continued for the next two years before the company finally returned to profitability at the end of the 2015 fiscal year . The slight turnaround was largely attributed to blockbuster games such as Pokémon Omega Ruby and Alpha Sapphire and Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. 
 In June 2013 , Iwata took the additional role of Nintendo of America 's CEO . As one of his first changes as CEO , Iwata decided that they would not hold large press conferences at E3 , and instead have several smaller events , each aimed at a certain demographic . While traveling to Tokyo in late @-@ 2013 , Iwata sketched an idea for a series of physical toys that could connect with Nintendo 's games . This concept soon developed into the Amiibo line of figures which launched less than a year later . Amiibo proved to be a huge success , with more than 6 million figurine sold by the end of 2014 , roughly a month after launch . By March 2016 , combined sales of figures and cards — a product released in 2015 — exceeded 64 million units , proving financially beneficial across all Nintendo platforms . 
 = = = Mobile market ( 2015 ) = = = 
 In early 2010 , the success of Apple Inc . ' s mobile App Store prompted concern among game developers that the medium was shifting to smart devices . That July , Iwata acknowledged competition from Apple Inc. and considered them the " enemy of the future " . However , during an interview the following year Iwata appeared entirely against the idea of Nintendo moving into the mobile market , claiming the company would " cease to be Nintendo " if they did so . He reasoned that mobile gaming would lack integrity over the quality of games in an effort to turn a profit . A slow shift in this view ensued over the following years as the mobile gaming market continued to grow . In 2012 he acknowledged that mobile devices provided significant competition but remained confident in his company 's abilities . In a message to shareholders in March 2014 fiscal year , Iwata stated , " ... I believe that the era has ended when people play all kinds of games only on dedicated gaming systems . " He cited the convenience of mobile devices for quick entertainment and expansive capabilities over a handheld console 's dedicated software . Criticism arose over his continued stubbornness in moving to the mobile market , with analysts and investors continually requesting a change in outlook . Yoshihisa Toyosaki , president of Architect Grand Design Inc . , claimed that " Nintendo is out of touch " , referring to the company 's history of ignoring outside input . This ultimately negatively influenced Nintendo 's finances and popularity to a degree . 
 In March 2015 , Iwata put part of Nintendo 's focus on the growing mobile game market , creating a landmark partnership with mobile provider DeNA to publish titles , as traditional hardware console sales began to falter . This came in stark contrast to the company 's previous business model which put focus on console exclusive titles to prompt people to buy their platforms . Iwata emphasized that although Nintendo IPs would be utilized in mobile games , the company would not compromise their integrity . He also stressed that the main goal would be to reach as many people as possible rather than which options would earn the most money , similar to the idea behind the Wii . After the partnership with DeNA was established , Iwata reiterated his stance that the common free @-@ to @-@ play type mobile games , which he referred to as " free @-@ to @-@ start , " threatened the future quality of games . Although he acknowledged the practice as a viable means of promoting titles in the short @-@ term , he considered the model outdated and not a sound direction for core development . 
 = = = Public relations = = = 
 During the earlier years of his presidency at Nintendo , Iwata would often forego media appearances , unless new hardware was being announced , in order to spend more time programming . However , his attitude towards this changed , and he eventually became a prominent part of Nintendo 's public relations . Iwata helped Nintendo to improve relations with its fans by regularly responding to them through social media , and he shared insights on Nintendo 's employees , games , and hardware through his interview series Iwata Asks . Inspiration for this series , which began in September 2006 , stemmed from Iwata 's background as a game programmer and his curiosity of the mindset of other developers . These interviews often showcased the friendly camaraderie between Iwata and other members of Nintendo as jokes and laughter were commonplace . They also revealed a different side of the normally secretive Nintendo : openness to discuss some of the inner workings of the company . 
 In 2011 , Iwata helped to institute Nintendo Direct , a series of online press conferences open to all that revealed upcoming Nintendo games and products outside of typical industry channels . These videos were often quirky and humorous , reflecting the personality of Iwata himself . This stood completely against the generally serious tones displayed by Sony and Microsoft . One such video displayed a mock battle between him and Nintendo of America President Reggie Fils @-@ Aimé to showcase the inclusion of Mii characters , Nintendo digital avatars , in Super Smash Bros. for Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. These frequently spurred the creation of Internet memes ; such memes include the phrase " please understand " which was often used by Iwata for delays or other negative news , adding " [ Iwata laughs ] " to forum posts as a reference to his frequent laughter in segments of Iwata Asks , and images of Iwata staring silently at a bunch of bananas as part of a pre @-@ recorded E3 2012 video to promote the Donkey Kong franchise . 
 As a byproduct of his presence in Iwata Asks and Nintendo Direct , Iwata became the public face of Nintendo . Iwata enjoyed conversing with reporters and would prepare stories in advance to entertain them . Even when time did not allow , he would mingle with interviewers and chat casually . 
 = = = Other projects = = = 
 Iwata assisted in the founding of Creatures Inc . , which was established in 1995 by Tsunekazu Ishihara . In 1998 , Iwata helped his colleague and personal friend Shigesato Itoi establish <unk> by working as the company 's IT Manager . He acquired this position after being asked by Itoi one month prior to the June 6 launch date to arrange a website and the company 's technical systems , to which Iwata complied . Iwata personally enjoyed the role and even still held the position in 2007 , despite running Nintendo full @-@ time by this point . Soon after his promotion to president of Nintendo , Iwata assigned himself to a development team at HAL Laboratory working on Super Smash Bros. Melee , for the GameCube , to continue his programming passion . Stemming from his work with the Brain Age series , Iwata assisted in producing educational titles such as Kanji <unk> <unk> <unk> DS , English Training : Have Fun Improving Your Skills ! , and <unk> Hito ni <unk> <unk> no <unk> Training DS . He also worked on Animal Crossing , Mario , Metroid Prime , and the The Legend of Zelda series of games , among other titles . He also had a cameo in WarioWare : Smooth Moves . Iwata partook in the development of Pokémon GO , an augmented reality mobile game , starting in 2013 . The game was publicly revealed two months after his death in September 2015 . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 On June 5 , 2014 , Nintendo announced that Iwata would not be present at E3 2014 owing to medical @-@ related reasons . Iwata later issued a public message to shareholders on June 24 that he underwent surgery the previous week to remove a tumor in his bile duct that was discovered during a routine physical examination . After roughly four months of recovery from a successful surgery , he returned to work in October . During this time he lost a notable amount of weight but stated to be feeling healthier as a result . Iwata made his first public appearance on a Nintendo Direct announcement on November 5 , but looked " gaunt and pale . " He appeared to take this in stride and updated his own Mii , avatars used in Nintendo hardware , in June 2015 to reflect his slimmer self . On January 28 , 2015 , Iwata came down with a high fever and was suspected to have influenza ; a meeting with shareholders was postponed accordingly . At an unknown point after attending a different shareholder meeting on June 26 , Iwata suddenly became ill again . He later died due to complications with the tumor on July 11 at the age of 55 . A formal announcement of his death was made by Nintendo the following day . 
 Flags at Nintendo 's headquarters were lowered to half @-@ staff on July 13 . All of Nintendo 's regional offices took a day of silence on July 13 across all of its social media accounts in remembrance of Iwata . Members of the gaming industry and fans alike expressed their sadness on social media over Iwata 's death and gratitude for his accomplishments . Fans established memorials across the world , including at the Japanese Embassy in Moscow , Russia , and the Nintendo World Store in Manhattan , New York . <unk> Yoshida , president of SCE Worldwide Studios , stated : " I pray that Mr. Iwata , who contributed so much to the development of the gaming industry , rests in peace . " Composer and director Junichi Masuda , most known for his work with the Pokémon games , tweeted : " He was a man who understood Pokémon , and a great leader . When I visited the other day , he was well . I will pray for his soul from the bottom of my heart . " The Tokyo Institute of Technology issued a memorial statement on August 4 , with Iwata 's former classmates and professors contributing their memories . At The Game Awards 2015 , Reggie Fils @-@ Aimé delivered a tribute to Iwata , describing Iwata as " fearless " and " unique , in the fullest meaning of the word . " 
 Several hours after the announcement of Iwata 's death , a photograph of a rainbow over Nintendo 's headquarters in Kyoto was posted to Twitter and widely shared ; it was dubbed " the Rainbow Road to heaven , " in reference to a stage in the Mario Kart series . Funeral services for Iwata were held in Kyoto on July 16 and 17 . Despite stormy weather produced by Typhoon Nangka , an estimated 4 @,@ 100 people attended to pay their respects . Following the wake , Iwata 's remains were cremated . 
 Following Iwata 's death , general directors Shigeru Miyamoto and Genyo Takeda temporarily took over his former duties and managed the company together . On September 14 , Nintendo announced that Tatsumi <unk> , head of its Human Resources Division and former CEO of Nintendo of America , would succeed Iwata as the fifth president of Nintendo . 
 = = Influence and legacy = = 
 Throughout his life , Iwata was known for unconventional ideas and changing the medium of gaming . He was seen as the embodiment of Nintendo : playful , quirky , humorous , and fun . Iwata 's proficiency in programming led many to refer to him as a " genius " in the subject , with some likening him to a Japanese Bill Gates . His hands @-@ on approach to business earned him admiration and respect from both developers and gamers . The opening to Iwata 's " Heart of a Gamer " speech at GDC 2005 is regarded as the " essence " of who he was : a humble businessman dedicated to video games . He , alongside others at Nintendo such as Miyamoto , are credited with vastly expanding the gaming market and creating a new genre . By targeting a new audience instead of competing against Microsoft and Sony , Iwata avoided a " straight fight " with Nintendo 's competitors and successfully achieved his goals . Accordingly , Iwata was referred to as a " gentle revolutionary . " The simplistic appeal of the Nintendo DS and Wii served to expand the market . Chris Kohler of Wired magazine stated that " thanks to Nintendo 's Satoru Iwata , we 're all gamers now , " referring to the surge in video game popularity following the releases of the Nintendo DS and Wii . Although widely respected , he received criticism over his stubbornness in moving Nintendo to the mobile market . Following Iwata 's death , Reggie Fils @-@ Aimé remarked , " ... it will be years before his impact on both Nintendo and the full video game industry will be fully appreciated . " 
 In October 2015 , a custom Amiibo featuring Iwata 's Mii avatar was crafted and auctioned for US $ 1 @,@ 900 on eBay ; all proceeds were to be donated to the Child 's Play charity in his memory . Iwata was posthumously and unanimously granted the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2015 Golden Joystick Awards for his influence across the gaming industry . Iwata was also posthumously granted the Lifetime Achievement Award at the 2016 DICE Awards . At the 2016 Game Developers Choice Awards , Iwata was honored with a short animated film by David Hellman , the artist who worked on Braid . A tribute in honor of Iwata reading " This game is dedicated to our wingman who fell in battle " was placed at the end of the credits for Star Fox Zero . 
 = Duncan & Miller Glass Company = 
 Duncan & Miller Glass Company was a well @-@ known glass manufacturing company in Washington , Pennsylvania . Items that were produced by the company are known as " Duncan glass " or " Duncan Miller glass . " The company was founded in 1865 by George Duncan with his two sons and son @-@ in @-@ law in the South Side neighborhood of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania . By 1890 , the company joined other glass companies to form the United States Glass Company , a powerful glass trust . In 1892 , the factory was destroyed in a fire , and the company was relieved of its trust relationship with the US Glass Company . After the fire , the second generation of the Duncan family moved operations to Washington , Pennsylvania . In 1900 , John Ernest Miller , the company 's long @-@ time designer , became a full shareholder along with members of the Duncan family . By 1955 , economic pressures from machine @-@ produced glass forced the company to sell off its assets to the US Glass Company , who continued to produce Duncan @-@ style glass until 1980 . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1865 , George Duncan purchased the Ripley & Company glass factory at 10th and Carson Streets in the South Side neighborhood of Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania from D.C. Ripley , a former business partner of Duncan . The factory was located adjacent to the Monongahela River , which provided easy access to transportation . A new company , George Duncan & Sons , was formed by Duncan , his sons Harry B. Duncan and James E. Duncan , and Augustus H. Heisey , who was married to George 's daughter Susan . In 1874 , John Ernest Miller , a 20 @-@ year veteran of the glass manufacturing industry , joined the company as a designer . He was previously the foreman of the mould shop at King , Son and Company . The addition of Miller proved to be fortuitous , because Miller 's designs over the next 52 years became internationally famous . In 1877 , George Duncan died and James E. Duncan took control of the company . 
 In 1890 , the United States Glass Company formed a glass trust that included the Duncan & Miller operation . In 1892 , their factory was destroyed by fire , relieving the company of their trust relationship . After the fire , son @-@ in @-@ law Augustus Heisey left the company to begin his own glass manufacturing operation in Newark , Ohio . James E. Duncan rebuilt the factory on Jefferson Avenue in Washington , Pennsylvania , where access to railroads was convenient , and the natural gas which was needed to power the furnaces was inexpensive . Construction of the plant , which featured a 16 Pot Deep Eye furnace , was finished on January 3 , 1893 . The first pattern produced in the new facility was the well @-@ known Mitchell pattern . 
 On November 15 , 1900 , the firm was officially incorporated as Duncan and Miller Glass Company , with John Ernest Miller joining the Duncan family as stockholders . The company abruptly ceased operations on June 13 , 1955 . By then , modern assembly lines and glassmaking machinery caused hand made glass to be uneconomical . The remaining inventory was sold at greatly reduced prices , causing glass collectors to travel hundreds of miles to purchase the final pieces . The molds and equipment were sold to the US Glass Company , where their Duncan Division in Tiffin , Ohio continued to produce Duncan @-@ ware pieces . A number of Duncan employees also joined US Glass Company in Tiffin . The Duncan factory was sold to Andy Bros. , but before they could move in , a fire destroyed the building on June 29 , 1956 . Production of the Duncan @-@ ware glass ceased in 1980 . 
 = = Duncan craftsmanship = = 
 At its peak , Duncan & Miller 's glass was one of Washington 's most successful manufacturing concerns , and was more widely known throughout the county than any other line of goods made in Washington . 
 The glass making processes and technologies at Duncan & Miller did not significantly differ from contemporary glassmakers in Western Pennsylvania and neighboring Ohio and West Virginia . Duncan differentiated itself through exceptional artistry and design . This was accomplished by employing highly skilled workers , and using unique batch formulas to produce colorful glass . The production process for each piece usually required 10 craftsmen . 
 Some of the most popular styles were produced during the 1920s through the 1940s , including the Canterbury , Caribbean , <unk> , Nautical , Sandwich , Spiral Flutes and Teardrop . The most famous design was a swan which required 14 craftsmen . The most popular etching designs were the First Love , Language of Flowers , and Passion Flower . 
 = = Legacy and collections = = 
 The National Duncan Glass Society was founded in 1975 at a meeting of glass collectors at the Citizens Library in Washington , Pennsylvania . For the next 17 years , the society operated a Duncan Glass museum at the Washington County Historical Society office and the F. Julius LeMoyne House . On July 8 , 1993 , the society opened a stand @-@ alone museum in an old building on Jefferson Avenue , near the original location of the Duncan glass plant . 
 One of the Duncan family residences was a 17 room Victorian mansion on Wade Avenue in Washington , Pennsylvania that was built in 1892 . This mansion is now used as the Washington & Jefferson College President ’ s House . Its design is archetypical Queen Anne Victorian style , with ornate " gingerbread " details , stained and beveled glass , recessed doors and windows , and louvered wooden shutters . In 1944 , Walter Hudson Baker , who was a graduate of Washington & Jefferson College , donated the house to the college in memory of his wife , Amy Duncan Baker ; it has been used as the President 's House since . It was profiled in a book of regional architecture by the Washington County History and Landmarks Foundation . 
 = University of Houston = 
 The University of Houston ( UH ) is a state research university and the flagship institution of the University of Houston System . Founded in 1927 , UH is the third @-@ largest university in Texas with nearly 43 @,@ 000 students . Its campus spans 667 acres in southeast Houston , and was known as University of Houston – University Park from 1983 to 1991 . The Carnegie Foundation classifies UH as a comprehensive doctoral degree @-@ granting institution with very high research activity . The U.S. News & World Report ranks the university No. 187 in its National University Rankings , and No. 105 among top public universities . UH is one of four public universities in Texas with a Phi Beta Kappa chapter . 
 The university offers more than 280 degree programs through its 12 academic colleges on campus — including programs leading to professional degrees in law , optometry , and pharmacy . The institution conducts nearly $ 130 million annually in research , and operates more than 40 research centers and institutes on campus . Interdisciplinary research includes superconductivity , space commercialization and exploration , biomedical sciences and engineering , energy and natural resources , and artificial intelligence . Awarding more than 9 @,@ 000 degrees annually , UH 's alumni base exceeds 260 @,@ 000 . The economic impact of the university contributes over $ 3 billion annually to the Texas economy , while generating about 24 @,@ 000 jobs . 
 The University of Houston hosts a variety of theatrical performances , concerts , lectures , and events . It has more than 400 student organizations and 17 intercollegiate sports teams . Annual UH events and traditions include The Cat 's Back , Homecoming , and Frontier Fiesta . The university 's varsity athletic teams , known as the Houston Cougars , are members of the American Athletic Conference and compete in the NCAA Division I in all sports . The football team regularly makes bowl game appearances , and the men 's basketball team has made 19 appearances in the NCAA Division I Tournament — including five Final Four appearances . The men 's golf team has won 16 national championships — the second @-@ most of any NCAA golf program . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 The University of Houston began as Houston Junior College ( HJC ) . On March 7 , 1927 , trustees of the Houston Independent School District ( HISD ) Board of Education unanimously passed a resolution that authorized the founding and operating of a junior college . The junior college was operated and administered by HISD . 
 Originally HJC was located in San Jacinto High School and offered only night courses . Its first session began March 7 , 1927 , with an enrollment of 232 students and 12 faculty . This session was primarily held to educate the future teachers of the junior college , freshmen were not permitted to enroll . A more accurate date for the official opening of HJC is September 19 , 1927 , when enrollment was opened to all persons having completed the necessary educational requirements . The first president of HJC was Edison Ellsworth Oberholtzer , who was the dominant force in establishing the junior college . 
 = = = University beginnings = = = 
 The junior college became eligible to become a university in October 1933 when Governor of Texas , Miriam A. Ferguson , signed House Bill 194 into law . On April 30 , 1934 , HISD 's Board of Education adopted a resolution to make the school a four @-@ year institution , and Houston Junior College changed its name to the University of Houston . 
 UH 's first session as a four @-@ year institution began June 4 , 1934 , at San Jacinto High School with an enrollment of 682 . In 1934 , the first campus of the University of Houston was established at the Second Baptist Church at Milam and McGowen . The next fall , the campus was moved to the South Main Baptist Church on Main Street — between Richmond Avenue and Eagle Street — where it stayed for the next five years . In May 1935 , the institution as a university held its first commencement at Miller Outdoor Theatre . 
 In 1936 , heirs of philanthropists J. J. Settegast and Ben Taub donated 110 acres ( 0 @.@ 45 km2 ) to the university for use as a permanent location . At this time , there was no road that led to the land tract , but in 1937 , the city added Saint Bernard Street , which was later renamed to Cullen Boulevard . It would become a major thoroughfare of the campus . As a project of the National Youth Administration , workers were paid fifty cents an hour to clear the land . In 1938 , Hugh Roy Cullen donated $ 335 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 5 @,@ 631 @,@ 643 @.@ 03 in 2015 ) for the first building to be built at the location . The Roy Gustav Cullen Memorial Building was dedicated on June 4 , 1939 , and classes began the next day . The first full semester of classes began officially on Wednesday , September 20 , 1939 . 
 In a year after opening the new campus , the university had about 2 @,@ 500 students . As World War II approached , enrollment decreased due to the draft and enlistments . The university proposed to be in a new , highly unusual training activity of the United States Navy , and was one of six institutions selected to give the Primary School in the Electronics Training Program . By the fall of 1943 , there were only about 1 @,@ 100 regular students at UH ; thus , the 300 or so servicemen contributed in sustaining the faculty and facilities of the Engineering College . This training at UH continued until March 1945 , with a total of 4 @,@ 178 students . 
 On March 12 , 1945 , Senate Bill 207 was signed into law , removing the control of the University of Houston from HISD and placing it into the hands of a board of regents . In 1945 , the university — which had grown too large and complex for the Houston school board to administer — became a private university . 
 In March 1947 , the regents authorized creation of a law school at the university . In 1949 , the M.D. Anderson Foundation made a $ 1 @.@ 5 million gift to UH for the construction of a dedicated library building on the campus . By 1950 , the educational plant at UH consisted of 12 permanent buildings . Enrollment was more than 14 @,@ 000 with a full @-@ time faculty of more than 300 . KUHF , the university radio station , signed on in November . By 1951 , UH was the second @-@ largest university in the State of Texas and was the fastest growing university in the United States and is no w looking to be recognized as a Historically Black College and University ( HBCU ) with having a full yard restored on campus in Spring 2016 . 
 = = = State university = = = 
 In 1953 , the university established KUHT — the first educational television station in the nation — after the four @-@ year @-@ long Federal Communications Commission 's television licensing freeze ended . During this period , however , the university as a private institution was facing financial troubles . Tuition failed to cover rising costs , and in turn , tuition increases caused a drop in enrollment . 
 After a lengthy battle between supporters of the University of Houston , led by school president A.D. Bruce , and forces from state universities geared to block the change , Senate Bill 2 was passed on May 23 , 1961 , enabling the university to enter the state system in 1963 . 
 As the University of Houston celebrated its 50th anniversary , the Texas Legislature formally established the University of Houston System in 1977 . Philip G. Hoffman resigned from his position as president of UH and became the first chancellor of the University of Houston System . The University of Houston became the oldest and largest member institution in the UH System with nearly 30 @,@ 000 students . 
 On April 26 , 1983 , the university appended its official name to University of Houston – University Park ; however , the name was changed back to University of Houston on August 26 , 1991 . This name change was an effort by the UH System to give its flagship institution a distinctive name that would eliminate confusion with the University of Houston – Downtown ( UHD ) , which is a separate and distinct degree @-@ granting institution that is not part of the University of Houston . 
 = = = Restructuring and growth = = = 
 In 1997 , the administrations of the UH System and the University of Houston were combined under a single chief executive officer , with the dual title of Chancellor of the UH System and President of the University of Houston . Arthur K. Smith became the first person to have held the combined position . As of 1997 , the University of Houston System Administration has been located on campus in the Ezekiel W. Cullen Building . 
 On October 15 , 2007 , Renu <unk> was selected for the position of UH System chancellor and UH president . On November 5 , 2007 , <unk> was confirmed as the third person to hold the dual title of UH System chancellor and UH president concurrently , and took office in January 2008 . 
 In January 2011 , the University of Houston was classified by the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching as a research university with very high research activity . 
 = = Campuses = = 
 = = = University of Houston Main Campus = = = 
 The campus of the University of Houston is located in southeast Houston , with an official address of 4800 Calhoun Road . It was known as University of Houston – University Park from 1983 to 1991 . The campus spans 667 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 70 km2 ) and is roughly bisected by Cullen Boulevard — a thoroughfare that has become synonymous with the university . 
 The university campus includes numerous green spaces , fountains , and sculptures , including a work by famed sculptor Jim Sanborn . Renowned architects César Pelli and Philip Johnson have designed buildings on the UH campus . Recent campus beautification projects have garnered awards from the Keep Houston Beautiful group for improvements made to the Cullen Boulevard corridor . 
 The University of Houston ( UH ) is the flagship institution of the University of Houston System ( UHS ) . It is a multi @-@ campus university with a branch campus located in Sugar Land . The University of Houston – Clear Lake ( UHCL ) , the University of Houston – Downtown ( UHD ) , and the University of Houston – Victoria ( UHV ) are separate universities ; they are not branch campuses of UH . 
 = = = Campus layout = = = 
 The University of Houston 's campus framework has identified the following five core areas and districts : inner campus , the Arts District , the Professional District , the Wheeler District , and the Stadium District . In addition , the campus contains several outlying areas not identified among the four districts . 
 The inner campus contains the academic core of the university and consists of the M.D. Anderson Library , the College of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences , the College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics including the Physics Department , the College of Technology , and the Honors College . The interior of the campus has the original buildings : the Roy G. Cullen Building , the Old Science Building , and the Ezekiel W. Cullen Building . Academic and research facilities include the Cullen Performance Hall , the Science and Engineering Research and Classroom Complex , and Texas Center for Superconductivity , and various other science and liberal arts buildings . This area of campus features the reflecting pool at Cullen Family Plaza , the Lynn <unk> Park , and various plazas and green spaces . 
 The Arts District is located in the northern part of campus and is home to the university 's School of Art , the Moores School of Music , the School of Theatre and Dance , the Gerald D. Hines College of Architecture , and the Valenti School of Communication . The district also has the Cynthia Woods Mitchell Center for the Performing Arts which houses the Lyndall Finley Wortham Theatre , the main stage of the School of Theatre and Dance , and Moores Opera Center . Other facilities include the Dudley Recital Hall and the Organ Recital Hall in the Fine Arts Building , the Quintero Lab Theatre in the School of Theatre and Dance , and the Moores Opera House and Choral Recital Hall in the Moores School of Music Building . 
 The Professional District is located northeast and east of the university campus . The district has facilities of the University of Houston Law Center , the Cullen College of Engineering , and the C.T. Bauer College of Business . This area of campus is home to Calhoun Lofts , which is an upper @-@ level and graduate housing facility . The East Parking Garage is located on the east end of the district . Adjacent to the district is the University Center ( UC ) , the larger of two student unions on campus . 
 The Wheeler District is located in the southern portion of the campus , along Wheeler Avenue and east of Cullen Boulevard . This area has undergraduate dormitories , the Conrad N. Hilton College of Hotel and Restaurant Management , and the College of Optometry . Dormitory facilities include the twin 18 @-@ story Moody Towers , Cougar Village , and the Quadrangle which has the following five separate halls : Oberholtzer , Bates , Taub , Settegast , and Law . Adjacent to the Moody Towers and Lynn <unk> Park is the Hilton University of Houston Hotel . 
 = = = Facilities = = = 
 The university 's Energy Research Park is a research park specializing in energy research , consisting of 74 acres and 19 acres of undeveloped land . Much of the physical property was originally developed in 1953 by the oilfield services company Schlumberger as its global headquarters . It was acquired by the university in 2009 . 
 The University of Houston Libraries is the library system of the university . It consists of the M.D. Anderson Library and three branch libraries : the Music Library , the Weston A. <unk> Optometry Library , and the William R. Jenkins Architecture and Art Library . In addition to the libraries administered by the UH Libraries , the university also has the O 'Quinn Law Library and the Conrad N. Hilton Library . 
 The campus has the Cynthia Woods Mitchell Center for the Performing Arts , which houses the Lyndall Finley Wortham Theatre and Moores Opera Center . The Cullen Performance Hall is a 1 @,@ 544 seat proscenium theater which offers a variety of events sponsored by departments and organizations at the university in addition to contemporary music concerts , opera , modern dance , and theatrical performances put on by groups in and outside the Houston area . The Blaffer Gallery exhibits the works of both visiting artists and those of students in the university 's School of Art . 
 The 264 @,@ 000 ft ² ( 25 @,@ 000 m ² ) Campus Recreation and Wellness Center , which is home to the nation 's largest collegiate natatorium , was recognized by the National Intramural @-@ Sports Association as an outstanding facility upon its completion in 2004 . 
 The LeRoy and Lucile Melcher Center for Public Broadcasting houses the studios and offices of KUHT Houston PBS , the nation 's first public television station ; KUHF ( 88 @.@ 7 FM ) , Houston 's NPR station ; the Center for Public Policy Polling ; and television studio labs . 
 The 200 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 19 @,@ 000 m2 ) Science and Engineering Research and Classroom Complex ( <unk> ) was designed by architect César Pelli . It houses facilities for many interdisciplinary research programs at UH , including <unk> . 
 The university has an on @-@ campus Hilton hotel that is part of the Conrad N. Hilton College of Hotel and Restaurant Management . This hotel was established with a donation by the founder of Hilton Hotels , Conrad N. Hilton , and is staffed by students in the College of Hotel and Restaurant Management . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Metropolitan Transit Authority of Harris County ( METRO ) operates public transportation services , including buses and the METRORail tram service , which serve the university . METRORail Purple Line stations serving the university include : 
 Elgin / Third Ward 
 Robertson Stadium / UH / <unk> 
 UH South / University Oaks 
 = = = Sugar Land Campus = = = 
 The University of Houston Sugar Land ( <unk> ) is a branch campus of the University of Houston located in Sugar Land , Texas . The campus was founded in 1995 as a higher education " teaching center " of the University of Houston System . It was originally named the " Fort Bend Institute " and later the " University of Houston System at Fort Bend " prior to its name as the " University of Houston System at Sugar Land " . In 2002 , the campus was moved to its current 250 @-@ acre area on University Boulevard at U.S. Highway 59 with the opening of the Albert and Mamie George Building . On April 23 , 2009 , a $ 37 million USD facility was opened on the campus dubbed " Brazos Hall " housing the Sugar Land campus of Wharton County Junior College . Originally approved in May 2006 , the Fort Bend County Libraries system opened their University Branch at the <unk> campus on November 10 , 2011 . The library serves as a joint @-@ use facility between both the public and university students . On November 16 , 2011 , the University of Houston System announced that the University of Houston as an institution would replace the university system as the administrative entity for the teaching center , effectively making it a branch campus of the university . With this action , the campus was renamed the " University of Houston Sugar Land " as of January 2012 . 
 = = Institutional structure = = 
 The University of Houston ( UH ) is one of four separate and distinct institutions in the University of Houston System , and was known as University of Houston – University Park from 1983 to 1991 . The University of Houston ( UH ) is the flagship institution of the University of Houston System ( UHS ) . It is a multi @-@ campus university with a branch campus located in Sugar Land . The University of Houston – Clear Lake ( UHCL ) , the University of Houston – Downtown ( UHD ) , and the University of Houston – Victoria ( UHV ) are stand @-@ alone universities ; they are not branch campuses of UH . 
 The organization and control of the University of Houston is vested in the Board of Regents of the University of Houston System . The Board has all the rights , powers , and duties that it has with respect to the organization and control of other institutions in the System ; however , UH is maintained as a separate and distinct institution . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 The president is the chief executive officer ( CEO ) of the University of Houston , and serves concurrently as chancellor of the University of Houston System . The chancellor is the CEO of the UH System , and the position is appointed by its board of regents . 
 The administrations of the University of Houston and the UH System are located on the university campus in the Ezekiel W. Cullen Building . The Chancellor / President resides in the Wortham House , provided by the Board of Regents of the University of Houston System as part of the chancellor / president 's employment contract . 
 = = Academics = = 
 The mission of the University of Houston is to " discover and disseminate knowledge through the education of a diverse population of traditional and nontraditional students , and through research , artistic and scholarly endeavors , as it becomes the nation 's premier public university in an urban setting . " 
 The university offers 282 degree programs : 111 bachelors ; 121 masters ; 47 research doctorates ; and three professional doctorate degrees in law , optometry , and pharmacy . Awarding more than 9 @,@ 000 degrees annually , UH 's alumni base exceeds 260 @,@ 000 and is the largest in the Houston area . 
 The University of Houston 's faculty includes three @-@ time Pulitzer Prize winner Edward Albee , National Medal of Science recipient Paul Chu from the Physics Department , and Nobel Peace Prize Laureate Jody Williams . 
 The College of Liberal Arts and Social Sciences has the Creative Writing Program , which was founded by alumnus Donald Barthelme and offers degrees in poetry , fiction , and non @-@ fiction . 
 The Gerald D. Hines College of Architecture is one of only 36 schools to have an accreditation from the National Architectural Accrediting Board . 
 The University of Houston 's academic colleges are as follows : 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 The University of Houston was ranked the 31st top college in the United States by <unk> and <unk> 's Social Mobility Index college rankings . The U.S. News & World Report ranks the university No. 187 in its National University Rankings , and No. 105 among top public universities . The Princeton Review has listed UH as one of America 's best colleges . The institution ranks in the Top 50 American Research Universities , and is among the Top 300 in the global Academic Ranking of World Universities . 
 The University of Houston Law Center was ranked 58th among the nation 's " Best Law Schools " in U.S. News & World Report in 2012 . U.S. News & World Report ranked the C.T. Bauer College of Business as the top Undergraduate Business Program in Houston , third among public universities in the state of Texas , and 43rd in the nation among public universities . In 2002 , the Conrad N. Hilton College of Hotel and Restaurant Management ranked third in the nation in hospitality management by the Journal of Hospitality & Tourism Education . 
 The Wolff Center for Entrepreneurship at the C.T. Bauer College of Business is the No. 1 ranked undergraduate program for Entrepreneurship in the nation . The program has been ranked by The Princeton Review and Entrepreneur magazine as No. 1 for 2008 , 2010 , and 2011 ; and No. 2 in 2007 and 2009 . 
 = = Research = = 
 The Carnegie Foundation classifies the University of Houston as a research university with very high research activity . The designation makes UH one of only seven public universities in Texas with that classification . 
 The university conducts nearly $ 130 million annually in academic and scientific research , and operates more than 40 research centers and institutes on campus . Through these facilities , UH maintains partnerships with government , health care and private industry . Areas of interdisciplinary research include nanotechnology , superconductivity , space commercialization and exploration , biomedical sciences and engineering , energy and natural resources , and artificial intelligence . 
 Six interdisciplinary research clusters enable scholars to exchange ideas and explore research areas and to work with industry , other research organizations , and the community . University of Houston research clusters include : Arts and Human Enrichment , Bio @-@ Med Sciences and Engineering , Community Advancement and Education , Complex Systems / Space Exploration , Energy and Natural Resources , and Nano @-@ Materials . 
 = = Student life = = 
 The University of Houston is notable for its diverse student body , and U.S. News & World Report ranks UH as the second @-@ most ethnically diverse research university in the United States . With 42 @,@ 704 students in the fall 2015 semester , the university has significant numbers of Asian American and Hispanic students . Its international student population is primarily from Asia . 
 = = = Art , music and theatre = = = 
 Located in the Fine Arts Building , Blaffer Art Museum is a contemporary art museum dedicated to emerging , mid @-@ career , and underrepresented artists and bodies of work through exhibitions , publications , and public programs . Its educational programs include public lectures , artists ' talks , docent tours , audio guides , and youth programs such as Studio Saturday , Summer Arts , and the Young Artist Apprenticeship Program . 
 The Cullen Performance Hall is a 1 @,@ 544 seat proscenium theater located near Entrance 1 . The hall offers a variety of events sponsored by departments and organizations at the university in addition to contemporary music concerts , opera , modern dance , and theatrical performances put on by groups in and outside the Houston area . 
 The Rebecca and John J. Moores School of Music presents concerts in various campus venues : Dudley Recital Hall and the Organ Recital Hall in the Fine Arts Building , and in the Moores Opera House and Choral Recital Hall in the music building . Musical events range from opera to jazz with performers including students , faculty , and guest artists . 
 The School of Theatre and Dance offers a subscription series of five plays each year . Works by classical and modern dramatists , as well as new musical collaborators , are seen in full productions or " gypsy <unk> . " 
 The School of Art exhibits young artists several times a year , including the Master of Fine Arts exhibition held traditionally near the end of the spring semester in the Blaffer Art Museum . The School of Art also hosts presentations by numerous visiting artists and art historians throughout the academic year . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 Fifteen percent of UH students live on campus . UH has several on campus dormitories : Moody Towers , The Quadrangle , Cougar Village I & II , Cougar Place , Calhoun Lofts , Bayou Oaks , Cullen Oaks , and Cambridge Oaks . 
 Moody Towers , frequently just called " The Towers , " is one of the tallest complexes on campus and the largest area of residence halls . Each of the two towers consists of eighteen stories and together house 1 @,@ 100 students . The Towers feature a newly renovated dining hall . The rooms in The Towers are scheduled to be renovated during the summer of 2011 . 
 The Quadrangle , also known as " The Quad , " is the oldest housing area on campus and consists of several coed dorm halls : Bates , Law , Oberholtzer , Settegast , and Taub . Oberholtzer Hall features a smaller , albeit cozy dining hall . The Quadrangle houses 800 students . The rooms in The Quads are scheduled to be renovated during the summer of 2011 . 
 In August 2009 , Calhoun Lofts — a new university @-@ owned and operated residential facility aimed at graduate and professional students — opened and includes retail stores , lecture halls , and recreation facilities . 
 Cougar Village I & II are new freshman / Honors College dorm which opened in August 2010 and August 2013 , respectively . The dormitory features themed floors with kitchens and lounges , a tutoring center , computer labs , multi @-@ purpose rooms , study areas , a convenience store , a laundry facility , and a fitness center . Cougar Village I & II are exclusive only to freshman and Honor College students . 
 In addition to traditional dormitories , Cougar Place was an apartment @-@ style housing complex consisting of 400 units . Cougar Place has since been demolished as of 2013 and has been replaced with a new on @-@ campus housing complex for sophomores . 
 The university has privately owned apartment complexes on campus : Cullen Oaks , Bayou Oaks , and Cambridge Oaks . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 The official student newspaper is The Daily Cougar , and has been published since 1927 . Students also produce the official University of Houston yearbook , The <unk> . 
 The UH Student Video Network , a student @-@ run network , appears on the University of Houston cable network and is one of the few fee @-@ funded student organizations on campus . 
 <unk> Radio , the University of Houston 's student @-@ run college radio station , made its debut on August 29 , 2011 . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 The seal of the University of Houston , officially adopted in 1938 , is a stylized version of the coat @-@ of @-@ arms of General Sam Houston . The first official version was placed on the floor of the Roy Gustav Cullen Building . 
 The official colors of the University of Houston are scarlet red and albino white . These were the colors of Sam Houston 's ancestor , Sir Hugh , and were adopted by UH at the same time as the official seal . Scarlet red symbolizes courage or inner strength to face the unknown , and white symbolizes the goodness and purity of spirit embodied in helping one 's fellow man . 
 Cougar Red Friday is part of the ongoing Keep Houston Red initiative at the University of Houston . Students and staff are encouraged to wear red shirts on Friday to show pride and passion for the University . 
 The school 's official mascot is a cougar , which was adopted in 1947 and later named Shasta . The university owned a series of female cougars , but this tradition ceased in 1989 , upon the death of Shasta V. When a cougar cub was orphaned in Washington State and moved to the Houston Zoo in 2011 , the university adopted it as its first live male cougar mascot . 
 The Frontiersmen - initially exclusive to members of the Sigma Chi Fraternity , but later opened membership to the entire student body - is a group of students who participate in university events to drive school spirit . At football games , the Frontiersmen — donning cowboy hats , Wrangler Jeans , and dusters for attire — run across the field with the university 's flag and the Flag of Texas after each score . 
 Frontier Fiesta — a re @-@ creation of a 19th @-@ century Western town , with music , food and historical exhibits — is a major event on campus each spring semester . The student @-@ led festival is a part of a long @-@ standing tradition dating back to the 1940s established by Gan Bey which later became the Sigma Chi Fraternity 's Epsilon Xi chapter at UH . Frontier Fiesta attained widespread notoriety when the Sigma Chi variety show performance known as " Bella Union " garnered national attention on the cover of Life ( magazine ) as " The Greatest College Show on Earth " and soon @-@ after drew crowds numbered in the tens of thousands from all across the country to participate in the festivities . As Frontier Fiesta grew it eventually evolved into what we know today as the Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo . Although , there is still an annual " Frontier Fiesta " held on UH 's campus - the Houston Rodeo is today 's closest resemblance to the original Frontier Fiesta . 
 The <unk> is an oil field warning siren that was chosen to represent the university 's ties to the petroleum industry . The purchase of the siren was completed in 1991 . The Sigma Chi Fraternity has been in charge of the siren and gave it the name " The <unk> " in honor of its fallen brother , David <unk> . 
 Cougar First Impressions — a program headed by the UH Staff Council — takes place every year on the first two days of classes , when faculty and staff turn out to welcome new and returning students . 
 = = = The Cougar Paw = = = 
 The Cougar Paw is a popular hand sign used by University of Houston students , faculty , alumni , and athletics fans to represent camaraderie and support . The Cougar Paw tradition was adopted through several athletics events between the University of Houston and the University of Texas . 
 The University of Houston and the University of Texas played their first football game against one another in 1953 . Since this was their first meeting , members of Alpha Phi Omega — the service fraternity in charge of taking care of Shasta I , the university 's mascot — brought her to the game . During the trip , Shasta 's front paw was caught in the cage door and one toe was cut off . At the game , several Longhorn players saw what had happened and began taunting UH players by holding up their hands with the ring finger bent , suggesting the Cougars were invalids . Texas went on to win this game 28 – 7 . UH students had been using the victory sign as a hand signal up to that time , but began using the bent @-@ finger sign as a reminder that they would remember the taunts . 
 The Cougars didn 't play the Longhorns again until 1968 . With UH fans holding up the new sign of Cougar pride , UH played UT to a 20 – 20 tie . They didn 't meet again until 1976 , the first year UH was a member of the Southwest Conference . In front of a record crowd at Texas ' Memorial Stadium , UH defeated UT 30 – 0 , a rout that signaled the beginning of the end for legendary Texas coach Darrell Royal . This solidified the use of the Cougar Paw as a tradition . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 UH 's 17 @-@ sport intercollegiate program is a member of the American Athletic Conference . Houston was previously a member of Conference USA , of which it was a member since the conference was formed in 1995 to 2013 . During that timespan , the Cougars won 33 C @-@ USA titles . Prior to 1995 , Houston was a member of the Southwest Conference . 
 After 61 years of athletics at UH , other notable achievements include 16 national titles in men 's golf , five NCAA Men 's Basketball Final Four appearances , and two College World Series appearances . 
 More than 50 Olympic athletes have attended UH , bringing home 33 medals , including 19 gold . Former Olympian and UH alumnus Leroy Burrell returned as the men 's track and field head coach in 1998 . In April 2014 , Kelvin Sampson was named the eighth men 's basketball head coach . Ronald <unk> is the current women 's basketball coach . In December 2014 , Tom Herman was introduced as the head football coach . 
 In addition to varsity sports , the University of Houston offers a variety of intramural sports programs . 
 = = = Varsity sports = = = 
 The university has an intercollegiate sports program that competes in the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) . The NCAA 's Division I sports at the University of Houston include baseball , basketball , cross country , American football , golf , and track and field for men ; basketball , cross country , soccer , softball , swimming and diving , tennis , and track and field for women . 
 The Houston Cougars football team has made 24 post @-@ season bowl appearances and has to its credit several Southwest Conference championships and Cotton Bowl Classic appearances , as well as the 2006 Conference USA Championship and the 2015 American Athletic Conference championship . The 1989 Heisman Trophy winner , Andre Ware , was a Cougar . 
 The men 's basketball team has made 19 NCAA Tournament appearances , with five trips to the Final Four . See also Phi Slama Jama , the Cougars teams of the early 1980s that featured NBA legends Clyde Drexler and Hakeem Olajuwon . 
 Houston competes with other notable sports teams , such as the baseball team , which has made 20 NCAA Tournament appearances with two trips to the College World Series ; the men 's golf team , which has won 16 NCAA National Championships ; the women 's soccer team , which was rated as the top first @-@ year women 's program in the country in 1998 ; the swimming and diving teams , which have spawned multiple Olympians and All @-@ Americans ; the track and field team , which perennially ranks in the top 10 as an NCAA team ; and the volleyball team , which had a streak of ten consecutive trips to the NCAA Tournament . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Awarding more than 9 @,@ 000 degrees annually , UH 's alumni base exceeds 260 @,@ 000 . The University of Houston has seen many now notable persons pass through its halls . 
 Jack Valenti , long @-@ time president of the Motion Picture Association of America and creator of the MPAA film rating system , received his <unk> from UH and for decades was one of the most influential people in Hollywood . Acclaimed artist and filmmaker Julian Schnabel is also a University of Houston alum . 
 Tom <unk> , longtime ABC News anchor , is an alumnus . He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in 1956 . 
 Alice Sebold , a noted novelist known for Lucky and The Lovely Bones , and Matt <unk> , creator of WordPress ( the most popular , open @-@ source blogging platform ) , also attended the university . 
 Notable athletes within the list include NFL players Wilson Whitley , Glenn Montgomery , Alfred Oglesby , Craig Veasey , Donnie Avery , David <unk> , Kevin Kolb , Billy Milner , Sebastian Vollmer , Case <unk> , and Heisman Trophy winner Andre Ware ; baseball stars Doug Drabek , Michael Bourn , and Brad Lincoln ; golfers Fred Couples , Billy Ray Brown , Steve <unk> , and Fuzzy Zoeller ; track and field legends Carl Lewis and Leroy Burrell ; NBA legends Hakeem " The Dream " Olajuwon , Clyde " The Glide " Drexler and " The Big E " Elvin Hayes as well as Bo Outlaw , Don Chaney , Michael Young , Damon Jones , Carl Herrera and Otis Birdsong ; and legendary Dallas Cowboys coach Tom Landry . The owner of the San Diego Padres and noted philanthropist John Moores holds both undergraduate and law degrees . The former Defensive Coordinator of the Houston Texans , Wade Phillips , is a UH alumnus , as well . 
 Elizabeth Warren , a U.S. Senator representing Massachusetts and formerly a Harvard Law School faculty member and chair of the Congressional Oversight Panel created to oversee the U.S. banking bailout during the 2008 – 2009 financial crisis , received her B.S. from UH in 1970 . Tom DeLay , a former member and majority leader of the U.S. House of Representatives , who represented Texas 's 22nd congressional district from 1984 until 2006 , also attended the University of Houston . Other politicians who attended UH include Gene Green , a Democratic politician and a U.S. congressman from the state of Texas representing that state 's 29th congressional district , which includes most of eastern Houston , along with large portions of Houston 's eastern suburbs ; and Ted Poe , a Republican politician currently representing Texas 's 2nd congressional district in the United States House of Representatives . Poe 's district includes most of northern Houston , as well as most of the Beaumont – Port Arthur metropolitan area . 
 Other notable celebrity alumni include Jim Parsons , star of the television series The Big Bang Theory , Brent Spiner of Star Trek : The Next Generation , actors Robert Wuhl , Loretta Devine , Dennis Quaid , Randy Quaid , Brett Cullen , comedian Bill Hicks and former attorney and talk show host Star Jones , Project Runway contestants Chloe Dao and Laura Bennett , sportscasters Jim Nantz and Robert Flores , and country music star Larry Gatlin . 
 <unk> Stewart , Miss USA 2008 is a former student at the University , last attending in 2007 . Jason <unk> the artist and fashion designer is a graduate as well . 
 = = = Alumni Association = = = 
 The University of Houston Alumni Association is the official alumni association of the University of Houston . Formed in 1940 , it is a nonprofit organization with a Life Membership Program of over 5 @,@ 000 members . The alumni association is headquartered at the University of Houston 's on @-@ campus Athletics / Alumni Center . It can be found on the web at <unk> It was previously known as the " Ex @-@ Students Association " and the " Houston Alumni Organization . " 
 = Dolls and Dolls = 
 " Dolls and Dolls " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the fifth season of the American television series Will & Grace . It was written by Kari Lizer and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on April 24 , 2003 . Singer @-@ songwriter Madonna guest starred in " Dolls and Dolls " . 
 In the episode , Karen ( Megan Mullally ) is prompted to meet " real people " , and finds a peculiar office worker named Liz ( Madonna ) , and becomes her roommate . Meanwhile , when Will ( Eric McCormack ) sprains his ankle , he develops a habit of taking too many painkillers , and his drastic personality change prompts a concerned Grace ( Debra Messing ) and Jack ( Sean Hayes ) to intervene and interfere . 
 " Dolls and Dolls " received mixed reviews from television critics . According to the Nielsen ratings system , the episode was watched by 17 @.@ 7 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 9 @.@ 3 rating / 23 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Following her divorce , Karen ( Megan Mullally ) decides that she would like to spend time with " real people " and after seeing a roommate needed ad , she decides to be someone 's roommate . She visits Liz ( Madonna ) , a peculiar office worker and the individual who put up the ad . At meeting Liz , Karen becomes intrigued and decides to be her roommate . The two go to a bar , in search for men . While there , Karen and Liz discover they both like the same man , which prompts the two to fight over him . As a result , they are no longer welcomed back to the bar . The two go home with Liz no longer wanting to be roommates with Karen . Karen tries to change Liz 's mind , but to no avail . Liz tells Karen to write a check to the landlord , Walker Property Management , for her side of the rent . Unbeknownst to Liz , Karen owns the apartment building , and decides she does not want Liz as a tenant in her building . 
 Meanwhile , when Will ( Eric McCormack ) sprains his ankle , he begins taking painkillers , as prescribed by his doctor , to relieve himself from the pain . His friends , Grace ( Debra Messing ) and Jack ( Sean Hayes ) , begin seeing changes in Will 's personality , including him not going to work , and not reacting to a messy apartment as he is compulsively obsessed with cleanliness . One day , he notices that his pill bottle has gone missing and is searching for them , not knowing that Grace and Jack have taken it . They will not give him the bottle back as they believe he has a problem . At the end , Will admits to his problem and promises his friends he will stop taking them . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dolls and Dolls " was written by Kari Lizer and directed by series producer James Burrows . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on April 24 , 2003 . Will & Grace was one of several sitcoms to have a " super @-@ sized " episode , which NBC employed as a sweeps stunt , and to initiate a mostly comedy lineup . Instead of the usual 30 @-@ minute episodes , " Dolls and Dolls " was increased to 40 minutes . 
 It was announced , by then @-@ NBC Entertainment President Jeff Zucker , at the annual Television Critics Association news tour in January 2003 that singer @-@ songwriter Madonna would be appearing in an episode of Will & Grace . On March 18 , Madonna taped her appearance . While taping " Dolls and Dolls " , Madonna recalled the first time she made her way on the set , the studio audience " cheered so hard " that she had to make her entrance all over again . " I had to wait too long to say my first line , so we had to do it over . " Madonna 's role in the show made it her episodic television series debut . Her decision to do the show was due to her being a " big fan " . In an interview with the entertainment news program Access Hollywood , the singer revealed that her manager gave her tapes of the show to watch . She liked the show and called it " hysterical " with " really good writing " . She most enjoyed actress Megan Mullally 's character Karen , and said she would do the show if her scenes were with her . Executive producer Tim Kaiser told TV Guide that he sent Madonna arrangements of English roses with an invitation to make an appearance on the show , as he was informed that she did not own a television set , and had no idea what Will & Grace was until tapes of the show — with past guest stars — were sent to her . He noted that she agreed to do the appearance , as long as she did not have to play herself . Kaiser admitted that Madonna " had a few nerves " but was a real professional on set . In the episode , she played the character Liz , and according to Entertainment Weekly , a nod to her long @-@ time publicist Liz Rosenberg . It was reported that Madonna 's appearance on the show was to promote her album American Life ( 2003 ) . Many believed that the guest spot on the show would be good for the singer , following her appearance in the film 2002 film Swept Away , which was a box office disappointment . Her manager , however , insisted that Madonna 's guest spot was not an attempt to showcase her acting abilities . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Dolls and Dolls " was watched by 17 @.@ 7 million households in its original American broadcast . The episode received a 9 @.@ 3 rating / 23 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode finished in the number eighth spot tied with the April 23 , 2003 episode of Fox 's reality show competition American Idol . It finished in 13th place in the weekly ratings for the week of April 21 – 27 , 2003 . Following the airing of " Dolls and Dolls " a clip show of past guest stars aired , garnering 16 @.@ 92 million viewers , and receiving an 8 @.@ 8 rating / 21 share . Since airing , " Dolls and Dolls " has received mixed reviews from television critics . 
 Adam Buckman of the New York Post did not enjoy Madonna 's guest appearance , observing that she " proves she 'll do just about anything for attention , including going on a dumb show like Will & Grace [ ... ] Madonna did herself no favors by agreeing to participate in a cheap , desperate ratings stunt . " Nonetheless , Buckman said that in the episode " she delivered her lines capably " and that her role as Liz was with " admirable gusto . " Entertainment Weekly writer Ken Tucker noted that the singer 's appearance was " one of the worst , if most fascinating , celebrity cameos I 've ever witnessed . " Tucker said that " Madonna @-@ as @-@ TV @-@ actress " defeated " Madonna @-@ as @-@ movie @-@ actress " primarily because " she was paired with a pro like [ Megan ] Mullally and had less screen time than she did in her most recent movie dud , Swept Away . According to David Kronke for the Whittier Daily News , " Madonna may have put the <unk> on her video , but not on her guest appearance as Karen 's ... new best bosom buddy . " While Charleston Daily Mail 's Kevin McDonough reported that Madonna appearing on Will & Grace was " clearly a reprise " of singer Cher 's guest stints on the episodes " Gypsies , Tramps and Weed " and " A.I. : Artificial Insemination " . McDonough wrote that the cameos made by Cher " made sense " , and that the latter " has an ability to laugh at herself that Madonna has never exhibited . " Mark A. Perigard of the Boston Herald said Will & Grace had been " guilty of some pretty poor stunt casting " and included Madonna as a primary example . Writing for The Times publication , Lisa Verrico noted that Will & Grace was becoming the " new " Friends opining with all the guest stars in season five — Demi Moore , Minnie Driver , and Madonna — that have been featured on the show . 
 Before the airing , Neal Justin of the Star Tribune expected " sparks " between Madonna and Mullally 's characters in this episode . A reviewer from the Sunday Independent wrote that Madonna " stretches herself to play someone with a sense of humour " in " Dolls and Dolls " . The Hartford Courant 's Roger Catlin wrote that despite Madonna not being successful on the big screen , " she happens to cut just the right figure " as Karen 's roommate . With Catlin writing " with some sharp timing on a bunch of self @-@ referential jokes " , he asked " Is there a series in her [ Madonna 's ] future ? " Jim Keogh for the Worcester Telegram & Gazette was complimentary to the singer commenting that she was " pretty good " in " Dolls and Dolls " . Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk was complimentary in his review of season five , writing , that the cast were involved in a lot of " fun situations " with the guest appearances from Kevin Bacon , Rip Torn , Elton John , Andy García , Madonna , Demi Moore , Macaulay Culkin , and Gene Wilder . " In March 2006 , Entertainment Weekly named Madonna 's guest spot as their number ten most memorable guest appearance on Will & Grace . 
 = SMS Prinz Eugen = 
 Three ships of the Austrian and later Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy have been named SMS Prinz Eugen in honor of Prince Eugene of Savoy 
 SMS Prinz Eugen ( 1862 ) , a broadside ironclad that fought at the Battle of Lissa 
 SMS Prinz Eugen ( 1877 ) , a casemate ship built in the 1870s to replace the original vessel 
 SMS Prinz Eugen ( 1912 ) , a dreadnought battleship built in the 1910s 
 = Nathaniel Dance = 
 Sir Nathaniel Dance ( 20 June 1748 – 25 March 1827 ) was an officer of the Honourable East India Company who had a long and varied career on merchant vessels , making numerous voyages to India and back with the fleets of East Indiamen . He was already aware of the risks of the valuable ships he sailed on being preyed on by foreign navies , having been captured by a Franco @-@ Spanish fleet in 1780 during the East Indies campaign of the American War of Independence . His greatest achievement came during the Napoleonic Wars , when having been appointed commodore of one of the company 's fleets , he came across a French squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Comte de Linois , which was raiding British shipping in the area . Through skilful seamanship and aggressive tactics he fooled the French commander into thinking that the British convoy was escorted by powerful naval forces , and the French decided not to risk attacking the convoy . Dance compounded the deception by taking his lightly armed merchants and chasing the French away , despite the considerable disparity of force . Having saved the convoy from almost certain destruction , Dance was hailed as a hero , lavishly rewarded with money and a knighthood , and spent the last years of his life in comfortable retirement . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Dance was born in London on 20 June 1748 , the son of James Dance and his wife Elizabeth . James Dance was a successful lawyer of the city , but shortly after the birth of Nathaniel , he abandoned his wife to live with an actress , and in time established himself as a successful actor and playwright in Drury Lane . Elizabeth Dance and her family were instead cared for by James 's father , and Nathaniel 's paternal grandfather , George Dance the Elder , a prominent architect for the City of London . Nathaniel lived with his grandfather until 1759 , when he went to sea under the patronage of Nathaniel Smith , a high @-@ ranking official in the Honourable East India Company . With Smith 's support , Dance rose through the ranks of the service , by 1780 having made eight voyages to India , as well as one to the Mediterranean and one to the West Indies . While making his ninth voyage to India as first officer on Royal George when a combined Spanish and French fleet captured his ship in the Action of 9 August 1780 . Dance was taken to Spain , where he spent six months on parole . He became commander of the Lord Camden in January 1787 , making another four voyages to India aboard her , before being appointed commander of a new ship , the Earl Camden , in which he sailed to China in January 1803 . 
 = = Voyage home = = 
 The Earl Camden sailed from Canton with the rest of the fleet on 31 January 1804 , bound for England . By virtue of his seniority Dance was appointed commodore of the fleet of 11 " country " ships , and 16 East Indiamen . The fleet that had been assembled was the richest to date , carrying cargoes with an estimated value of £ 8 million , ( approximately £ 635 million in present @-@ day terms ) . Dance had been taken seriously ill at Bombay during the outward voyage , but had recovered in time to sail with the convoy . The fleet did not have any naval escorts , and though the East Indiamen were heavily armed for merchants , carrying nominal batteries of between 30 and 36 guns , they were no match for disciplined and professional naval forces . Not all of their listed armament was always carried , but to give the illusion of greater strength , fake gunports were often painted on the hulls , in the hope of distant observers mistaking them for 64 @-@ gun ships of the Royal Navy . By the time the fleet approached the Strait of Malacca on 14 February , Dance 's convoy had swelled to include 16 East Indiamen , 11 country ships , a Portuguese merchant ship from Macau and a vessel from Botany Bay in Australia . Although the HEIC had provided the small , armed brig Ganges as an escort , this vessel could only dissuade pirates ; it could not hope to confront a French warship . As they neared the entrance to the straits suspicious sails were sighted in the south west . Dance sent some of his ships to investigate , and it was soon discovered that this was Linois 's squadron , consisting of the 74 @-@ gun Marengo , the two heavy frigates Sémillante and Belle Poule , the corvette Berceau , and the Dutch brig Aventurier . 
 = = = The battle = = = 
 Having ascertained the identity of the ships Dance signalled for his merchants to form the line of battle , and continued their heading , while the French closed , but made no move to attack . Dance used the delay to gather his ships together so the stronger East Indiamen stood between the French and the weaker country ships . The merchants continued on towards the straits , followed by Linois , who was trying to gauge the strength of the convoy . There were more ships in the convoy than he had expected , and taken in by Dance 's manoeuvres and the painted gunports , Linois suspected that several warships were escorting them . He seemed to be confirmed in his suspicions when at dawn on 15 February , both forces raised their colours . Dance ordered the brig Ganges and the four lead ships to hoist blue ensigns , while the rest of the convoy raised red ensigns . By the system of national flags then in use in British ships , this implied that the ships with blue ensigns were warships attached to the squadron of Admiral Peter Rainier , while the others were merchant ships under their protection . 
 With the French still appearing reluctant to attack on the morning of 16 February , Dance ordered his ships to increase their speed by breaking into a sailing formation . This had the effect of making the convoy appear less intimidating and Linois decided to attack . By the afternoon the French were observed to be moving to cut off the rearmost ships of the convoy . Dance promptly hoisted colours , and ordered his largest ships , led by the East Indiamen Royal George , Ganges and his own ship , Earl Camden , to come about and close on the French . Advancing under full sail , they endured the fire of the French as they closed , before firing broadsides at close range . At this the French abandoned their attack , turned , and fled under a press of sail . Dance hoisted the signal for a general chase and his merchant fleet pursued the French squadron for two hours , before Dance broke off and returned on his original heading . The fleet resumed their course towards the Malacca Strait , and having met two British ships of the line from Admiral Peter Rainier 's fleet on 28 February , were escorted as far as Saint Helena . There the convoy met with other British merchants , and were escorted to Britain by Royal Navy warships , arriving in August 1804 . 
 = = Rewards = = 
 The achievement of a convoy of merchants not only escaping without loss from a French squadron , but going so far as to attack , drive off , and then pursue their would @-@ be predators , was widely hailed as a signal victory . 
 The Naval Chronicle declared : 
 We cannot sufficiently express our opinion of the coolness , intrepidity , and skill , with which the Commander of this Fleet , unaccustomed as he was to the practice of naval engagements , provided against every emergency , and prepared his plans , either for attack or defence , as the manoeuvres of the French Admiral might render it expedient for him to adopt either the one of the other . His conduct was worthy of the experience and science of our most approved and veteran Admirals , while the ardour and promptitude with which his orders were obeyed and his plans executed by the several Captains under his command , may have been rivalled , but can scarcely be exceeded in the most renowned of our naval exploits . 
 Dance received £ 5 @,@ 000 from the Bombay Insurance Company ( approximately £ 338 @,@ 000 in present @-@ day terms ) , a pension of £ 500 a year ( approximately £ 34 @,@ 000 a year in present @-@ day terms ) , plate worth 200 guineas from the Honourable East India Company , a ceremonial sword worth £ 100 , and a silver vase . His captains were also rewarded . Captain Timmins of the Royal George received £ 1000 , a sword and plate , while the other captains received £ 500 , and a sword and plate , with money being paid to the officers and seaman under their command , with an ordinary seaman receiving £ 6 ( approximately £ 500 @.@ 00 in present @-@ day terms ) . 
 Dance himself credited the actions of those under his command as being largely responsible for the victory , writing in reply to the award from the Bombay Insurance Company : 
 Placed , by the adventitious circumstances of seniority of service and absence of convoy , in the chief command of the fleet intrusted to my care , it has been my good fortune to have been enabled , by the firmness of those by whom I was supported , to perform my trust not only with fidelity , but without loss to my employers . Public opinion and public rewards have already far outrun my deserts ; and I cannot but be sensible that the liberal spirit of my generous countrymen has measured what they are pleased to term their grateful sense of my conduct , rather by the particular utility of the exploit , than by any individual merit I can claim . 
 Dance received a knighthood and went into a comfortable retirement , dying at Enfield on 25 March 1827 at the age of 78 . 
 = The World Is Not Enough ( song ) = 
 " The World Is Not Enough " is the theme song from the 1999 James Bond film of the same name , performed by the alternative rock group Garbage . The song was written by composer David Arnold ( who also scored the film ) and lyricist Don Black , previously responsible for four other Bond songs , and was produced by Garbage and Arnold . " The World Is Not Enough " was composed in the style of the series ' title songs , in contrast with the post @-@ modern production and genre @-@ hopping of Garbage 's first two albums . The group recorded most of " The World Is Not Enough " while touring Europe in support of their album Version 2 @.@ 0 , telephoning Arnold as he recorded the orchestral backing in London before travelling to England . Garbage later finished recording and mixing the song at Armoury Studios in Canada . The lyrics reflect the film 's plot ( told from the viewpoint of antagonist Elektra King ) , with themes of world domination and seduction . 
 The song and its accompanying soundtrack were released internationally by Radioactive Records when the film premiered worldwide at the end of November 1999 . " The World Is Not Enough " was praised by reviewers ; it reached the top forty of ten singles charts and the top ten of four . It was included on the James Bond compilation The Best of Bond ... James Bond and Garbage 's greatest hits album , Absolute Garbage . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In September 1998 Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli , owners of Eon Productions and long @-@ time producers of James Bond films , chose David Arnold to compose the score for the nineteenth Bond movie ( scheduled for release in November of the following year ) . Arnold composed the score for Tomorrow Never Dies , the previous film , and oversaw the recording of Shaken and Stirred : The David Arnold James Bond Project ( an album of cover versions recorded by contemporary artists including Pulp , Aimee Mann and David McAlmont ) . Arnold and the film 's production team wanted an early rough draft of the song so elements of its melody could be incorporated into the main score . Director Michael Apted thought the use of " Nobody Does It Better " as a love theme throughout The Spy Who Loved Me very effective , and he wanted Arnold to use that as a reference point . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Arnold wanted a theme song marrying the " classic Bond sound " with the electronica that would influence most of his score . An orchestra would be required as audiences expect traditional elements in a Bond film , and without them The World Is Not Enough would be seen as a generic action movie . Getting the balance right might be a " poisoned chalice " , since the results could sound too much or too little like a Bond theme . Arnold collaborated with lyricist Don Black on the song . Black , with 30 years of experience writing Bond themes , wrote the lyrics to Tom Jones 's " Thunderball " , Shirley Bassey 's " Diamonds Are Forever " , Lulu 's " The Man with the Golden Gun " and k.d. lang 's closing credits theme , " Surrender " , from Tomorrow Never Dies . Arnold and Black met several times to discuss lyrics for " The World Is Not Enough " , also collaborating by phone , fax and email . According to Arnold , he " strung some la @-@ las together , and all of a sudden the [ song ] came to life " . By the end of 1998 he and Black finished the music and lyrics , except for the bridge ( a contrasting section of about eight bars ) . 
 The lyrics are from the viewpoint of Elektra King , the Bond girl revealed as the mastermind of the villainous scheme . Its underlying themes are seduction and domination , described by Arnold as " a steel fist in a velvet glove . It beckons you in with its crooked finger . " Black added that although the lyrics reflected the film 's plot , they were " of course all about world domination " and " a lot more personal and intense " , evoking a " ballady and dramatic " mood . A line of dialogue from the film , " There 's no point in living if you can 't feel alive , " was included in the lyrics . 
 By the first week of January 1999 , Arnold completed the song 's outline and made a synthesizer @-@ arranged demo recording in his recording studio . He played the demo for Wilson , Broccoli and Apted , who were " extremely pleased " with the results . Arnold 's agent then presented the demo to MGM executives in Los Angeles , who initially disliked it because it was a ballad and they expected a more uptempo song . MGM asked Arnold to rewrite a three @-@ note sequence considered too similar to a motif in earlier Bond themes . 
 That month Arnold offered the theme to Garbage lead singer Shirley Manson , who was very enthusiastic ; Arnold said he " never heard someone screaming down the phone " . A week later he sent the band the rough demo , which they approved . Manson requested a small change in the lyrics , disliking the line " I know when to kiss and I know when to kill " , so Arnold and Black changed " I " to " we " for the final version . 
 Garbage drummer and co @-@ producer Butch Vig said that when the group contributed to film soundtracks , " one of our fantasies would be to do the Bond theme or do the new Bond song . " Manson called herself a fan of the series , " an institution I admire and has always captured my imagination since I was a child " , and the films had a " sensibility quite similar to how we approach making music " . The chance to record a Bond theme appealed to her because " you know it 's going down in movie history " , and coming from Scotland , like original Bond Sean Connery , " that 's very close and inherent in our culture . It 's not Bond if it 's not Scottish ! " The singer considered Garbage 's music and the series ' concepts " something that you can enjoy on the surface , but underneath there are lots of conflicting themes you can get into . " 
 At the beginning of August Garbage 's involvement was confirmed in a press release from MGM and Radioactive Records , Shirley Manson 's record label , which would release the soundtrack and the single . Although Music Week reported that Jamiroquai , Robbie Williams , <unk> Spiteri , Björk and Melanie C were rejected by the producers before Garbage was chosen , Arnold denied that the other artists had auditioned ; the single was suitable only for a film , and was not created with a particular artist in mind . 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The first recordings were made during the European leg of Garbage 's Version 2 @.@ 0 world tour . After listening to the orchestral demo , the band worked on the key and tempo . Garbage used a portable studio from a number of European cities to record material for Arnold , keeping in touch by phone as he produced the song 's string arrangement in London . Since the strings carried the structure of the song , they had to be finalised and recorded before Manson could sing her parts . Arnold recorded the strings with a 60 @-@ piece orchestra in one day at London 's Metropolis Studios . 
 Garbage flew to London for a day to record the basic tracks , laying down electric guitar , bass guitar and Manson 's vocals with the orchestra . Manson called working with the orchestra " exhilarating " . That night , the band flew to Switzerland to resume their tour for three weeks . 
 The final recording was made in August at Armoury Studios in Vancouver , Canada , where Garbage built upon their first mix of the song , adding and subtracting parts , and completed final recording and mixing . The band kept the arrangement tight to preserve the song 's dynamic , sweeping melody . " The orchestra took up so much space and really dictated where the song was going dynamically , " keeping the recording simple , Vig recalled . " Besides the drums and bass and some percussive loops , there 's a little bit of guitar that Duke and Steve did . There 's not a lot of miscellaneous tracks on there . There 's a few little ear @-@ candy things that we did , but it 's all meant to work around Shirley 's singing . " Although Garbage owned its own recording studio in Madison , Wisconsin , for legal reasons the song could not be recorded in a U.S. studio . " The World Is Not Enough " was completed , mixed and mastered at the end of the month , and the group returned to their recording studio in Madison to record their mix of the song . Garbage 's version ( the " chilled @-@ out remix " ) downplayed the classic Bond sound in favour of the band 's style . Vig later said about the original recording , " We 're pretty pleased with how it turned out . To Garbage fans , it sounds like a Garbage song . And to Bond fans , it 's a Bond song . " 
 = = = Copyright infringement case = = = 
 Two songwriters sued Eon , MGM , Universal Music and Universal Studios for copyright infringement over " The World Is Not Enough " , alleging that it derived from their song " This Game We Play " , which was submitted to MGM executives in February 1999 for consideration for the soundtrack of The Thomas Crown Affair . Their claim centered on a four @-@ note sequence in " The World Is Not Enough " which they alleged was identical to part of " This Game We Play " . When the songwriters were gathering evidence , one posed as an employee of composer James Horner to contact Don Black and solicit his services for Ocean 's Eleven . They recorded their conversation with Black , trying to get him to disclose when he and Arnold composed " The World Is Not Enough " , and contacted Shirley Manson in a similar manner . 
 The case was argued in the United States District Court for the Middle District of Tennessee in June 2004 . The court rejected the plaintiffs ' claim , concluding that Arnold independently composed " The World Is Not Enough " and it did not share a passage with " This Game We Play " . The plaintiffs conceded that Arnold did not have access to " This Game We Play " after journal entries , delivery invoices , telephone and computer records , written declarations from Michael G. Wilson and Barbara Broccoli and testimony from David Arnold , Don Black , Shirley Manson and Arnold 's personal assistant provided " irrefutable evidence " that " The World Is Not Enough " had already been written and was not changed significantly — other than a lyrical alteration ( the removal of one line to accommodate Shirley Manson ) and an amendment to the score ( the removal of the " three @-@ note motif " to accommodate the MGM executives ) — from the date that " This Game We Play " was submitted to MGM . 
 = = Music video = = 
