 In September 1998 , Bowie launched his own Internet service provider , BowieNet , developed in conjunction with Robert Goodale and Ron Roy . Subscribers to the dial @-@ up service were offered exclusive content , as well as a BowieNet email address and Internet access . The service was closed by 2006 . 
 = = = 1999 – 2012 : <unk> Bowie = = = 
 Bowie created the soundtrack for <unk> , a 1999 computer game in which he and Iman also appeared as characters . Released the same year and containing re @-@ recorded tracks from <unk> , his album Hours featured a song with lyrics by the winner of his " Cyber Song Contest " Internet competition , Alex Grant . Making extensive use of live instruments , the album was Bowie 's exit from heavy electronica . Sessions for the planned album Toy , intended to feature new versions of some of Bowie 's earliest pieces as well as three new songs , commenced in 2000 , but the album was never released . Bowie and Visconti continued their collaboration , producing a new album of completely original songs instead : the result of the sessions was the 2002 album Heathen . 
 On 25 June 2000 , Bowie made his second appearance at the Glastonbury Festival in England , playing 30 years after his first . On 27 June , Bowie performed a concert at BBC Radio Theatre in London , which was released in the compilation album Bowie at the Beeb , which also featured BBC recording sessions from 1968 to 1972 . Bowie and Iman 's daughter was born on 15 August . 
 In October 2001 , Bowie opened the Concert for New York City , a charity event to benefit the victims of the 11 September attacks , with a minimalist performance of Simon & Garfunkel 's " America " , followed by a full band performance of " Heroes " . 2002 saw the release of Heathen , and , during the second half of the year , the Heathen Tour . Taking place in Europe and North America , the tour opened at London 's annual Meltdown festival , for which Bowie was that year appointed artistic director . Among the acts he selected for the festival were Philip Glass , Television and the Dandy Warhols . As well as songs from the new album , the tour featured material from Bowie 's Low era . Reality ( 2003 ) followed , and its accompanying world tour , the A Reality Tour , with an estimated attendance of 722 @,@ 000 , grossed more than any other in 2004 . Onstage in Oslo , Norway , on 18 June , Bowie was hit in the eye with a lollipop thrown by a fan ; a week later he suffered chest pain while performing at the Hurricane Festival in <unk> , Germany . Originally thought to be a pinched nerve in his shoulder , the pain was later diagnosed as an acutely blocked coronary artery , requiring an emergency angioplasty in Hamburg . The remaining 14 dates of the tour were cancelled . That same year , his interest in Buddhism led him to support the Tibetan cause by performing at a concert to support the New York Tibet House . 
 In the years following his recuperation from the heart attack , Bowie reduced his musical output , making only one @-@ off appearances on stage and in the studio . He sang in a duet of his 1972 song " Changes " with Butterfly Boucher for the 2004 animated film Shrek 2 . 
 During a relatively quiet 2005 , he recorded the vocals for the song " ( She Can ) Do That " , co @-@ written with Brian <unk> , for the film Stealth . He returned to the stage on 8 September 2005 , appearing with Arcade Fire for the US nationally televised event Fashion Rocks , and performed with the Canadian band for the second time a week later during the CMJ Music Marathon . He contributed backing vocals on TV on the Radio 's song " Province " for their album Return to Cookie Mountain , made a commercial with Snoop Dogg for XM Satellite Radio and joined with Lou Reed on Danish alt @-@ rockers Kashmir 's 2005 album No Balance Palace . 
 Bowie was awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award on 8 February 2006 . In April , he announced , " I 'm taking a year off — no touring , no albums . " He made a surprise guest appearance at David Gilmour 's 29 May concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London . The event was recorded , and a selection of songs on which he had contributed joint vocals were subsequently released . He performed again in November , alongside Alicia Keys , at the Black Ball , a New York benefit event for Keep a Child Alive , a performance marking the last time Bowie performed his music on stage . 
 Bowie was chosen to curate the 2007 High Line Festival , selecting musicians and artists for the Manhattan event , including electronic pop duo Air , surrealist photographer Claude <unk> and English comedian Ricky Gervais . Bowie performed on Scarlett Johansson 's 2008 album of Tom Waits covers , Anywhere I Lay My Head . On the 40th anniversary of the July 1969 moon landing — and Bowie 's accompanying commercial breakthrough with " Space Oddity " — EMI released the individual tracks from the original eight @-@ track studio recording of the song , in a 2009 contest inviting members of the public to create a remix . A Reality Tour , a double album of live material from the 2003 concert tour , was released in January 2010 . 
 In late March 2011 , Toy , Bowie 's previously unreleased album from 2001 , was leaked onto the internet , containing material used for Heathen and most of its single B @-@ sides , as well as unheard new versions of his early back catalogue . 
 = = = 2013 – 16 : Final years = = = 
 On 8 January 2013 ( his 66th birthday ) , his website announced a new album , to be titled The Next Day and scheduled for release 8 March for Australia , 12 March for the United States and 11 March for the rest of the world . Bowie 's first studio album in a decade , The Next Day contains 14 songs plus 3 bonus tracks . His website acknowledged the length of his hiatus . Record producer Tony Visconti said 29 tracks were recorded for the album , some of which could appear on Bowie 's next record , which he might start work on later in 2013 . The announcement was accompanied by the immediate release of a single , " Where Are We Now ? " , written and recorded by Bowie in New York and produced by longtime collaborator Visconti . 
 A music video for " Where Are We Now ? " was released onto Vimeo the same day , directed by New York artist Tony Oursler . The single topped the UK iTunes Chart within hours of its release , and debuted in the UK Singles Chart at No. 6 , his first single to enter the top 10 for two decades ( since " Jump They Say " in 1993 ) . A second video , " The Stars ( Are Out Tonight ) " , was released 25 February . Directed by Floria Sigismondi , it stars Bowie and Tilda Swinton as a married couple . On 1 March , the album was made available to stream for free through iTunes . The Next Day debuted at No. 1 on the UK Albums Chart , his first since Black Tie White Noise ( 1993 ) , and was the fastest @-@ selling album of 2013 at the time . The music video for the song " The Next Day " created some controversy , initially being removed from YouTube for terms @-@ of @-@ service violation , then restored with a warning recommending viewing only by those 18 or over . 
 According to The Times , Bowie ruled out ever giving an interview again . An exhibition of Bowie artefacts , called " David Bowie Is " , was organized by the Victoria and Albert Museum in London , and shown there in 2013 . The London exhibit was visited by 311 @,@ 956 people , making it one of the most successful exhibitions ever staged at the museum . Later that year the exhibition began a world tour , starting in Toronto and including stops in Chicago , Paris , Melbourne , and Groningen . Bowie was featured in a cameo vocal in the Arcade Fire song " Reflektor " . A poll carried out by BBC History Magazine , in October 2013 , named Bowie as the best @-@ dressed Briton in history . 
 At the 2014 Brit Awards on 19 February , Bowie became the oldest recipient of a Brit Award in the ceremony 's history when he won the award for Best British Male , which was collected on his behalf by Kate Moss . His speech read : " I 'm completely delighted to have a Brit for being the best male – but I am , aren 't I Kate ? Yes . I think it 's a great way to end the day . Thank you very , very much and Scotland stay with us . " Bowie 's reference to the forthcoming September 2014 Scottish independence referendum garnered a significant reaction throughout the UK on social media . On 18 July , Bowie indicated that future music would be forthcoming , though he was vague about details . 
 New information was released in September 2014 regarding his next compilation album , Nothing Has Changed , which was released in November . The album featured rare tracks and old material from his catalogue in addition to a new song titled " Sue ( Or in a Season of Crime ) " . In May 2015 , " Let 's Dance " was announced to be reissued as a yellow vinyl single on 16 July 2015 in conjunction with the " David Bowie is " exhibition at the Australian Centre for the Moving Image in Melbourne . 
 In August 2015 , it was announced that Bowie was writing songs for a Broadway musical based on the SpongeBob SquarePants cartoon series . Bowie wrote and recorded the opening title song to the television series The Last Panthers , which aired in November 2015 . The theme that was used for The Last Panthers was also the title track for his January 2016 release Blackstar which is said to take cues from his earlier krautrock influenced work . According to The Times : " Blackstar may be the oddest work yet from Bowie " . On 7 December 2015 , Bowie 's musical Lazarus debuted in New York . His last public appearance was at opening night of the production . 
 Blackstar was released on 8 January 2016 , Bowie 's 69th birthday , and was met with critical acclaim . Following his death on 10 January , producer Tony Visconti revealed that Bowie had planned the album to be his swan song , and a " parting gift " for his fans before his death . Several reporters and critics subsequently noted that most of the lyrics on the album seem to revolve around his impending death , with CNN noting that the album " reveals a man who appears to be grappling with his own mortality " . Visconti later said that Bowie had been planning a post @-@ Blackstar album , and had written and recorded demo versions of five songs in his final weeks , suggesting that Bowie believed he had a few months left . The day following his death , online viewing of Bowie 's music skyrocketed , breaking the record for Vevo 's most viewed artist in a single day . On 15 January , Blackstar debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart ; nineteen of his albums were in the UK Top 100 Albums Chart , and thirteen singles were in the UK Top 100 Singles Chart . Blackstar also debuted at number one on album charts around the world , including Australia , France , Germany , Italy , New Zealand and the US Billboard 200 . 
 As of 11 January 2016 , more than 1 @.@ 3 million people had visited the " David Bowie Is " exhibition , making it the most successful exhibition ever staged by the Victoria and Albert Museum in terms of worldwide attendance . The museum stated that the exhibition would continue to tour , with confirmed travel to Japan in 2017 . 
 = = Acting career = = 
 The beginnings of Bowie 's acting career predate his commercial breakthrough as a musician . Studying avant @-@ garde theatre and mime under Lindsay Kemp , he was given the role of Cloud in Kemp 's 1967 theatrical production Pierrot in Turquoise ( later made into the 1970 television film The Looking Glass Murders ) . In the black @-@ and @-@ white short The Image ( 1969 ) , he played a ghostly boy who emerges from a troubled artist 's painting to haunt him . The same year , the film of Leslie Thomas 's 1966 comic novel The Virgin Soldiers saw Bowie make a brief appearance as an extra . In 1976 he earned acclaim for his first major film role , portraying Thomas Jerome Newton , an alien from a dying planet , in The Man Who Fell to Earth , directed by Nicolas Roeg . Just a Gigolo ( 1979 ) , an Anglo @-@ German co @-@ production directed by David Hemmings , saw Bowie in the lead role as Prussian officer Paul von <unk> , who , returning from World War I , is discovered by a Baroness ( Marlene Dietrich ) and put into her Gigolo Stable . 
 Bowie played Joseph Merrick in the Broadway theatre production The Elephant Man , which he undertook wearing no stage make @-@ up , and which earned high praise for his expressive performance . He played the part 157 times between 1980 and 1981 . Christiane F. – Wir Kinder vom Bahnhof Zoo , a 1981 biographical film focusing on a young girl 's drug addiction in West Berlin , featured Bowie in a cameo appearance as himself at a concert in Germany . Its soundtrack album , Christiane F. ( 1981 ) , featured much material from his Berlin Trilogy albums . Bowie starred in The Hunger ( 1983 ) , with Catherine Deneuve and Susan Sarandon . In Nagisa Oshima 's film the same year , Merry Christmas , Mr. Lawrence , based on Laurens van der Post 's novel The Seed and the Sower , Bowie played Major Jack Celliers , a prisoner of war in a Japanese internment camp . Bowie had a cameo in Yellowbeard , a 1983 pirate comedy created by Monty Python members , and a small part as Colin , the hitman in the 1985 film Into the Night . He declined to play the villain Max Zorin in the James Bond film A View to a Kill ( 1985 ) . 
 Absolute Beginners ( 1986 ) , a rock musical based on Colin MacInnes 's 1959 novel about London life , featured Bowie 's music and presented him with a minor acting role . The same year , Jim Henson 's dark fantasy Labyrinth found him with the part of Jareth , the king of the goblins . Two years later , he played Pontius Pilate in Martin Scorsese 's 1988 film The Last Temptation of Christ . Bowie portrayed a disgruntled restaurant employee opposite Rosanna Arquette in The Linguini Incident ( 1991 ) , and the mysterious FBI agent Phillip Jeffries in David Lynch 's Twin Peaks : Fire Walk with Me ( 1992 ) . He took a small but pivotal role as Andy Warhol in Basquiat , artist / director Julian Schnabel 's 1996 biopic of Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat , and co @-@ starred in Giovanni <unk> 's Spaghetti Western Il Mio West ( 1998 , released as Gunslinger 's Revenge in the US in 2005 ) as the most feared gunfighter in the region . He played the ageing gangster Bernie in Andrew Goth 's Everybody Loves Sunshine ( 1999 ) , and appeared in the TV horror serial of The Hunger . In Mr. Rice 's Secret ( 2000 ) , he played the title role as the neighbour of a terminally ill 12 @-@ year @-@ old , and the following year appeared as himself in Zoolander . 
 Bowie portrayed physicist Nikola Tesla in the Christopher Nolan film , The Prestige ( 2006 ) , which was about the bitter rivalry between two magicians in the late 19th century . In the same year , he voice @-@ acted in the animated film Arthur and the Invisibles as the powerful villain <unk> and appeared as himself in an episode of the Ricky Gervais television series Extras . In 2007 , he lent his voice to the character Lord Royal Highness in the SpongeBob 's Atlantis SquarePantis television film . In the 2008 film August , directed by Austin Chick , he played a supporting role as Ogilvie , alongside Josh Hartnett and Rip Torn , with whom he had worked in 1976 for The Man Who Fell to Earth ( 1976 ) . 
 = = Musicianship = = 
 From the time of his earliest recordings in the 1960s , Bowie employed a wide variety of musical styles . His early compositions and performances were strongly influenced by rock and rollers like Little Richard and Elvis Presley , and also the wider world of show business . He particularly strove to emulate the British musical theatre singer @-@ songwriter and actor Anthony Newley , whose vocal style he frequently adopted , and made prominent use of for his 1967 debut release , David Bowie ( to the disgust of Newley himself , who destroyed the copy he received from Bowie 's publisher ) . Bowie 's music hall fascination continued to surface sporadically alongside such diverse styles as hard rock and heavy metal , soul , psychedelic folk and pop . 
 Musicologist James Perone observes Bowie 's use of octave switches for different repetitions of the same melody , exemplified in his commercial breakthrough single , " Space Oddity " , and later in the song " Heroes " , to dramatic effect ; Perone notes that " in the lowest part of his vocal register ... his voice has an almost crooner @-@ like richness . " 
 Voice instructor Jo Thompson describes Bowie 's vocal vibrato technique as " particularly deliberate and distinctive " . Schinder and Schwartz call him " a vocalist of extraordinary technical ability , able to pitch his singing to particular effect . " Here , too , as in his stagecraft and songwriting , the singer 's role playing is evident : historiographer Michael Campbell says that Bowie 's lyrics " arrest our ear , without question . But Bowie continually shifts from person to person as he delivers them ... His voice changes dramatically from section to section . " In a 2014 analysis of 77 " top " artists ' vocal ranges , Bowie was 8th , just behind Christina Aguilera and just ahead of Paul McCartney . In addition to the guitar , Bowie was also a fluent player of the keyboard , harmonica , saxophone , <unk> , viola , cello , koto , thumb piano , drums and percussion . 
 = = Painter and art collector = = 
 Bowie was also a painter . One of his paintings sold at auction in late 1990 for $ 500 , and the cover for his 1995 album Outside is a close @-@ up of a self @-@ portrait ( from a series of five ) he painted that same year . He was invited to join the editorial board of the journal Modern Painters in 1998 , and participated in the Nat Tate art hoax later that year . In 1999 , in an interview to the BBC , he said " The only thing I buy obsessively and addictively is art " . His art collection , which included works by Damien Hurst , Henry Moore and Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat among others , was valued at over £ 10m in mid @-@ 2016 . This collection is due to be sold off at auction in late 2016 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Bowie married Mary Angela Barnett on 19 March 1970 at Bromley Register Office in Bromley , London . Their son Duncan , born on 30 May 1971 , was at first known as Zowie . Bowie and Angela divorced on 8 February 1980 in Switzerland . 
 On 24 April 1992 , Bowie married the Somali @-@ American model Iman in a private ceremony in Lausanne . The wedding was later solemnised on 6 June in Florence . They had one daughter , Alexandria " Lexi " Zahra Jones , born in August 2000 . The couple resided primarily in New York City and London , as well as owning an apartment in Sydney 's Elizabeth Bay . 
 = = = Sexuality = = = 
 Bowie declared himself gay in an interview with Michael Watts for a 1972 issue of Melody Maker , coinciding with his campaign for stardom as Ziggy Stardust . According to Buckley , " If Ziggy confused both his creator and his audience , a big part of that confusion centred on the topic of sexuality " . In a September 1976 interview with Playboy , Bowie said , " It 's true — I am a bisexual . But I can 't deny that I 've used that fact very well . I suppose it 's the best thing that ever happened to me " . According to his first wife , Angie , Bowie had a relationship with Mick Jagger . 
 In a 1983 interview with Rolling Stone , Bowie said his public declaration of bisexuality was " the biggest mistake I ever made " and " I was always a closet heterosexual " . On other occasions , he said his interest in homosexual and bisexual culture had been more a product of the times and the situation in which he found himself than of his own feelings . 
 Blender asked Bowie in 2002 whether he still believed his public declaration was his biggest mistake . After a long pause , he said , " it was a lot tougher [ here ] in America [ than in Europe ] . I had no problem with people knowing I was bisexual . But I had no inclination to hold any banners nor be a representative of any group of people " . Bowie said he wanted to be a songwriter and performer rather than a headline for his bisexuality , and in " puritanical " America , " I think it stood in the way of so much I wanted to do " . 
 Buckley wrote that Bowie " mined sexual intrigue for its ability to shock " , and was probably " never gay , nor even consistently actively bisexual " , instead experimenting " out of a sense of curiosity and a genuine allegiance with the ' transgressional ' " . Biographer Christopher Sandford said , according to Mary Finnigan — with whom Bowie had an affair in 1969 — the singer and his first wife Angie " created their bisexual fantasy " . Sandford wrote that Bowie " made a positive fetish of repeating the quip that he and his wife had met while ' fucking the same bloke ' ... Gay sex was always an anecdotal and laughing matter . That Bowie 's actual tastes swung the other way is clear from even a partial tally of his affairs with women " . The BBC 's Mark Easton wrote in 2016 that Britain was " far more tolerant of difference " and that gay rights , such as same @-@ sex marriage , and gender equality would not have " enjoyed the broad support they do today without Bowie 's androgynous challenge all those years ago " . 
 = = = Religion and spirituality = = = 
 Over the years , Bowie made numerous references to religions and to his evolving spirituality . Beginning in 1967 , he showed an interest in Buddhism ; after a few months ' study at Tibet House in London , he was told by a Lama , " You don 't want to be Buddhist . ... You should follow music " . By 1975 Bowie admitted , " I felt totally , absolutely alone . And I probably was alone because I pretty much had abandoned God " . 
 After Bowie married Iman in a private ceremony in 1992 , he said they knew that their " real marriage , sanctified by God , had to happen in a church in Florence " . Earlier that year , he knelt on stage at The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert and recited the Lord 's Prayer before a TV audience of up to one billion people . In 1993 , Bowie said he had an " undying " belief in the " unquestionable " existence of God . Interviewed in 2005 , Bowie said whether God exists " is not a question that can be answered . ... I 'm not quite an atheist and it worries me . There 's that little bit that holds on : ' Well , I 'm almost an atheist . Give me a couple of months . ... I 've nearly got it right ' " . In his will , Bowie stipulated that he be cremated and his ashes scattered in Bali " in accordance with the Buddhist rituals " . 
 " Questioning my spiritual life has always been germane " to Bowie 's songwriting . " Station to Station " is " very much concerned with the Stations of the Cross " ; the song specifically references Kabbalah . Bowie called the album " extremely dark ... the nearest album to a magick treatise that I 've written " . Earthling showed " the abiding need in me to vacillate between atheism or a kind of gnosticism ... What I need is to find a balance , spiritually , with the way I live and my demise . " Released shortly before his death , " Lazarus " — from his final album , Blackstar — began with the words , " Look up here , I ’ m in Heaven " . 
 = = = Politics = = = 
 In 1976 , speaking as The Thin White Duke , Bowie 's persona at the time , and " at least partially tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " , he made statements that expressed support for fascism and perceived admiration for Adolf Hitler in interviews with Playboy , NME and a Swedish publication . Bowie was quoted as saying : " Britain is ready for a fascist leader ... I think Britain could benefit from a fascist leader . After all , fascism is really nationalism ... I believe very strongly in fascism , people have always responded with greater efficiency under a regimental leadership . " He was also quoted as saying : " Adolf Hitler was one of the first rock stars " and " You 've got to have an extreme right front come up and sweep everything off its feet and tidy everything up . " Bowie later retracted these comments in an interview with Melody Maker in October 1977 , blaming them on mental instability caused by his drug problems at the time , saying : " I was out of my mind , totally , completely crazed . " 
 In the 1980s and 1990s , Bowie 's public statements shifted sharply towards anti @-@ racism and anti @-@ fascism . In an interview with MTV in 1983 , Bowie criticised the channel for not providing enough coverage of black musicians , and the music videos for " China Girl " and " Let 's Dance " were described by Bowie as a " very simple , very direct " statement against racism . The album Tin Machine took a more direct stance against fascism and Neo @-@ Nazism , and was criticised for being too preachy . 
 In 2016 , filmmaker and activist Michael Moore said he had wanted to use " Panic in Detroit " for his 1997 documentary The Big One ; denied at first , he was given the rights after calling Bowie personally . " I 've read stuff since his death saying that he wasn 't that political and he stayed away from politics . But that wasn 't the conversation that I had with him . " 
 = = Death = = 
 On 10 January 2016 , two days after his 69th birthday and the release of the album Blackstar , Bowie died from liver cancer in his New York City apartment . He had been diagnosed 18 months earlier but had not made the news of his illness public . The Belgian theatre director Ivo van Hove , who had worked with the singer on his Off @-@ Broadway musical Lazarus , explained that Bowie was unable to attend rehearsals due to the progression of the disease . He noted that Bowie had kept working during the illness . 
 Bowie 's producer Tony Visconti wrote : 
 He always did what he wanted to do . And he wanted to do it his way and he wanted to do it the best way . His death was no different from his life — a work of art . He made Blackstar for us , his parting gift . I knew for a year this was the way it would be . I wasn 't , however , prepared for it . He was an extraordinary man , full of love and life . He will always be with us . For now , it is appropriate to cry . 
 Following Bowie 's death , fans gathered at impromptu street shrines . At the mural of Bowie in his birthplace of Brixton , south London , which shows him in his Aladdin Sane character , fans laid flowers and sang his songs . Other memorial sites included Berlin , Los Angeles , and outside his apartment in New York . After news of his death , sales of his albums and singles soared . Bowie had insisted that he did not want a funeral , and according to his death certificate he was cremated in New Jersey on 12 January . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Bowie 's songs and stagecraft brought a new dimension to popular music in the early 1970s , strongly influencing both its immediate forms and its subsequent development . Bowie was a pioneer of glam rock , according to music historians Schinder and Schwartz , who credited Marc Bolan and Bowie with creating the genre . At the same time , he inspired the innovators of the punk rock music movement . When punk musicians were " noisily reclaiming the three @-@ minute pop song in a show of public defiance " , biographer David Buckley wrote that " Bowie almost completely abandoned traditional rock instrumentation . " Bowie 's record company promoted his unique status in popular music with the slogan , " There is old wave , there is new wave , and there is Bowie " . Musicologist James Perone credited him with having " brought sophistication to rock music " , and critical reviews frequently acknowledged the intellectual depth of his work and influence . 
 As described by John Peel , " The one distinguishing feature about early @-@ 70s progressive rock was that it didn 't progress . Before Bowie came along , people didn 't want too much change " . Buckley called the era " bloated , self @-@ important , leather @-@ clad , self @-@ satisfied " ; then Bowie " subverted the whole notion of what it was to be a rock star " . 
 After Bowie there has been no other pop icon of his stature , because the pop world that produces these rock gods doesn 't exist any more . ... The fierce partisanship of the cult of Bowie was also unique — its influence lasted longer and has been more creative than perhaps almost any other force within pop fandom . 
 Buckley called Bowie " both star and icon . The vast body of work he has produced ... has created perhaps the biggest cult in popular culture . ... His influence has been unique in popular culture — he has permeated and altered more lives than any comparable figure . " 
 Through continual reinvention , his influence broadened and extended . Biographer Thomas Forget added , " Because he has succeeded in so many different styles of music , it is almost impossible to find a popular artist today that has not been influenced by David Bowie . " In 2000 , Bowie was voted by other music stars as the " most influential artist of all time " in a poll by NME . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian wrote that Bowie was confirmed by 1980 to be " the most important and influential artist since the Beatles " . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph stated that Bowie had " one of the supreme careers in popular music , art and culture of the 20th century " and " he was too inventive , too mercurial , too strange for all but his most devoted fans to keep up with " . The BBC 's Mark Easton argued that Bowie provided fuel for " the creative powerhouse that Britain has become " by challenging future generations " to aim high , to be ambitious and provocative , to take risks " . Easton concluded that Bowie had " changed the way the world sees Britain . And the way Britain sees itself " . 
 Numerous figures from the music industry whose careers Bowie had influenced paid tribute to him following his death ; panegyrics on Twitter also came from outside the entertainment industry and pop culture , such as those from the Vatican , namely Cardinal Gianfranco <unk> , who quoted " Space Oddity " , and the German Foreign Office , which thanked Bowie for his part in the Fall of the Berlin Wall and referenced " Heroes " . At the 58th Annual Grammy Awards , Lady Gaga performed a medley of nine Bowie songs . At the 2016 Brit Awards , Annie Lennox called Bowie " a quintessential visionary " and " the ultimate iconoclast " before his friend Gary Oldman received the Brits icon award on behalf of the singer and his family . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Bowie 's 1969 commercial breakthrough , the song " Space Oddity " , won him an Ivor Novello Special Award For Originality . For his performance in the 1976 science fiction film The Man Who Fell to Earth , he won a Saturn Award for Best Actor . In the ensuing decades he has been honoured with numerous awards for his music and its accompanying videos , receiving , among others , two Grammy Awards and four Brit Awards — winning Best British Male Artist twice , the award for Outstanding Contribution to Music in 1996 , and the Brits Icon award in 2016 . 
 In 1999 , Bowie was made a Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French government . He received an honorary doctorate from Berklee College of Music the same year . He declined the royal honour of Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) in 2000 , and turned down a knighthood in 2003 . Bowie later stated " I would never have any intention of accepting anything like that . I seriously don 't know what it 's for . It 's not what I spent my life working for . " 
 Throughout his career he sold an estimated 140 million records worldwide . In the United Kingdom , he was awarded 9 platinum , 11 gold and 8 silver albums , and in the United States , 5 platinum and 7 gold . Five of Bowie 's studio albums appear on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . 
 In the BBC 's 2002 poll of the 100 Greatest Britons , he was ranked 29 . In 2004 , Rolling Stone magazine ranked him 39th on their list of the 100 Greatest Rock Artists of All Time . Bowie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 17 January 1996 and named a member of the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in June 2013 . In 2016 , Rolling Stone proclaimed Bowie " the greatest rock star ever " . 
 In 2008 , the spider <unk> <unk> was named in his honour . On 5 January 2015 , a main @-@ belt asteroid was named <unk> <unk> . On 13 January 2016 , Belgian amateur astronomers at <unk> Public Observatory in conjunction with radio station Studio Brussels created a " Bowie asterism " of seven stars which had been in the vicinity of Mars at the time of Bowie 's death ; when appropriately connected they form the lightning bolt on Bowie 's face on the cover of his Aladdin Sane album . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Selected film roles 
 = Silent Hill 2 = 
 Silent Hill 2 is a survival horror video game published by Konami for the PlayStation 2 and developed by Team Silent , a production group within Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo . The game was released in September 2001 as the second installment in the Silent Hill series . An extended version of the game was published for Xbox in December of the same year , containing a short bonus scenario and other minor additions . It was later ported to the Microsoft Windows operating system in 2002 . A remastered high @-@ definition version of the game was released for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 in 2012 as part of the Silent Hill HD Collection . 
 While set in the series ' eponymous fictional American town , Silent Hill 2 is not a direct sequel to the first Silent Hill game . Instead , it centers on James Sunderland , who enters the town after receiving a letter written by his deceased wife , saying she is waiting for him in their " special place " in Silent Hill . Joined by Maria , who strongly resembles her , he searches for her and discovers the truth about her death . Additional material in re @-@ releases and ports included Born from a Wish , a sub @-@ scenario which focuses on Maria before she and James meet . 
 Silent Hill 2 uses a third @-@ person view and gameplay places a greater emphasis on finding items and solving riddles than combat . Psychological aspects such as the gradual disappearance of Mary 's letter were added to the game . More humanoid than their counterparts in the preceding game , some of the monsters were designed as a reflection of James ' subconscious . References to real world history , films and literary works can also be found in the game . 
 Silent Hill 2 received critical acclaim from critics . Within the month of its release in North America , Japan , and Europe , over one million copies were sold , with the greatest sales in North America . English @-@ language critics praised the atmosphere , graphics , story and monster designs of Silent Hill 2 , but criticized the controls as difficult to use although much improved than its predecessor . Since its release , the game appeared on several critics ' top lists for its story and use of metaphors , psychological horror and taboo topics as well as its soundtrack / sound design . It is now considered by many critics to be the greatest horror game of all time . 
 Due to the success of Silent Hill 2 , a sequel titled Silent Hill 3 was released in 2003 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The objective of Silent Hill 2 is to guide the player character , James Sunderland , through the monster @-@ filled town of Silent Hill as he searches for his deceased wife . The game features a third @-@ person view , with various camera angles . The default control for Silent Hill 2 has James moving in the direction that he is facing when the player tilts the analog stick upwards . Silent Hill 2 does not use a heads @-@ up display ; to check James ' health , location , and items , the player must enter the pause @-@ game menu to review his status . Throughout the game , James collects maps , which can only be read if there is sufficient light or when his flashlight is on . He also updates relevant maps to reflect locked doors , clues , and obstructions , and writes down the content of all documents for future reference . 
 Much of the gameplay consists of navigating the town and finding keys or other items to bypass doors or other obstructions , with less focus on killing enemies . Occasionally puzzles will be presented , often with riddles left for the player to interpret . The difficulty levels of the enemies and the puzzles are determined independently by the player before starting the game . James keeps a radio with him , which alerts him to the presence of creatures by emitting static , allowing him to detect them even through the thick fog . He also tilts his head in the direction of a nearby item or monster . For combat , he finds three melee weapons and three firearms over the course of the game , with another two melee weapons unlocked during replays . " Health " restoratives and ammunition can be found throughout the game . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 While not a direct sequel to the events and characters of the first Silent Hill game , Silent Hill 2 takes place in the series ' namesake town , located in the northeastern United States . Silent Hill 2 is set in another area of the town , and explores some of Silent Hill 's backstory . The town draws upon the psyche of its visitors and ultimately forms alternative versions of the town , which differ depending on the character . The concept behind the town was " a small , rural town in America " ; to make the setting more realistic , some buildings and rooms lack furnishings . 
 = = = Letter from Silent Heaven = = = 
 James Sunderland ( Guy <unk> ) is the protagonist of the main scenario of Silent Hill 2 . He comes to the town after receiving a letter from his wife Mary ( Monica Taylor Horgan ) , who died of an illness three years before . While exploring the town , he encounters Maria ( also Monica Taylor Horgan ) , who strongly resembles Mary except for a different personality and clothing ; Angela Orosco ( Donna Burke ) , a teenage runaway on a search for her mother ; Eddie Dombrowski ( David <unk> ) , another teenage runaway who was somehow brought to the town ; and Laura ( Jacquelyn <unk> ) , an eight @-@ year @-@ old who has met and befriended Mary . 
 After arriving in Silent Hill , James decides to search a local park , where he meets Maria , who claims that she has never met or seen Mary and , as she is scared , he allows her to follow him . While looking for Laura inside a hospital , James and Maria are ambushed by the monster Pyramid Head , and Maria is killed by him just as James escapes ; He resumes his task of finding Mary , and chooses to search a local hotel , where he and Mary spent their vacation . On the way , James finds Maria alive and unharmed in a locked room . She claims ignorance to their previous encounter and discusses elements of James and Mary 's past that only Mary would know . James then sets off to find a way to release Maria from the room and eventually returns to find her dead again . Later on , he rescues Angela from a monster ; she confesses that her father used to sexually abuse her , and a newspaper clipping James can find implies she killed him in self @-@ defense before coming to Silent Hill . He also confronts Eddie , who admits to maiming a bully and killing a dog before fleeing to Silent Hill ; attacked by Eddie , James kills him in self @-@ defense . At this point it is revealed that in Eddie 's version of Silent Hill all the monsters experienced by James are experienced by Eddie as people laughing and taunting him to violence . 
 At the hotel , James locates a videotape which depicts him killing his dying wife . At this point in the game , the letter from Mary vanishes from the envelope . In another room , a final meeting with Angela sees her giving up on life as she is unable to cope with her trauma and guilt any longer . She walks into a fire and is not seen again . At this point it is revealed that in Angela 's version of Silent Hill the town is always on fire . 
 James later encounters two Pyramid Heads , along with an alive Maria , who is killed again . James realizes that Pyramid Head was created because he needed someone to punish him , and all of the monsters have been manifestations of James ' psyche . The envelope from Mary disappears and both Pyramid Heads commit suicide . James heads to the hotel 's rooftop ; depending on choices made by the player throughout the game , he encounters either Mary or Maria disguised as her . 
 Silent Hill 2 features six endings , all presented as equally possible ; Konami has kept their canonicity ambiguous . In " Leave " , James has one last meeting with Mary , reads her letter , and leaves the town with Laura . " In Water " sees James commit suicide by driving his car off a cliff . The " Maria " ending sees Mary as the woman on the rooftop , who has not forgiven James for killing her . After her defeat , James dismisses her as a hallucination and then leaves the town with an alive Maria , who briefly coughs , suggesting she will become sick just as Mary did , and the cycle will repeat . The other three endings are only available in replay games , including " Rebirth " , in which James plans to resurrect Mary using arcane objects collected throughout the game , and two joke endings : " Dog " , where James discovers that a dog has apparently been controlling all the events of the game , and " UFO " , where James is abducted by extraterrestrials with the help of the first game 's protagonist , Harry Mason . 
 = = = Born from a Wish = = = 
 Born from a Wish is a side @-@ story scenario in the special editions and re @-@ releases of the game in which the player takes control of Maria shortly before she and James meet at Silent Hill . After waking up in the town with a gun and contemplating suicide , she resolves to find someone . She eventually encounters a local mansion , where she hears the voice of its owner , Ernest Baldwin . Ernest refuses to let Maria into the room where he is and will only talk to her through its closed door . After Maria completes tasks for him , Ernest warns her about James , whom he describes as a " bad man " . After Maria opens the door to Ernest 's room and finds it empty , she leaves the mansion . At the conclusion of the scenario , Maria contemplates suicide , but ultimately resolves to find James . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Influences and design = = = 
 Development of Silent Hill 2 started in June 1999 , directly after the completion of its predecessor . The game was created by Team Silent , a production group within Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo . The story was conceived by CGI director Takayoshi Sato , who based it on Russian author Fyodor Dostoyevsky 's novel Crime and Punishment ( 1866 ) , with individual members of the team collaborating on the actual scenario . The main writing was done by Hiroyuki Owaku and Sato , the latter of which provided the dialog for the female characters . Silent Hill 2 's budget has been estimated at US $ 7 – 10 million by Sato , in contrast to the previous installment 's estimated one of US $ 3 – 5 million . The decision to produce a sequel to Silent Hill was partly a financial one , as it had been commercially successful , and partly a creative one , as the team had faced difficulties while working on the game . The team was given a small window to settle on a platform and could not gather information on the then @-@ unannounced GameCube and Xbox consoles , which led them to begin production of the game for the PlayStation 2 . Producer Akihiro Imamura stated that the decision was also influenced by " a wish from the business section that we move rapidly on the PS2 . You know , it is currently the market focus " . Imamura read all comments about the original game and kept them in mind when working on Silent Hill 2 . He estimated that a total of fifty people worked on the game : while the creative team from the first game remained , they had to bring in thirty people from Konami Computer Entertainment Tokyo . Developed at the same time , the PlayStation 2 version of Silent Hill 2 and its Xbox port debuted at the March 2001 Tokyo Game Show to positive reaction . 
 Silent Hill 2 shared the same atmosphere of psychological horror as the first Silent Hill game . As the developers already had a rough sense of the game 's environment , they focused on the game 's plot first , in contrast to the process of the first game . The hardware of the PlayStation 2 allowed the developers to create improved fog and shadow special effects ; for example , as a monster approaches the player character , its shadow cast on the wall by the flashlight grows . When dealing with the camera angles of the game , the team struggled with a balance between those that stayed true to the creative vision and those that did not hamper gameplay . Psychological elements , such as the gradual disappearance of Mary 's letter and symbolic holes , were incorporated into the game . The team wanted Silent Hill 2 's protagonist to " reflect [ the ] evil , " against which the protagonist of the first game battles . 
 For the art style of the game , the team drew on a variety of influences : the work of film directors David Cronenberg , David Fincher , David Lynch and Alfred Hitchcock , along with films similar to the 1990 psychological thriller / horror film Jacob 's Ladder and painters such as Francis Bacon , Rembrandt and Andrew Wyeth . Early in the project , they studied the 1996 video game Tomb Raider 's creation of 3D environments . Other influences on the game included the 1992 survival horror video game Alone in the Dark , the first Silent Hill game , and the Japanese comic <unk> by <unk> . When working on the character designs , Sato and his team sketched human faces and various expressions . To gain a better sense of the characters ' facial structures , they drew the characters ' profiles from various angles , before creating wire @-@ frame models , each consisting of six thousand polygons ; they then completed the model with textures . Data for the character animation was taken through motion capture , and using Softimage , they animated the characters . Masahiro Ito designed the monsters of Silent Hill 2 ; " soured flesh " was the concept behind their appearance . The monsters were also to incorporate " an element of humanity . " For the most part , the monsters reflect the subconscious of the protagonist ; for example , the monster Pyramid Head was based on the executioners of the town 's fictional history and is intended to be a punisher for James . Two exceptions to this theme are the " Abstract Daddy " , a reflection of the subconscious and memories of Angela , and the " Creepers " , which are also seen in the first game . 
 Silent Hill 2 also incorporates some references to real @-@ life events . In the original scenario , the developers designed Maria and James with double personalities : Maria 's other personality was " Mary " , a reference to Mary Jane Kelly , Jack the Ripper 's last victim , while James ' was " Joseph " , a reference to one of the Jack the Ripper suspects . Eddie Dombrowski 's name was taken from actor Eddie Murphy back during the beginning phases of production when Eddie was originally designed with a pleasantly optimistic personality . The name of Angela Orosco was derived from Angela Bennett , the name of the protagonist in the 1995 film The Net , and Laura 's from the 1970 novel No Language But a Cry by Richard D 'Ambrosio . The developers satirized guns in American society by allowing James to find a handgun in a shopping cart . There are also indications that the layout of Silent Hill has been based on the town of San Bruno , California , to a certain extent . 
 The story touches upon many mature themes and taboo subjects , including morality , grief , abuse ( physical , sexual , etc . ) suicide , mental illness and mental health , death , trauma , rape , guilt , existentialism , bullying , domestic violence , incest , loneliness , body image , murder , substance abuse , pain and suffering , loss of loved ones , relationship issues , euthanasia , self @-@ loathing , sexuality , etc . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Akira Yamaoka composed the music of Silent Hill 2 . At his home , Yamaoka took three days to write the music for " Theme of Laura " , the main theme of Silent Hill 2 , by combining " a sad melody " and " a strong beat " , although he does not consider a melody to be the " most important " element of a music piece . He wanted to evoke emotion from the player with the music . Silent Hill 2 makes extensive use of sound effects ranging from screams to footsteps on broken glass . In charge of the game 's fifty sound effects , Yamaoka wanted to surprise the player with different sounds and create an unsettling environment . He also incorporated occasional silence , commenting that " selecting moments of silence is another way of producing sound . " 
 Konami published Silent Hill 2 Original Soundtrack in Japan on October 3 , 2001 . Eight tracks ( " Theme of Laura " , " Null Moon " , " Love Psalm " , " True " , " Promise " , " <unk> in <unk> Air " , " Laura Plays the Piano " and " Overdose Delusion " ) appeared in the 2006 PlayStation Portable release The Silent Hill Experience . At the 2006 Play ! A Video Game Symphony concert in Chicago , Illinois , Yamaoka performed music from the series with a full @-@ size orchestra ; among the pieces performed was " Theme of Laura " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Silent Hill 2 was first released for the PlayStation 2 in North America on September 24 , 2001 , in Japan on September 27 , 2001 , and in Europe on November 23 , 2001 . The original European edition also included a second disc : a " Making @-@ of " DVD video featuring trailers , an artwork gallery and a documentary on the title 's development . 
 = = = Extended Version = = = 
 An extended version of the game was published for Xbox in North America on December 20 , 2001 , Japan on February 22 , 2002 , and Europe on October 14 , 2002 . Each region had a different subtitle for the game : Saigo no Uta ( <unk> , lit . " Poem of the Last Moment " ) in Japan , Restless Dreams in North America , and Inner Fears in Europe . This edition contained the short bonus scenario , Born from a Wish and other minor enhancements . This revised version was ported back to the PlayStation 2 and subtitled Director 's Cut in Europe , but did not get a subtitle in North America , and was just released under the " Greatest Hits " banner . Creature Labs ported this edition to Windows , which Konami released in December 2002 . Added features in the PC version include the ability to quicksave and watch trailers for Silent Hill 3 . 
 In 2006 , Konami re @-@ released the extended version of Silent Hill 2 with its indirect PS2 sequels , Silent Hill 3 and Silent Hill 4 : The Room , in a bundle entitled The Silent Hill Collection in Europe and Japan in 2006 . Silent Hill HD Collection , a compilation of remastered high @-@ definition editions of Silent Hill 2 and 3 , was released for the PlayStation 3 and the Xbox 360 on March 20 , 2012 ; it also contains new voice actors for the characters of both games , along with the option in Silent Hill 2 to listen to the original ones , but was notable for multiple bugs and technical issues upon launch which were barely ironed out following the release of online patches . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Silent Hill 2 was positively received , selling over one million copies in the month of its release in North America , Japan and Europe , with the most units sold in North America . Rating aggregation site Game Rankings shows an average rating of 85 @.@ 82 % for the PS2 version , 82 @.@ 40 % for the Xbox version , and 71 @.@ 30 % for the PC version . Rating aggregation site Metacritic shows an average rating of 89 out of 100 for the PS2 version , 84 out of 100 for the Xbox version , and 70 out of 100 for the PC version . 
 Silent Hill 2 has received praise from video game journalists at the time of its release and in retrospect . Andy Greenwald of Spin magazine praised it as a frightening , though " restrained " game . Jon Thompson of Allgame stated : " Silent Hill 2 feels a bit rushed , and although it might not live up to the dizzying horror of the first game , it packs enough of its own punch to make it a worthy sequel . " IGN 's Doug Perry wrote : " It 's frightening , deep , clever , and tries to improve the genre , if just a little , and in the end , that 's all I really want in a survival horror game . " Joe Fielder of GameSpot concluded , " Silent Hill 2 is a much prettier , somewhat smarter but less @-@ compelling game than the original . " In Replay : The History of Video Games ( 2010 ) , <unk> Donovan described Silent Hill 2 as the " high point " of the series . In a retrospective article on the survival horror genre , IGN writer Jim Sterling praised the game 's plot as " one of the finest examples of narrative construction in gaming to this day . " In another retrospective article on survival horror , fellow IGN writer Travis Fahs credited the game as a factor in the " short @-@ lived period of renewed interest in horror games . " Online game critic for the Escapist Magazine Ben " Yahtzee " Croshaw lists this game as among his top 5 favourite games of all time , praising the game for thick and unsettling atmosphere creating tension and fear for players . In his review of the game he commented , " Silent Hill 2 is the game I replay every now and again to remind myself that for all the shiny brown , quick @-@ time event , RPG element space marines , gaming is still worth defending , " and that , " It 's a fascinating voyage of pain and despair that leaves you emotionally drained and satisfied . " 
 The graphics and atmosphere of Silent Hill 2 received praise from reviewers , who highlighted the smooth transitions from computer @-@ generated ( CG ) to in @-@ game cutscenes and the sense of claustrophobia caused by the fog . On the other hand , Thompson felt that the grainy image effects and dense fog hid the details of the environment , while Fielder wrote that the exterior environments " rarely push the PlayStation 2 's graphical capabilities " . Character animation was considered realistic by reviewers , though James ' animation in the CG sometimes appeared " marionette " -like , according to Perry . The voice acting received mixed responses from reviewers divided over whether it was well done with an improved script , or hampered by the script . Reviewers enjoyed the monster designs , although some found the monsters less frightening due to the abundance of ammunition , and easily avoided . Reviewers found the camera , though improved , still difficult when battling monsters which hung from the ceiling — concerns echoed by reviewers of the PC version . The soundtrack and sound effects were considered by reviewers to be effective in creating suspense , though Thompson considered them sometimes " a bit forced and contrived " . The puzzles were generally seen as not overly challenging by reviewers , though Thompson found them generally easy and GameSpy 's David <unk> wrote that they were sometimes illogical . Less well @-@ received was the combat , criticized for its lack of challenge and easily defeated monsters and bosses . 
 Reactions to the Xbox port were also positive . Reviewers have written that the PlayStation 2 and Xbox versions were mostly similar , except for the Born from a Wish side @-@ scenario found on the Xbox version . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed called Born from a Wish " more like a demo than anything " , while Fielder described it as " a commendable extra " . Both felt that it could be completed in around an hour and did not add much to the game . The PC port , in contrast , received mixed reaction . Allen Rausch of GameSpy considered the PC port overall to be " [ a ] fantastic translation of Konami 's stylish and scary survival @-@ horror game " . IGN 's Ivan <unk> advised against playing the game with the keyboard , and rated the game " Great " . Conversely , Ron Dulin , another reviewer for GameSpot , wrote : " Not even the game 's foggy atmosphere is thick enough to hide Silent Hill 2 's problems . " 
 The Silent Hill HD Collection received an average score of 70 / 100 from Metacritic for the PlayStation 3 release and 69 / 100 for the Xbox 360 release , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . According to Play , " Technically the collection is lacking , but there 's no denying the quality of the games . " The Official PlayStation Magazine stated : " As an exercise in Playstation fear , it doesn 't come any purer than this . " Conversely , GameTrailers expressed disappointment with the collection , writing : " The inconsistent presentation , compromises to the original developer ’ s vision , and lack of any interesting bonus features make this compilation ’ s $ 40 price even more unnerving than its games . " The new voice acting drew a range of reactions , from praise as a general improvement over the originals , to mixed results . Several reviewers commented on the absence of other Silent Hill games , such as Silent Hill 4 : The Room and Silent Hill : Origins . Glitches and issues with the lip @-@ synching were also noted . 
 Silent Hill 2 is today considered by many to be the greatest horror game of all time due to its story and use of metaphors , psychological horror , and taboo topics . It ranked 1st on X @-@ Play 's list of the scariest games of all time in 2006 . IGN listed it as one of the five best horror video games created after 2000 in 2009 , and one of the 12 greatest PlayStation 2 games of all time . Additionally , in 2010 , IGN ranked it as 54th in its top 100 PS2 games ; in a retrospective by GamePro , it was the 26th best game for the PS2 . In 2008 , GamesRadar placed it on its list of the 15 best " videogame stories " ever , describing it as " a punishing tale not easily matched " . In 2009 , Wired News listed it as the 11th most influential game of the decade for its emphasis on psychological horror and exploration of taboo topics such as incest and domestic abuse , rather than gore . In 2012 , a top video games of all @-@ time list by G4 television network ranked the game at the 85th place . That same year , the game 's narrative was ranked at 1st place on GamesRadar 's list of " The Best Videogame Stories Ever " . More recently , Silent Hill 2 was listed as number two top horror game of all time in the October 2014 issue of Game Informer , and number 8 on GameTrailers 's " Top Ten Twos " list of the best second games on franchises , in 2015 . 
 = History of hip @-@ hop dance = 
 The History of Hip @-@ Hop dance encompasses the people and events since the late 1960s that have contributed to the development of the early hip @-@ hop dance styles : uprock , breaking , locking , roboting , boogaloo , and popping . Black Americans and Latino Americans created uprock and breaking in New York City . Black Americans in California created locking , roboting , boogaloo , and popping — collectively referred to as the funk styles . All of these dance styles are different stylistically . They share common ground in their street origins and in their improvisational nature . 
 More than 40 years old , hip @-@ hop dance became widely known after the first professional street @-@ based dance crews formed in the 1970s in the United States . The most influential groups were Rock Steady Crew , New York City Breakers , The Lockers , and The Electric Boogaloos who are responsible for the spread of breaking , locking , and popping respectively . The Brooklyn @-@ based dance style uprock influenced breaking early in its development . Boogaloo gained more exposure because it is the namesake of the Electric Boogaloos crew . Uprock , roboting , and boogaloo are respected dance styles but none of them are as mainstream or popular as breaking , locking , and popping . 
 Parallel with the evolution of hip @-@ hop music , hip @-@ hop social dancing emerged from breaking and the funk styles into different forms . Dances from the 1990s such as the Running Man , the Worm , and the Cabbage Patch entered the mainstream and became fad dances . After the millennium , newer social dances such as the Cha Cha Slide and the Dougie also caught on and became very popular . 
 Hip @-@ hop dance is not a studio @-@ derived style . Street dancers developed it in urban neighborhoods without a formal process . All of the early substyles and social dances were brought about through a combination of events including inspiration from James Brown , DJ Kool Herc 's invention of the break beat , the formation of dance crews , and Don Cornelius ' creation of the television show Soul Train . 
 = = Birth of breaking = = 
 According to hip @-@ hop activist Afrika Bambaataa and b @-@ boy Richard " Crazy Legs " Colón , the purest hip @-@ hop dance style , breaking ( commonly called " breakdancing " ) , began in the early 1970s as elaborations on how James Brown danced to his song " Get on the Good Foot " . People mimicked these moves in their living rooms , in hallways , and at parties . It was at these parties that breaking flourished and developed with the help of a young Clive Campbell . Campbell , better known as DJ Kool Herc , was a Jamaican @-@ born DJ who frequently spun records at neighborhood teenage parties in the Bronx . Jeff Chang , in his book Can 't Stop Won 't Stop ( 2005 ) , describes DJ Kool Herc 's eureka moment in this way : 
 Herc carefully studied the dancers . " I was smoking cigarettes and I was waiting for the records to finish . And I noticed people was waiting for certain parts of the record , " he says . It was an insight as profound as Ruddy Redwood 's dub discovery . The moment when the dancers really got wild was in a song 's short instrumental break , when the band would drop out and the rhythm section would get elemental . Forget melody , chorus , songs — it was all about the groove , building it , keeping it going . Like a string theorist , Herc zeroed in on the fundamental vibrating loop at the heart of the record , the break . 
 In response to this revelation , Herc developed the Merry @-@ Go @-@ Round technique to extend the breaks — the percussion interludes or instrumental solos within a longer work of music . When he played a break on one turntable , he repeated the same break on the second turntable as soon as the first was finished . He then looped these records one after the other in order to extend the break as long as he wanted : " And once they heard that , that was it , wasn 't no turning back , " Herc told Chang . " They always wanted to hear breaks after breaks after breaks after breaks . " It was during these times that the dancers , later known as break @-@ boys or b @-@ boys , would perform what is known as breaking . 
 Breaking started out strictly as toprock , footwork @-@ oriented dance moves performed while standing up . <unk> usually serves as the opening to a breaker 's performance before transitioning into other dance moves performed on the floor . A separate dance style that influenced toprock is uprock , also called rocking or Brooklyn uprock , because it comes from Brooklyn , New York . The uprock dance style has its roots in gangs . Although it looks similar to toprock , uprock is danced with a partner and is more aggressive , involving fancy footwork , shuffles , hitting motions , and movements that mimic fighting . When there was an issue over turf , the two warlords of the feuding gangs would uprock , and whoever won this preliminary dance battle decided where the real fight would be . Because uprock 's purpose was to moderate gang violence , it never crossed over into mainstream breaking as seen today , except for some specific moves adopted by breakers who use it as a variation for their toprock . 
 Aside from James Brown and uprock , hip @-@ hop historian Jorge " Popmaster Fabel " Pabon writes that toprock was also influenced by " tap dance , Lindy hop , salsa , Afro @-@ Cuban , and various African and Native American dances . " From toprock , breaking progressed to being more floor @-@ oriented , involving freezes , downrock , head spins , and windmills . These additions occurred due to influences from 1970s martial arts films , influences from gymnastics , and the formation of dance crews — teams of street dancers who get together to develop new moves , create dance routines , and battle other crews . One b @-@ boy move taken from gymnastics is called the flare , which was made famous by gymnast Kurt Thomas and is called the " Thomas flair " in gymnastics . 
 B @-@ boys Jamie " Jimmy D " White and Santiago " Jo Jo " Torres founded Rock Steady Crew ( RSC ) in 1977 in the Bronx . Along with Dynamic Rockers and Afrika Bambaataa 's Mighty Zulu Kings , they are one of the oldest continually active breaking crews . For others to get into the crew , they had to battle one of the Rock Steady b @-@ boys — that was their audition , so to speak . The crew flourished once it came under the leadership of b @-@ boy Richard " Crazy Legs " Colón . Crazy Legs opened a Manhattan chapter of the crew and made his friends and fellow b @-@ boys Wayne " Frosty Freeze " Frost and Kenneth " Ken Swift " Gabbert co @-@ vice presidents . RSC was instrumental in the spread of breaking 's popularity beyond New York City . They appeared in Wild Style and Beat Street — 1980s films about hip @-@ hop culture — as well as in the movie Flashdance . They also performed at the Ritz , at the Kennedy Center , and on the Jerry Lewis Telethon . In 1981 , the Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts hosted a breaking battle between Dynamic Rockers and Rock Steady Crew . The Daily News and National Geographic covered this event . In 1982 , their manager <unk> " Kool Lady " Blue organized the New York City Rap Tour , which featured Rock Steady Crew , Afrika Bambaataa , Cold Crush Brothers , the Double Dutch Girls , and Fab 5 Freddy . This tour traveled to England and France , which spread hip @-@ hop culture to these countries . In 1983 , they performed for Queen Elizabeth II at the Royal Variety Performance . The following year , they recorded a song titled " ( Hey You ) The Rock Steady Crew " , which was commercially released . RSC now has satellite crews based in Japan , the United Kingdom , and Italy . 
 = = = Capoeira debate = = = 
 Capoeira is an Afro @-@ Brazilian martial art , described by Pabon as " a form of self defense disguised as a dance . " Its influence on breaking is disputed and debated ; one side believes that breaking came from capoeira , while the other side denies this . Capoeira is hundreds of years older than breaking , and uprock is similar in purpose to capoeira in that both translate aggressive combat movements into stylized dance . Both breaking and capoeira are performed to music and , since both art forms are acrobatic , some moves look similar to each other . However , capoeira is more rule @-@ oriented . One rule in capoeira is that a capoeirista 's back can never touch the ground . In contrast , a breaker 's back is almost always on the ground , and the only rule in breaking is that you do not touch your opponent during a battle . 
 Jelon Vieira and <unk> Machado brought capoeira to the United States in the 1970s . Throughout this decade Vieira taught capoeira workshops in New York City and started a capoeira performance company called Dance Brazil that toured across the United States . In Gerard Taylor 's Capoeira : The Jogo de Angola from Luanda to Cyberspace ( 2005 ) , master capoeira teacher Mestre <unk> is quoted as saying : " Demonstrations by Maestre Jelon [ Vieira ] and <unk> Machado are considered by many to be responsible for the incorporation of capoeira movements into breakdancing . " Former Village Voice reporter Sally Banes and her colleague , photographer Martha Cooper , witnessed breaking in 1980 while covering Henry Chalfant 's photography exhibit of subway graffiti . She wrote of the dance : " Its spatial level called to mind capoeira , the spectacular Brazilian dance cum martial art form that incorporates <unk> , kicks , and feints low to the ground , but the two were dissimilar enough in shape and timing that capoeira seemed at most only a distant relative , and certainly one the breakdancers weren 't acquainted with — at least on a conscious level . " In his book Hip Hop Had a Dream ( 2008 ) , Damien Morgan states : " Breakdancing can have its origins in capoeira , because it does not focus on injuring the opponent ; it rather emphasizes skill towards your opponent , to express yourself away from violence ... in most cases , it is blatantly obvious to see some of Breakdancing 's foundations in Capoeira . " 
 Several breaking practitioners and pioneers tend to side with the camp that does not believe breaking came from capoeira . B @-@ boy Crazy Legs states : " We didn 't know what the f @-@ ck no capoeira was , man . We were in the ghetto ! " According to Pabon , " Unlike the popularity of the martial arts films , capoeira was not seen in the Bronx jams until the 1990s . Top rockin ' seems to have developed gradually and unintentionally , leaving space for growth and new additions , until it evolved into a codified form . " B @-@ boy crew <unk> Rockers adds : " Despite of [ sic ] many rumours and opinions Breaking didn 't originate from Capoeira but during the last few years many moves , steps and freezes of this Brazilian ( <unk> ) dance have inspired more and more B @-@ Girls and B @-@ Boys who integrated them into their dance . " B @-@ boy Ken Swift was breaking long before he saw <unk> : " In ' 78 I started [ breaking ] and I didn 't see it [ capoeira ] til ' 92 ... I was around , too — I was in Brooklyn , Bronx , Queens , I went around and I didn 't see it . What we saw was Kung Fu — we saw Kung Fu from the 42nd Street theaters . So those were our inspirations ... when we did the Kung Fu sh @-@ t we switched it up and we put this B @-@ boy flavor into it ... " 
 = = Funk styles = = 
 While breaking was developing in New York , other styles of dance were developing in California . Unlike breaking , the funk styles — which originated in the 1970s in California — were not originally hip @-@ hop dance styles : they were danced to funk music rather than hip @-@ hop music , and they were not associated with the other cultural pillars of hip @-@ hop ( DJing , graffiti writing , and MCing ) . The funk styles are actually slightly older than breaking due to fact that boogaloo and locking were developed in the late 1960s . 
 = = = Locking and roboting = = = 
 Like breaking , the different moves within the funk styles occurred due to the formation of crews . Don " Campbellock " Campbell created locking , and in 1973 founded The Lockers ( originally called The <unk> Dancers ) in Los Angeles . Locking is characterized by consistently freezing or " locking " in place while dancing . Campbell developed locking accidentally while pausing in between dance moves when trying to remember how to do the Funky Chicken . He developed routines based on his new style using these pauses or " locks " . Chang lists some of the other dance moves performed in locking , including " ... points , skeeters , scooby doos , stop ' n go , which @-@ away , and the fancies . " 
 The Lockers made several appearances on Soul Train — the song @-@ and @-@ dance television program featuring funk music , soul music , disco , R & B , and social dancing . They also appeared on The Carol Burnett Show , The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson , The Dick Van Dyke Show , and Saturday Night Live . Three original members of The Lockers were Toni Basil , who doubled as the group 's manager ; Charles " Charles Robot " Washington , a pioneer of roboting ; and Fred " Mr. Penguin " Berry , who played the character of Rerun on the television show What 's Happening ! ! . Berry left the group in 1976 to be on the show and was replaced by street dancer Tony " Go @-@ Go " Lewis . After The Lockers disbanded , Tony Go @-@ Go went on to open a locking school in Japan in 1985 . 
 <unk> comes from Richmond , California . Before joining The Lockers , Charles Robot had his own dance crew called The Robot Brothers . He was inspired in 1969 by a mime artist named Robert Shields , who would pantomime in front of the Hollywood Wax Museum where he worked . On October 27 , 1973 , The Jackson 5 performed " Dancing Machine " on Soul Train , which popularized roboting , but this was not the first time the dance had been performed on the show . Charles Robot had performed roboting on Soul Train two years earlier with his dance partner Angela Johnson . 
 = = = Boogaloo and popping = = = 
 The Electric Boogaloos are another funk styles crew founded in Fresno in 1977 by Sam " Boogaloo Sam " Solomon , Nate " Slide " Johnson , and Joe " Robot Joe " Thomas . Their name was originally The Electric Boogaloo Lockers , but they dropped " Lockers " the following year at the urging of their manager Jeff <unk> after the group moved from Fresno to Long Beach . Boogaloo Sam is widely credited with developing popping and boogaloo . However , there is disagreement as to whether he created the dances himself or borrowed moves from other street dancers . What is not contested is how influential he and his crew were in exposing popping and boogaloo to mainstream audiences . 
 Boogaloo is both a style of dance and a style of music . It started out as a fad dance , and several songs were released in the 1960s celebrating it including " Boogaloo Down Broadway " , " My Baby Likes to Boogaloo " , " Hey You ! Boo @-@ Ga @-@ Loo " , " Do the Boogaloo " , " Boogaloo # 3 " , and " Sock Boogaloo " . In response to this song @-@ and @-@ dance craze , Puerto Rican artists in New York City created a style of music called <unk> ( or Latin boogaloo ) that combined mambo , soul , and R & B. Singer Joe Cuba was a pioneer of this style . 
 Although boogaloo was already a fad dance and a music genre in the 1960s , it did not become a dance style until Boogaloo Sam learned it , expanded it , and started performing it in public venues . He was influenced to expand boogaloo by cartoons ; the 1960s social dances the Twist , the Popcorn , and the Jerk ; and the movements of everyday people . As a dance style , it is characterized by rolling hip , knee , and head movements as if the body has no bones . Electric boogaloo is the signature dance style of The Electric Boogaloos . It is a combination of boogaloo and popping . 
 Popping is based on the technique of quickly contracting and relaxing muscles to cause a jerk in the dancer 's body , referred to as a pop or a hit . Popping is also an inadvertent umbrella term that includes several other illusory dance styles such as ticking , liquid , tutting , waving , gliding , twisto @-@ flex , and sliding . Most of these cannot be traced to a specific person or group and may have influences earlier than hip @-@ hop . Earl " Snake Hips " Tucker was a professional dancer in the 1920s who appeared in the film Symphony in Black and performed at the Cotton Club in Harlem . Since hip @-@ hop did not exist in the 1920s his style was considered jazz , but his " slithering , writhing " movement foreshadowed waving and sliding . 
 The most recognizable popping move is the moonwalk . In 1983 , Michael Jackson performed the moonwalk — called the backslide in popping context — on ABC 's Motown 25 television special . This performance popularized the moonwalk all over the world . However , it was not the first time the backslide had been performed on television or on film . Cab Calloway performed the backslide in 1932 , and Bill Bailey performed it in the movies Cabin in the Sky ( 1943 ) and Rhythm and Blues Revue ( 1955 ) . In 1982 , during a performance in London on Top of the Pops , street dancer Jeffrey Daniel performed the backslide during the song " A Night to Remember " . 
 In the 1970s , while Los Angeles was known for locking and Fresno was known for popping , several other cities in Northern California had their own local funk styles . Sacramento was known for a style called sac @-@ ing , San Jose for dime stopping , and Oakland for snake hitting . The San Francisco crew Granny and Robotroid incorporated stepping moves and JROTC rifle drill movements in their dancing to make a unique funk style called Fillmore strutting . This dance was named after the Fillmore district in San Francisco where Granny and Robotroid were from . Granny and Robotroid performed on the Gong Show in 1976 . Although strutting had exposure on national television , it ( and the rest of the localized funk styles ) faded and never became mainstream . 
 = = Terminology = = 
 When the movies Breakin ' and Breakin ' 2 : Electric Boogaloo were released , all the styles of dance performed in those films were put under the " breakdance " label . In addition , Breakin was released outside the United States as Breakdance : The Movie . The media followed suit by calling all represented styles " breakdancing " , which caused a naming confusion among the general public . This was problematic for two reasons . 
 The first reason is that " breakdancing " became an inadvertent umbrella term among the general public for both breaking and the funk styles . The funk styles were created in California independent from breaking , which was created in New York . They are called funk styles because they were originally danced to funk music . This name gives them a separate identity from breaking , which is traditionally danced to break beats . 
 The second reason this was problematic is that " breakdancing " was originally called b @-@ boying or breaking by the street dancers who created it . A break is a musical interlude during a song — the section on a musical recording where the singing stops and the percussive rhythms are the most aggressive . When 1970s hip @-@ hop DJs played break beats , dancers reacted to those breaks with their most impressive dance moves . DJ Kool Herc coined the terms " b @-@ boys " and " b @-@ girls " , which stands for " break @-@ boys " and " break @-@ girls . " To describe the movement , the suffix " ing " was added after the word identifying the dancer ( b @-@ boying ) or the music beat ( breaking ) . According to Timothy " Popin Pete " Solomon , one of the original members of the Electric Boogaloos , and Raquel Rivera , author of the book New York Ricans from the Hip Hop Zone ( 2003 ) , " breakdancing " is a media @-@ coined term and incorrect . 
 = = Dance crews = = 
 A dance crew is a team of street dancers who come together to develop new moves and battle other crews . As hip @-@ hop culture spread throughout New York City , the more often breaking crews got together to battle against each other . It was during this time that the different dance moves within breaking developed organically . All styles of hip @-@ hop are rooted in battling , and being a part of a crew was the only way to learn when these styles began because they were not taught in studios : they all started out as social dances . Forming and participating in a crew is how street dancers practiced , improved , made friends , and built relationships . In breaking in particular , battling is how b @-@ boys / b @-@ girls improved their skill . 
 Aside from Rock Steady Crew , several breaking crews were active in the 1970s such as Mighty Zulu Kings , Dynamic Rockers , New York City Breakers , <unk> , Air Force Crew , Crazy Commanders Crew , Starchild La Rock , and Rockwell Association . In the same way b @-@ boy crews were active on the east coast of the United States spreading breaking throughout New York , funk crews were also active on the west coast spreading the funk styles throughout California . Aside from The Lockers and The Electric Boogaloos , other funk styles crews such as Medea Sirkas / Demons of the Mind , Black Messengers , The Robot Brothers , The Go @-@ Go Brothers , Granny and Robotroid , and Chain Reaction were active during the 1970s performing on stage . 
 Chain Reaction was a four @-@ man dance crew from Reseda , California whose members included Thomas " T @-@ Bopper " Guzman @-@ Sanchez , Paul " Cool Pockets " Guzman @-@ Sanchez , Robert " Bosco " Winters , and Mike " Deuce " Donley . Just like The Electric Boogaloos had their own signature dance style called electric boogaloo , Chain Reaction also had their own signature dance style called crossover locking . They performed on the talk show Thicke of the Night and in the movie Xanadu . Xanadu premiered in 1980 , four years earlier than the hip @-@ hop dance classics Beat Street and Breakin ' . Xanadu was the first time boogaloo , popping , and crossover locking were performed on film . In 1984 , T @-@ Bopper created a new dance crew called United Street Force . By invitation , this crew performed at the White House for President Ronald Reagan . 
 Crews still form based on friendships and neighborhoods . For example , dance crew Diversity — formed in 2007 — consists of brothers and friends from Essex and London . Crews also form for other reasons such as theme ( Jabbawockeez ) , gender ( ReQuest Dance Crew ) , ethnicity ( Kaba Modern ) , dance style ( Massive Monkeys ) , and age ( Hip Op @-@ eration ) . In 2013 , Hip Op @-@ eration performed an exhibition routine at the World Hip Hop Dance Championships in Las Vegas . At the time , their youngest member was 66 . 
 In the 1970s , b @-@ boy crews were neighborhood @-@ based and would engage in battles held at local block parties called " jams " . Today crews can battle in organized competitions with other crews from around the world . New Zealand crew ReQuest won the Australian @-@ based competition World Supremacy Battlegrounds in 2009 and the American @-@ based competition Hip Hop International in 2009 and 2010 . On October 12 , 2010 , the Vietnamese Ministry of Culture , Sport , and Tourism presented the Certificate of Merit to dance crew Big Toe for winning a variety of international dance competitions . Dance crews are more prevalent in hip @-@ hop , but hip @-@ hop dance companies do exist . Examples include Zoo Nation ( UK ) , Culture Shock ( USA ) , Lux Aeterna ( USA ) , Boy Blue Entertainment ( UK ) , Unity UK ( UK ) , Bounce <unk> Company ( Sweden ) , and <unk> Dance Company ( USA ) . 
 = = Social dancing = = 
 Hip @-@ hop social dancing ( party dancing ) began when hip @-@ hop musical artists started to release songs with an accompanying dance . In 1990 , rapper MC Hammer created the Hammer dance and popularized it in his music video " U Can 't Touch This " . The Hammer dance was a social dance that became wildly popular and then faded as the album it was associated with , Please Hammer , Don 't Hurt ' Em , lost popularity . Most social dances are short @-@ lived fad dances , some are line dances , and others spawn new dance styles that stay relevant even after the life of the songs they came from come to an end . The development of hip @-@ hop social dancing extends further back than the 1990s with the Charleston , a jazz dance ; Chubby Checker 's Twist , which was considered rock & roll ; several 1970s fad dances made popular by James Brown ; and the influence of the television show Soul Train . 
 The Charleston was created in the 1920s by African @-@ Americans in Charleston , South Carolina as a rebellion against prohibition . It gained popularity once it was embraced by Caucasians , but it was still considered an immoral dance due to its association with alcohol . This dance relied on partnering and eventually led to the creation of Lindy Hop . Lindy Hop and the Charleston fall under the swing dance genre ; however , there is a dance move used in breaking that is taken from the Charleston called the Charlie rock . Singer @-@ songwriter Chubby Checker released the song " The Twist " with an accompanying dance of the same name in 1960 . He performed the dance on the television show American Bandstand , and the song reached number one in 1960 and 1962 . The Twist was the most popular dance craze of the 1960s because it broke away from the trend of partner dancing enabling people to perform on their own . 
 James Brown was a major contributor to social dance . He popularized several fad dances in the 1970s such as the Mashed Potato , the Boogaloo , and the Good Foot . His accompanying songs to these dances include " ( Do the ) Mashed Potatoes " , " Do the Boogaloo " , and " Get on the Good Foot " . The song " Do the Boogaloo " influenced Boogaloo Sam when he created the boogaloo dance style , and the Good Foot triggered the creation of breaking . In addition , James Brown also popularized the Funky Chicken , which was a major influence to Don Campbell when he created locking . In an interview with NPR , Lockers ' member Adolpho " Shabba Doo " Quiñones stated " We 're all children of James Brown ... And you know , if James Brown was our father then you 'd have to say Don Cornelius was our great uncle . " 
 In 1970 , Don Cornelius created Soul Train . Before officially becoming a crew , members of The Lockers made several appearances on this show . They introduced different dance moves such as the Robot , Which @-@ <unk> , and the Stop @-@ and @-@ Go during the " Dance of the Week " segment of the broadcast . Disco was very popular during the 1970s , so some dance styles at that time such as waacking and hustle stemmed from disco music rather than funk . Hip @-@ hop became more mainstream in the 1980s , and this surge in interest combined with the popularity of Soul Train kick @-@ started the rise of hip @-@ hop social dancing . 
 One of the more popular social dances created during the 1980s was the Cabbage Patch . The rap group Gucci Crew II created the dance and introduced it in their 1987 song of the same name , " The Cabbage Patch " . Another popular social dance was the Roger Rabbit . This dance imitates the floppy movements of the lead cartoon character as seen in the 1988 film Who Framed Roger Rabbit . The rap duo Kid ' n Play created the Kid ' n Play kick @-@ step and performed it in their 1990 movie House Party . It is a variation on the Charleston with elements of the Roger Rabbit and the Running Man . The Running Man is one of the most recognizable hip @-@ hop social dances . According to Essence magazine , Paula Abdul created the Running Man and taught the dance to Janet Jackson when she was working as her choreographer during Jackson 's Control era . Jackson further popularized the dance when she performed it in her 1989 music video " Rhythm Nation " , and rapper MC Hammer kept the fervor going when he started to do the Running Man in his performances . The pop duo LMFAO brought the Running Man back into the mainstream with their song " Party Rock Anthem " , which was named the 2011 song of the summer by <unk> The accompanying dance in the song called The Shuffle combines three social dances : the Running Man , the ( half ) Charleston , and the T @-@ step . 
 DJ Troy " Webstar " Ryan and Bianca " Young B " Dupree released the song " Chicken Noodle Soup " in 2006 . The dance was so popular , at one point YouTube had over 2 @,@ 000 video clips of kids performing it . The song sold 335 @,@ 000 ringtones , but it was not strong enough to sustain momentum for the full length album " Webstar Presents : Caught in the Web " , which was not successful . For this reason , the Chicken Noodle Soup song and dance faded . The Dougie comes from Dallas , Texas . The dance was named after the 1980s rapper Doug E. Fresh and popularized in the 2010 song " Teach Me How to Dougie " by the rap group Cali Swag District . According to the Wall Street Journal , the Dougie has been particularly popular as a celebratory dance among professional athletes . In 2010 , CNN news anchor Wolf Blitzer performed the Dougie at the Soul Train Music Awards . 
 = = = Line dances = = = 
 The Cha Cha Slide , the Cupid Shuffle , and the Soulja Boy are examples of urban line dances that were created from hip @-@ hop songs of the same name . These line dances have the same premise as the more widely know Electric Slide . There are variations to the Electric Slide , but the dance is always performed to the song " Electric Boogie " by Marcia Griffiths . In keeping with this tradition , the Cha Cha Slide , the Cupid Shuffle , and the Soulja Boy are always performed to their respective songs . 
 DJ Willie " Casper " Perry created the song " Cha Cha Slide " in 1996 for a personal trainer in his hometown Chicago . It did not get commercial airplay until 2000 when Chicago radio station <unk> @-@ FM started playing the song as part of its rotation . Soon after , other radio stations across the United States also started playing the song , and this increase in popularity led to a record deal with Universal Music Group . After securing a deal , the label began producing and distributing instructional videos of the dance to nightclubs , which helped spread its popularity . On February 20 , 2011 , dancers in Anaheim , California set a Guinness world record when 2 @,@ 387 people performed the dance at the Anaheim Convention Center . 
 The song " Cupid Shuffle " was released in February 2007 by singer Bryson " Cupid " Bernard from Lafayette , Louisiana . In August 2007 , 17 @,@ 000 people set a world record when they performed the Cupid Shuffle ( dance ) to his song in Atlanta . The Soulja Boy dance became popular through MySpace when rapper DeAndre " Soulja Boy " Way posted his song " Crank That " to his MySpace page and uploaded an accompanying instructional video showing viewers how to perform the dance . After amassing more than 16 million page views , he was signed to Interscope Records . 
 = Mileena = 
 Mileena is a player and occasional boss character from the Mortal Kombat series of fighting games . Since her introduction as a palette swap character for Mortal Kombat II in 1993 , Mileena has gained significant popularity and became one of the series ' most iconic elements . 
 In the games , Mileena was originally known as a dual sai @-@ wielding assassin in service of the dark emperor of Outworld , Shao Kahn , and an evil twin sister of his beautiful daughter Kitana . However , she was soon revealed to be just a monstrously deformed and mentally unbalanced clone of Kitana , created for Kahn by Shang Tsung . In the later games , Mileena also uneasily serves other masters , namely Shinnok and Onaga , and is a central character to the plot of the game Mortal Kombat : Deception . In the backstory of Mortal Kombat X , Mileena , the sole surviving heir of Shao Kahn , vies for the Outworld throne with warlord Kotal Kahn . 
 Mileena 's traits in the original timeline are traditionally defined by her fierce rivalry with Kitana , as well as her own lust for power and cannibalistic urges . The series ' 2011 reboot made her ever more unstable but also very immature , and her relationship to Kitana is more ambiguous . In the various other media in the franchise , Mileena 's appearances have been relatively rare and minor as compared to these of Kitana , and she is usually positioned in them as an adversary of Earthrealm champion Sonya Blade . She has often appeared in Mortal Kombat merchandise and was also extensively used to promote later games in the series as its semi @-@ ironic sex symbol . 
 Gameplay @-@ wise , she is considered a generally strong fighter , including being widely regarded as the best choice in Mortal Kombat II . In relation to her other aspects , Mileena received a diverse and often mixed , largely due to the character 's unbalanced deranged personality and conflicting messages from the dualism of her design , but in most cases favorable critical reaction , along with some negative criticism as well . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 After the ruler of the other dimensional realm Outworld , Shao Kahn , conquered the realm of Edenia and merged it with his own , he decided he would keep the former king 's daughter Kitana alive and raise her as his own . Though she grew up knowing nothing of her origin , the emperor nonetheless feared that one day Kitana would discover her true parentage and turn against him , and so he ordered Shang Tsung to bring to life a more vicious and loyal version of Kitana that could take her place if necessary . This was done by fusing her essence with a Tarkatan warrior from Baraka 's race . The process was not a complete success , however , as the hybrid clone was disfigured with the hideous mouth of the <unk> . Instead of replacing Kitana , as originally planned , Mileena would be used to spy on her and to ensure her allegiance to him , and so Shao Kahn introduced Mileena to Kitana as her supposedly lost twin sister . The two thus grew up together as his daughters and elite personal assassins , although Mileena grew to harbor a great bitterness and jealousy towards Kitana , whom Kahn favored over her . 
 As Kahn feared , Kitana did finally find the truth about her past and so Mileena was ordered to keep close watch over her rival when Kitana secretly allied with Earthrealm warriors during the events of Mortal Kombat II ( 1993 ) . Mileena has a secret companion in Baraka . Determined to stop her twin at any cost , she is then murdered by Kitana , her soul descending into the Netherrealm . In Mortal Kombat : Shaolin Monks , the 2005 beat 'em up retelling of Mortal Kombat II , Mileena fights against Liu Kang and Kung Lao alongside Jade and Kitana , but is defeated by the two Shaolin warriors and flees to the Wasteland to seek help from Goro . 
 Damned to the Netherealm after her death , Mileena swears fealty to its ruler Shinnok . During the events of Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 ( 1995 ) , Shao Kahn decides to resurrect Mileena so her skills as a vicious fighter would help him defeat Earth 's chosen warriors , also magically granting her the ability to read Kitana 's thoughts . Shinnok sees this as an opportunity to covertly monitor the events unfolding in Earthrealm and so he allows her to return to life . After Kahn is defeated , Mileena is summoned back to the Netherealm . In Mortal Kombat Gold ( 1999 ) , she assists in Shinnok 's invasion of Edenia , but allows her sister to escape from a dungeon . Following Shinnok 's defeat , Mileena comes to Kitana 's palace and demands the power over Edenia be shared with her . Kitana refuses and , when attacked , traps Mileena and locks her away in a dungeon . 
 Mileena remains imprisoned for years , until Onaga the Dragon King began his own invasion of Edenia , during which she is freed from her imprisonment by her ally Baraka . During the events of Mortal Kombat : Deception ( 2004 ) , Mileena is ordered by Onaga to pose as Kitana in order to confuse and misdirect his enemies . However , as Mileena begins the game 's titular deception , she develops a hidden agenda and decides to take control of both the forces of Edenia and Onaga 's own undead army for herself . In the game 's story mode ( Konquest ) , Mileena also trains the young Shujinko in Outworld and fights against Jade . 
 In Mortal Kombat : Armageddon ( 2006 ) , Mileena seizes Shao Kahn 's fortress , still under the guise of Kitana , and decides to continue her charade until the <unk> forces were corrupted enough to follow her under the true identity . Though at first confident that Outworld is hers to rule , Mileena is forced to reveal herself and surrender to the returning Shao Kahn when he mounts an offensive against the fortress to re @-@ instate himself as the ruler . The emperor then commands her to capture Shujinko , who would be used as a bargaining chip in gaining Onaga as an ally . Mileena , pretending to be Kitana , succeeds in capturing Shujinko , taking him to Shao Kahn 's palace . But having tasted power for herself , she is no longer content with being his minion and still plans to get the throne of Edenia back for herself . She is later killed by Shang Tsung during the final all @-@ out battle at the Pyramid . 
 Mileena returns in Mortal Kombat ( 2011 ) , an alternative @-@ timeline retelling of the original Mortal Kombat trilogy that brought some major changes to her character . In this game , Mileena was created by Shang Tsung in the " Flesh Pit " and introduced during the second tournament , instead of many years earlier . Meant to be a loyal replacement for Kitana , she is physically and mentally damaged , her animalistic rage controlled only by Shao Kahn as she uses her lascivious behavior to lure victims and then slaughter and devour them . In the game 's story mode , she serves as an opponent for Kitana , Jade , Stryker and Kabal , and is referred to by Shao Kahn as his " true daughter " , succeeding him after his death by Raiden 's hand . Her very immature personality and behavior is in sharp contrast to the scheming Mileena of the previous games . The game 's Challenge Tower mode has Mileena develop unrequited feelings for Scorpion , while Kitana 's uncanonical ending shows her as being unusually sympathetic towards Mileena . 
 Mileena returned as a playable character in Mortal Kombat X ( 2015 ) . Though she became empress of Outworld after Shao Kahn 's death , Mileena is overthrown by Kotal Kahn after Reptile reveals her origins , with her followers either killed or siding with Kotal Kahn . Refusing to accept defeat , Mileena resolves to reclaim the throne with the power of possessing Shinnok 's amulet . Allying herself with Rain , Tanya , and Kano , Mileena launches an unsuccessful surprise attack on Kotal Kahn in Outworld and is captured . She uses the amulet to protect herself from execution , but is overcome by its power before being rescued and taken away by Rain . She is later tracked down by the Special Forces , who work with D 'Vorah in apprehending Mileena again and recover the amulet . Mileena fights D 'Vorah but is defeated , and she is brought to Kahn . He orders Mileena to be executed by D 'Vorah , who subjects her to flesh @-@ eating parasites through mouth @-@ to @-@ mouth transmission . 
 = = = = Design = = = = 
 Mileena was the first evil female character to appear in the series , created by John Tobias for Mortal Kombat II simply to accommodate another palette @-@ swapped character . Tobias recalled : " I took advantage of Kitana and Mileena being masked sisters to make a play on the veil myth … One sister is beautiful . One is ugly . One is good . One is evil . Choose wisely before asking one on a date . " According to Acclaim Entertainment 's producer Robert O 'Farrell , the game was given two female fighters so it would better compete against Capcom 's Street Fighter II , which had only one . Mortal Kombat co @-@ creator and producer Ed Boon described the sisters as the " female versions of Scorpion and Sub @-@ Zero " . Since her debut , Mileena 's characteristic weapon is a pair of sharpened , dagger @-@ like sai , that at first she has been using in combat only as projectiles and during some of her finishing moves ( eventually , the sai were given more use in Mortal Kombat 2011 ) . Only in Mortal Kombat Gold does she use a longsword ( similar to that of Scorpion in Mortal Kombat 4 ) as her primary physical weapon . Prior to the release of Mortal Kombat 2011 , Mileena was one of the five " legendary characters " spotlighted by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment , alongside the likes of Scorpion and Sub @-@ Zero . Her MK2011 X @-@ ray attack was altered to incorporate sai stabbings after fan feedback " to fit Mileena as far as her style , her brutality . " 
 Her trademark moves through the series include double @-@ sai throws that can be also performed midair , teleport kicks , and on @-@ ground rolling attacks . Mileena also utilizes her sai in most of her Fatalities , including immobilizing her opponents prior to the killing sequence ( such as her " Rip Off " finisher in MK2011 ) , while she pretends to kiss her victims in others . In Mortal Kombat X , both of her Fatalities exhibit her cannibalistic traits . There was a popular but completely false urban legend @-@ style rumor regarding a supposed " Nudality " finishing move in Mortal Kombat II . Mileena 's Animality in UMK3 and Trilogy sees her transform into a skunk that sprays her opponent . 
 Mileena is physically identical to Kitana , the most glaring exception being her half @-@ <unk> face with large and exposed fang @-@ like teeth ( which got noticeably downsized for Deception and Armageddon ) . Boon described Mileena as " Anti @-@ Kitana " and said that her large " sharp , nasty teeth " have been not originally planned and were only drawn for her infamous Fatality " Man @-@ Eater " ( featured in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 , too ) , in which she sucks up the entire body of her victims and then regurgitates their clean bones . After Mortal Kombat II , her teeth were almost never used again during gameplay until Mortal Kombat 2011 ( in a leap attack to bite an opponent in the neck and in one Fatality to gnaw on the killed enemy 's severed head ) , with a sole exception of one Fatality in Deception in which she uses them to tear off the opponent 's head . Mileena 's skin color appears to be at times mildly darker than Kitana 's , but is always lighter than Jade 's . After the two were given more varying appearances in Mortal Kombat Gold ( hairstyle for Kitana @-@ derived characters is loose in Mortal Kombat II and pinned back in Ultimate MK3 ) , Mileena 's hair is usually much shorter than Kitana 's and is most often worn gathered in a ponytail . One element of Mileena 's anatomy that has often changed is her eyes . As her supposed twin sister , Mileena shared Kitana 's eyes in Mortal Kombat II ; her eyes then became " undead " style all @-@ white ( similar to the eyes of Scorpion and Noob Saibot ) in Ultimate MK3 . In Deception , Armageddon and Shaolin Monks , Mileena 's eyes return to normal , but with yellow pupils ( Kitana 's eyes are brown ) . In Mortal Kombat 2011 , however , she has Baraka @-@ like yellow eyes with slit pupils ( her eyes are also sometimes seen as glowing whole ) , except of her alternate Ultimate MK3 style costume ( available through pre @-@ order bonuses and later in a DLC package ) in which she has human eyes once again . In Mortal Kombat X , her facial appearance has undergone drastic changes on her facial appearance based on those from Mortal Kombat Legacy live @-@ action series , such as having a human @-@ like mouth , yet still retain most of her Tarkatan mouth , as seen on both of her cheeks . 
 Like Kitana and Jade , Mileena was originally portrayed by Katalin Zamiar in Mortal Kombat II , who was using her own sai . A false rumor printed in Game Informer told of a Mileena @-@ like secret character named Emerald supposedly hidden in the game . After MKII , Mileena was officially declared by Tobias and Boon to be " gone " and not returning , yet was brought back due to popular demand , with Becky Gable taking over the role in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 . Mileena 's main color has been either a shade of purple or magenta in various installments ( including when masquerading as Kitana in Deception ) and their outfits did not differ in a significant way ( more than just having different color patterns ) until Mortal Kombat Gold . Since then , her costumes have been generally getting more skimpy with every new game , including always having an exposed midriff since Deception . Mileena 's main costume in Deception and Armageddon is actually mostly black and features long flowing arm sleeves , a back @-@ only loincloth and a partially transparent veil . Her motion capture actor in these games was Carlos Pesina . In Shaolin Monks , Mileena appears half @-@ naked ( her costume made largely of just belts of leather and scraps of fabric ) , barefoot ( with a bandaged <unk> ) , and again wearing a veil in place of a mask ( the veil also returns as part of her formal outfit in Mortal Kombat 2011 ) . In the 2011 reboot game , her prime costume is based on her famous provocative alternate from Deception , but more detailed and again featuring a mask . In all , in this game she has the largest number of costumes out of all characters in the entire series . Her " Flesh Pit " alternate costume in the 2011 game is made of just some loose bandages put around her otherwise completely naked body , marking the first time that she has appeared unmasked by default . In this game , her motion capture actress was a woman . " The Ultimate Horror Pack " DLC for Mortal Kombat X included the <unk> Mileena . 
 = = = = Gameplay = = = = 
 Mileena is commonly perceived as one of the best characters of Mortal Kombat II in gameplay terms . She was ranked as the game 's best overall fighter by Sega Visions for her high speed and reach as well as her teleport kick that can uniquely dodge the opponent 's projectiles . Super Play too called her " the best MKII character " as she is " fast , with a good range of attacks , and the potential for the most awesome combo in the game . " EGM noted about how this " deadly woman ... can hold her own against any man in the game " as her players can use her " lightning speed " and the sai blasts to overcome other players , while C + VG evaluated all of Mortal Kombat II characters as " well @-@ balanced " and " potentially excellent " , but still the teleport kick of the " very fast " Mileena was singled out by them as " the best surprising move in the game . " According to CU Amiga , Mileena was " third only to Jax and Liu Kang for sheer brilliance , " being a " somewhat misleading character " whose moves need to be " learnt the right way to put them all together to be devastating . " Hyper <unk> that in the hands of the skilled players , all three " Mileena , Jax and Liu Kang are almost unstoppable . " In GamePro test , the " queen of the hill " Mileena was effective against all characters , and especially versus Jax ( who shared tier 1 with her in their ranking ) , Reptile and Shang Tsung . GamePro testers opined that " although Jax is the better overall characters against Tiers 2 @-@ 4 , Mileena 's massive advantage over him makes her number one . Neither suffers disadvantages against anyone else . With her rapid sai @-@ throwing ability , teleport attacks , and deadly combos , this beautiful assassin lands atop our rankings . " In Amiga Format test matches , both Mileena and Kitana were always " so much faster " that " poor Jax ... ended getting his head kicked in every time . " 
 Mileena is a hidden playable character in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 , in which she needs to be unlocked using a special " Kombat Kode " , but is available from the start in the compilation game Mortal Kombat Trilogy ( appearing as seen in Ultimate MK3 ) . According to Nintendo Power , Mileena 's original powers " may prove insufficient " for using her with same effectiveness in UMK3 in which most of the other characters got some additional special moves . Sega Saturn Magazine wrote that " she 's pretty much identical to the last time . " On the other hand , Total 64 wrote that Mileena of Trilogy ( directly based on UMK3 version ) is " a damn good fighter , has got plenty of powerful moves " and is " an all round classy fighting star ! " EGM Strategy Guide for UMK3 noted she has largely retained her ability to " zone " the opponent with her sai projectiles , which had contributed to making her " one of the toughest " characters in MKII . 
 According to GameSpy 's guide to Deception , Mileena " has some solid offensive tools " and " a few solid combos up her sleeve , as well as a few pop @-@ up attacks that are extremely quick and open up brief juggle opportunities , " but also severe weaknesses such as a very short range of her sai and poor ranged attack abilities . Prima Games ' official guide for Armageddon gave Mileena an overall rating of 6 / 10 , calling her a " punisher " type character and a better fighter than Kitana ( " seems to have the upper hand between the two " ) , but while she " is able to punish from any range and even interrupt high attacks and projectiles , the damage she inflicts is minor . " 
 In Prima Games ' official guide for the 2011 's Mortal Kombat reboot , Mileena was judged to be well @-@ balanced and universal , displaying neither particular weaknesses nor advantages that would result in a one @-@ sided battle against anyone else . In their test , Mileena always won around half of fights against any character ( in the range of 40 – 60 % , wins depending on an opposing character ) . In Mortal Kombat X , Mileena 's style of fighting is translated into her three variations : " <unk> " , " Piercing " , and " Ethereal " . In " <unk> " , as the name suggests , Mileena gains an expanded number of biting and pouncing attacks , highlighting her beastly and cannibalistic tendencies and turning her into a more aggressive fighter . In " Piercing " , her main trait is her sai , which she uses for both projectiles and extensive combination attacks . Her " Ethereal " variation focuses on her ability to teleport , and allows her to disappear for extended periods of time in order to strike stealthily . Prima evaluated her as a " solid character " with " several great ways to stop opponents from jumping toward her , " but who is " not as safe as some of the other characters , which means she has to take a few risks . " 
 Mileena is not playable in Shaolin Monks wherein she only appears as a sub @-@ boss character alongside Kitana and Jade , as well as an optional boss in a secret stage encounter . Mileena also appears in the super deformed @-@ style " cute " form in every minigame through the series : " Chess Kombat " , " Puzzle Kombat " and " Motor Kombat " . In " Motor Kombat " , Mileena 's Kombat Karting special weapon is a brief speed boost that is very useful to save her from a Fatality in a death trap or at the finish line , and makes her a " great character " to use in the arena Speedster . When playing offline , it also allows the player to " steal first place right at the finish line before the AI gets its own miraculous speed boost . " An overpowered version of Mileena is a Faction Invasion boss for the Outworld faction in Mortal Kombat X. 
 = = = Other appearances = = = 
 = = = = Film and television = = = = 
 Mileena appeared briefly in the 1997 feature film Mortal Kombat : Annihilation , and was played by martial artist and stuntwoman Dana Hee . She was featured in one scene in which she ambushes Sonya Blade from behind in a desert . The two duel before Sonya traps Mileena on the ground and kicks her in the head , snapping her neck . After this , Mileena 's shoulder tattoo comes to life and flies away . Mileena herself was never mentioned by name but was acknowledged in the closing credits . Her pink @-@ and @-@ black costume was a palette swap of Kitana 's main film attire ( a sleeveless corset @-@ like top and tights ) with an added mask and matching headband , and has blue eyes . Mileena has only one spoken line in the film ( " You wish " in response to Sonya confusing her with Kitana ) and it was the only time she has ever been shown with her hair in a plait , similar to Kitana 's in @-@ film hairstyle . Hee , who employed her own stunt double for that scene , described her role as " an evil , mysterious figure that leaves you wondering , ' Who is she ? ' " 
 Mileena appeared in the 1999 episode " Shadow of a Doubt " of the television series Mortal Kombat : Konquest , in which she had no direct relation to Kitana and was here depicted as an initially very repulsive and aggressive Outworld warrior sent by Shao Kahn to assassinate the weakened Kung Lao , with a magic spell placed over her to give her Kitana 's look ( for a while , he even called her his " new daughter " ) . Mileena , wearing a green costume , succeeded in seducing Kung Lao , but could not bring herself to kill him during their night of passion and was also explicitly warned by Shang Tsung to not do it . She makes excuses for Kahn and later fights an inconclusive duel against Kitana , broken by Shao Kahn . As punishment for her taking too much time in her mission , Kahn allows Mileena to keep her beauty with the exception of making her teeth exaggeratedly pointed . She then starts to wear her signature mask , which Kahn gives her before banishing her from his sight . In Konquest , Mileena was portrayed by Meg Brown and Audie England played Mileena pretending to be Kitana . Brown said she liked her sexy Mileena costume so much that she asked to be let " wear the outfit home for her boyfriend . " 
 Another alternative and younger version of Mileena appears in the 2011 live @-@ action webisode series Mortal Kombat : Legacy , portrayed by martial artist Jolene Tran in her acting debut . Their story is told in the two @-@ part episode " Kitana & Mileena , " which featured both animated and live @-@ action sequences . Mileena is shown to be a Shang Tsung @-@ created clone like in the games , but of an age similar to Kitana 's , as they were together since their infancy , and her scarred but otherwise normal @-@ looking mouth ( with lips , except as a baby ) changes as her teeth grow when she is overcome by a cannibalistic rage . The adolescent Mileena is clad in violet , does not appear to be Kitana 's twin , and is seen wearing a mask only in some of the animated sections ( in which both of them are wearing outfits similar to those in Mortal Kombat II ) . She is shown spar @-@ dueling against Kitana and losing to her , then killing and devouring a palace guard in a fit of insanity , as well as killing impostors of King Jerrod , Kitana 's biological father , in a team together with Kitana . When the two are eventually sent by Shao Kahn on a mission to assassinate the actual King Jerrod , Mileena kills him with a double sai throw to the chest when he was talking to Kitana . 
 Mileena returned for the 2013 second season of Legacy with actress Michelle Lee ( Ada Wong in Resident Evil 6 ) replacing Tran , who had posted on Twitter without explanation that she would not be returning . Lee called Mileena " such an awesome character " while playing her was her " dream come true . " In a scene from the fifth episode that was shown at San Diego Comic @-@ Con , Mileena fights and beats Johnny Cage before being defeated and decapitated by Kitana , who rescues an injured Cage just as he is about to die . Lee additionally filmed a short gag clip for Machinima.com titled " Mileena 's Lunch , " as part of the promotion of the second season of Legacy . Legacy director Kevin Tancharoen also shared a concept art of a very different looking Mileena from his abortive Mortal Kombat film reboot project . 
 = = = = Other media = = = = 
 Mileena was a minor character in the Mortal Kombat : Live Tour stage show in 1995 , where she was played mostly by Jennifer DeCosta and Lexi Alexander in a dual role . Alexander primarily played Kitana but wore Mileena 's costume underneath for a quick wardrobe change . In a short story prequel to Mortal Kombat 3 , sponsored by CD Projekt and published by Polish magazine Secret Service , Mileena is Shao Kahn 's assassin who attempts to ambush Sonya Blade at a metro station , but is intercepted with a drop kick and promptly beaten down by Johnny Cage . 
 Mileena had a brief role in the 1994 Midway @-@ produced Mortal Kombat II comic book that was written and illustrated by John Tobias , and took place prior to the second tournament . She joins Kitana , Baraka , Kintaro and Shang Tsung in being sent to attack Earthrealm by Shao Kahn , and kills Jax 's Special Forces partner Beran ( modeled after Midway art director Steve Beran ) by performing her " Maneater " Fatality off @-@ panel . She was a recurring secondary character in Malibu Comics ' Mortal Kombat series that was published from 1994 to 1995 . Making her debut in the first issue of the Goro : Prince of Pain miniseries , she is part of a team led by Kitana with orders to find the missing Goro in Outworld . She additionally has reservations about Kitana 's true loyalty to Kahn ( though she never speaks about it to anyone ) and considers herself to be " Shao Kahn 's true daughter . " Mileena duels Sonya twice — including the first " Tournament Edition " finale in which she stabs Sonya with her sai — but she loses both times . She was also featured in a one @-@ shot special entitled Kitana and Mileena : Sister Act , which explained their past : Mileena is a creation ordered by Shao Kahn , though he would never let her replace Kitana . 
 In Jerome Preisler 's novelization of Annihilation , based off an early draft of the film 's script , Mileena has teamed up with Smoke , but she is still killed by Sonya after an ensuing fight scene , albeit by different means . In Preisler 's novel , Mileena appears in a scene similar to this in the film , but instead set in a mist @-@ covered jungle wilderness . She ambushes Sonya while Smoke attacks Jax , and she is depicted as being unmasked , laughing an insane and inhuman laughter . Mileena scissor @-@ grips Sonya ’ s neck with " her powerful thigh muscles " before being thrown off by Sonya . She then introduces herself after this initial confrontation , adding that she does not appreciate being confused with her " virtuous half @-@ sister . " Sonya fatally strangles Mileena with the handle of her own sai after a second fight , and when she and Jax examine Mileena 's corpse , Sonya wonders if Mileena was just " another cyborg " after spotting a shoulder tattoo similar to the mark found on Cyrax . 
 In DC Comics ' 2015 Mortal Kombat X prequel miniseries , Sonya is asked by Emperor Kotal Kahn to help him defeat Mileena , his rival to the throne of Outworld . She has joined forces with Reiko , who becomes her advisor and lover . When Goro disappears after being sent in pursuit of Mileena , Kotal Kahn sends his father , Kotal K <unk> — armed with Shao Kahn 's magic hammer — to kill both her and Reiko . However , Kotal 's most trusted warriors are ambushed and slaughtered by Mileena 's forces that include <unk> 's Red Dragon mercenaries . K <unk> himself is then killed by Goro , whom Mileena had also recruited . After Ermac later informs Mileena of Kahn 's machinations in Outworld , and Rain — recuperating under Mileena 's care after having been burned by Kahn in the seventh chapter — reveals Reiko 's true allegiance with Havik , Mileena forms a temporary alliance with Kahn and the Earthrealm warriors to stop Reiko and the Red Dragon . Upon reaching Shang Tsung 's island , she defeats Skarlet with assistance from Ermac , then smashes Reiko 's head with Shao Kahn 's war hammer , a blow he survives due to Havik 's " Blood Code " curse . Writer Shawn <unk> explained , " Kotal didn ’ t overthrow Mileena in some macho power play ; he overthrew her out of genuine concern for the safety and well being of Outworld and its citizens . " 
 = = = = Promotion = = = = 
 In October 2004 , Mileena was featured in a spread in the special edition of Playboy magazine that spotlighted provocative video game characters . A famous promotional picture of her , known as " Sexy Mileena " ( a topless picture in her alternative Deception costume ) was created for this purpose by Midway Games artist <unk> <unk> . This image did not actually appear in Playboy ( in which a fairly common picture of Mileena in her primary costume in Deception was published instead ) but was used as an unlockable picture for an in @-@ game gallery . Another Mileena pin @-@ up picture was created in 2011 for Playboy by Justin Murray ( who designed Mileena 's alternate costume in Mortal Kombat X ) , along with these of Kitana , Sheeva , and Jade . It was , however , rejected for being " Hustler slutty " instead of " Playboy classy , " according to Beran . A full @-@ clothed image of Mileena was used as one of two alternative cover arts for " Kollector Edition " limited version of Deception for the Xbox video game console and a pin @-@ up of Mileena was featured in IGN 's Hotlist publication in 2006 . 
 Mileena was extensively used to promote the Mortal Kombat reboot game in 2011 @-@ 2012 . She was one of the only four playable characters in the demo version and was featured in several trailers , including " A Night Out With Mileena " in which several NetherRealm Studios employees tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek @-@ style answered the question where they would take her on a date . As part of this promotional campaign , fitness model Danni Levy portrayed Mileena in the live @-@ action trailer " <unk> " and a photo session , attending The Gadget Show : World Tour for the European 2011 championship in Mortal Kombat . Levy also portrayed Mileena in the 2012 live @-@ action commercial for the PlayStation Vita version of the game ; first in a teaser trailer , and then in the full trailer together with Kitana . Playboy model Jo Garcia dressed up in Mileena 's colors to play as her in a sponsored photo session and video in 2011 . Another model dressed as Mileena also promoted the 2011 game in Brazil for Warner Bros. and Saraiva Mega Store . A Mortal Kombat II style costume for Mileena was first added exclusively for the Vita version of MK2011 , before being later included in the Komplete Edition release for the other platforms . 
 = = = = Merchandise = = = = 
 A figurine of Mileena ( " the evil twin " ) from the Mortal Kombat II series came out exclusively with a special issue of the Argentinian magazine Top Kids in 1995 . A 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch action figure that was also based on her design in this game was released by Infinite Concepts in 1999 , with a detachable mask . An electronic music track called " Mileena 's Theme " by <unk> was released on iTunes in January 2011 as the first of three singles that were compiled on the album Mortal Kombat : Songs Inspired by the Warriors . Mileena was one of several MK characters featured on 2 @.@ 5 " x 3 @.@ 5 " collectible magnets by Ata @-@ Boy Wholesale in 2011 , and a ten @-@ inch polystone statue of her Mortal Kombat 2011 incarnation was released in the Enchanted Warriors series by Syco Collectibles in May 2012 . A " Klassic " UMK3 1 : 4 scale statue of Mileena was announced by Pop Culture Shock Collectibles to come in early 2015 . 
 Mileena is featured in the 1995 collectible card game Mortal Kombat Kard Game , as well as in the 2006 crossover collectible card game Epic Battles where she is one of the characters representing the Mortal Kombat universe that were featured already in the Premiere Edition . Io9 's Charlie Jane Anders included Mileena dress @-@ up apparel among 2011 's " sluttiest and weirdest " store @-@ bought Halloween costumes , but Justin <unk> of Complex praised it as one of " last @-@ minute video game costumes that actually look cool " and Brian <unk> of IGN included it among " ten ridiculous ( or ridiculously sexy ) video game inspired Halloween costumes " of 2012 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 Mileena has made several homage cameo appearances outside of the franchise , including in the comic book series Gen13 in 1995 and in the episode " Another Bad Thanksgiving " of the animated series The Cleveland Show in 2010 . In the 1996 martial arts film Book of Swords , there is a nod / tribute to Mileena in a minor role by Katalin Zamiar herself . Mileena might have inspired a redesign of the Marvel Universe character Elektra as played by Elodie Yung in the 2015 TV series Daredevil and the costume of Brie Bella in the 2015 video game WWE Immortals . Those who cosplayed as Mileena included film maker Sylvia Soska at Fantastic Fest 2011 , professional wrestler and model Eden Stiles ( Brandi Runnels ) for Halloween in 2013 , the Fourth Vice @-@ Miss Poland ( Teenagers ) 2013 Adrianna Schneider that same year , and model and media personality Adrianne Curry at the 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International and later at Fan Expo Canada 2014 . Some people even named their children after Mileena , which became trending in 2015 . 
 = = = Reactions = = = 
 Mileena 's addition to the series was well received and she quickly became one of the most popular and recognizable Mortal Kombat characters . Her debut appearance in Mortal Kombat II was met with a favorable critical reception : The Miami Herald called Kitana and Mileena , " leggy ladies who wear masks " , an " interesting step toward political correctness " as " a far cry from Little Miss Muffet , " Austin American @-@ Statesman described them as " far nastier than that martial @-@ artless aerobics instructor from the first game , " while Nintendo Power called her " beautiful , graceful , beguiling and strong , but most of all , deadly . " Some publications regarded her as the symbol of the game , including Consoles + and Video & Games that each positioned her as an equivalent of , respectively , Cammy and Ryu from Super Street Fighter II . In the early 2010s , a retrospective article by IGN 's Richard George listed " the hot chicks " as one of the reasons why Mortal Kombat II " is considered by many to be the pinnacle of the series , " and UGO named " the busty ninja sisters Kitana and Mileena " as front characters of the Mortal Kombat franchise . GamesRadar UK wrote , " we had two nigh @-@ identical twins of svelte , slinky sex and gore ... But then Milly took off her mask and it all went wrong . <unk> , nightmarishly , ball @-@ <unk> wrong . " 
 In 1996 , <unk> <unk> from French Player One noted that the " wickedly gracious " Mileena has always been his preference of all the characters since her introduction , while Marcin Górecki of Secret Service placed her ninth on his list of the best female fighters in the fighting genre 's history . On the other hand , Destructoid 's Brad Nicholson called her " the worst character ever created in a fighting game " in 2008 . In 2015 , Joe <unk> from WhatCulture ranked her as the 31st greatest female fighting game character of all time . Like Chun @-@ Li from Street Fighter , Mileena also quickly became a popular among female audience , including the actress Samantha Jo when she was a child . The Birthday Massacre vocalist Chibi described Mileena as one of her " heroes " when she announced her plan of getting a tribute tattoo , saying she likes her " because she 's pretty insane and vicious and seems like she 'd be very attractive , but then has this mouth full of heinous sharp teeth . " American model Tara Babcock opined that in the reboot " Mileena embodies a childish character through her fighting style and behavior . " 
 UGO rated Mileena 17th on their 2012 list of the top 50 Mortal Kombat characters , citing her then @-@ rare presence as an evil female player character ( a taboo @-@ breaking novelty in video games at the time of her 1993 MKII debut ) while stating that her brutal attacks and " slutty " outfits made her a fan favorite . Den of Geek placed Mileena fifth ( 14 spots ahead of Kitana ) in their 2015 rating of the series ' 73 playable characters . IGN , in 2011 , listed her as one of the series ' " four main characters " alongside mainstays Liu Kang , Scorpion and Sub @-@ Zero . Anurag Ghosh and Bill Fulks of Bright Hub included her among the " top ten awesome " Mortal Kombat characters as well as one of the sexiest ( " second only to the gorgeous Kitana " ) , and CraveOnline 's Dread Central called her " without question " one of the " most beloved " characters in the Mortal Kombat universe . In some rankings , however , Mileena placed lower , such as when fans voted her the series ' 20th greatest character in a 2013 online poll hosted by Dorkly , or in the " Supreme Mortal Kombat Champion " polls held by Mortal Kombat Online , where she was eliminated prior to the final rounds after losing to Jade and Shang Tsung in 2012 and 2013 , respectively , and was eliminated by Kitana in the first round of the 2014 edition . 
 = = = = Looks and attitude = = = = 
 Reception to the character 's conflicting looks and psychotic behavior has been mixed , though with elements such as her sexual allure and shock value well received , particularly in regards to her Fatalities . According to Joey Esposito of MTV , Mortal Kombat II " added ... sexually suggestive characters in Mileena and Kitana , but the tables were turned " with Mileena ’ s " Man Eater " Fatality , which he ranked among the " nine Mortal Kombat Fatalities that warped your childhood . " CU Amiga called it " the kiss of death to end all kisses " . Mileena shared seventh place with Kitana on GamesRadar 's 2006 list of top seven " girls kissing girls " in 2006 , and Paul Drury of Retro Gamer elected " Kitana 's and Mileena 's deadly kisses " as his favorite Fatalities . In 2011 , Topless Robot 's Ryan Aston ranked Mileena as the sixth @-@ most goofy Mortal Kombat character as " a pretty succinct commentary on the deplorable image of women in videogames " and for her absurd " Man @-@ Eater " finisher , but nevertheless calling her " quite the looker " . Complex ranked Mileena 's biting off an opponent 's head as the eighth @-@ best finishing move in the series , noting " a sexual element that was creepily out of context . " In 2012 , Game Rant ranked Mileena 's " just sick " " Yummy " finisher from Mortal Kombat : Deception as the series ' second @-@ best Fatality of all time . Kotaku included her " Nail Shooter " Fatality from Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 among their choices of " the most gruesome video game deaths " in 2013 , commenting it was " not necessarily the bloodiest one , but definitely one of the funniest . " 
 In spite of her disfigured face , Mileena is often rated among the most attractive characters in video games . UGO Networks counted Mileena among the best looking female ninja @-@ type characters in all media , and ranked her as the seventh " finest " female fighter in 2010 , but advised to " be careful around that big scary demon mouth she keeps under the <unk> . " Alongside Mileena and Jade , Kitana was included on the list of the " hottest chicks of 2011 " by Univision . That same year , Ben Kendrick of Game Rant ranked Mileena as the fourth " most awesome " character of the series and one of " the most disgusting yet alluring " game characters ever created , commenting it is " like Ed Boon is constantly saying ' yeah , I dare you to be attracted to this character ! ' " Mileena 's breasts placed 31st and ninth on the lists of the finest chests in gaming by GameFront 's Ross Lincoln in 2011 and Complex 's Drea Avellan in 2012 , respectively . In 2012 , Gadget Review 's Kristie Bertucci rated Mileena as the sixth " hottest " female video game character and noted her being " usually always at the top of the list as one of the most popular female characters ( not to mention sexy ) " in all video games . Larry Hester of Complex ranked Mileena herself as the <unk> " hottest " video game character in 2012 , writing " Mileena is what some guys would call a paper bagger . Her body is crazy but the face doesn 't really work for us . " In 2013 , Sean Hinz of ScrewAttack deemed Mileena the worst @-@ ever " hot chick " in video games for how she " can make you feel bad when you have a boner . " Stuart W. Bedford of WhatCulture placed her fourth on his list of " most sexually charged " female characters in gaming history , stating she " has been confusing penises the world over since her creation " . Belgian publication G MAG noted Mileena for her large cup size and minuscule outfits in an article discussing sexual themes in video games . 
 Mileena has been renowned as a notable female villain in video gaming . In 2009 , Gelo Gonzales of FHM listed the " menacing " character in his selection of the nine sexiest " bad girls of videogame land " . Complex ranked her eighth on their list of the " most diabolical video game she @-@ villains , " while Polish web portal Wirtualna Polska featured Mileena among the top ten villainesses in gaming , describing her as " absolutely phenomenal , simply dripping with sex " but advising to skip trying to check under her mask . The staff of Gameranx rated " this Mortal Kombat femme fatality " as the second sexiest female villain in gaming , writing : " She ’ s gorgeous , packs a punch , and is infused with evil from birth . How much more badass can you go ? " Placing Mileena 18th on his 2013 list of the most brutal fighters in Mortal Kombat , Hanuman Welch of Complex described her as a " deadly mixture of Kitana 's agility and seduction , and Baraka 's impulsive behavior . " Mileena and Kitana were among the top ten " hottest " female villains in gaming and " old school hotties that still got it " by Travis Hubert of Cheat Code Central in 2014 . Márcio Pacheco Alexsandro of Brazil 's Game Hall placed them both at second spot of his top list of female ninja characters in games , calling Mileena " beautiful and monstrous " and adding that there was nothing more " cool " than a ninja who is both sexy and insane . 
 Several publications commented on her cannibalistic tendencies . In a VentureBeat humor article by Jason <unk> , Mileena " tried her hand at stripping , modeling , and a stint on The View . But none of them could satisfy her insatiable desire for carnage and human flesh , " so she became Donald Trump ’ s co @-@ host on The Apprentice . Ranking 1992 's Mortal Kombat as the second most controversial violent video game in history , CNN 's Doug Gross noted that in the reboot , " options include eating an opponent 's head . " X360 chose her MK2011 Fatality , " in which she tears a man 's head off then <unk> down upon it " , to represent cannibalism on their list of the top ten video game crimes . In a feature about Tommy Wiseau 's 2011 web series The Tommy @-@ Wi Show , Carl Lyon of Fearnet described Wiseau therein as " an ambiguously @-@ accented , sleepy eyed ' actor ' who chews scenery like Mileena on an opponent 's throat . " Praising the 2011 reboot game for its inclusion of " iconic " characters and " the quite remarkable violence , " GamesMaster opined one " simply cannot watch Mileena throw swords into Johnny Cage , decapitate him and then take repeated bites out of his face like a dog on death row without deeply desiring this game . " Mileena finishing move of devouring a still @-@ living opponent in <unk> was chosen as the most " hardcore " in the game by French website <unk> . 
 Mileena was described by Computer and Video Games as " equally erotic and repulsive " . According to IGN , " at first blush she seems like your quintessential sultry video @-@ game vixen , but the mask comes off and she 's got a gaping mouth filled to the brim with dagger @-@ like teeth . " In 2008 , IGN 's Scott Collura listed " <unk> @-@ <unk> " as one of " top 50 chicks behaving badly , " while GamesRadar included her on the list of " gaming 's most repellent anti @-@ babes " . Comparing the Mortal Kombat characters to the seven deadly sins in Dante 's Inferno , Chris Holt of GamePro chose Mileena to represent Envy . Aaron Koehn of GamePro placed Mileena and Kitana eleventh on his 2009 list of the best palette @-@ swapped video game characters , but wrote that " if you gauge Mileena 's attractiveness simply based on the size of her baby @-@ feeders , be ready for some disappointment when she removes her mask . " ScrewAttack ranked her as seventh on their list of the top ten " ugly chicks in games " for her horrific looks when unmasked , but otherwise calling her " the ultimate woman . " Virgin Media included her on their list of the ten " game girls you wouldn 't dare to date " for being attractive " until she rips off her veil and reveals her monstrous form beneath . " Destructoid 's Nick Chester commented : " Her story , as far as I 'm concerned , is that she needs to see a dentist . " On the other hand , EGM 's Eric L. Patterson , stating his preference of Mileena over Kitana , wrote that Mileena 's face is actually one of the reasons why he likes her . Reviewing the Vita version of MK2011 , GamesRadar 's Jack DeVries called it " as pretty as Mileena minus mask , but overall , just as viciously fun . " Ranking Mileena as second on his 2013 list of ugliest video game characters , Alex Langley of Arcade Sushi wrote : " If ever there were a time to use the term ' <unk> ' it would be with Mileena , because everything about her is hot ... but her face . Her face will friggin ' bite your face off , which is never a sign of a good date . " Ramon <unk> of Dutch <unk> included Mileena among the " top 10 ugly game chicks " in 2015 due to her face despite " her nice figure " . French magazine <unk> placed Mileena second in a 2013 ranking of the sexiest girls in fighting games in which her bust was the criteria for her " reverse <unk> " approach to fashion after Mortal Kombat II , while comparing the character to shrimp in regards to her physical appearance : " Everything is good except for the head . " Playboy included Mileena , Kitana , and Jade together in their list of " the hottest video game breasts of all time " at 19th place . 
 = = = = Other reception = = = = 
 Mileena was noted for her alternate costume apparel , in particular her unmasked and near @-@ naked " Flesh Pits " outfit from MK2011 that Destructoid 's Hamza Aziz called " the new winner for <unk> ' outfit ' in a videogame ever . " GamesRadar 's Matt Bradford included it on his 2012 list of gaming 's " most ridiculous " alternate fighting costumes , commenting that it " <unk> our <unk> [ d ] -o @-@ meter . " IGN featured the unmasked Mileena on their list of worst @-@ dressed video game characters of 2011 , commenting that " the term ' butter face ' doesn 't even begin to describe this nightmare . " On the other hand , UGO ranked the " Sexy Mileena " from Deception as second best on the 2011 list of the gaming 's " most stylin ' alternate costumes " and called her one of the most interesting characters in the game for having " a perfect 10 body " but " a <unk> face , " adding that this outfit " basically ramps up the sex appeal to volcanic levels . " Including Mileena 's " Nudality " rumor from Mortal Kombat II on her 2014 list of the top seven nude @-@ code rumors , Ashley Reed of GamesRadar said it was " the talk of middle school hallways and sleepovers everywhere . " Kotaku 's Patrick Klepek , in 2015 , recalled hearing about " Mileena ’ s <unk> " while playing the game at arcades , while the Spanish edition of FHM opined that the rumor helped sell the game . 
 Mileena was one of the characters cited by Guy Aoki as allegedly perpetuating existing stereotypes of Asians as martial arts experts . In the 1996 moral panic themed book Interacting With Video , which condemned violence of video games as supposedly affecting social behaviour and causing real @-@ life violence , Patricia Marks Greenfield and Rodney R. Cocking used the " two Asian twin sisters , Mileena and Kitana , " as an example of a " highly eroticized dragon lady " trope , with Mileena 's " Man @-@ Eater " Fatality described as " a high @-@ powered kiss that evokes vagina dentata . " The authors wrote that despite the inclusion of " characters of color " such as the two and Jax , " we cannot assume that this greater diversity represents a more progressive identity politics , for one could argue that it merely increases the racist and sexist potential of individual fights . " Critical studies professor Marsha Kinder similarly accused Mortal Kombat II of " allowing you to have a misogynistic aspect of combat , " alleging that " some of the most violent possibilities are against women , " whose own " fatality moves are highly eroticised . " Kinder singled out Mileena to describe how the character can kill her opponent " by sucking him in and spitting out his bones . Talk about Spider Woman ! " 
 Joystiq 's Alexander Sliwinski wrote about Mileena that instead of " focusing on her fighting style , or assets , " they simply could not " get past one thing : how does she pronounce the letter P without touching her lips together ? " In 2010 , Game Informer included her among the palette swap characters not wanted by them in the future Mortal Kombat games , later describing her in the 2011 game as being " as creepy as ever . " When American radio host Howard Stern mocked a Mortal Kombat fan who admitted that he masturbates to Mileena , Matt Helgeson of Game Informer called the latter " insane " as " <unk> and Mileena should not mix . " Mike Harradence of PlayStation Universe wrote that " as for the date theme [ in the reboot game 's trailer ] , frankly we can ’ t really see the appeal – she ’ s not a patch on Sheeva , after all . " GameDaily praised the " superb fashion sense " of Soulcalibur 's Taki by contrasting her with Mileena . Writing about " outdated and cringe @-@ worthy representations of women in video games " in 2012 , MMGN 's Nathan Misa stated : " Look , I like Lara Croft 's booty shorts or Mileena 's two ... deadly sais as much as every other guy , but why not have more than virtual polygons to ogle at ? " Discussing what she perceived as video games ' popular misconceptions about women , Sarah Ditum wrote in PlayStation Official Magazine that same year : " Relax — we don ’ t really bite . Well , not unless we have a face full of hell fangs at the top of an impossibly hot bod . <unk> , Mileena . " 
 UGO included the film 's Mileena among " hot women ninjas " in media for how she " plays dirty in a mud wrestling battle against Sonya that ends with one girl down , one girl out of breath and the few audience members who made it that long into the movie pleasantly surprised . " Nathan Birch of <unk> rated her fight against Sonya in Annihilation as 14th in his 2015 ranking of fight scenes from the two feature films . JoBlo.com also chose " Sonya Blade ( Sandra Hess ) vs. <unk> [ sic ] ( Dana Hee ) " as one of the 18 options in their 2012 " the best cinematic girl @-@ on @-@ girl fight " poll . " Kitana & Mileena " episode of Legacy received a Writers Guild of America Award nomination in the category Outstanding Achievement in Writing Derivative New Media . 
 = Fire ( Big Sean song ) = 
 " Fire " is a song by American recording artist Big Sean from his second studio album Hall of Fame ( 2013 ) . It was released on August 20 , 2013 by GOOD Music and Def Jam Recordings as the fourth single from the record . It was written and produced by <unk> Camper Jr. and Rob Kinelski of Cocaine 80s , with additional songwriting provided by Big Sean and Alexander Izquierdo of The Monsters and the <unk> . " Fire " is a hip hop song that lyrically describes the perseverance to overcome personal difficulties . 
 " Fire " received generally favorable reviews from music critics , who compared it the catalogs of fellow rappers Kanye West and Jay @-@ Z , and recognized it as a standout track from Hall of Fame . The song peaked at number 19 on the U.S. Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles component chart to the Billboard Hot 100 , and reached number 46 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . An accompanying music video was premiered through Vevo on August 2 , 2013 , and featured American recording artist Miley Cyrus ; critics primarily focused on the continuation of the increasingly provocative image she established earlier in the year . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 When describing his second studio album Hall of Fame ( 2013 ) in December 2012 , Big Sean stated that he wished to " teach and leave a legacy " with its tracks , admitting that the content on his debut record Finally Famous ( 2011 ) " didn 't really teach too much . " " Fire " was officially premiered through SoundCloud on July 29 , 2013 , after having surfaced online earlier that day . On his Instagram account , Big Sean commented that " this IS NOT a single ... yet , but 1 of [ his ] favorites on the album . " The track was released for digital download on August 20 by GOOD Music and Def Jam Recordings . Its release preceded the launch of Hall of Fame , which was made available later that month . 
 " Fire " is a hip hop song that incorporates a " moody but confident bass line [ and ] celebratory piano keys " . It was compared to the musical styles seen on Graduation ( 2007 ) , the third studio album by Kanye West , and Watch the Throne ( 2011 ) , a collaborative record between West and Jay @-@ Z. Lyrically , it has been described to " place emphasis on pushing through personal struggles " , and has also been noted for " [ lifting ] a few cues from heroes such as mentor Kanye West and Jay @-@ Z " . Big Sean performed " Fire " on The Arsenio Hall Show , which had recently been revived after a nearly twenty @-@ year hiatus , on September 19 , 2013 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " Fire " received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Kyle Anderson spoke favorably of the track , calling it the " centerpiece of Fame , an infectious antidote to his famous mentor [ Kanye West ] ' s self @-@ seriousness . " While recognizing musical similarities to Graduation and Watch the Throne , Gary Graff from The Oakland Press felt that Big Sean drew inspiration from West and Jay @-@ Z 's records while maintaining " his own stylized favor and flow " . Khari of The Source felt that " Fire " was appropriately placed as the second song on Hall of Fame , where it matched the " flawless effort " seen in the opening track " Nothing Is Stopping You " . David Jeffries of AllMusic and Edna Gundersen from USA Today both considered the track to be a standout from the record , and both placed it on their lists of recommended purchases from the album . 
 = = Music video = = 
 An accompanying music video for " Fire " was directed by Jack Heller and Matthew Williams ; it premiered through Vevo on August 2 , 2013 . The clip features American recording artist Miley Cyrus ; according to Emily Blake and Nadeska Alexis of MTV News , it is composed entirely of " seductive stances and sultry glares [ which ] are interrupted solely by images of a red rose and a burning picture of the MC [ Big Sean ] himself " . Big Sean commented that the lyrics delivered in the track " really [ don 't ] have anything to do with her personal story in the video . " 
 Critical commentary regarding the music video focused on Cyrus ' increasingly provocative image . Margaret Eby of Daily News stated that she " just can 't stop strutting her stuff " and " [ flaunted ] several barely @-@ there outfits in the three @-@ minute video . " A writer for The Huffington Post shared a similar sentiment , adding that " even though her wardrobe is full of crop tops and <unk> bitty shorts , Miley Cyrus ' skimpy outfits still manage to shock . " A writer for Rap @-@ Up provided a favorable review , complimenting Cyrus for " [ turning ] up the heat " in the " striking visuals " . Writing for VH1 , Emily Exton joked that " hip @-@ hop 's fledgling relationship with a former Disney star just got a little stronger " , and noted that " Jay @-@ Z may have encouraged Miley ’ s love of twerking with his " Somewhereinamerica " shout @-@ out , but it appears Sean is less interested in seeing Billy Ray 's daughter shake her thing than having her walk around in dazzling heels and stare the camera down in the name of art . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Hall of Fame . 
 Big Sean – lead vocals , songwriting 
 Elijah Blake – background vocals 
 <unk> " Hey DJ " Camper – songwriting , production 
 James Fauntleroy – background vocals 
 Melanie Fiona – background vocals 
 Alexander Izquierdo – songwriting 
 Rob Kinelski – songwriting , production 
 Nicole <unk> – background vocals 
 = = Charts = = 
 " Fire " peaked at number 19 on the U.S. Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles component chart to the Billboard Hot 100 , which represents the twenty @-@ five songs that failed to reach the flagship Billboard Hot 100 . It also reached number 46 on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Virginia Central Railroad = 
 The Virginia Central Railroad was an early railroad in the U.S. state of Virginia that operated between 1850 and 1868 from Richmond westward for 206 miles ( 332 km ) to Covington . Chartered in 1836 as the Louisa Railroad by the Virginia General Assembly , the railroad began near the Richmond , Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad 's line and expanded westward to Orange County , reaching Gordonsville by 1840 . In 1849 , the Blue Ridge Railroad was chartered to construct a line over the Blue Ridge Mountains for the Louisa Railroad which reached the base of the Blue Ridge in 1852 . After a decision from the U.S. Supreme Court , the Louisa Railroad was allowed to expand eastward from a point near Doswell to Richmond . 
 Renamed as the Virginia Central Railroad in 1850 , the railroad bypassed the under construction Blue Ridge Railroad via a temporary track built over Rockfish Gap . This connected the railroad 's eastern division with its expanding line across the Blue Ridge in the Shenandoah Valley . Having reached Clifton Forge by 1857 , the railroad began operating the completed Blue Ridge Railroad in 1858 and continued preparing for further expansion until the beginning of the American Civil War in 1861 . As a prime target for Federal raids by Union Cavalry , the railroad faced significant action against it during the war . Although the war left the railroad with only a fraction of its line left operable , the railroad was running over its entire pre @-@ war length by July 1865 . 
 After the war , both longtime president Edmund Fontaine and former Confederate General Williams Carter Wickham served as president of the Virginia Central and oversaw its expansion towards Covington . The Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad was formed in 1868 from the merger of the Virginia Central Railroad and the Covington and Ohio Railroad , and had expanded westward to the Ohio River by 1873 after new financing from Collis P. Huntington was recruited . The new railroad ( reorganized as the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway in 1878 ) expanded eastward in the 1880s via the Peninsula Subdivision to Newport News . The Chesapeake and Ohio operated for over one hundred years until it was reorganized through merger as CSX Transportation in the 1980s . Today , CSX , Amtrak , and the Buckingham Branch Railroad still use portions of the old Virginia Central line for freight and passenger rail service . 
 = = Louisa Railroad = = 
 The Virginia General Assembly passed on February 18 , 1836 , an act to incorporate the Louisa Railroad company to construct a rail line extending from the Richmond , Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad ( RF & P ) westward . The railroad , as specified by the original charter , was to connect with the RF & P near Taylorsville , at what would become Hanover Junction , and extend westward , passing the Louisa courthouse , to Orange County at the base of the Southwest Mountains . The Virginia Board of Public Works owned two @-@ fifths of the total $ 300 @,@ 000 ( $ 8 @,@ 533 @,@ 200 today ) stock sold to finance the railroad 's initial construction . 
 Construction of the Louisa Railroad began in October 1836 , reaching the Louisa courthouse by 1839 , and by 1840 had reached Gordonsville . The railroad had been planned by its original charter to build across the Blue Ridge Mountains to Harrisonburg , but in 1839 , the Commonwealth requested a survey to be conducted to determine a feasible route to Staunton by way of Charlottesville . Ultimately , this route , which passed over the mountains at Rockfish Gap , was chosen as a better alternative than the original plan to cross at Swift Run Gap to the north . In 1847 , the charter was modified by the Assembly to provide for the railroad 's construction to the eastern base of the Blue Ridge , and in 1849 , the Blue Ridge Railroad was chartered to cross the mountains at Rockfish Gap to Waynesboro . Claudius Crozet was appointed Chief Engineer of the Blue Ridge Railroad , and under his leadership and direction , the railroad began construction over the Blue Ridge using a series of four tunnels . Meanwhile , the Louisa Railroad had reached the Rivanna River near Charlottesville by 1850 and by 1852 had reached <unk> River , near the eastern end of the Blue Ridge Railroad . 
 Operation of the Louisa Railroad was initially handled by the RF & P , beginning with the first operation of a train over Louisa Railroad tracks on December 20 , 1837 . This condition continued until June 1847 , when the Louisa Railroad took over operations . 
 The eastern terminus of the Louisa Railroad was originally at Hanover Junction ( now known as Doswell ) with the RF & P Railroad . The charter of that line protected it from construction of a parallel competitor , but an act by the Virginia General Assembly in 1848 authorized the extension of the Louisa Railroad easterly through Hanover and Henrico Counties to reach Richmond . This act was protested by the RF & P for violating the earlier decree of the Assembly against a parallel competitor . The RF & P 's claim was originally overturned by a Virginia State Court , which ruled that the Assembly retained the right to authorize construction of other railroads between Richmond and Fredericksburg , and that the original charter of the RF & P only applied to the transportation of passengers . The decision of the court was appealed and eventually reached the U.S. Supreme Court in Richmond , Fredericksburg and Potomac Railroad Company v. Louisa Railroad Company , which ruled in favor of the Louisa Railroad , upholding the state court 's decision . 
 The first president of the Louisa Railroad was Frederick Overton Harris , a native of Louisa County , who served until 1841 . After Harris ' term , Charles Y. Kimbrough , also from Louisa , served until 1845 , when Edmund Fontaine was elected to office upon Kimbrough 's death . Edmund Fontaine would continue to serve as president of the Louisa Railroad and its successor until after the American Civil War . 
 = = Further expansion as the Virginia Central = = 
 While the Blue Ridge Mountain section was being breached , the Louisa Railroad was busy building westward from the western foot of the mountains , across the Shenandoah Valley to Staunton . In January 1850 , the Commonwealth authorized the Louisa Railroad to increase its stock in order to build from Staunton to Covington . On February 2 , 1850 , the Louisa Railroad , having expanded greatly since its beginnings in Louisa and Hanover counties , was renamed as the Virginia Central Railroad . 
 In order to connect the eastern and western divisions of the railroad at this time divided by the unfinished Blue Ridge Railroad , a temporary track over Rockfish Gap was proposed by the railroad 's chief engineer , Charles Ellet , Jr . , and by 1854 had been constructed and was in use . Built over and around the under construction Blue Ridge Tunnel , this 4 @.@ 38 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 7 @.@ 05 km ) track , called the Mountain Track , included steep grades ( maximum 5 @.@ 6 % with a ruling grade of 5 @.@ 3 % ) and sharp curves ( minimum radius of 300 feet ( 91 m ) ) , thereby limiting speeds to around 5 – 7 miles per hour ( 8 @.@ 0 – 11 @.@ 3 km / h ) . Three small tank locomotives were ordered for the temporary track , one of which was supplied by the Tredegar Iron Works of Richmond , the Joseph R. Anderson , and two from Baldwin Locomotive Works of Philadelphia , the Baldwin and C.R. Mason . A second temporary track 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) around the Brooksville Tunnel and a third 3 ⁄ 4 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 1 @.@ 2 km ) around Robertson 's hollow were also constructed . The temporary tracks successfully joined the railroad and by eliminating the extra cost and effort of removing freight and passengers from trains for transport over the mountains , facilitated further growth and expansion westward . 
 Construction continued from Staunton through a water gap near Goshen at Great North Mountain by 1855 , and had reached Millboro by 1856 . This western section of the line included an additional three tunnels , and a temporary track approximately 1 @.@ 25 miles ( 2 @.@ 01 km ) long was used at Millboro while the tunnel was being completed . By 1857 , the railroad had reached a point known as Jackson 's River Station , at the foot of the Alleghany Mountains . This location would later be known as Clifton Forge and become a division point for the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway . 
 The temporary track over Rockfish Gap was used until the Blue Ridge Tunnel 's opening in April 1858 , and the last train to use the temporary track did so on the evening of April 12 . That night , the connection with the completed Blue Ridge Railroad was made , and on the morning of the 13th , the mail train was the first train routed through the tunnel . With the tunnel in use , the temporary track was promptly torn up . At the time of the Blue Ridge Tunnel 's completion , it was the longest tunnel in the United States and the first tunnel in the country to be completed without the use of vertical shafts . Although the Virginia Central did not own the Blue Ridge Railroad , it was granted the right to operate it from the Commonwealth of Virginia in return for an annual fee . 
 In 1859 , the Virginia Central 's line carried 134 @,@ 883 passengers throughout the year , and hauled 64 @,@ 177 tons of freight . The road connected Richmond to a point about 10 miles ( 16 km ) east of Covington , where the proposed Covington and Ohio Railroad would have started , a distance of approximately 195 miles ( 314 km ) . In February 1853 , the Commonwealth of Virginia had chartered the Covington and Ohio Railroad to extend the line completed by the Virginia Central westward across the Alleghany Mountains to the Ohio River . This company began work in 1855 and completed important grading work on the Alleghany grade , including the construction of numerous tunnels , and , to a lesser extent , in the areas around Charleston and the Kanawha River . However , as the American Civil War began in 1861 , westward expansion came to a halt and the Covington and Ohio 's line remained incomplete . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 The Virginia Central was one of the most important railroads for the Confederacy during the war , as it linked the fertile Shenandoah farmland of Virginia to Richmond and points eastward , enabling supplies and troops to easily be transported to nearby campaigns . The Blue Ridge tunnels and the Virginia Central were key tools in the fast mobilization of Confederate General Stonewall Jackson 's famous " foot cavalry " . Soon after the beginning of the war , the Virginia Central contracted with the Confederate States Postal Service , as it had done with the U.S. Postal Service before the war , to carry mail over its line . This service , along with passenger and general goods transport , became less reliable as the transport of military goods and troops took precedence . 
 As the war progressed , the railroad continually fell into a state of disrepair due to its constant use and the limited availability of supplies for upkeep . Union raids also destroyed many sections of the line , including the majority of the railroad 's depots , with notable exceptions for those at Gordonsville and Charlottesville , two key points of trade . The defeat of Jubal Early 's forces at Waynesboro led to the destruction of much of the bridges and line between Staunton and Keswick , and as Union armies converged on Richmond , further damage was done to the eastern section of the railroad . By the end of the war , the railroad operated less than 20 miles ( 32 km ) of track and held only $ 40 ( $ 618 @.@ 35 today ) in gold . 
 During the Peninsula Campaign of 1862 , the South Anna River bridge was destroyed by Union cavalry and the Virginia Central 's line between Hanover and Atlee was torn up . Although this and numerous other raids caused significant damage , the damage was soon repaired and the line was generally kept in good use . May 1863 saw another raid against the line , during which the Louisa Court House was attacked and the Hanover depot burned . During Ulysses S. Grant 's Overland Campaign of 1864 , Phillip Sheridan was ordered , along with nearly 8 @,@ 000 men , to proceed westward to join forces with David Hunter in Charlottesville , destroying as much of the Virginia Central as possible along the way . From Charlottesville , the combined force would advance towards Richmond from the west . Robert E. Lee responded by sending cavalry under the command of Wade Hampton and Fitzhugh Lee , who would meet Sheridan on June 11 at <unk> Station on the Virginia Central 's line . Confederate forces succeeded in pushing Sheridan back , who at 10 : 00 pm of the 12th withdrew towards the Army of the Potomac . Little damage was done to the tracks during the raid , and the damage was soon repaired and the line returned to operation . 
 = = Rebuilding = = 
 Reconstruction of the Virginia Central began soon after the Confederacy 's collapse , and under the permission of General Edward Ord , repairs commenced on April 21 , 1865 . Construction of temporary bridges and repairs were made swiftly , enabling trains to run to the Rivanna River by May . Temporary overland stage and wagon routes were set up to bypass inoperable sections of the railroad as repairs were made and provided for the transportation of goods and passengers . By the end of July , trains were able to run to the western terminus of Jackson 's River Station . The Virginia Central 's rolling stock had suffered throughout the Civil War , and the operable equipment had dwindled to an amount insufficient to provide for demand . To help solve this issue , four locomotives and forty cars were rented from the government at a price of $ 20 and $ 2 ( $ 309 @.@ 17 and $ 30 @.@ 92 today ) each per day respectively . The Beaverdam Depot was rebuilt in 1866 . 
 In November 1865 , an election for a new president of the company was held , and former Confederate General Williams Carter Wickham was elected over longtime president Edmund Fontaine by 364 votes . In recognition of Fontaine 's dedication and service to the railroad , the stockholders resolved to grant Fontaine and his family free tickets for life . Fontaine was unanimously reelected as president of the company in 1866 and 1867 . 
 = = Chesapeake and Ohio Railroad = = 
 Since before the Civil War , the section of the line between Jackson 's River Station and Covington , a distance of about 10 miles ( 16 km ) , had remained incomplete . This section was necessary for further westward expansion , and by July 31 , 1867 , the last of the track was laid and placed in operation . Reaching Covington enabled connection with the Covington and Ohio railroad , which at that time was still under construction , and provided for the future merging of the two companies as specified by an act of the Virginia General Assembly passed on March 1 , 1867 . 
 On August 31 , 1868 , the Virginia Central was merged with the Covington and Ohio to form the new Chesapeake and Ohio ( C & O ) Railroad ( reorganized as the Chesapeake and Ohio Railway in 1878 ) , and Wickham was elected as president . Wickham realized the need to find adequate financing to resume the westward work through the challenging mountainous terrain , as the Virginia Board of Public Works was no longer in a position to help as it had in the past . After failing in the impoverished southern states and with British investors , Wickham found new capital and financing by recruiting Collis P. Huntington , one of the so @-@ called " Big Four " , a group of businessmen who had recently completed the western portion of the transcontinental railroad . Under Huntington 's leadership , and with millions in new financing from New York City , westward construction resumed in 1868 . 
 Having long paid tolls for the use of the state @-@ owned Blue Ridge Railroad , the C & O arranged to purchase the line from the Commonwealth of Virginia and assumed full ownership on April 1 , 1870 . In all , the Virginia Central and the C & O paid around $ 900 @,@ 000 ( $ 16 @,@ 841 @,@ 842 @.@ 11 today ) to the Commonwealth , including both the purchase price and previous fees for use , which was significantly less than the Commonwealth 's expenditure of $ 1 @,@ 694 @,@ 870 @.@ 85 ( $ 31 @,@ 716 @,@ 385 @.@ 83 today ) in building the line . 
 Construction of the old Covington and Ohio line began from Huntington , West Virginia on the western end and Covington on the eastern end , and progressed towards the middle . By July 1869 , construction of the line westward had reached White Sulphur Springs , West Virginia , and with the use of three temporary tracks around two unfinished tunnels and an embankment , the entire line of 227 miles ( 365 km ) from Richmond to White Sulphur Springs could be traveled . In August 1871 , a locomotive named the Greenbrier was floated down the Ohio River to aid in the construction of the line from the western side . The final spike ceremony for the 428 @-@ mile ( 689 km ) long line from Richmond to the Ohio River was held on January 29 , 1873 , at Hawk 's Nest railroad bridge in the New River Valley , near the town of <unk> in Fayette County , West Virginia . The last spike was driven by C.R. Mason , who had also driven the first spike of the Louisa Railroad and had held various positions over the course of the Virginia Central 's and C & O 's history . 
 Huntington was also aware of the potential to ship eastbound coal from West Virginia 's untapped natural resources with the completion of the new railroad . His agents began acquiring property in Warwick County in eastern Virginia . In the 1880s , he oversaw the extension of the C & O 's new Peninsula Subdivision , which extended from the Church Hill Tunnel in Richmond southeast down the peninsula through Williamsburg to Newport News , where the company developed coal piers on the harbors of Hampton Roads and Newport News . 
 The Richmond and Alleghany Railroad , which ran from Clifton Forge to Richmond following the James River and the old James River and Kanawha Canal , was merged into the Chesapeake and Ohio in 1889 . On this line , trains descended nearly 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) in elevation to Richmond following the path of the river . The addition of the " James River Line " allowed the C & O to avoid the heavier grades of the old Virginia Central 's line to the north and became the principal artery of eastbound coal transportation down to the present day , with the earlier Virginia Central line used for westbound empty hoppers . From the convergence of the lines in Richmond , both eastbound and westbound coal trains utilized the Peninsula Subdivision through Williamsburg to service the coal piers in the East End of Newport News . 
 = = Modern times and other uses = = 
 After the Chesapeake and Ohio was consolidated with several other large railroads in the 1980s to form CSX Transportation , the line built by the Virginia Central from Staunton to Clifton forge was considered for abandonment . CSX , however , decided to keep the line in order to route empty coal trains westward , which , although intended for times of excess traffic , has become common practice . In addition to CSX , portions of the old Virginia Central line are in use by Amtrak 's Cardinal from Gordonsville to Clifton Forge , and the Buckingham Branch Railroad , a Virginia @-@ based short @-@ line railroad that leases the line from CSX . 
 Many years after the original Virginia Central became part of the Chesapeake and Ohio in 1868 , another railroad between Fredericksburg and Orange used the name " Virginia Central . " The Potomac , Fredericksburg & Piedmont Railroad Company ( PF & P ) operated 38 miles ( 61 km ) of 3 @-@ foot ( 910 mm ) gauge railroad between Fredericksburg ( with a connection to the RF & P Railroad ) and Orange ( with a connection to the Orange & Alexandria Railroad ) . It operated as narrow gauge until 1926 , when the line was standard gauged and the name changed to the Virginia Central Railway . In 1937 , the entire line was abandoned except for a 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) segment in Fredericksburg which lasted until 1984 . 
 = Yellow ( Coldplay song ) = 
 " Yellow " is a song by British alternative rock band Coldplay . The band wrote the song and co @-@ produced it with British record producer Ken Nelson for their debut studio album , Parachutes ( 2000 ) . The song 's lyrics are a reference to the band 's lead singer Chris Martin 's unrequited love . 
 The song was recorded in March 2000 , and released in June that same year as the second single from Parachutes , following " Shiver " , and the lead single in the United States . The single reached number four in the UK Singles Chart , giving Coldplay their first top @-@ five hit in the United Kingdom . Helped by heavy rotation and usage in promotions , the song thrust the band into massive popularity . " Yellow " has since been covered by various recording artists worldwide , and remains one of the band 's most popular songs . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 " Yellow " was written in a Rockfield studio in Wales called the Quadrangle , where Coldplay began working on their debut studio album , Parachutes . One night after finishing recording " Shiver " , the album 's lead single , the band took a break and went out of the studio . Outside , there were few lights on and the stars in the sky were visible and " just amazing " , according to the song 's co @-@ producer , Ken Nelson . He told the band to look at the stars , which they did . Vocalist Chris Martin was inspired by the sight and the song 's main melody , consisting of a chord pattern , popped into his head . At first , Martin did not take it seriously " as he relayed the tune to the rest of the band in his worst Neil Young impersonation voice " . Martin has said , " The song had the word ' stars ' and that seemed like a word you should sing in a Neil Young voice . " The melody " started off a lot slower " , according to drummer Will Champion , and it sounded like a Neil Young song . Not long after , despite not taking the song seriously , Martin 's idea worked out when he had developed the tempo of the verse . When guitarist Jonny Buckland started playing it and supplemented it with his ideas , they had created the riff , " and it sort of got a bit heavier " . 
 While composing the song 's lyrics , Martin could not find the right words . He was thinking of a specific word , which he deemed a missing key word in the lyrics , to fit the song 's concept . He looked around the studio and saw Stephanie , a friend that happened to be present in the studio at that time . Martin later titled the song " Yellow " as a reference to Stephanie 's yellow glow . The lyrics progressed from there with the band collaborating . Bassist Guy Berryman came up with the opening line " Look at the stars " . That night , having quickly composed the song , the band recorded it . 
 A much different origin of the song was told on The Howard Stern Show in November 2011 . Chris Martin explained to Stern that he was impersonating Neil Young while entertaining guests when he came across the first chord of the song , which stuck with him for a bit then in a Neil Young voice he sang " look at the stars " . Martin went on to further explain that the word " yellow " has absolutely no meaning whatsoever and while writing the rest of the song he tried his best to change yellow to something else since every lyric before yellow made no sense but in the end the word " L " just sounded right . Martin also told Stern that through the years depending on the attitude and manner of whoever interviews him , he would make up some story about a song or album titles just to move on to the next question . Martin applauded Stern saying " I like you , Howard , so that 's the first time I 've ever told anyone the truth behind ' Yellow ' . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The band and Nelson produced the track . Nelson was acquainted with the band 's music through the former 's manager . Nelson 's manager gave him a copy of an EP and single by Coldplay , and showed interest in working with them after seeing the band perform live . " Yellow " was initially recorded upstairs in the project studio , basically a demo room in Liverpool 's Parr Street Studios . The track was later mixed in New York . 
 Nelson and the band encountered problems in producing some aspects of the song . According to Champion , " ... it was really difficult to record , because it worked at about five or six different tempos . It was a tough choice of choosing which tempo to play , because sometimes it sounded too rushed , and sometimes it sounded as if it was dragging ... " The band was trying to get the right tempo , according to Nelson , " because a beat either side of the tempo we picked didn 't have the same groove " . To improve the song , they recorded this part live and Buckland overdubbed his guitar . They recorded it two or three times until Nelson and the band were happy at the output . The backing vocals were recorded in the control room of Quadrangle . 
 Nelson used an analogue 2 @-@ inch type tape in recording most of the tracks in the album . As recording progressed , " Yellow " was one of a couple of songs that they " couldn 't quite get on analogue " . They recorded different versions but it did not satisfy their taste . So Nelson used Pro Tools " to get the feel of [ the track ] just right " ; once all takes were recorded into the computer , " we then put it down to the 2 @-@ inch , which I found was a great way to do it " , according to Nelson . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Martin has explained of the song : " ' Yellow ' refers to the mood of the band . Brightness and hope and devotion . " The references in some of the song 's lyrics , including the swimming and drawing a line , " are all metaphorical slants on the extent of his emotional devotion " . The drawing of a line refers to Martin 's habit of writing lists , and underlining those important things on the list . Martin has commented that the song is about devotion , referring to his unrequited love ( Martin was single at the time he wrote the song ) . Despite its lyrical theme , most people have considered " Yellow " as a happy song . The song is written in the key of B major with a tempo of 88 beats per minute and the vocal range spanning from F ♯ 4 to G ♯ 5 . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Yellow " and " Shiver " were initially released as EPs in the spring of 2000 along with the songs " Help Is Round the Corner " and " No More Keeping My Feet on the Ground " , the third taken from the band 's first EP , Safety . In the United States , the song was released as the lead single from the album . In October 2000 , the track was sent to US college and alternative radio outlets . The band released a limited @-@ edition CD of " Trouble " , the third single from Parachutes , which features a remix of " Yellow " . It was pressed to 1 @,@ 000 copies , and was issued only to fans and journalists . The single , accompanied by its TV reception through its music video , received massive radio airplay , particularly at BBC Radio 1 . The reaction was chiefly positive and even the newly revitalized BBC Radio 2 played the track repeatedly . This heavy rotation continued for months after its release , eventually ending as 2000 's most @-@ aired song . A month after the album was released in the United States via record label Nettwerk , " Yellow " was used as the theme song for ABC autumn television promotions . The song was also used as the theme music for The Cancer Council Australia 's " Daffodil Day " , in recognition of that organization 's official flower 's yellow hue . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song was well @-@ received by music critics . Matt Diehl of Rolling Stone magazine has noted " Yellow " is " <unk> romantic " , adding that " the band creates a hypnotic slo @-@ mo otherworld where spirit rules supreme " . " Yellow " won Best Single at the 2001 NME Carling Awards . It was nominated at the 2002 Grammy Awards for Best Rock Song and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . Billboard said that " every time that electric @-@ guitar riff barges in , you 're hooked all over again . " In August 2009 the song was listed at # 263 on Pitchfork Media 's " Top 500 songs of the 2000s " . In October 2011 , NME placed it at number 139 on its list " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Yellow " played well in Europe , and was popular . In the United Kingdom , its midweek sales suggested that the single would reach the Top 10 of the chart . Although the band supposed " Yellow " would decline inside the Top 20 , they would have considered its performance a triumph since the album 's lead single , " Shiver " , had only reached the 35th position . Since " Yellow " ' s second week sales were stronger , it eventually reached number four , giving the band their first Top 10 single in the United Kingdom . The popularity of the song in British clubs , pubs and sporting events bolstered the album to debut at number one on the UK Albums Chart . As of February 2015 , the song has sold 530 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . 
 " Yellow " achieved popularity in the United States , and was Coldplay 's first American hit . The single charted on eight different Billboard singles charts ; it also topped various US modern @-@ rock radio playlists in the spring of 2001 . The single performed as it did in Europe and has helped Parachutes be certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America during the single 's stay on the chart . As of October 2014 , the song has sold over 2 million copies in the US . 
 After Coldplay 's appearance at Sound Relief in Australia , In the charting week starting 22 March 2009 , the single made a return to the Australian ARIA Top 50 , after almost eight years since its last appearance in the Top 50 . It re @-@ entered the chart at number 48 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Yellow " was filmed at Studland Bay in the county of Dorset , South West England . The video is minimalistic , featuring only Martin singing the song as he walks along the beach . He is seen wearing a set of waterproofs with his hair wet , suggesting that it had just rained . The video is one continuous shot with no cuts . The entire sequence is in slow motion . 
 It was conceived and produced by Coldplay . Originally , it had been intended for the whole band to appear in the video , in a sunny setting . Champion 's mother 's funeral was held on the day of the shooting , so it was decided that only Martin would appear in the video , which was also the immediate explanation of his mood during this part . The weather also opposed the original plan , with harsh winds and rain instead of the sunny day that had been envisioned . It had also been originally intended for there to be moving stars in the sky , as if in a time @-@ lapse . The directors agreed that the moving stars would distract the focus of the video from Martin . The plan of time advancing was kept . The video begins with the beach being somewhat dark until sunlight arrives nearly at the video 's midway point . 
 The video was directed by British directing duo James Frost & Alex of The Artists Company . It was shot at 50 frames per second , twice the regular speed . At the shoot , Chris Martin had to sing the song at double speed so that the audio and visual content would be in sync , a common yet difficult practice of music videos . The final product is slowed to 25 frames per second , giving the slow motion effect of the video . The transition of the video from night to day was achieved during the telecine process . During the transfer from film to videotape , an operator manually adjusted the amount of lighting for blue in the beginning , red in the middle , and yellow at the end of the video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Coldplay have performed the song throughout their career , and it is a firm audience favourite . The band had their debut performance on television on the show Later ... with Jools Holland . They performed Parachutes 's lead single , " Shiver " , and the new song , " Yellow " ; but it was the latter that had an immediate studio audience impact . They have also performed at the Glastonbury Festival , one of the prominent festivals in Europe . During their second appearance in July 2000 , Coldplay performed " Yellow " and " effortlessly " captured over 10 @,@ 000 spectators . Coldplay 's popularity at this time was still growing and " Yellow " has helped cultivate it ; Martin has said it was the best day of their year . During most concert performances , large yellow balloons are dropped on the audience . The first known sighting of yellow balloons was on 24 September 2002 at the UIC Pavilion in Chicago . Chris Martin noticed the balloons in the air with a surprised look . In more recent years , the balloons are filled with confetti , and at the end of the song Chris Martin pops one with his guitar and confetti flies everywhere . 
 A live acoustic version performed on Jo Whiley 's The Lunchtime Social was included on the Acoustic EP . Another live version featuring only piano and vocals performed and broadcast in Los Angeles on KCRW 's Morning Becomes Eclectic was included on the Japanese Clocks EP . Most recently an acoustic piano version the song was recorded in the studio for Starbucks charity compilation album Every Mother Counts 2012 . 
 Coldplay performed the song at the Celebrating Steve event at the Apple campus on 16 October 2011 . Before the performance , Martin revealed that , when they first played it for Steve Jobs 10 years ago , Jobs said the song was " shit " and that " they would never make it " . 
 = = Covers and versions = = 
 " Yellow " has been covered by numerous singers worldwide , some in different languages and styles . A Chinese language version of " Yellow " was recorded by Chinese rock singer Zheng Jun in 2001 , six months after the original release of the single . Singaporean singer Tanya Chua covered the song . The cover band and comedy act Richard Cheese and Lounge Against the Machine covered this as a Lounge style version on his 2004 album I 'd Like a Virgin . The song has also been performed by the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra . American musicians Petra Haden and Bill Frisell covered the song , featuring it in their album Petra Haden and Bill Frisell ; the cover appears in episode 3 @.@ 08 of the The <unk> .. In 2006 , Tre Lux covered " Yellow " on the cover album A Strange Gathering . Fame Academy winner Alex Parks often performed " Yellow " and a cover appears on her debut album . English vocal troupe G4 covered the song for their second album , G4 & Friends , with " unique harmonies " . American singer @-@ writer Brooke White covered " Yellow " on her 2006 album Songs from the Attic . White 's manager directed her to cover American hard rock band Aerosmith 's 1973 single " Dream On " , but she wanted to do " Yellow " . Since they had contradicting ideas , they compromised and ended up producing cover versions of the two . In 2009 , Jem performed a cover of " Yellow " for Starbucks Entertainment 's Valentine 's Day compilation Sweetheart : Our Favorite Artists Sing Their Favorite Love Songs . Russian singer Grigory <unk> has covered the song , featuring it in his 2006 album V <unk> <unk> . 
 The song has also been covered in live performances by various artists . Sara Bareilles gave a rendition of her " all @-@ time favorite song " at the iHeartRadio event in January 2011 . The progressive bluegrass trio Nickel Creek has played " Yellow " in the middle of " The Lighthouse 's Tale " at their concerts . Boyce Avenue an acoustic rock band from Florida covered " Yellow " in their album entitled " Influential Sessions " . Galway @-@ based musicians Joe Joyce and Oisin Tierney have been known to cover " Yellow " as part of their performances , and American band The Almost has often covered " Yellow " at their live shows . American alternative rock band Brand New often covers part of the song live at the end of their song " The Boy Who Blocked His Own Shot " . The X Factor 2008 contestant Diana Vickers covered the song for ' Best of British week ' . During their 2010 tour , Limp Bizkit have also covered the song regularly live . U2 performed a snippet of " Yellow " during the introduction to their song " Moment of Surrender " live at Glastonbury Festival 2011 . Alex Turner of Arctic Monkeys also sung the first line of the song at Glastonbury Festival 2013 . Renard Queenston made a remix of the song under their alias Furries in a Blender . Country music singer Kacey Musgraves performed an acoustic cover version of the song for the 2015 Royal Variety Performance in London . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Brian Hiatt of Rolling Stone magazine has deemed the song a career @-@ making record . Roach has claimed in his book , Coldplay : Nobody Said It Was Easy , that although " Shiver " earned the band their debut UK Top 40 single , it was " Yellow " that has changed " everything " , and that it " exemplifies so much of what had made Coldplay so popular " . In the US , after it was being used in promos of ABC , the band grew in popularity which continued in 2001 . According to Barry Walters in his review of Coldplay 's second album , A Rush of Blood to the Head , for Spin magazine , the band is still known in the United States for their " surprise smash ' Yellow ' " . A Billboard magazine review said , " After one single ( ' Yellow ' ) and its accompanying album ( Parachutes ... ) , Coldplay have already been anointed heir to the Brit @-@ rock throne . " The song has since been regarded as the centerpiece track on the album . 
 The song was featured in Richard Linklater 's film Boyhood . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Yellow " – 4 : 31 
 " Help Is Round the Corner " – 2 : 36 
 " No More Keeping My Feet on the Ground " ( From the Safety EP ) – 4 : 31 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Chris Martin – lead vocals , acoustic guitar , piano , mellotron 
 Jonny Buckland – electric guitar , backing vocals 
 Guy Berryman – bass guitar 
 Will Champion – drums 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Resident Evil 4 = 
 Resident Evil 4 , known in Japan as Biohazard 4 , is a survival horror third @-@ person shooter video game developed and published by Capcom . The sixth main entry in the Resident Evil horror series , the game was originally released for the GameCube in North America and Japan in January 2005 , and in Europe and Australia in March 2005 . The story of Resident Evil 4 follows the U.S. government special agent Leon S. Kennedy , who is sent on a mission to rescue Ashley Graham , the U.S. President 's daughter who has been kidnapped by a sinister cult . Traveling to a rural area of Spain , Leon fights hordes of violent villagers and mutated monsters , and reunites with the mysterious spy Ada Wong . 
 It was first hinted at the December 1999 release , Resident Evil 4 underwent a long development time during which four proposed versions of the game were discarded . Initially developed for the PlayStation 2 , the first attempt was directed by Hideki Kamiya after producer Shinji Mikami requested him to create a new entry in the Resident Evil series . Nevertheless , it was decided to start development over again . The game was intended to be a GameCube exclusive as part of the Capcom Five , but a PlayStation 2 version was announced before the game was released for the GameCube . Resident Evil 4 was subsequently released for Microsoft Windows , Wii , PlayStation 3 , Xbox 360 , and in downsized versions for iOS , Zeebo and Android ( exclusive to Samsung outside of Japan ) . 
 Resident Evil 4 garnered critical acclaim . It received many Game of the Year awards for 2005 , and was seen as a successful cross @-@ platform hit that influenced the evolution of the survival horror and third @-@ person shooter genres . The game pioneered and popularized the " over the shoulder " third @-@ person view perspective in video games . It has since been widely considered to be one of the best video games of all time . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player controls the protagonist Leon S. Kennedy from a third @-@ person perspective . The gameplay focuses on action and shootouts involving crowds of enemies in large open areas . The camera is placed behind Leon , and zooms in for an over @-@ the @-@ shoulder view when aiming a weapon , or a first @-@ person view when aiming with a sniper rifle . There is no crosshair for firearms , instead , every firearm has a laser sight . Unlike previous games where players can only shoot straight , up or down , players have more options . For example , shots to the feet can cause enemies to stumble , shots to the arms can make them drop their weapons , and headshots instantly kills most human enemies . Players can shoot at projectiles like thrown axes or scythes . 
 Another aspect of Resident Evil 4 , new to the series , is the inclusion of context @-@ sensitive controls . Based on the situation , players can interact with the environment : kicking down a ladder , jumping out of a window , dodging an attack or executing a " finishing move " on weakened enemies . There are also quick time events , in which the player must press buttons indicated on @-@ screen to execute actions such as dodging a falling boulder or wrestling an enemy to stay alive . These are often incorporated into the game 's many boss fights , where the player must avoid instant kill attacks . 
 The main enemies are violent villagers referred to as Los <unk> ( " The Cattle " in Spanish ) . Los <unk> can dodge , wield melee and projectile weapons , and are capable of working collectively and communicating with each other . They were once simple farmers until becoming the product of an infestation of Las Plagas ( " The Plague " in Spanish ) . 
 The inventory system of the game features a grid system , represented by an attaché case , that has each item take up a certain number of spaces . The case can be upgraded several times , allowing for more space . Weapons , ammunition and healing items are kept in the case , while key items and treasures are kept in a separate menu . Items may be bought from and sold to a merchant that appears in various locations throughout the game . He sells first aid sprays , weapons , allows for weapons to be upgraded and buys various treasures that Leon finds . The various weapons each have their own advantages and disadvantages . 
 Capcom added new content made specifically for the PlayStation 2 version of the game , which was later incorporated into the PC and Wii releases . The largest addition is " Separate Ways " , a minigame which focuses on Ada Wong 's involvement in Resident Evil 4 and her connection to the series ' villain Albert Wesker . " Ada 's Report " , a five @-@ part documentary , analyzes Ada 's relationship with Wesker and his role in the plot . Other unlockable content in all versions includes the minigames " The Mercenaries " and " Assignment Ada " ( using Ada to retrieve Las Plagas samples ) , new costumes for Leon and Ashley , new weapons , and a cutscene browser . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Six years after the events of Resident Evil 2 , former Raccoon City police officer Leon S. Kennedy ( Paul Mercier ) is sent on a mission to rescue Ashley Graham ( Carolyn Lawrence ) , the U.S. President 's daughter , who has been kidnapped by a mysterious cult . He travels to a nameless rural village in an unspecified part of Spain , where he encounters a group of hostile villagers who pledge their lives to Los Illuminados ( " The Enlightened Ones " in Spanish ) , the cult that kidnapped Ashley . 
 While in the village , Leon is captured by its chief , <unk> Mendez , and injected with a mind @-@ controlling parasite known as Las Plagas . He finds himself held captive with Luis Sera ( Rino Romano ) , a former Los Illuminados researcher . The two work together to escape , but then quickly go their separate ways . Leon discovers that Ashley is being held in a church , and rescues her . They both escape from the church after Osmund Saddler ( Michael Gough ) , leader of the Illuminados , reveals his plan to use the <unk> they injected into Ashley to manipulate her into injecting the president of the United States with the " sample " ( a Master <unk> ) once she returns home , allowing Saddler to begin his conquest of the world . Leon and Ashley try to take refuge in a castle , but are attacked by more Illuminados under the command of Ramon Salazar ( Rene Mujica ) , another of Saddler 's henchmen who owns the castle , and the two become separated by Salazar 's traps . Meanwhile , Luis searches for the pills to slow Leon and Ashley 's infection , as well as a sample of Las Plagas . He brings the two items to Leon but is killed by Saddler , who takes the sample , while the pills to suppress the infection remain in Leon 's hands . While in the castle , Leon briefly encounters Ada Wong ( Sally Cahill ) , a woman from his past who supports him during his mission . He then battles his way through the castle before finally killing Salazar . 
 Afterwards , Leon travels to a nearby island research facility , where he continues the search for Ashley . He soon discovers that one of his former training comrades , Jack Krauser ( Jim Ward ) , who was believed to have been killed in a helicopter crash two years prior , is responsible for her kidnapping . It is eventually revealed that both Ada and Krauser are working with Albert Wesker ( Richard Waugh ) , for whom both intend to secure a Plagas sample . Suspicious of the mercenary 's intentions , Saddler orders Krauser to kill Leon , believing that no matter which one dies , he will benefit . After Krauser 's defeat , Leon rescues Ashley , and they remove the Plagas from their bodies using a specialized <unk> device . Leon finally confronts Saddler , and with Ada 's help , manages to kill him . However , Ada takes the sample from Leon at gunpoint before escaping in a helicopter , leaving Leon and Ashley to escape via her jet @-@ ski as the island self @-@ destructs . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = <unk> versions = = = 
 First hinted at in early December 1999 , Resident Evil 4 underwent a lengthy development time during which at least four proposed versions of the game were discarded . Initially developed for the PlayStation 2 , the first attempt was directed by Hideki Kamiya after producer Shinji Mikami requested him to create a new entry in the Resident Evil series . Around the turn of the millennium , Resident Evil 2 writer Noboru Sugimura created a scenario for the title , based on Kamiya 's idea to make a " cool " and " stylish " action game . The story was based on unraveling the mystery surrounding the body of protagonist Tony , an invincible man with skills and an intellect exceeding that of normal people , with his superhuman abilities explained with biotechnology . As Kamiya felt the playable character did not look brave and heroic enough in battles from a fixed angle , he decided to drop the prerendered backgrounds from previous installments and instead opted for a dynamic camera system . This new direction required the team to make a trip to Europe , where they spent 11 days in the United Kingdom and Spain , photographing things like Gothic statues , bricks , and stone pavements for use in textures . Though the developers tried to make the " coolness " theme fit into the world of Resident Evil , Mikami felt it strayed too far from the series ' survival horror roots and gradually convinced all of the staff members to make the game independent from it . Kamiya eventually rewrote the story to be set in a world full of demons and changed the hero 's name to Dante . The cast of characters remained largely identical to that in Sugimura 's scenario , although the hero 's mother and his father , the latter an early version of the Umbrella Corporation founder Lord <unk> E. Spencer , were written out of the story . The game 's new title was revealed as Devil May Cry , released for the PlayStation 2 in August 2001 , resulting in its own franchise . 
 Development on Resident Evil 4 started over at the end of 2001 . The first official announcement of the game was made in November 2002 , as one of five games exclusively developed for the GameCube by Capcom Production Studio 4 . This revision , commonly dubbed the " fog version " , was directed by Hiroshi Shibata and was 40 percent finished at that time . The game saw Leon S. Kennedy desperately struggling to survive after having infiltrated the castle @-@ like Umbrella 's main headquarters located in Europe and featured traditional Resident Evil monsters such as zombies . During the course of the new story which was again written by Sugimura 's scenario creation company Flagship , Leon became infected with the Progenitor Virus and possessed a hidden power in his left hand . The producer of the final version also pointed out that Ashley did not appear back then , though there was a different girl who was never revealed to the public . The game was to feature some first @-@ person perspective gameplay elements . 
 At E3 2003 , another revision was revealed that is widely known as the " hook man version " now , though officially titled Maboroshi no Biohazard 4 ( <unk> 「 <unk> 」 , lit . " The Phantom Biohazard 4 " ) on the Biohazard 4 Secret DVD . During Mikami 's introduction of the trailer , he assured that development was proceeding very smoothly and claimed the game to be scarier than ever before , warning gamers with the quote " Don 't pee your pants ! " The story was set in a haunted building where Leon contracted a bizarre disease and fought paranormal enemies , such as animated suits of armor , living dolls , and a ghostlike man armed with a large hook . The game had an otherworldly feel to it , containing elements like flashbacks and hallucinations that were marked by a bluish tint and a shaking camera . It also displayed various gameplay mechanics that carried over to the final release , like the over @-@ the @-@ shoulder camera and a laser sight for aiming in battles and quick time events . Other features , such as dialogue choices , were removed later . Though ultimately scrapped , five minutes of gameplay footage for this version was released on the Biohazard 4 Secret DVD , a Japanese pre @-@ order bonus given out in January 2005 . 
 The <unk> version had only a basic story concept , having dropped the previous scenario penned by Noboru Sugimura of Flagship . In 2012 , Resident Evil 3 : Nemesis scenario writer Yasuhisa Kawamura said he was responsible for this version , as he wanted to make Biohazard 4 scarier " and suggested using a particular scene from the film Lost Souls , where the main character [ ... ] suddenly finds herself in a derelict building with a killer on the loose . An arranged version of this idea eventually turned into Hook Man . The idea went through several iterations as Mr Sugimura and I carefully refined this world ( which , I have to say , was very romantic ) . Leon infiltrates the castle of Spencer seeking the truth , while inside a laboratory located deep within , a young girl wakes up . Accompanied by a <unk> [ an abbreviation for " Bio Organic Weapon " in the series ' lore ] dog , the two start to make their way up the castle . Unfortunately , there were many obstacles that needed to be overcome and the cost of development was deemed too expensive . " Kawamura added he was very sorry and " even ashamed " that Mikami had to step in and scrap this version . After this attempt , the last cancelled revision featured classic zombies again . However , it was discontinued after few months , and before it was ever shown to the public , as the developers felt it was too formulaic . 
 The story of the Progenitor Virus was eventually covered in Resident Evil 5 and the Spencer Estate became the setting for Resident Evil 5 downloadable content ( DLC ) pack " Lost in Nightmares " ( featuring Chris Redfield and Jill Valentine ) . 
 = = = Final version = = = 
 Following that , it was decided to reinvent the series . Mikami took over directorial duties from Shibata and began working on the version that was released . In an interview with Game Informer , Mikami explained his decision to shift to a new gameplay system is due to the feeling that the older system is " more of the same " after playing Resident Evil 0 . He says that he only felt nervous once more when playing with the newer system . Speaking for the team , game producer Hiroyuki Kobayashi mentioned how the staff were " tired of the same thing " and how some got bored and moved on to other projects . In addition to that , the producer also felt that the older format was " stuck in a cookie cutter mold " and described it as " shackles holding us down " . 
 However , despite what Kobayashi said , not every single staff member were on the same page about changing the gameplay system . Kobayashi mentioned how some of the development team felt depressed and were hard to motivate after the focus of the game shifted from horror to action . Although Mikami demanded the camera system to be completely revised , the staff members had reservations about making big changes to the series he had created . Eventually , he intervened , explained his proposed changes , and wrote a new story for the title that , unlike previous installments , was not centered on the company Umbrella . Inspired by Onimusha 3 : Demon Siege , a game Mikami had enjoyed playing but felt could have been better with a different view , he decided to place the camera behind the playable character . To go along with the new gameplay and story , a new type of enemy called " Ganado " was created , as opposed to using the undead creatures from previous Resident Evil games . Furthermore , producers expended additional detail to modify and update characters that had previously appeared in the series . In a documentary explaining the conception of the game 's characters , a game designer stated he intended to make Leon Kennedy " look tougher , but also cool " . 
 The game 's English voice actors recorded their parts in four sessions , over three to four months . Capcom assigned <unk> Ohara as the game 's script translator and voice over coordinator . Carolyn Lawrence , who provided the voice for Ashley Graham , described her character as " vulnerable , because Leon has to come to her rescue all the time " . She also described Kennedy 's character as " more brawn , perhaps , than brain " . In addition to the voice acting , the game 's designer detailed each cinematic sequence so that each character 's facial expressions matched the tone of their voice actor . 
 Along with Resident Evil : Dead Aim and Resident Evil Outbreak , two side story titles that did not fall under the exclusive policy , it was announced on October 31 , 2004 that Resident Evil 4 would come to the PlayStation 2 in 2005 , citing increased profit , changing market conditions , and increased consumer satisfaction as the key reasons . The PlayStation 2 version included new features , primarily a new subgame featuring Ada Wong . On February 1 , 2006 , Ubisoft announced that they would be publishing the game on the PC for Microsoft Windows . On April 4 , 2007 , a Wii version was announced , and was launched later in the year . The game features all of the extras in the PS2 version , along with other additions , including a trailer for Resident Evil : The Umbrella Chronicles . 
 = = Release = = 
 The original version for the GameCube featured two different collector 's editions of the game . The first was available as a pre @-@ order that included the game , Prologue art book and a T @-@ shirt . GameStop offered another limited edition that was packaged in a tin box with the art book , a cel of Leon , and a soundtrack CD . Australia received an exclusive collector 's edition that came with the game and a bonus disc with interviews and creator 's footage . 
 = = = Ports = = = 
 Resident Evil 4 was ported to the PlayStation 2 after Capcom stated that it did not fall under the exclusivity deal with Nintendo . It was released in North America on October 25 , 2005 . The largest addition to the game is " Separate Ways " , a new scenario for Ada written by Haruo Murata . According to producer Masachika Kawata , the Separate Ways campaign was something thought up by the PS2 porting team and was added after getting approval from Shinji Mikami . The port was later included with Resident Evil Code : Veronica X and Resident Evil Outbreak as part of the compilation Resident Evil : The Essentials . The PlayStation 2 version featured two standard and collector 's bundles from pre @-@ orders . The standard package included the game and a T @-@ shirt , while the collector 's bundle included the game , a T @-@ shirt , a figurine of Leon , and the soundtrack Biohazard Sound Chronicle Best Track Box . This quickly sold out , and a second pressing was released that included an Ada figurine . Another , called the Resident Evil 4 : Premium Edition , was packaged in a SteelBook media case , along with the art book , a documentary DVD , and a cel art of Ada . 
 A PC port of Resident Evil 4 developed by Sourcenext was first released in Hong Kong on February 1 , 2007 , published by Typhoon Games . It was later released in Europe , North America and Australia in March 2007 and was published by Ubisoft . The port contains the bonus features from the PS2 version , such as " Separate Ways " , the <unk> 412 laser cannon and a second set of unlockable costumes for Leon and Ashley , as well as an Easy difficulty level . It also supports multiple widescreen resolutions . The shadow and lighting issues were fixed in the first and only patch for the game , Version 1 @.@ 10 . 
 Resident Evil 4 : Wii Edition was released for the Wii on May 31 , 2007 in Japan and on June 19 , 2007 in the United States . It features updated controls that utilize the pointing and motion @-@ sensing abilities of the Wii Remote and Nunchuk , though both the GameCube controller and the Classic Controller are also supported . The Wii Remote is able to aim and shoot anywhere on the screen with a reticle that replaces the laser sight found in the other versions , and motion @-@ based gestures are used to perform some context @-@ sensitive actions , such as dodging or slashing Leon 's knife . The Wii Edition also includes the extra content from the PS2 and PC versions , and a trailer for Resident Evil : The Umbrella Chronicles . The Wii Edition became available for download from the Wii U 's Nintendo eShop in Europe on October 29 , 2015 . 
 Resident Evil 4 : Mobile Edition was released in Japan for au 's BREW 4 @.@ 0 on February 1 , 2008 . It was first announced by Capcom at TGS 2007 . Differences from the original include changing the flow of the story from being continuous to being divided into sections such as " Village " , " <unk> " , " Fortress " and " Subterranean Tunnel " . There is also a more challenging Mercenary Mode . The game uses the <unk> eruption engine and was adapted to the Zeebo and iOS platforms . On July 13 , 2009 , without any formal announcement , Resident Evil 4 : Mobile Edition was released by Capcom for the iOS platform via the App Store in Japan , but was quickly removed , though some players were able to purchase and download the game . The game has since been officially released in Japan and North America . Later , Capcom made an update that had different difficulty levels and <unk> . Recently , Capcom released a new separate version called Resident Evil 4 for Beginners , which offers the first two levels ( three counting a training level ) of both Story Mode and Mercenary Mode . However , the rest of the levels are available for purchase in @-@ game as downloadable content . Due to the release of the iPad , Capcom recreated the iPhone version of Resident Evil 4 : Mobile Edition and updated it to HD graphics as Resident Evil 4 : iPad Edition . 
 On March 23 , 2011 , high definition remastered versions of both Resident Evil Code : Veronica and Resident Evil 4 were announced to be in development for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 , as part of the Resident Evil : Revival Selection series . The ports are to feature all the bonus content from the previous releases , including " Separate Ways " . On July 23 , 2011 Capcom announced at Comic @-@ Con 2011 that Resident Evil 4 would be released on September 20 , 2011 for the PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Games on Demand . In Japan , Resident Evil 4 and Resident Evil Code : Veronica were released on a single disc with the title Biohazard Revival Selection on September 8 , 2011 . For North America and Europe , both titles , including Resident Evil 4 HD , were only released as downloads on Xbox Live Games on Demand and PlayStation Network . On February 27 , 2014 , Capcom released Resident Evil 4 Ultimate HD Edition for Microsoft Windows . The port features improved graphics and many other enhancements that were included in Resident Evil 4 HD . Resident Evil 4 will be re @-@ released on PlayStation 4 and Xbox One on August 30th 2016 
 In April 2013 , Resident Evil 4 was released on Android , but outside of Japan it is exclusive to Samsung through Samsung Galaxy Apps . 
 = = = Merchandise = = = 
 An album titled Biohazard 4 Original Soundtrack was released in Japan on December 22 , 2005 . It contains 62 compositions from the game and the 48 @-@ page Visual Booklet with liner notes from composers Shusaku Uchiyama and Misao Senbongi . Other merchandise for the game included figures by McFarlane Toys , NECA and Hot Toys . <unk> Entertainment has also created various miniature collectibles based on several main characters and enemies from Resident Evil 4 . Two special controllers designed to resemble chainsaws were designed by <unk> for use with the game 's GameCube and PlayStation 2 versions . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 The GameCube version sold over 320 @,@ 000 copies in North America during the first twenty days . The European release sold its entire 200 @,@ 000 units during the first month . By January 2006 , over 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies of the GameCube and PlayStation 2 versions had been shipped worldwide . According to January 17 , 2007 sales figures provided by Capcom , the GameCube version of Resident Evil 4 has sold a total of 1 @.@ 6 million units worldwide , while the PS2 version has sold over 2 million units . As of September 30 , 2011 , the PS2 version has sold 2 @.@ 2 million units and the Wii Edition has sold 1 @.@ 9 million units . According to Capcom 's Platinum Titles list , the game has sold 5 @.@ 9 million units across all formats , making it the fourth biggest @-@ selling Resident Evil title and for which it holds the record for " Best @-@ Selling Survival Horror Game " in the 2012 Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition . In addition , the 2014 Windows release of Ultimate HD Edition sold more than 560 @,@ 000 units on Steam , as of May 2016 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Resident Evil 4 was critically acclaimed and received an overall score of 96 / 100 on Metacritic for the GameCube and PlayStation 2 versions . In addition to the gameplay , the characters and story generally received positive commentary , leading to the finished product being deemed by most as one of the best video games ever made . GameSpot 's Greg Kasavin praised the game 's voice acting , but claimed that it was betrayed by " some uncharacteristically goofy dialogue " . Yahoo ! Games ' Adam <unk> and GameSpot 's Kevin VanOrd acclaimed Capcom for adding great amounts of detail to the game 's characters . IGN 's Matt Casamassina went into further detail in his review for Resident Evil 4 , praising not only the detailed character design , but also the fight choreography and three @-@ dimensional modeling within cinematic sequences . Casamassina also complimented the game 's voice actors , especially Paul Mercier ( Leon ) , commenting , " For once , the characters are believable because Capcom has hired competent actors to supply their voices . Leon in particular is very well produced " . IGN and Nintendo Power specifically recognized Resident Evil 4 's character design and voice acting . The increased variety of weapons has been praised by gaming publications such as GamePro and Game Over Online . G4 TV show X @-@ Play gave it a 5 out of 5 , for introducing a new style of gameplay for the series as well as incorporating moments where the player would have to interact with the cut scenes . Not long after , it was awarded as the best game ever reviewed on the show . The makers of Resident Evil 4 worked on various innovations associated with the use and inventory of weapons . Game Over stated that players can use the vast array of weapons to " go for headshots now " . Game Informer stated that ammunition is more plentiful in Resident Evil 4 than in other games in the series , making the game more action @-@ oriented . 
 The ratings of the PC port were not as high as for the other versions . It was heavily criticized for no mouse support and frustrating keyboard controls , low @-@ quality FMV cut scenes , choppy graphics rendering ( lacks shadows and proper lighting ) and requiring a gamepad controller for more precise aiming and gameplay . Despite the issues , the game still received generally positive reviews from IGN and GameSpot that praised the gameplay . Japanese game magazine Famitsu reviewed the Wii version of the game , with two editors giving the game a perfect 10 score , and the remaining pair giving it a 9 , resulting in a score of 38 out of 40 . The reviewers noted that the game 's improved controls offer something fresh and different . Multiple reviewers agreed that even those who own the original will find something fun and enjoyable in this version . British magazine NGamer gave the Wii Edition a score of 96 % , slightly lower than the 97 % given to the GameCube version . They praised the visuals , controls and features and commented on the fact that such an " exceptional package " was on sale for a low price ; however , when writing about the Wii controls , they said " if you 've played the GC version this won 't be as special " . Official Nintendo Magazine gave the Wii version 94 % , 3 % less than the original due to it simply not having the same impact it did back then . IGN praised the Wii version , stating it is the superior edition , but does not push the Wii like it did with GameCube and PS2 . GameSpot praised the new controls of the Wii Edition , but commented on the lack of exclusive Wii features . Hyper 's <unk> Davies commended Resident Evil 4 : Wii Edition for its " visual improvements " but criticized it for having " no new content " . The PS3 version of Resident Evil 4 HD received a score of 9 @.@ 0 from Destructoid , which called it " a hallmark of excellence " . 
 In their October 2013 issue , Edge retroactively awarded the game ten out of ten , one of twenty @-@ three games to achieve that perfect score in the magazine 's twenty @-@ year history . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The game has received several awards from various organizations from various video game websites . It was named Game of the Year at the 2005 Spike Video Game Awards . Nintendo Power also named it their 2005 Game of the Year . Game Informer named it their 2005 Game of the Year as well . It tied with Kingdom Hearts II as Famitsu 's Game of the Year 2005 . Nintendo Power acknowledged the title 's voice acting in its 2005 Nintendo Power Awards , while IGN gave the game the " Best Artistic Design " award in its " Best of 2005 " segment . The International Game Developers Association nominated Resident Evil 4 for their best " Visual Arts " award , but lost the award to Sony 's Shadow of the Colossus . 
 Resident Evil 4 is often considered one of the best video games of all time . Nintendo Power ranked it as number one top best GameCube games of all time " in 2005 and also ranked it second on their list of the best games of the 2000s in 2010 . In 2008 , Resident Evil 4 was also ranked first place in the list of the best video games of all time according to the readers of IGN . In 2009 , Game Informer ranked Resident Evil 4 number one on their list of top GameCube games and number three on their list of top PlayStation 2 games . ScrewAttack named Resident Evil 4 the best GameCube game of all time , while GamePro ranked it as the second best game for the PS2 . In 2010 , the readers of PlayStation Official Magazine voted it the 10th greatest PlayStation title ever released . In 2007 , Edge ranked the game at second place in its list of top games of all time , behind only The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time . That same year , G4 named it the 21st top video game of all time , calling it " a modern horror masterpiece . " In 2015 , the game placed 7th on USgamer 's The 15 Best Games Since 2000 list . In early 2006 , in their 200th issue , Nintendo Power ranked it in second place in their Top 200 Games of all @-@ time list , also behind only The Legend of Zelda : Ocarina of Time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Resident Evil 4 is regarded as one of the most influential games of the 2000s decade , due to its influence in redefining the third @-@ person shooter genre by introducing a " reliance on offset camera angles that fail to obscure the action " . The new gameplay alterations and immersive style appealed to many not previously familiar with the series . The over @-@ the @-@ shoulder viewpoint introduced in Resident Evil 4 has later become standard in third @-@ person shooters , including titles ranging from Gears of War to Batman : Arkham Asylum . It has also become a standard " precision aim " feature for action games in general , with examples ranging from Dead Space and Grand Theft Auto to the Ratchet & Clank Future series and Fallout . 
 Resident Evil 4 redefined the survival horror genre by emphasizing reflexes and precision aiming , thus broadening the gameplay of the series with elements from the wider action game genre . However , this also led some reviewers to suggest that the Resident Evil series had abandoned the survival horror genre , by demolishing the genre conventions that it had established . Other major survival horror series followed suit , by developing their combat systems to feature more action , such as Silent Hill Homecoming and the 2008 version of Alone in the Dark . These changes represent an overall trend among console games shifting towards visceral action gameplay . While working on The Last of Us , Naughty Dog took cues from Resident Evil 4 , particularly the tension and action . 
 = Heterodontosaurus = 
 Heterodontosaurus is a genus of heterodontosaurid dinosaur that lived during the Early Jurassic period , 200 – 190 million years ago . Its only known member species , Heterodontosaurus tucki , was named in 1962 based on a skull discovered in South Africa . The genus name means " different toothed lizard " , in reference to its unusual , heterodont dentition ; the specific name honors G. C. Tuck , who supported the discoverers . Further specimens have since been found , including an almost complete skeleton in 1966 . 
 Though it was a small dinosaur , Heterodontosaurus was one of the largest members of its family , reaching between 1 @.@ 18 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) and possibly 1 @.@ 75 m ( 5 @.@ 7 ft ) in length , and weighing between 2 and 10 kg ( 4 @.@ 4 and 22 @.@ 0 lb ) . The body was short with a long tail . The five @-@ fingered forelimbs were long and relatively robust , whereas the hind @-@ limbs were long , slender , and had four toes . The skull was elongated , narrow , and triangular when viewed from the side . The front of the jaws were covered in a horny beak . It had three types of teeth ; in the upper jaw , small , incisor @-@ like teeth were followed by long , canine @-@ like tusks . A gap divided the tusks from the chisel @-@ like " cheek teeth " . 
 Heterodontosaurus is the eponymous and best known member of the family Heterodontosauridae . This family is considered one of the most primitive or basal groups within the order of ornithischian dinosaurs . In spite of the large tusks , Heterodontosaurus is thought to have been herbivorous , or at least omnivorous . Though it was formerly thought to have been capable of quadrupedal locomotion , it is now thought to have been bipedal . Tooth replacement was sporadic and not continuous , unlike its relatives . At least four other heterodontosaurid genera are known from the same geological formations as Heterodontosaurus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Heterodontosaurus was a small dinosaur . The most complete skeleton , SAM @-@ PK @-@ 1332 , belonged to an animal measuring about 1 @.@ 18 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) in length . Its weight was variously estimated at 1 @.@ 8 kg ( 4 @.@ 0 lb ) , 2 @.@ 59 kg ( 5 @.@ 7 lb ) , and 3 @.@ 4 kg ( 7 @.@ 5 lb ) in separate studies . The closure of vertebral sutures on the skeleton indicates that the specimen was an adult , and probably fully grown . A second specimen , consisting of an incomplete skull , indicates that Heterodontosaurus could have grown substantially larger – up to a length of 1 @.@ 75 m ( 5 @.@ 7 ft ) and with a body mass of nearly 10 kg ( 22 lb ) . The reason for the size difference between the two specimens is unclear , and might reflect variability within a single species , sexual dimorphism , or the presence of two separate species . The size of this dinosaur has been compared to that of a turkey . Heterodontosaurus was amongst the largest known members of the Heterodontosauridae family . The family contains some of the smallest known ornithischians – the North American Fruitadens , for example , reached a length of only 65 to 75 cm ( 26 to 30 in ) . 
 The neck consisted of nine cervical vertebrae , which would have formed an S @-@ shaped curve , as indicated by the shape of the vertebral bodies in the side view of the skeleton . The vertebral bodies of the anterior cervical vertebrae are shaped like a parallelogram , those of the middle are rectangular and those of the posterior show a trapezoid shape . The trunk was short , consisting of 12 dorsal and 6 fused sacral vertebrae . The tail was long compared to the body ; although incompletely known , it probably consisted of 34 to 37 caudal vertebrae . The dorsal spine was stiffened by ossified tendons , beginning with the forth dorsal vertebra . This feature is present in many other ornithischian dinosaurs and probably countered stress caused by bending forces acting on the spine during bipedal locomotion . In contrast to many other ornithischians , the tail of Heterodontosaurus lacked ossified tendons , and was therefore probably flexible . It had a long , narrow pelvis and a pubis which resembled those possessed by more advanced ornithischians . 
 The forelimbs were robustly built and proportionally long , measuring 70 % of the length of the hind limbs . The radius of the forearm measured 70 % of the length of the humerus ( forearm bone ) . The hand was large , approaching the humerus in length , and possessed five fingers equipped for grasping . The second finger was the longest , followed by the third and the first finger ( the thumb ) . The first three fingers ended in large and strong claws . The fourth and fifth fingers were strongly reduced , and possibly vestigial . The phalangeal formula , which states the number of finger bones in each finger starting from the first , was 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 . 
 The hindlimbs were long , slender , and ended in four toes , the first of which ( the hallux ) did not contact the ground . Uniquely for ornithischians , several bones of the leg and foot were fused : the tibia and fibula were fused with upper tarsal bones ( astragalus and calcaneus ) , forming a tibiotarsus , while the lower tarsal bones were fused with the metatarsal bones , forming a tarsometatarsus . This constellation can also be found in modern birds , where it has evolved independently . The tibiotarsus was about 30 % longer than the femur . The ungual bones of the toes were claw @-@ like , and not hoof @-@ like as in more advanced ornithischians . 
 Following the description of the related Tianyulong in 2009 , which was preserved with hundreds of long , filamentous integuments ( sometimes compared to bristles ) from neck to tail , Heterodontosaurus has also been depicted with such structures , for example in publications by American palaeontologists Gregory S. Paul and Paul Sereno . Sereno has stated that a <unk> may have looked like a " nimble two @-@ legged porcupine " in life . The restoration published by Sereno also featured a hypothetical display structure located on the snout , above the nasal fossa ( depression ) . 
 = = = Skull and dentition = = = 
 The skull of Heterodontosaurus was small but robustly built . The two most complete skulls measured 108 mm ( 4 in ) ( holotype specimen SAM @-@ PK @-@ <unk> ) and 121 mm ( 5 in ) ( specimen SAM @-@ PK @-@ K1332 ) in length . The skull was elongated , narrow , and triangular when viewed from the side , with the highest point being the sagittal crest , from where the skull sloped down towards the snout tip . The back of the skull ended in a hook @-@ like shape , which was offset to the quadrate bone . The orbit ( eye opening ) was large and circular , and a large spur @-@ like bone , the palpebral , protruded backwards into the upper part of the opening . Below the eye socket , the jugal bone gave rise to a sideways projecting boss , or horn @-@ like structure . The jugal bone also formed a " blade " that created a slot together with a flange on the pterygoid bone , for guiding the motion of the lower jaw . <unk> , the antorbital fossa was bounded by a prominent bony ridge , to which the animal 's fleshy cheek would have been attached . The proportionally large lower temporal fenestra was egg @-@ shaped and tilted back , and located behind the eye opening . The elliptical upper temporal fenestra was visible only looking at the top of the skull . The left and right upper temporal fenestrae were separated by the sagittal crest , which would have provided lateral attachment surfaces for the jaw musculature in the living animal . 
 The lower jaw tapered towards the front , and the dentary bone ( the main part of the lower jaw ) was robust . The front of the jaws where covered by a toothless keratinous beak ( or rhamphotheca ) . The upper beak covered the front of the premaxilla bone and the lower beak covered the predentary , which are , respectively , the foremost bones of the upper and lower jaw in ornithischians . This is evidenced by the rough surfaces on these structures . The palate was narrow , and tapered towards the front . The external nostril openings were small , and the upper border of this opening does not seem to have been completely bridged by bone . If not due to breakage , the gap may have been formed by connective tissue instead of bone . The antorbital fossa , a large depression between the eye and nostril openings , contained two smaller openings . A depression above the snout has been termed the " nasal fossa " or " sulcus " . A similar fossa is also seen in Tianyulong , <unk> , and Eoraptor , but its function is unknown . 
 An unusual feature of the skull was the different @-@ shaped teeth ( heterodonty ) for which the genus is named , which is otherwise mainly known from mammals . Most dinosaurs ( and indeed most reptiles ) have a single type of tooth in their jaws , but Heterodontosaurus had three . The beaked tip of the snout was toothless , whereas the hind part of the premaxilla in the upper jaw had three teeth on each side . The first two upper teeth were small and cone @-@ shaped ( comparable to incisors ) , while the third on each side was much enlarged , forming prominent , canine @-@ like tusks . These first teeth were probably partially encased by the upper beak . The first two teeth in the lower jaw also formed canines , but were much bigger than the upper equivalents . The canines had fine serrations along the back edge , but only the lower ones were serrated at the front . Eleven tall and chisel @-@ like " cheek " <unk> lined each side of the posterior parts of the upper jaw , which were separated from the canines by a large diastema ( gap ) . The cheek @-@ teeth increased gradually in size , with the middle teeth being largest , and decreased in size after this point . These teeth had a heavy coat of enamel on the inwards side , and were adapted for wear ( <unk> ) , and they had long roots , firmly embedded in their sockets . The tusks in the lower jaw fit into an indentation within the diastema of the upper jaw . The cheek @-@ teeth in the lower jaw generally matched those in the upper jaw , though the enamel surface of these were on the outwards side . The upper and lower teeth rows were inset , which created a " cheek @-@ recess " also seen in other ornithischians . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 The holotype specimen of Heterodontosaurus tucki ( SAM @-@ PK @-@ <unk> ) was discovered during the British @-@ South African expedition to South Africa and Basutoland ( former name of Lesotho ) in 1961 @-@ 1962 . Today , it is housed in the Iziko South African Museum . It was excavated on a mountain at an altitude of about 1 @,@ 890 m ( 6 @,@ 201 ft ) , at a locality called <unk> , in the district of Transkei ( sometimes referred to as Herschel ) in the Cape Province of South Africa . The specimen consists of a crushed but nearly complete skull ; associated postcranial remains mentioned in the original description could not be located in 2011 . The animal was scientifically described and named in 1962 by palaeontologists Alfred Walter Crompton from South Africa and Alan J. Charig from the United Kingdom . The genus name refers to the different @-@ shaped teeth , and the specific name honors George C. Tuck , a director of Austin Motor Company , who supported the expedition . The specimen was not fully prepared by the time of publication , so only the front parts of the skull and lower jaw were described , and the authors conceded that their description was preliminary , serving mainly to name the animal . It was considered an important discovery , as few early ornithischians were known at the time . The preparation of the specimen , i.e. the freeing of the bones from the tock matrix , was very time consuming , since they were covered in a thin , very hard , ferruginous layer containing haematite . This could only be removed by a diamond saw , which damaged the specimen . 
 In 1966 , a second specimen of Heterodontosaurus ( SAM @-@ PK @-@ K1332 ) was discovered at the Voyizane locality , in the Elliot Formation of the <unk> Group of rock formations , 1 @,@ 770 m ( 5 @,@ 807 ft ) above sea level , on <unk> Mountain . This specimen included both the skull and skeleton , preserved in articulation ( i.e. the bones being preserved in their natural position in relation to each other ) , with little displacement and distortion of the bones . The postcranial skeleton was briefly described by palaeontologists Albert Santa Luca , Crompton and Charig in 1976 . Its forelimb bones had previously been discussed and figured in an article by palaeontologists Peter Galton and Robert T. Bakker in 1974 , as the specimen was considered significant in establishing that the Dinosauria were a monophyletic natural group , whereas most scientists at the time , including the scientists who described Heterodontosaurus , thought that the Saurischia and Ornithischia were not directly related . The skeleton was fully described in 1980 . SAM @-@ PK @-@ K1332 is the most complete heterodontosaurid skeleton described to date . Though a more detailed description of the skull of Heterodontosaurus was long promised , it remained unpublished upon the death of Charig in 1997 . It was not until 2011 that the skull was fully described by David B. Norman and colleagues . 
 Other specimens referred to Heterodontosaurus include the front part of a juvenile skull ( SAM @-@ PK @-@ K10487 ) , a fragmentary maxilla ( SAM @-@ PK @-@ <unk> ) , a left maxilla with teeth and adjacent bones ( SAM @-@ PK @-@ <unk> ) , all of which were collected at the Voyizane locality during expeditions in 1966 @-@ 1967 , although the first was only identified as belonging to this genus in 2008 . A partial snout ( NM QR 1788 ) found in 1975 on <unk> Farm south of Voyizane was thought to belong to Massospondylus until 2011 , when it was reclassified as Heterodontosaurus . South African palaeontologist Robert Broom discovered a partial skull , possibly in the Clarens Formation of South Africa , which was sold to the American Museum of Natural History in 1913 , as part of a collection that consisted almost entirely of synapsid fossils . This specimen ( AMNH 24000 ) was first identified as belonging to a sub @-@ adult Heterodontosaurus by Sereno , who reported it in a 2012 monograph about the Heterodontosauridae , the first comprehensive review article about the family . This review also classified a partial postcranial skeleton ( SAM @-@ PK @-@ <unk> ) from Voyizane as Heterodontosaurus . However , in 2014 , Galton suggested it might belong the related genus Pegomastax instead , which was named by Sereno based on a partial skull from the same locality . 
 In 1970 , palaeontologist Richard A. Thulborn suggested that Heterodontosaurus was a junior synonym of the genus Lycorhinus , which was named in 1924 with the species L. angustidens , also from a specimen discovered in South Africa . He reclassified the type species as a member of the older genus , as the new combination Lycorhinus tucki , which he considered distinct due to slight differences in its teeth and its stratigraphy . He reiterated this claim in 1974 , in the description of a third Lycorhinus species , Lycorhinus consors , after criticism of the synonymy by Galton in 1973 . In 1974 , Charig and Crompton agreed that Heterodontosaurus and Lycorhinus belonged in the same family , Heterodontosauridae , but disagreed that they were similar enough to be considered congeneric . They also pointed out that the fragmentary nature and poor preservation of the Lycorhinus angustidens holotype specimen made it impossible to fully compare it properly to H. tucki . In spite of the controversy , neither party had examined the L. angustidens holotype first hand , but after doing so , palaeontologist James A. Hopson also defended generic separation of Heterodontosaurus in 1975 , and moved L. consors to its own genus , Abrictosaurus . 
 = = Classification = = 
 When it was described in 1962 , Heterodontosaurus was classified as a primitive ornithischian , one of the two main orders of Dinosauria , the other being the Saurischia . The authors found it most similar to the poorly known genera Geranosaurus and Lycorhinus , the second of which had been considered a therapsid stem @-@ mammal until then due to its dentition . They noted some similarities with ornithopods , and provisionally placed the new genus in that group . Palaeontologists Alfred Romer and Oskar Kuhn independently named the family Heterodontosauridae in 1966 as a family of ornithischian dinosaurs including Heterodontosaurus and Lycorhinus . Thulborn instead considered these animals as hypsilophodontids , and not a distinct family . Bakker and Galton recognised Heterodontosaurus as important to the evolution of ornithischian dinosaurs , as its hand pattern was shared with primitive saurischians , and therefore was primitive or basal to both groups . This was disputed by some scientists who believed the two groups had instead evolved independently from " <unk> " archosaur ancestors , and that their similarities were due to convergent evolution . Some authors also suggested a relationship , such as descendant / ancestor , between heterodontosaurids and <unk> , both being primitive ornithischians , as well as to primitive ceratopsians , such as Psittacosaurus , though the nature of these relations were debated . 
 By the 1980s , most researchers considered the heterodontosaurids as a distinct family of primitive ornithischian dinosaurs , but with an uncertain position with respect to other groups within the order . By the early 21st century , the prevailing theories were that the family was the sister group of either the Marginocephalia ( which includes pachycephalosaurids and ceratopsians ) , or the <unk> ( the former group plus ornithopods ) , or as one of the most basal radiations of ornithischians , before the split of the <unk> ( which includes the derived ornithischians ) . Heterodontosauridae was defined as a clade by Sereno in 1998 and 2005 , and the group shares skull features such as three or fewer teeth in each premaxilla , caniniform teeth followed by a diastema , and a jugal horn below the eye . Many genera have been referred to Heterodontosauridae since the family was erected , yet Heterodontosaurus remains the most completely known genus , and has functioned as the primary reference point for the group in the palaeontological literature . 
 The cladogram below shows the interrelationships within Heterodontosauridae , and follows the analysis by Sereno , 2012 : 
 The Heterodontosauridae family persisted from the Late Triassic until the Early Cretaceous period , and existed for at least a 100 million years . Heterodontosaurids are known from Africa , Eurasia , and the Americas , but the majority have been found in southern Africa . Heterodontosaurids appear to have split into two main lineages by the Early Jurassic ; one with low @-@ crowned teeth , and one with high @-@ crowned teeth ( including Heterodontosaurus ) . The members of these groups are divided biogeographically , with the low @-@ crowned group having been discovered in areas that were once part of Laurasia ( northern landmass ) , and the high @-@ crowned group from areas that were part of Gondwana ( southern landmass ) . In 2012 , Sereno labelled members of the latter grouping a distinct subfamily , <unk> . Heterodontosaurus appears to be the most derived <unk> , due to details in its teeth , such as very thin enamel , arranged in an asymmetrical pattern . The unique tooth and jaw features of <unk> appear to be specialisations for effectively processing plant material , and their level of sophistication is comparable to that of later ornithischians . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 = = = Growth and ontogeny = = = 
 The ontogeny , or the development of the individual from juvenile to adult , is poorly known for Heterodontosaurus , as juvenile specimens are scarce . As shown by the juvenile skull SAM @-@ PK @-@ K10487 , the eye sockets became proportionally smaller as the animal grew , and the snout became longer and contained additional teeth . Similar changes have been reported for several other dinosaurs . The morphology of the teeth , however , did not change with age , indicating that the diet of juveniles was the same as that of adults . The length of the juvenile skull was suggested to be 45 mm . Assuming similar body proportions as adult individuals , the body length of this juvenile would have been 45 mm ( 2 in ) . Indeed , the individual probably would have been smaller , since juvenile animals in general show proportionally larger heads . 
 = = = Sexual dimorphism = = = 
 In 1974 , Thulborn suggested that the large tusks of heterodontosaurids represented a secondary sex characteristic . According to this theory , only adult male individuals would have possessed fully developed tusks ; the holotype specimen of the related Abrictosaurus , which lacked tusks altogether , would have represented a female . This hypothesis was questioned by palaeontologist Richard Butler and colleagues in 2006 , who argued that the juvenile skull SAM @-@ PK @-@ K10487 possessed tusks despite its early developmental state . At this state , secondary sex characteristics are not expected . Furthermore , tusks are present in almost all known Heterodontosaurus skulls ; the presence of sexual dimorphism however would suggest a 50 : 50 ratio between individuals bearing tusks and those lacking tusks . The only exception is the holotype specimen of Abrictosaurus ; the lack of tusks in this individual is interpreted as a specialisation of this particular genus . 
 = = = Tooth replacement and aestivation = = = 
 Much controversy has surrounded the question of whether or not , and to what degree , Heterodontosaurus showed the continuous tooth replacement that is typical for other dinosaurs and reptiles . In 1974 and 1978 , Thulborn found that the skulls known at that time lacked any indications of continuous tooth replacement : The cheek teeth of the known skulls are worn uniformly , indicating that they formed simultaneously . Newly erupted teeth are absent . Further evidence was derived from the wear facets of the teeth , which were formed by tooth @-@ to @-@ tooth contact of the lower with the upper dentition . The wear facets were merged into one another , forming a continuous surface along the complete tooth row . This surface indicates that food procession was achieved by back and forth movements of the jaws , not by simple vertical movements which was the case in related dinosaurs such as <unk> . Back and forth movements are only possible if the teeth are worn uniformly , again strengthening the case for the lack of a continuous tooth replacement . Simultaneously , Thulborn stressed that a regular tooth replacement was essential for these animals , as the supposed diet consisting of tough plant material would have led to quick abrasion of the teeth . These observations led Thulborn to conclude that Heterodontosaurus must have replaced its entire set of teeth at once on a regular basis . Such a complete replacement could only have been possible within phases of aestivation , when the animal did not fed . <unk> also complies with the supposed habitat of the animals , which would have been desert @-@ like , including hot dry seasons when food was scarce . 
 A comprehensive analysis conducted in 1980 by Hopson questioned Thulborn 's ideas . Hopson showed that the wear facet patterns on the teeth in fact indicate vertical and lateral rather than back and forth jaw movements . Furthermore , Hopson demonstrated variability in the degree of tooth wear , indicating continuous tooth replacement . He did acknowledge that X @-@ ray images of the most complete specimen showed that this individual indeed lacked unerupted replacement teeth . According to Hopson , this indicated that only juveniles continuously replaced their teeth , and that this process ceased when reaching adulthood . Thulborn 's aestivation hypothesis was rejected by Hopson due to lack of evidence . 
 In 2006 , Butler and colleagues conducted computer tomography scans of the juvenile skull SAM @-@ PK @-@ K10487 . To the surprise of these researchers , replacement teeth yet to erupt were present even in this early ontogenetic stage . Despite these findings , the authors argued that tooth replacement must have occurred since the juvenile displayed the same tooth morphology as adult individuals – this morphology would have changed if the tooth simply grew continuously . In conclusion , Butler and colleagues suggested that tooth replacement in Heterodontosaurus must have been more sporadic than in related dinosaurs . <unk> replacement teeth in Heterodontosaurus were not discovered until 2011 , when Norman and colleagues described the upper jaw of specimen SAM @-@ PK @-@ <unk> . Another juvenile skull ( AMNH 24000 ) described by Sereno in 2012 also yielded unerupted replacement teeth . As shown by these discoveries , tooth replacement in Heterodontosaurus was episodical and not continuous as in other heterodontosaurids . The unerupted teeth are triangular in lateral view , which is the typical tooth morphology in basal ornithischians . The characteristic chisel @-@ like shape of the fully erupted teeth therefore resulted from tooth @-@ to @-@ tooth contact between the dentition of the upper and lower jaws . 
 = = = Locomotion and metabolism = = = 
 Although most researchers now consider Heterodontosaurus a bipedal runner , some earlier studies proposed a partial or fully quadrupedal locomotion . In 1980 , Santa Luca described several features of the forelimb that are also present in recent quadrupedal animals and imply a strong arm musculature : these include a large olecranon ( a bony eminence forming the uppermost part of the ulna ) , enlarging the lever arm of the forearm . The medial <unk> of the humerus was enlarged , providing attachment sites for strong flexor muscles of the forearm . Furthermore , projections on the claws might have increased the forward thrust of the hand during walking . According to Santa Luca , Heterodontosaurus was quadrupedal when moving slowly but was able to switch to a much faster , bipedal run . Polish palaeontologists Teresa Maryańska and Halszka Osmólska supported Santa Luca 's hypothesis in 1985 ; furthermore , they noted that the dorsal spine was strongly flexed downwards in the most completely known specimen . In 1987 , Gregory S. Paul suggested that Heterodontosaurus might have been obligatorily quadrupedal , and that these animals would have galloped for fast locomotion . David Weishampel and Lawrence Witmer in 1990 as well as Norman and colleagues in 2004 argued in favour of exclusively bipedal locomotion , based on the morphology of the claws and shoulder girdle . The anatomical evidence suggested by Santa Luca was identified as adaptations for foraging ; the robust and strong arms might have been used for digging up roots and breaking open insect nests . 
 Most studies consider dinosaurs as endothermic ( warm @-@ blooded ) animals , with an elevated metabolism comparable to that of today 's mammals and birds . In a 2009 study , Herman <unk> and colleagues calculated the aerobic endurance of various dinosaurs . Even at moderate running speeds , Heterodontosaurus would have exceeded the maximum aerobic capabilities possible for an <unk> ( cold @-@ blooded ) animal , indicating endothermy in this genus . 
 = = = Diet and tusk function = = = 
 Heterodontosaurus is commonly regarded as a herbivorous dinosaur . In 1974 , Thulborn proposed that the tusks of the dinosaur played no important role in feeding ; rather , that they would have been used in combat with conspecifics , for display , as a visual threat , or for active defence . Similar functions are seen in the enlarged tusks of modern <unk> and <unk> , but the curved tusks of warthogs ( used for digging ) are dissimilar . 
 Several more recent studies have raised the possibility that the dinosaur was omnivorous and used its tusks for prey killing during an occasional hunt . In 2000 , Paul Barrett suggested that the shape of the premaxillary teeth and the fine serration of the tusks are reminiscent of carnivorous animals , hinting at facultative carnivory . <unk> , in contrast , lack serration on their tusks . In 2008 , Butler and colleagues argued that the enlarged tusks formed early in the development of the individual , and therefore could not constitute sexual dimorphism . Combat with conspecifics thus is an unlikely function , as enlarged tusks would be expected only in males if they were a tool for combat . Instead , feeding or defence functions are more likely . It has also been suggested that Heterodontosaurus could have used its jugal bosses to deliver blows during combat , and that the palpebral bone could have protected the eyes against such attacks . In 2011 , Norman and colleagues drew attention to the arms and hands , which are relatively long and equipped with large , recurved claws . These features , in combination with the long hindlimbs that allowed for fast running , would have made the animal capable of seizing small prey . As an omnivore , Heterodontosaurus would have had a significant selection advantage during the dry season when vegetation was scarce . 
 In 2012 , Sereno pointed out several skull and dentition features that suggest a purely or at least preponderantly herbivorous diet . These include the horny beak and the specialised cheek teeth , which were suitable for cutting off vegetation , as well as fleshy cheeks , which would have helped keeping food within the mouth during mastication . The jaw muscles were enlarged , and the jaw joint was set below the level of the teeth . This deep position of the jaw joint would have allowed an evenly spread bite along the tooth row , in contrast to the scissor @-@ like bite seen in carnivorous dinosaurs . Finally , size and position of the tusks are very different in separate members of the Heterodontosauridae family ; a specific function in feeding thus appears unlikely . Sereno surmised that heterodontosaurids were comparable to today 's peccaries , which possess similar tusks and feed on a variety of plant material such as roots , tubers , fruits , seeds and grass . Butler and colleagues suggested that the feeding apparatus of Heterodontosaurus was specialised to process tough plant material , and that late @-@ surviving members of the family ( Fruitadens , Tianyulong and Echinodon ) probably showed a more generalised diet including both plants and invertebrates . Heterodontosaurus was characterised by a strong bite at small gape angles , but the later members were adapted to a more rapid bite and wider gapes . A 2016 study of ornithischian jaw mechanics found that the relative bite forces of Heterodontosaurus was comparable to that of the more derived Scelidosaurus . The study suggested that the tusks could have played a role in feeding by grazing against the lower beak while cropping vegetation . 
 = = Palaeoecology = = 
 Heterodontosaurus is known from fossils found in formations of the Karoo Supergroup , including the Upper Elliot Formation and the Clarens Formation , which date to the Hettangian and Sinemurian ages of the Lower Jurassic , around 200 @-@ 190 million years ago . Originally , Heterodontosaurus was thought to be from the Upper Triassic period . The Upper Elliot Formation consists of red / purple mudstone and red / white sandstone , whereas the slightly younger Clarens Formation consists of white / cream @-@ coloured sandstone . The Clarens Formation is less rich in fossils than the Upper Elliot Formation ; its sediments also often form cliffs , restricting accessibility for fossil hunters . The Upper Elliot Formation is characterised by animals that appear to be more lightly built than those of the Lower Elliot Formation , which may have been an adaptation to the drier climate at this time in southern Africa . Both formations are famous for their abundant vertebrate fossils , including temnospondyl amphibians , turtles , <unk> , aetosaurs , crocodylomorphs , and non @-@ mammal cynodonts . 
 Other dinosaurs from these formations include the <unk> Lesothosaurus , the basal sauropodomorph Massospondylus , and the theropod Megapnosaurus . The Lower Elliot Formation shows the largest known heterodontosaurid diversity of any rock unit ; besides Heterodontosaurus , it contained Lycorhinus , Abrictosaurus , and Pegomastax . Yet another member of the family , Geranosaurus , is known from the Clarens Formation . The high heterodontosaurid diversity have led researchers to conclude that different species might have fed on separate food sources in order to avoid competition ( niche partitioning ) . With its highly specialised dentition , Heterodontosaurus might have been specialised for tough plant material , while the less specialised Abrictosaurus might have predominantly consumed softer vegetation . The position of the individual heterodontosaurid specimens within the rock succession is poorly known , making it difficult to determine how many of these species really were conspecific , and which species existed at separate times . 
 = Heaven Up Here = 
 Heaven Up Here is the second album by the English post @-@ punk band Echo & the Bunnymen , released on 30 May 1981 . In June 1981 , Heaven Up Here became Echo & the Bunnymen 's first Top 10 release when it reached number 10 on the UK Albums Chart . It was also the band 's first entry into the United States albums charts when it reached number 184 of the Billboard 200 . Heaven Up Here released the singles " A Promise " and " Over the Wall " . 
 Recorded at Rockfield Studios near Monmouth in Wales , Heaven Up Here was co @-@ produced by Hugh Jones and the band . A generally well received album by fans in the United Kingdom and by critics , Heaven Up Here won the " Best Dressed LP " and " Best Album " awards at the 1981 NME Awards . The album has also been listed at number 471 in Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 After the public and press interest garnered from Echo & the Bunnymen 's debut album , Crocodiles , the band released the Shine So Hard EP which maintained their profile . Work then soon began on their second album , Heaven Up Here . Following musical differences between the band and Crocodiles producers Bill Drummond and David Balfe , Hugh Jones was brought in to produce Heaven Up Here . Jones had previously engineered Crocodiles and co @-@ produced Shine So Hard with Drummond . Jones would later go on to produce the band 's 2005 album Siberia . The band were also given an additional producer credit . The album was recorded at Rockfield Studios near Monmouth in Wales during March 1981 . 
 In the liner notes to the 2003 remastered version of the album , lead singer Ian McCulloch said that he constantly had the American rock band The Velvet Underground 's song " What Goes On " in the back of his mind . He also stated that the band wanted to record a soul album . In the same liner notes , bassist Les Pattinson said that the band was often lazy and hence had hired rehearsal space at the Ministry in Liverpool . He said this made them work harder and develop " language " in the rhythm . According to guitarist Will Sergeant , McCulloch considers Heaven Up Here to be Sergeant 's album because he was bossy and a control freak during the recording . 
 = = Music = = 
 In 1981 , music magazine the NME described the album as darker and more passionate than 1980 's Crocodiles . The Record Mirror also said that the band sang the blues and devoted themselves to existential sadness . They went on to note that the album offered " an anatomy of melancholy , resplendent with the glamour of doom " . Melody Maker disagreed when in 1981 they said " the Bunnymen are continuing to play majestic , uplifting music that will shine through the dark days ahead of us " . In the 2002 book Turquoise Days : The Weird World of Echo & the Bunnymen , author Chris Adams said that in 1995 McCulloch had said , " That <unk> edge [ of the album ] still stands up . " In relation to their style of music , in 1980 McCulloch had said , " I always say ' We 're a rock band ' . Because I 'm proud of that . " He added , " I like rock music [ ... ] I prefer being good or great within that basic format [ ... ] I just prefer basic songs . " 
 In his 2005 book Rip It Up and Start Again : Post Punk 1978 – 1984 , British music journalist Simon Reynolds described the sound of Heaven Up Here as having been filled out with " guitar overdubs , keyboard glints , vocal multitracking and atmospheric vapours " . Comparing Heaven Up Here with Joy Division 's 1980 album Closer , Reynolds said they are " harrowed by the same things [ ... ] hypocrisy , distrust , betrayal , lost or frozen potential " . However , he said that " Closer shows Ian Curtis fatally mesmerised by his own dread visions , Heaven Up Here ultimately turns its face towards the light " with the tracks " No Dark Things " – which he describes as renouncing " death @-@ wishful thinking " – and " All I Want " – which he describes as " a blasting celebration of desire for desire 's sake " and " pure intransitive exhilaration " . 
 = = Cover = = 
 The photograph used on the front and back cover of the album was taken by photographer Brian Griffin . The picture shows the band on a wet beach in the south of Wales ; there are dark clouds in the sky and the sun is low on the horizon causing the band to be silhouetted . The picture was taken on a day off from recording the album . The original album 's cover art was designed by Martyn Atkins . The cover received the " Best Dressed LP " award in the 1981 NME Awards . Reynolds said that the band 's manager Drummond saw them as representing " cold , dampness , darkness " . 
 The front cover picture of the original album was kept for the 2003 reissue . However , the design was altered slightly by graphic designer Rachel Gutek of the design company <unk> . The release contained an expanded booklet written by music journalist Max Bell giving the background to the album . The booklet also contains a number of photographs which are credited to Sergeant and Pattinson . 
 = = Releases = = 
 The album was originally released as an LP by Korova in the United Kingdom on 30 May 1981 . It was then released in the United States by Sire Records on 24 June 1981 . It was released elsewhere on Korova although with a different catalogue number . Side one of the LP contained five tracks and side two had six . The album was first released on CD on 16 May 1988 . 
 Along with their first five albums , the album was remastered and reissued on CD in 2003 containing five bonus tracks – these releases were marketed as 25th anniversary editions . " Broke My Neck ( Long Version ) " , which was recorded at <unk> Studios in Norway on 7 June 1981 , is the B @-@ side of the 12 @-@ inch single " A Promise " – an edited version was used as the B @-@ side of the 7 @-@ inch single . The other four bonus tracks were recorded live at the Manley Vale Hotel in Sydney , Australia on 11 November 1981 . The reissued album was produced by music historian Andy Zax and producer Bill Inglot . 
 The only single from Heaven Up Here released worldwide was " A Promise " on 10 July 1981 . The single stayed on the UK Singles Chart for four weeks and reached number 49 . Later that year , " Over the Wall " was released as a single in Australia only . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Heaven Up Here was generally well received by the music press and critics . In a 1982 interview with the band for the NME , rock journalist Barney Hoskins described the album as " one of the most superior articulations of ' rock ' form in living memory . " Later reviews have continued to receive the album well : Allmusic reviewer Aaron Warshaw said that McCulloch " sings with soaring abandon and passion throughout the album " and that Sergeant 's guitar playing was at its " angular finest " . Not all reviews were positive : Robert Christgau , giving the album a C rating , said that he held " no brief against tuneless caterwaul , but tuneless psychedelic caterwaul has always been another matter . " In his 1999 book From the Shores of Lake Placid and Other Stories , the band 's manager Bill Drummond said " The album is dull as <unk> . The songs are unformed , the sound uniformly grey . " 
 Heaven Up Here sold well in the United Kingdom , staying on the UK Albums Chart for a total of 16 weeks and reaching a peak of number 10 in June 1981 . The album was the first release by Echo & the Bunnymen to make it onto the American charts when it reached number 184 on the Billboard 200 . 
 In 2003 , the album was ranked number 471 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . The NME has ranked the album number 39 in its list of the 50 greatest albums of the ' 80s and number 51 in its list of the greatest albums of all time . The album also received the NME 's 1981 best album award . Reynolds described the award as " essentially an anti @-@ New Pop protest vote by post @-@ punk 's silent majority " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks written by Will Sergeant , Ian McCulloch , Les Pattinson and Pete de Freitas . 
 Side one 
 " Show of Strength " – 4 : 50 
 " With a Hip " – 3 : 16 
 " Over the Wall " – 5 : 59 
 " It Was a Pleasure " – 3 : 12 
 " A Promise " – 4 : 08 
 Side two 
 " Heaven Up Here " – 3 : 45 
 " The Disease " – 2 : 28 
 " All My Colours " – 4 : 06 
 " No Dark Things " – 4 : 27 
 " Turquoise Days " – 3 : 51 
 " All I Want " – 4 : 09 
 2003 reissue bonus tracks 
 " Broke My Neck " ( long version ) – 7 : 22 
 " Show of Strength " ( live ) – 4 : 41 
 " The Disease " ( live ) – 1 : 53 
 " All I Want " ( live ) – 3 : 09 
 " Zimbo " ( live ) – 3 : 52 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Will Sergeant – lead guitar 
 Ian McCulloch – vocals , rhythm guitar , piano 
 Les Pattinson – bass 
 Pete de Freitas – drums 
 Leslie Penning – woodwind 
 Hugh Jones – producer , engineer 
 The Bunnymen – producer 
 Martyn Atkins – album design 
 Brian Griffin – photography 
 Andy Zax – producer ( reissue ) 
 Bill Inglot – producer ( reissue ) , remastering 
 Dan Hersch – remastering 
 Claes <unk> – engineering on " Broke My Neck " ( long version ) 
 Rachel Gutek – album design ( reissue ) 
 = Swissair Flight 111 = 
 Swissair Flight 111 ( ICAO : <unk> , <unk> ) was a scheduled international passenger flight from New York City , United States to Geneva , Switzerland . This flight was also a codeshare flight with Delta Air Lines . On 2 September 1998 , the McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 performing this flight , registration HB @-@ IWF , crashed into the Atlantic Ocean southwest of Halifax International Airport at the entrance to St. <unk> Bay , Nova Scotia . The crash site was 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) from shore , roughly equidistant from the tiny fishing and tourist communities of Peggys Cove and Bayswater . All 229 passengers and crew aboard the MD @-@ 11 died — the highest death toll of any McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 accident in aviation history and the second @-@ highest of any air disaster to occur in Canada , after Arrow Air Flight 1285 , which crashed in 1985 with 256 fatalities . This is one of the three MD @-@ 11 accidents with passenger fatalities along with China Eastern Airlines Flight 583 and another hull loss of China Airlines Flight 642 . 
 The search and rescue response , crash recovery operation , and investigation by the Government of Canada took over four years and cost CAD 57 million ( at that time approximately US $ 38 million ) . The Transportation Safety Board of Canada 's ( TSB ) report of their investigation stated that flammable material used in the aircraft 's structure allowed a fire to spread beyond the control of the crew , resulting in a loss of control and the crash of the aircraft . 
 Swissair Flight 111 was known as the " UN shuttle " because of its popularity with United Nations officials ; the flight often carried business executives , scientists , and researchers . 
 = = Involved = = 
 = = = Aircraft = = = 
 The aircraft , a McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 , serial number <unk> , registration HB @-@ IWF , was manufactured in 1991 and Swissair was its only operator . It bore the title of Vaud , in honor of the Swiss canton of the same name . The cabin was configured with 241 seats . First- and business @-@ class seats were equipped with in @-@ seat in @-@ flight entertainment system . The aircraft was powered by three Pratt & Whitney <unk> turbofan engines and had logged a total of 36 @,@ 041 hours before the crash . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 The pilot @-@ in @-@ command was 49 @-@ year @-@ old Urs Zimmermann . At the time of the accident , he had approximately 10 @,@ 800 hours of total flying time , of which 900 hours was in MD @-@ 11 . He was also an instructor pilot for the MD @-@ 11 . Before his career with Swissair , he was a fighter pilot in the Swiss Air Force . Zimmermann was described as a friendly person with professional skills , who always works with exactness and precision . 
 The first officer , 36 @-@ year @-@ old Stefan Löw , had approximately 4 @,@ 800 hours of total flying time , including 230 hours in MD @-@ 11 . He was an instructor on the MD @-@ 80 and A320 . From 1982 to 1990 , he had been a pilot in the Swiss Air Force . The cabin crew comprised a maître de <unk> ( purser ) and eleven flight attendants . All crew members on board Swissair Flight 111 were qualified , certified , and trained in accordance with Swiss regulations under the Joint Aviation Authorities ( JAA ) . 
 = = Flight timeline = = 
 The flight took off from New York 's John F. Kennedy Airport at 20 : 18 Eastern Daylight Time ( 00 : 18 UTC ) . From 20 : 33 EDT ( 00 : 33 UTC ) until 20 : 47 EDT ( 00 : 47 UTC ) , the aircraft experienced an unexplained thirteen @-@ minute radio blackout , of which cause was determined to be communication radios tuning errors . 
 At 22 : 10 Atlantic Time ( 01 : 10 UTC ) , the flight crew detected an odour in the cockpit and determined it to be smoke from the air conditioning system . Following the captain 's request , the crew turned off the air conditioning vent . Four minutes later , the odour returned and the smoke became visible , prompting the pilots to make a " pan @-@ pan " radio call to the air traffic control Moncton . ATC Moncton controls air traffic over the Province of Nova Scotia , including most flights en route to or from Europe . The pan @-@ pan call indicated that there was an urgency due to smoke in the cockpit but did not declare an emergency as denoted by a " Mayday " call . The crew requested a diversion to a convenient airport . They then accepted ATC Moncton 's offer of a vector to the closer Halifax International Airport in Enfield , Nova Scotia , 66 nm ( 104 km ) away rather than Logan International Airport , Boston , which at that time was 234 nautical miles ( 433 km ) further away . 
 At 22 : 18 AT ( 01 : 18 UTC ) , ATC Moncton handed over traffic control of the plane to Halifax Terminal Control Unit , a specialized ATC unit managing traffic in and out of Halifax . At 22 : 19 AT ( 01 : 19 UTC ) , the crew requested more distance for the aircraft to descend from 21 @,@ 000 feet ( 6 @,@ 400 m ) when they were advised the aircraft was 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ) away from Halifax International Airport . At 22 : 20 AT ( 01 : 20 UTC ) , on the crew 's fuel dump request , ATC Halifax diverted the plane toward St. Margaret 's Bay , where it was safer for the aircraft to dump fuel and still in the distance of 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ) from Halifax . 
 In accordance with the Swissair checklist entitled " In case of smoke of unknown origin " , the crew shut off the power supply in the cabin , which also turned off the recirculating fans in the ceiling . This created a vacuum in the ceiling space above the passenger cabin and induced the fire to spread into the cockpit , cutting off the power of autopilot . At 22 : 24 : 28 AT ( 01 : 24 : 28 UTC ) , the crew informed ATC Halifax that " we now must fly manually . " followed by two times of emergency declarations . Ten seconds later , the crew declared emergency the third time " And we are declaring emergency now Swissair one eleven . " which were the last words received from Flight 111 . The flight data recorder stopped recording at 22 : 25 : 40 AT ( 01 : 25 : 40 UTC ) , followed one second later by the cockpit voice recorder . The aircraft briefly appeared again on radar screens from 22 : 25 : 50 AT ( 01 : 25 : 50 UTC ) to 22 : 26 : 04 AT ( 01 : 26 : 04 UTC ) . The last altitude recorded was 9 @,@ 700 feet . According to the cockpit voice recorder , shortly after the first emergency declaration , the captain left his seat to fight the fire that was spreading to the rear of the cockpit ; the Swissair volume of checklists was later found fused together in the wreckage , indicating that the captain may have attempted to use them to fan back the flames . The captain did not return to his seat ; whether he was killed by the fire , asphyxiated by the smoke , or killed in the crash is not known . Flight data recording shows that engine two was shut down due to an engine fire approximately one minute before impact , implying that the first officer was still alive and continued trying to take back control of the aircraft until the final moments of the flight . At 22 : 31 : 18 AT ( 01 : 31 : 18 UTC ) , the aircraft struck the ocean at an estimated speed of 345 mph ( 555 km / h , 154 m / s , or 299 knots ) and with a force of the order of <unk> , causing the aircraft to disintegrate instantly . The crash location was approximately 44 ° 24 ′ 33 ″ N 63 ° 58 ′ 25 ″ W , with 300 meters ' uncertainty . 
 = = Post @-@ crash response = = 
 = = = Search and rescue operation = = = 
 The search and rescue ( SAR ) operation was code @-@ named Operation Persistence and was launched immediately by Joint Rescue Coordination Centre Halifax ( <unk> Halifax ) , which tasked the Canadian Forces Air Command , Maritime Command , Land Force Command , Canadian Coast Guard ( CCG ) and Canadian Coast Guard Auxiliary ( <unk> ) resources . 
 The first rescue resources to approach the crash site were <unk> volunteer units . These units were mostly privately owned fishing boats that operated out of Peggys Cove , Bayswater , and other harbours on St. Margaret 's Bay and the <unk> Peninsula . They were soon joined by the dedicated Canadian Coast Guard SAR vessel CCGS Sambro and CH @-@ 113 Labrador SAR helicopters flown by the 413 Squadron from CFB Greenwood . 
 The crash site 's proximity to Halifax meant that ships docked at Canada 's largest naval base , CFB Halifax , and one of the largest Canadian Coast Guard bases , CCG Base Dartmouth , were within one hour 's sailing time . Calls immediately went out and ships sailed as soon as possible to St. Margaret 's Bay . 
 The land @-@ based search , including shoreline searching , was the responsibility of Halifax Regional Search and Rescue . The organization was responsible for all ground operations including military operations and other ground search and rescue teams . 
 = = = Search and recovery operation = = = 
 By the afternoon of 3 September , it was apparent that there were no survivors from the crash and <unk> Halifax de @-@ tasked dedicated SAR assets ( CCGS Sambro and the CH @-@ 113 Labrador helicopters ) . The Royal Canadian Mounted Police were given overall command of the recovery operation , with HMCS Preserver ( AOR 510 ) remaining on @-@ scene commander . 
 The aircraft broke up on impact with the water and most of the debris sank to the ocean floor ( a depth of 55 m ( 180 ft ) ) . Some debris was found floating in the crash area and over the following weeks debris washed up on the nearby shorelines . 
 The initial focus of the recovery was on finding and identifying human remains and on recovering the flight recorders . As the force of impact was " in the order of at least 350 g " , the aircraft was fragmented and the environmental conditions only allowed the recovery of human remains along with the aircraft wreckage . Only one of the victims was visually identifiable . Eventually , 147 were identified by fingerprint , dental records , and X @-@ ray comparisons . The remaining 81 were identified through DNA tests . 
 With Canadian Forces divers ( navy clearance divers , port inspection divers , ship 's team divers , and Army combat divers ) working on the recovery , a request was made by the Government of Canada to the Government of the United States for a larger dedicated salvage recovery vessel . USS Grapple was tasked to the recovery effort , arriving from Philadelphia on 9 September . Among Grapple 's crew were 32 salvage divers . 
 The cockpit voice recorder ( CVR ) and flight data recorder ( FDR ) were found by the submarine HMCS Okanagan using sonar to detect the underwater locator beacon signals and were quickly retrieved by Canadian Navy divers ( the FDR on 6 September and the CVR on 11 September 1998 ) . Both had stopped recording when the aircraft lost electrical power at approximately 10 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) , 5 minutes and 37 seconds before impact . 
 The recovery operation was guided by the Transportation Safety Board of Canada ( TSB ) with resources from the Canadian Forces , Canadian Coast Guard , RCMP , and other agencies . The area was surveyed using route survey sonar , laser line scanners , and remotely operated vehicles ( ROVs ) to locate items . After being located , the debris was then recovered ( initially by divers and ROVs , later by dredging and trawling ) . 
 On 2 October 1998 , the TSB initiated a heavy lift operation to retrieve the major portion of the wreckage from the deep water before the expected winter storms began . By 21 October , an estimated 27 % of the wreckage was recovered . 
 At that point in the investigation , the crash was generally believed to have been caused by faulty wiring in the cockpit after the entertainment system started to overheat . Certain groups issued Aviation Safety Recommendations . The TSB released its preliminary report on 30 August 2000 and the final report in 2003 . 
 The final phase of wreckage recovery employed the ship Queen of the Netherlands to dredge the remaining aircraft debris . It concluded in December 1999 with 98 % of the aircraft retrieved : approximately 279 @,@ 000 lb ( 127 @,@ 000 kg ) of aircraft debris and 40 @,@ 000 lb ( 18 @,@ 000 kg ) of cargo . 
 = = = Response to victims ' families and friends = = = 
 JFK Airport used the JFK Ramada Plaza to house relatives and friends of the victims of the crash , due to the hotel 's central location relative to the <unk> " Jerry " Hauer , the head of the emergency management task force of Mayor of New York City Rudy Giuliani , praised the response of Swissair and codeshare partner Delta Air Lines in responding to the accident : he had criticized Trans World Airlines in its response to the TWA Flight 800 crash in 1996 . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 = = = Examination = = = 
 An estimated 2 million pieces of debris were recovered and brought ashore for inspection at a secure handling facility in a marine industrial park at Sheet Harbour , where small material was hand inspected by teams of RCMP officers looking for human remains , personal effects , and valuables from the aircraft 's cargo hold . The material was then transported to CFB Shearwater , where it was assembled and inspected by over 350 investigators from multiple organizations , such as the Transportation Safety Board of Canada , U.S. National Transportation Safety Board , U.S. Federal Aviation Authority ( FAA ) , Air Accidents Investigation Branch , Boeing , Pratt & Whitney , and Swissair . 
 As each piece of wreckage was brought in , it was carefully cleaned with fresh water , sorted , and weighed . The item was then placed in a specific area of a hangar at CFB Shearwater , based on a grid system representing the various sections of the plane . All items not considered significant to the crash were stored with similar items in large boxes . When a box was full , it was weighed and moved to a custom @-@ built temporary structure ( J @-@ Hangar ) on a discontinued runway for long @-@ term storage . If deemed significant to the investigation , the item was documented , photographed , and kept in the active examination hangar . Particular attention was paid to any item showing heat damage , burns , or other unusual marks . 
 The lack of flight recorder data for the last six minutes of the flight added significant complexity to the investigation and was a major factor in its lengthy duration . The Transportation Safety Board team had to reconstruct the last six minutes of flight entirely from the physical evidence . As the aircraft was broken into 2 million pieces by the impact , this process was time @-@ consuming and tedious . The investigation became the largest and most expensive transport accident investigation in Canadian history , costing C $ 57 million ( US $ 48 @.@ 5 million ) over five years . 
 = = = Cockpit and recordings = = = 
 The front 33 ft ( 10 m ) of the aircraft , from the front of the cockpit to near the front of the first @-@ class passenger cabin , was reconstructed . Information gained by this allowed investigators to determine the severity and limits of the fire damage , its possible origins , and progression . The cockpit voice recorder used a 1 / 4 inch recording tape that operated on a 30 @-@ minute loop . It therefore only retained that half @-@ hour of the flight before the recorders failed , six minutes before the crash . The CVR recording and transcript were covered by a strict privilege under section 28 of the Canadian Transportation Accident Investigation and Safety Board Act and thus were not publicly disclosed . The air traffic control recordings are less strictly privileged : section 29 of the same act provides only that they may not be used in certain legal proceedings . The air traffic control transcripts were released within days of the crash in 1998 and the air traffic control audio was released in May 2007 . 
 = = Probable cause = = 
 The TSB investigation identified eleven causes and contributing factors of the crash in its final report . The first and most important was : 
 Aircraft certification standards for material flammability were inadequate in that they allowed the use of materials that could be ignited and sustain or propagate fire . Consequently , flammable material propagated a fire that started above the ceiling on the right side of the cockpit near the cockpit rear wall . The fire spread and intensified rapidly to the extent that it degraded aircraft systems and the cockpit environment , and ultimately led to the loss of control of the aircraft . 
 Investigators identified evidence of arcing in wiring of the in @-@ flight entertainment system network , but this did not trip the circuit breakers . The investigation was unable to confirm if this arc was the " lead event " that ignited the flammable covering on <unk> insulation blankets that quickly spread across other flammable materials . The crew did not recognize that a fire had started and were not warned by instruments . Once they became aware of the fire , the uncertainty of the problem made it difficult to address . The rapid spread of the fire led to the failure of key display systems , and the crew were soon rendered unable to control the aircraft . Because he had no light by which to see his controls after the displays failed , the pilot was forced to steer the plane blindly ; intentionally or not , the plane swerved off course and headed back out into the Atlantic . Recovered fragments of the plane show that the heat inside the cockpit became so great that the ceiling started to melt . The recovered standby attitude indicator and airspeed indicators showed that the aircraft struck the water at 300 knots ( 560 km / h , 348 mph ) in a 20 degrees nose down and 110 @-@ degree bank attitude , or almost inverted ; the impact force of the aircraft crashing into the Atlantic Ocean was later calculated to be 350 times the force of gravity ( " G " s ) . Death was instantaneous for all passengers and crew due to the impact forces and deceleration . 
 The TSB concluded that even if the crew had been aware of the nature of the problem immediately after detection of the initial odor , and had commenced an approach as rapidly as possible , the developing fire @-@ related conditions in the cockpit would have made a safe landing at Halifax impossible . 
 = = = TSB recommendations = = = 
 The TSB made nine recommendations relating to changes in aircraft materials ( testing , certification , inspection , and maintenance ) , electrical systems , and flight data capture , as both flight recorders had stopped when they lost power six minutes before impact . General recommendations were also made regarding improvements in checklists and in fire @-@ detection and fire @-@ fighting equipment and training . These recommendations have led to widespread changes in FAA standards , principally impacting wiring and fire hardening . 
 = = = 2011 speculation = = = 
 In September 2011 , the CBC program The Fifth Estate reported allegations suggesting that an incendiary device might have been the cause of the crash . These claims came from a former RCMP arson investigator who was assigned to the Swissair file the day after the crash . Sgt. Tom Juby claimed that suspicious levels of magnesium and other elements associated with arson were discovered in the wiring and that he was ordered to remove references to magnesium or a suspected bomb from his investigative notes . The TSB claimed that the high levels of magnesium in some wires could be explained by prolonged exposure to sea water during the recovery effort . A TSB document obtained by the Fifth Estate showed that the TSB had placed pristine wires in sea water for several weeks and upon testing those wires showed no traces of magnesium . 
 = = Victims = = 
 Most of the passengers were American , French , or Swiss . 
 There were 132 American ( including one Delta Air Lines flight attendant and one United Air Lines flight attendant ) , 41 Swiss ( including the 13 crew members ) , 30 French , six British , three German , three Italian , three Canadian , two Greek , two Lebanese , one each from Afghanistan , China , India , Iran , Russia , Saudi Arabia , Spain , St. Kitts and Nevis , Sweden , and Yugoslavia , and four other passengers on board . 
 = = = Notable victims = = = 
 Several notable individuals died in this accident , including : 
 Pierre <unk> , head of <unk> . 
 Roger R. Williams , MD , an accomplished and internationally recognized cardiovascular geneticist , and the founder of the Cardiovascular Genetics research clinic at the University of Utah was traveling from New York to Geneva where he was to chair a <unk> meeting at the World Health Organization 
 Pierce J. Gerety , Jr . , UNHCR Director of Operations for the Great Lakes Region of Africa , who was on a special mission for U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan to the Democratic Republic of the Congo to attempt to negotiate a peace accord with Laurent Kabila in an erupting regional war 
 Klaus Kinder @-@ Geiger , who specialized in the theory of BNL 's Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider ( <unk> ) 
 Joseph LaMotta , son of former boxing world champion Jake LaMotta 
 Jonathan Mann , former head of the WHO 's AIDS program , and his wife , AIDS researcher Mary Lou Clements @-@ Mann 
 Prof. Victor <unk> , professor of Pharmacology , University of Catania , Italy . 
 European Synchrotron Radiation Facility ( <unk> ) physicist Per <unk> , who had been working at Brookhaven National Laboratory since 1996 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 The Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) medical examiners identified most of the bodies within 10 weeks of the accident . Due to extreme impact forces only one body was identifiable by sight . For approximately 100 bodies , the examiners used DNA ; the DNA analysis has been referred to as the largest DNA identification project in Canadian history . About 90 bodies were identified by Canadian medical examiners using dental records . For around 30 bodies , examiners used fingerprints and ante mortem ( before death ) X @-@ rays . The large number of ante mortem dental X @-@ rays meant that around 90 bodies had been identified by the end of October . The RCMP contacted relatives of victims to ask for medical histories and dental records . Blood samples from relatives were used in the DNA identification of victims . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Memorials and tributes = = = 
 A memorial service was held in Zürich . The following year a memorial service was held in Nova Scotia . 
 Two memorials to those who died in the crash were established by the Government of Nova Scotia . One is to the east of the crash site at The <unk> , a promontory one kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mile ) north of Peggys Cove . The second is a more private , but much larger commemoration located west of the crash site near Bayswater Beach Provincial Park on the <unk> Peninsula in Bayswater . Here , the unidentified remains of the victims are interred . A fund was established to fund maintenance of the memorials and the government passed an act to recognize them . Various other charitable funds were also created , including one in the name of a young victim from Louisiana , Robert Martin Maillet , which provides money for children in need . 
 A further permanent memorial , albeit not publicly accessible , was created inside the Operations Center at Zurich Airport where a simple plaque on the ground floor in the centre opening of a spiral staircase pays tribute to the victims . 
 In September 1999 Swissair , Delta , and Boeing ( who had acquired McDonnell Douglas through a merger in 1997 ) agreed to share liability for the accident and offered the families of the passengers financial compensation . The offer was rejected in favour of a $ 19 @.@ 8 billion suit against Swissair and DuPont , the supplier of the Mylar insulation sheathing . A US federal court dismissed the claim in February 2002 . 
 Two paintings , including Le <unk> ( The Painter ) by Pablo Picasso , were on board the aircraft and were destroyed in the accident . 
 = = = Impacts on the industry = = = 
 At the time of the accident , the McDonnell Douglas MD @-@ 11 was the only tri @-@ jet airliner in production . The MD @-@ 11 was produced as a freighter then ; the last passenger version was delivered to Sabena in 1998 . The last MD @-@ 11 overall was delivered to Lufthansa Cargo in 2001 , as a freighter . 
 The crash of Flight 111 caused a strong blow to Swissair . Ironically , the <unk> system on the aircraft that was blamed for causing the accident was installed by Swissair to attract more passengers in order to ease the airline 's financial difficulties . Swissair finally went bankrupt shortly after the 911 attack in 2001 , which caused a powerful disruption to the aviation transportation industry . 
 After the crash , the flight route designator for Swissair 's New York @-@ Geneva route was changed to Flight 139 , still performed by MD @-@ 11s . After Swissair 's bankruptcy in 2002 , Crossair received the international traffic rights of Swissair , and began operating flights as Swiss International Airlines . At that time the flight designator was changed to flight LX 023 , and operated by Airbus A330 @-@ 200s . 
 Since the crash , there have been many television documentaries on Flight 111 , including the CBC 's The Fifth Estate , " The Investigation of Swissair 111 " , PBS 's NOVA " <unk> " , and episodes of disaster shows like History Channel 's Disasters of the Century , Discovery Channel 's Mayday , National Geographic Channel 's Seconds From Disaster and in March 2003 The Swiss television also broadcast a documentary called " Feuer an Bord - Die <unk> von Swissair <unk> 111 " ( " fire on board - the tragedy of Swissair flight 111 " ) . NOVA created a classroom activity kit for school teachers , using the crash as an example of an aircraft crash investigation . The Canadian poet Jacob McArthur Mooney 's 2011 collection , Folk , tangentially interrogates the disaster and its effect on Nova Scotia residents . 
 In May 2007 , the TSB released copies of the audio recordings of the air traffic control transmissions associated with the flight . The transcripts of these recordings had been released in 1998 ( within days of the crash ) , but the TSB had refused to release the audio on privacy grounds . The TSB argued that under Canada 's Access to Information Act and Privacy Act , the audio recordings constituted personal information and were thus not <unk> . Canada 's Federal Court of Appeal rejected this argument in 2006 in a legal proceeding concerned with air traffic control recordings in four other air accidents . The Supreme Court of Canada did not grant leave to appeal that decision and consequently the TSB released a copy of the Swissair 111 air traffic control audio recordings to the Canadian Press , which had requested the recordings under the Access to Information Act . Several key minutes of the air traffic control audio can be found on the Toronto Star web site . 
 = Ironic ( song ) = 
 " Ironic " is a song by Canadian @-@ American singer Alanis Morissette . It was released in February 1996 as the third single from her third studio album , Jagged Little Pill ( 1995 ) . It was written by Morissette and Glen Ballard , and was produced by him . " Ironic " is a pop rock song written in the key of B major , and includes a moderate tempo of eighty @-@ two beats per minute . The lyrics present several situations that are described as " ironic " . This has led to debates about whether any of the situations match the accepted meaning of irony . 
 The track topped the Canadian RPM Top Singles chart for six weeks , and reached the top five in Australia , New Zealand and Norway . In the United States , the song reached number four on April 13 , 1996 , and currently is her highest @-@ charting single on the Billboard Hot 100 . " Ironic " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The song won the Juno Award for Single of the Year , and received two Grammy Award nominations in 1997 , for Record of the Year and Best Short Form Music Video . French director Stéphane Sednaoui filmed the music video . In it , Morissette drives through a winter landscape , and she plays multiple roles as her passengers . MTV nominated the music video for six MTV Video Music Awards in 1996 , winning three of them . The music video was listed on VH1 's " Greatest Music Videos " list and was parodied by Allison Rheaume and " Weird Al " Yankovic . 
 In 2004 , Morissette changed the lyrics of " Ironic " to denote her support for same @-@ sex marriage at the fifteenth GLAAD Media Awards . This version was included on her albums iTunes Originals ( 2004 ) and Jagged Little Pill Acoustic ( 2005 ) , and was performed at the House of Blues in 2005 , along with Canadian singer Avril Lavigne . " Ironic " was included on the set list of her tour Jagged Little Pill World Tour ( 1995 ) , and her compilation albums MTV Unplugged ( 1999 ) , The Collection ( 2005 ) , among others . The song was covered by Mexican duet Jesse & Joy for their album Esta Es Mi Vida <unk> ( 2007 ) , and by American band Four Year Strong for their cover album Explains It All ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 " Ironic " was written by Alanis Morissette and Glen Ballard , and produced by the former for her third studio album , Jagged Little Pill ( 1995 ) . In an interview with Christopher Walsh of Billboard , Ballard explained how he and Morissette met , and how " Ironic " was written . He commented : " I 'm telling you , within 15 minutes we were at it — just writing . ' Ironic ' was the third song we wrote . Oh God , we were just having fun . I thought ' I don 't know what this is — what genre it is — who knows ? It 's just good ' " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com , it is a pop rock song , set in the time signature of common time , composed in a moderate tempo of eighty @-@ two beats per minute . It is set in the key of B major with Morissette 's vocal range from the tone of E5 to B ♭ 5 , and " Ironic " chord progression starts with the sequence of Emaj7 – F ♯ 6 – Emaj7 – F ♯ 6 , before changing to F ♯ – <unk> – F ♯ – G ♯ m7 in the chorus . 
 = = = Linguistic usage disputes = = = 
 The song 's usage of the word " ironic " attracted media attention for an improper application of the term , because according to Jon Pareles of The New York Times , the song gives a distinct " unironic " sense in its implications . According to the Oxford English Dictionary " irony " is " a figure of speech in which the intended meaning is the opposite of that expressed by the words used " . Thus , lyrics such as " It 's like rain on your wedding day " and " A traffic jam when you 're already late " are not ironic . Morissette commented about the writing of the song : " For me the great debate on whether what I was saying in ' Ironic ' was ironic wasn 't a traumatic debate . I 'd always embraced the fact that every once in a while I 'd be the <unk> queen . And when Glen and I were writing it , we definitely were not doggedly making sure that everything was technically ironic " . 
 Comedian Ed Byrne performed a skit in which he jokingly attacked the song for its lack of ironies : " The only ironic thing about that song is it 's called ' Ironic ' and it 's written by a woman who doesn 't know what irony is . That 's quite ironic . " Also satirists Berger and Wyse parodied the song in one segment of their cartoon strip The Pitchers . In that episode , a superhero named " Irony Man " compared his superpowers to lyrics from Morissette 's song , causing his cohorts to rename him " The Man from Alanis " . In December 2009 , the comedy website CollegeHumor released a spoof video of the song called " Actually Ironic " , featuring actress Sarah <unk> , in which Patrick Cassels amended the lyrics in a form that would be appropriately ironic . The CollegeHumor spoof was replicated in July 2013 by sisters Rachael and Eliza Hurwitz , from New York City , who published their version on YouTube . The sisters sing the line " We fixed it for you , Alanis . You 're welcome . " throughout their " It 's Finally Ironic " video . In his 2014 song " Word Crimes " , Weird Al references Morissette 's lyrics by singing " Irony is not coincidence " , and the music video for the song shows a fire truck burning ( depicted as " Irony " ) compared with rain during a wedding ( which is described as " Weather " ) . Morissette herself poked fun at her grammar mistakes during a 2013 performance of " <unk> " with The Lonely Island on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . In it , Morissette cut off their song to explain that their use of hashtag rap to demonstrate the function of a semicolon is incorrect , to which they respond that her critiquing their grammar is " ironic " . 
 In 2014 , Michael Reid Roberts penned for Salon.com a defense of the song 's use of the term " ironic " , as the song cites situational ironies , which is defined as the " state of affairs or event [ s ] that seems deliberately contrary to what one expects and is often wryly amusing as a result " , as some of the situations described in the lyrics could in fact be said to be " ironic " . 
 Also in 2014 , Michael Stevens of the YouTube channel <unk> devoted time to the discussion of irony in the August 12th episode " <unk> . " In this video , Stevens considers the difference between the typically cited " situational " irony , versus " dramatic " irony . According to him , the irony of the song may not necessarily be in the situations themselves , but rather in the dramatic irony – when someone is unaware of the significance of the event while others are . The situations aren 't ironic themselves , but life itself is ironic . It is a song about " the difference between what life knows we need , and what life thinks we need . What 's ironic is not 10 @,@ 000 spoons when all you need is a knife , it 's the fact that , as Alanis believes , you have all of those spoons because , unbeknownst to you , but known by life , what you really need right now is only spoons ... or the last thing you need right now is a knife . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Jaime Gill from Dot Music commented on the original version of " Ironic " , on his review of Jagged Little Pill Acoustic ( 2005 ) , that " [ Jagged Little Pill ] gave us pop 's greatest parlour game , with spot the genuine irony in ' Ironic ' " and calling the song " pretty " and " catchy " . But he later criticized the lyrics , calling the song " idiotic " , and giving a positive review to the acoustic version saying : " it actually sounds more relaxed and engaging without the hoary loud guitars of the original " . Even though Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic marked the track as one of the " All Media Guide track pick " of the album , in a separate review , from the same website , the CD single release was rated with two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five stars . Pareles noted that in verses of " Ironic " , and another song from the album ( " Mary Jane " ) , " it 's easy to envision Morissette on the stage of a club , singing wry couplets backed by acoustic guitar " . He also commented in another article he wrote , that the song was actually " unironic " . Dave <unk> of PopMatters felt that the acoustic version of " Ironic " , was much worse than the original version . The single won the Juno Award for Single of the Year at the 1997 ceremony , and in the same year it was nominated for a Grammy Award , in the category of Record of the Year . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Ironic " debuted on the Canadian RPM Singles Chart at number ninety @-@ five on the issue dated January 8 , 1996 . Twelve weeks later the track topped the chart , on April 1 , 1996 , staying there for six weeks , being replaced by " Closer to Free " by American band <unk> . Spending twenty @-@ nine weeks within the top 100 , it was last seen on July 22 , 1996 , at number eighty @-@ one . On other RPM charts , the single topped the Alternative 30 Chart and reached number six on the Adult Contemporary Chart . The track debuted at number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the highest debut on the issue ending March 16 , 1996 . The single eventually reached its peak position , at number four , on April 13 , 1996 . " Ironic " is currently Morissette 's highest @-@ charting hit on the Hot 100 chart . In other US charts , the single became her third number @-@ one hit on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks , where it stayed for three weeks . The song topped the Mainstream Top 40 , reached number five on Adult Top 40 chart and twenty @-@ eight of the Adult Contemporary chart . 
 In Australia , the song debuted at number forty on their singles chart . In its eighth week , it peaked at number three on May 12 , 1996 , where it stayed for two weeks . It was last appeared on the chart on July 21 , 1996 , at number thirty @-@ seven . To date , " Ironic " is her best charting song on the country . The song was generally well @-@ received throughout Europe . In the United Kingdom " Ironic " debuted and peaked at number eleven , on April 20 , 1996 . It left the chart eight weeks later , at number sixty @-@ seven . In the Norwegian Singles Charts , it debuted at number eighteen , rising to number seventeen the next week . It rose to number five on its third week , and later peaked at number four , staying there for five weeks . It later dropped one place , and remained there for another two weeks . " Ironic " kept within the chart for seventeen weeks . In Belgium , it reached sixth place on the Ultratop 50 ( Flanders region ) , and ninth place on the Ultratop 50 ( Wallonia zone ) . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 The music video for " Ironic " was directed by Stéphane Sednaoui . In the beginning of the video , Morissette is at a gas station , walking to her automobile with a cup of coffee in her hand . Then , she drives her car through a winter landscape , and she begins to sing the song 's first verse . When it comes to the chorus , a second Morissette comes in . She is in a green sweater and sits in the backseat on the passenger side . When the first chorus ends , a third Morissette comes in , and she is in a yellow sweater with braided hair , also in the backseat , but on the driver 's side . Along the way , the yellow Morissette is singing and eating at the same time , and when it comes to the second verse , a fourth and last Morissette comes in , she is in a red sweater sitting in the front passenger seat . During the second chorus , she climbs out of the window when they are still driving and almost gets knocked out by a bridge , but still manages a smile after doing so . The camera comes back to the driving Morissette , after the breakdown , and she takes off her hat , tosses it into the back seat , and becomes as loud as the other three while singing the song . When Morissette sings the outro , she is still driving through the winter landscape , and suddenly the car breaks down ( possibly having run out of gas , which may be " ironic " in itself since the video started with her at a gas station . ) Morissette ( as the driver ) gets out of the car , and all her " passengers " have disappeared . 
 Blaine Allan noted in the book Television : Critical Methods and Applications ( 2002 ) how Morissette interacts with the watcher . He commented that unlike Britney Spears ' " Lucky " music video , where Spears plays dual role of a girl named " Lucky " and her fan , and both appear together in some scenes helped by visual effects , " Ironic " does not utilize them , using solely editing , giving the sense that all the <unk> interact with each other . Journalist Carol Vernallis also found that Morissette 's " chitchat " way of singing the song creates an intimate connection viewer . She mentioned the video in her book Experiencing Music Video : Aesthetics and Cultural Context ( 2004 ) , where she studied how the audience may pay attention to the lyrics of the song in a music video . Vernallis added that " Ironic " music video functions as a limited example of how the meaning of a song 's lyrics become " inaccessible " when they are videotaped and televised . 
 Charles Aaron from Spin called " Ironic " music video " neat " . The video was nominated for six MTV Video Music Awards in 1996 : " Video of the Year " , " Best Direction in a Video " , " Viewer 's Choice " , " Best Female Video " , " Best New Artist in a Video " and " Best Editing " , winning the last three . It was nominated in 1997 for the Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video . Also , it was listed number eighteen at VH1 's 100 Greatest Videos . In late 1996 , a parody version of the video was released featuring a young girl , Alison Rheaume , who mimics Morissette 's actions and wardrobe while lip syncing to the original song . At the end , her father notices her in the car sitting in the driveway and tells her to stop fooling around . This version of the video , directed by David Rheaume , was included on Morissette 's CD / DVD The Collection ( 2005 ) . " Weird Al " Yankovic produced a parody version of the video in 2003 for his television comedy series Al TV , in which he takes the place of the fourth version of Morissette in the front passenger seat . 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 The single was added in the set list for Morissette 's concert tour , Jagged Little Pill World Tour ( 1995 ) . The song was added to the tour 's video album Jagged Little Pill Live ( 1997 ) . Since then , " Ironic " has been included in her albums MTV Unplugged ( 1999 ) , Feast on Scraps ( 2002 ) , Live in the Navajo Nation ( 2002 ) , and The Collection , as well as 1997 Grammys and the MTV Unplugged compilation albums . 
 With " Ironic " , Morissette denoted her support for same @-@ sex marriage . In March 2004 , Morissette amended a lyric at the fifteenth annual GLAAD Media Awards : " It 's meeting the man of my dreams / And then meeting his beautiful husband " . She commented to USA Today that her support about same @-@ sex unions " goes a step further than clever lyrics . " She remarked that " [ her ] fantasy would now be to marry some of [ her ] gay couple friends . " Later in June 2004 , she said to VH1 : " I don 't have any gay @-@ couple friends who are formally engaged , but I would be honored to support the gay community in that way ... I did it as a sort of spontaneous thing at a radio station about a month ago with a couple , and my heart was so with them . " Morissette recorded an acoustic version of the song with the changed lyric for her iTunes Originals release , in 2004 . Another acoustic version was recorded for the album Jagged Little Pill Acoustic , as well for the compilation album Cities 97 Sampler , Volume 16 ( 2004 ) . The song was also performed in a duo with Avril Lavigne at the House of Blues in 2005 . 
 = = Covers and use in media = = 
 " Ironic " was covered in 2007 by Mexican duet Jesse & Joy for their album Esta Es Mi Vida <unk> , and the pop punk band Four Year Strong for their 90 's cover album Explains It All ( 2009 ) . In the 1996 novel Naïve . Super by Norwegian author Erlend Loe , the protagonist watches the video for the song on television and dreams about " meeting an Alanis @-@ girl and living in a house together with her " . In the Jay and Silent Bob comic Chasing Dogma ( 1998 ) , the character Tricia Jones is singing " Ironic " before Jay steps into the shower . In 2003 , Ji @-@ In Cho covered the song for the German version of the Fame Academy talent show , which became a success in the German charts . In September 2001 , " Ironic " was listed as " one of the songs deemed inappropriate due to its lyrics " by American mass media company Clear Channel Communications , after the September 11 attacks occurred . The music of the song was featured in the romantic comedy film I Could Never Be Your Woman ( 2007 ) , where Saoirse Ronan , as Izzie <unk> , sings an altered version of the lyrics in a talent show . It also made a predominant appearance as the opener to 2013 comedy movie The Internship , starring Owen Wilson and Vince Vaughn , as they sing along to it . More recently , the song was briefly on an episode of Castle when the titular character laments about the song 's title being subjected to misuse since it was first released . In 2015 , Morissette appeared on The Late Late Show with James Corden and sang a version of the song with new lyrics " updated " for the technology era , and an homage to the linguistics of the original mentioned above . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from " Ironic " CD single : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Rachel Weisz = 
 Rachel Hannah Weisz ( / <unk> / <unk> ; born 7 March 1970 ) is an English film and theatre actress as well as a former fashion model who holds both British and American citizenship . 
 Weisz began her acting career at Trinity Hall , Cambridge in the early 1990s , then started working in television , appearing in the detective drama Inspector Morse , the British mini @-@ series Scarlet and Black and the television film Advocates II . She made her film debut in the science fiction movie Death Machine ( 1994 ) . Her first Hollywood appearance came in the action film Chain Reaction ( 1996 ) , opposite Keanu Reeves and Morgan Freeman . 
 Next , she appeared as Evelyn Carnahan @-@ O 'Connell in the adventure films The Mummy ( 1999 ) and The Mummy Returns ( 2001 ) . Other notable films featuring Weisz are the war film Enemy at the Gates ( 2001 ) , opposite Jude Law ; the comedy @-@ drama About a Boy ( 2002 ) , opposite Hugh Grant ; the supernatural action @-@ thriller Constantine ( 2005 ) , pairing her once again with Keanu Reeves ; and in the Darren Aronofsky @-@ directed romantic drama The Fountain , opposite Hugh Jackman . For her supporting role in the drama thriller The Constant Gardener ( 2005 ) , opposite Ralph Fiennes , she received an Academy Award , a Golden Globe and a Screen Actors ' Guild award . In 2006 , Weisz received the BAFTA Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year . She played the Wicked Witch of the East , <unk> , in the fantasy adventure Oz the Great and Powerful ( 2013 ) . In 2015 , she appeared in two films that played at the Cannes Film Festival , Youth and The Lobster . 
 Weisz also works in theatre . Her stage breakthrough was the 1994 revival of Noël Coward 's play Design for Living , which earned her the London Critics ' Circle Award for the most promising newcomer . Weisz 's performances also include the 1999 Donmar Warehouse production of Tennessee Williams ' Suddenly , Last Summer , and their 2009 revival of A Streetcar Named Desire . Her portrayal of Blanche DuBois in the latter play earned her the Olivier Award for Best Actress . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Weisz was born in Westminster , London , and grew up in Hampstead Garden Suburb . Her father , George Weisz , was an inventor from Hungary . Her mother , Edith Ruth ( née Teich ) , is a teacher @-@ turned @-@ psychotherapist from Vienna , Austria . Her parents fled to the United Kingdom before the outbreak of the Second World War , to escape the Nazis . Her father is Jewish ; her maternal grandfather , Alexander Teich , was also Jewish , and had been a secretary of the World Union of Jewish Students . Her mother 's ancestry is Austrian Jewish , " Catholic Viennese " and Italian . Weisz 's mother was brought up as a Roman Catholic , and , according to Vogue , later converted to Judaism . Weisz has a younger sister , Minnie , who is a photographer and curator . 
 Weisz 's parents valued the arts and encouraged her sister and her to form opinions of their own by introducing them to family debates . Her parents later divorced . Weisz left North London Collegiate School and attended Benenden School for one year , completing A @-@ levels at St Paul 's Girls School . Weisz claimed that she was a bad pupil until an English literature teacher inspired her at the age of 16 . 
 Known for being an " English rose " due to her appearance , Weisz started modelling when she was 14 . In 1984 she gained public attention when she turned down an offer to star in King David with Richard Gere . 
 After leaving school , she entered Trinity Hall , Cambridge , where she graduated with a second @-@ class honours , upper division ( 2 : 1 ) Bachelor of Arts degree in English . During her university years , where she was a contemporary of Sacha Baron Cohen , Alexander Armstrong , Sue Perkins , Mel Giedroyc , Richard Osman , and Ben Miller ( whom she briefly dated ) , she appeared in various student productions , co @-@ founding a student drama group called Cambridge Talking Tongues . It won a Guardian Student Drama Award at the 1991 Edinburgh Festival Fringe for an improvised piece called Slight Possession , directed by David Farr . The group existed until 1993 . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = = 1992 – 98 = = = = 
 She appeared in the 1992 television film Advocates II , followed by roles in the Inspector Morse episode " Twilight of the Gods " , and the BBC 's steamy period drama Scarlet and Black , alongside Ewan McGregor . " Dirty Something " , a BBC Screen Two , hour @-@ long film made in 1992 , was Rachel Weisz 's first film , playing Becca who met and fell in love with a traveller Dog ( Paul Reynolds ) at the end of Glastonbury Festival . The opening scenes were filmed at the festival . Also starring as an older fellow traveller and sage was Larry ( Bernard Hill ) . 
 Weisz started her film career with a minor role in the 1994 film Death Machine , but her first major role came in the 1996 film Chain Reaction , which also starred Keanu Reeves and Morgan Freeman . While the film received mostly negative reviews – it holds a 16 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , it was a minor financial success . She next appeared as Miranda Fox in Stealing Beauty , directed by the Italian Academy Award @-@ winner Bernardo Bertolucci , where she was first labelled an " English rose " . 
 Following this , Weisz found roles in the 1997 American drama Swept from the Sea , the 1998 British television comedy @-@ drama My Summer with Des , the Michael Winterbottom 's crime film I Want You , and David Leland 's The Land Girls , based on Angela Huth 's book of the same name . 
 = = = = 1999 – 2003 = = = = 
 In 1999 Weisz played Greta in the historical film Sunshine . The same year , her international breakthrough came with the 1999 adventure film The Mummy , in which she played the female lead opposite Brendan Fraser . Her character was the English Egyptologist Evelyn Carnahan , who undertook an expedition to the fictional ancient Egyptian city of Hamunaptra to discover an ancient book . Variety criticised the direction of the film , writing : " ( the actors ) have been directed to broad , undisciplined performances [ ... ] Buffoonery hardly seems like Weisz 's natural domain , as the actress strains for comic effects that she can 't achieve " . She followed this up with the sequel The Mummy Returns in 2001 , which grossed an estimated $ 433 million worldwide , ( equivalent to $ 579 million in 2016 dollars ) higher than the original 's $ 260 million ( equal to $ 369 million in 2016 dollars ) . In 2000 , she portrayed Petula in the film Beautiful Creatures , following this up with 2001 's Enemy at the Gates , and the 2002 comedy @-@ drama About a Boy , with Hugh Grant , based on Nick Hornby 's 1998 novel . In 2003 , she played Marlee in the adaptation of John Grisham 's legal thriller novel The Runaway Jury , along with Dustin Hoffman , John Cusack and Gene Hackman ; and starred in the film adaptation of the romantic comedy @-@ drama play The Shape of Things . 
 = = = = 2004 – 09 = = = = 
 In 2004 Weisz appeared in the comedy Envy , opposite Ben Stiller , Jack Black and Christopher Walken . The film failed at the box office . Variety magazine opined that Weisz and co @-@ star Amy Poehler " get fewer choice moments than they deserve . " Her next role was alongside Keanu Reeves in Constantine , based on the comic book Hellblazer . Film Threat called her portrayal " effective at projecting scepticism and , eventually , dawning horror " . 
 Her next appearance , in 2005 , was in Fernando Meirelles 's The Constant Gardener , a film adaptation of a John le Carré thriller set in the slums of Kibera and <unk> , Kenya . Weisz played an activist , Tessa Quayle , married to a British embassy official . The film was critically acclaimed , earning Weisz the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress , the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress , and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Supporting Role . UK newspaper The Guardian noted that the film " established her in the front rank of British actors " , while the BBC wrote : " Weisz is exceptional : film star charisma coupled with raw emotion in a performance to fall in love with " . In 2006 , she received the BAFTA Britannia Award for British Artist of the Year . 
 In 2006 she starred in Darren Aronofsky 's romantic drama The Fountain . The San Francisco Chronicle found her portrayal of Queen Isabel " less convincing " than other roles . That same year , she provided the voice for Saphira the dragon in the fantasy film Eragon ; and rejected an offer to star in The Mummy : Tomb of the Dragon Emperor due to script issues . The part eventually went to Maria Bello . Her subsequent films include the 2007 Wong Kar @-@ wai drama My Blueberry Nights , and Rian Johnson 's 2008 caper film The Brothers Bloom , alongside Adrien Brody and Mark Ruffalo . In 2009 she played the lead role of Hypatia of Alexandria in the historical drama film Agora , a Spanish production directed by Alejandro Amenábar . The New York Times called her portrayal " adept " , noting that she imparted " a sympathetic presence " . 
 = = = = 2010 – present = = = = 
 Weisz starred in the film The Whistleblower , which debuted at the Toronto Film Festival in 2010 . The film was based on the true story of human trafficking by employees of contractor DynCorp . During its première , the intense depiction of the treatment meted out to victims by the kidnappers made a woman in the audience faint . Variety magazine wrote " Weisz 's performance holds the viewer every step of the way . " That same year , she guest @-@ starred in the animated series The Simpsons , in the 22nd season episode " How Munched is That Birdie in the Window ? " . Weisz 's 2011 roles included an adaptation of Terence Rattigan 's play The Deep Blue Sea , Fernando Meirelles ' psychosexual drama 360 opposite Jude Law again and Anthony Hopkins , the BBC espionage thriller Page Eight , and the thriller film Dream House , alongside Daniel Craig . 
 She filmed scenes for To the Wonder , a 2012 romantic drama film written and directed by Terrence Malick , alongside Ben Affleck , Olga Kurylenko , Javier Bardem and Rachel McAdams ; her scenes were cut . She has also starred in the 2012 action thriller film The Bourne Legacy based on the series of books by Robert Ludlum . 
 She portrayed <unk> , in Oz the Great and Powerful , which opened on 7 March 2013 . In 2015 she appeared in drama film Youth and in science fiction film The Lobster . The film won Cannes Jury Prize . She appeared in the 2015 drama film The Light Between Oceans with Michael Fassbender . She will appear in an upcoming British biographical drama film about sailor Donald Crowhurst , The Mercy , which is being directed by James Marsh . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 On stage , Weisz 's breakthrough role was that of Gilda in Sean Mathias 's 1994 revival of Noël Coward 's Design for Living at the Gielgud Theatre , for which she received the London Critics ' Circle Award for the most promising newcomer . Her portrayal was described as " wonderful " by a contemporary review . In 1999 she played the role of Catherine in the Donmar Warehouse production of Tennessee Williams ' Suddenly Last Summer , What 's on Stage called her " captivating " , stating that she brought " a degree of credibility to a difficult part " . The same year , Weisz appeared in Neil LaBute 's The Shape of Things at the Almeida Theatre , then temporarily located in London 's King 's Cross . <unk> called her " a sophisticated , independent artist " with " great stage presence " . In 2009 she appeared as Blanche DuBois , in Rob Ashford 's revival of the play A Streetcar Named Desire . Her performance in the play was praised by the critics , the Daily Telegraph noted that she " rises to the challenge magnificently " . Weisz and her husband starred in a Broadway play titled Betrayal . It began performances in October 2013 , and continued until January 2014 . Despite mixed reviews , it grossed $ 17 @.@ 5 million , becoming the second highest broadway play of 2013 . 
 = = = Awards and honours = = = 
 = = = = Film = = = = 
 Weisz gained honours for her work in The Constant Gardener , including the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress , the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture , and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture . She was also nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Actress in a Leading Role . Furthermore , the role also led to her receiving the London Critics ' Circle Film Award for British Actress of the Year , the British Independent Film Award for Best Actress , and the San Diego Film Critics ' Society Award for Best Supporting Actress . Additionally , she was nominated for the Online Film Critics ' Society Award for Best Supporting Actress . In 2006 , Weisz was invited to join the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences , and was also honoured at the Los Angeles BAFTA ceremony with the Britannia Award for Artist of the Year . 
 = = = = Theatre = = = = 
 In 1991 , Weisz received the Student Drama Award at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe , for her part in the play Slight Possession . In 1994 she was awarded the London Critics ' Circle Award for Most Promising Newcomer , for the play Design for Living . In January 2010 , the Critics ' Circle Theatre Awards in London named her Best Actress of 2009 , for her performance as Blanche Dubois in the Donmar revival of A Streetcar Named Desire . She also won the 2010 Olivier Award for Best Actress for the same role . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Weisz began dating American filmmaker and producer Darren Aronofsky in the summer of 2001 . They met backstage at London 's Almeida Theatre , where she was starring in The Shape of Things . Weisz moved to New York with Aronofsky the following year ; in 2005 , they were engaged . Their son , Henry Chance Aronofsky , was born in 2006 in New York City . The couple resided in the East Village in Manhattan . In November 2010 , Weisz and Aronofsky announced that they had been apart for months , but remain close friends and are committed to bringing up their son together in New York . 
 Weisz began dating English actor Daniel Craig in December 2010 and they married on 22 June 2011 in a private New York ceremony , with only four guests in attendance , including Weisz 's son and Craig 's daughter . Weisz , a British citizen by birth , became a naturalised American citizen in 2011 . 
 In 2009 Weisz expressed her views on Botox to Harper 's Bazaar – " It should be banned for actors , as steroids are for sportsmen . Acting is all about expression ; why would you want to iron out a frown ? " During her career , she has been featured on the covers of magazines such as <unk> , Vogue and Esquire . She serves as a muse to fashion designer Narciso Rodriguez , and was named L 'Oréal 's global ambassador in 2010 . 
 On 7 July 2007 she presented at the American leg of Live Earth , along with Alec Baldwin and Kevin Bacon . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Cyberwoman = 
 " Cyberwoman " is the fourth episode of the first series of the British science fiction television series Torchwood . Written by Chris Chibnall and directed by James Strong , the episode was first broadcast on the digital channel BBC Three on 5 November 2006 , and later repeated on terrestrial channel BBC Two on 8 November . 
 In the episode , Ianto Jones ( Gareth David @-@ Lloyd ) is revealed to secretly house his girlfriend , Lisa Hallett ( Caroline Chikezie ) , a half @-@ converted Cyberman , in the basement of the Torchwood Hub . Ianto wants to turn her into a human again , but by doing so her Cyberman influence takes control , and the rest of the team must stop her before she could become a threat to Earth . However , Ianto still believes she can be saved . 
 The episode was among the first pitched for the series , as creator Russell T Davies saw a potential to continue the story from the Doctor Who episodes " Army of Ghosts " and " Doomsday " . Episode writer originally intended the episode to appear sometime midway through the series , but was ultimately brought forward to the fourth slot . It was filmed in the third production block . Because of the limited number of filming locations and cast members , it was among the cheapest episodes in the first series . It was seen by almost 1 @.@ 4 million viewers after its original broadcast and received generally mixed reactions from critics , though the producers regard the episode as one of their favourites in the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Torchwood Three team , sans Ianto Jones ( who remains behind ) , go out for a drink . Alone in the hub , Ianto brings in Japanese cybernetics expert Dr. Tanizaki ( Togo Igawa ) down to a basement deep inside , home to Lisa Hallett , Ianto 's girlfriend . They both worked in Torchwood One during the events of Doctor Who ' " Doomsday " , when Cybermen partially converted Lisa before the invasion ended . Ianto has since cared for her by placing her in the basement with a conversion unit to keep her alive . Ianto wants Tanizaki to reverse the process . Tanizaki is able to make her breathe on her own again , but by that time , the team is recalled back to deal with a rogue unidentified flying object . When Tanizaki brings Lisa back down to the basement , her Cyberman influence takes over and she kills him by attempting to " upgrade " him . 
 This causes a power flicker in the Hub ; Ianto makes an excuse to look into it himself and finds Tanizaki 's body . As he leaves Lisa to hide the body , she drains even more power by re @-@ entering the conversion unit . Believing the Hub is under attack , team leader Jack Harkness ( John Barrowman ) sends Gwen Cooper ( Eve Myles ) and Owen Harper ( Burn Gorman ) to the basement where they find the abandoned conversion unit . Jack runs down to find Owen unconscious and Gwen about to be converted . He stops the process and attempts to shoot Lisa , but Ianto stops him , allowing Lisa to escape . Ianto pleads with Jack that they try save her , but Jack affirms that there is no cure . 
 Ianto approaches Lisa to reason with her , only to end up being knocked unconscious . Jack buys technical expert Toshiko Sato ( Naoko Mori ) time to go to the surface to recharge the emergency power cells by allowing himself to be " deleted " ( death from electrocution by a Cyberman 's touch ) twice by Lisa , though he would survive due to his immortality . To allow the rest of the team to escape , Jack sprays Lisa with a special " barbecue sauce " that summons the pet pterodactyl ; as it attacks her , the team escapes by the invisible lift . Ianto punches Jack for his actions , uttering he is " the biggest monster of them all . " Meanwhile , a pizza delivery girl ( Bethan Walker ) unwittingly enters the Hub to find a seriously injured Lisa . Ianto runs back to the Hub , but is stopped by Jack , who threatens him at gunpoint with an ultimatum ; either he will execute Lisa , or if he does not do so in ten minutes , Jack will enter and kill them both . 
 Ianto returns to the basement and is devastated to find Lisa dead . He then sees the delivery girl , who has a large cut across her forehead ; Lisa implanted her brain into the delivery girl . At first reluctant , Ianto aims his gun at her , but cannot bring himself to shoot her . The girl tries to explain she did this for Ianto , but then promises that they can be upgraded together . The rest of the Torchwood team , arriving to hear that , open fire and kill her , leaving Ianto to mourn . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The idea behind the episode came from series creator Russell T Davies , who realised there was a story " begging to be told " after the Doctor Who episodes " Army of Ghosts " and " Doomsday " ; in the episodes , Cybermen from a parallel universe invade Earth to assimilate the human population . They were ultimately defeated when the Doctor ( David Tennant ) banishes them to the void , a space between universes , to be imprisoned . " Cyberwoman " was among the first episodes pitched for the first series . When Chris Chibnall was appointed head writer for Torchwood , Davies asked him to write an episode about a cyber girl in the basement of the Hub . 
 Out of the entire first series , " Cyberwoman " is the biggest nod to Doctor Who , there was little to no mention of the series , despite being a spin @-@ off , which was made deliberate to send out " confusing signals " to the audience about what the series is . Chibnall wanted to include a base description of what a Cyberman is for any viewer who had not seen Doctor Who . The episode was the first to centre on Ianto , who in the first three episodes was more or less a background character , and what John Barrowman described as like Torchwood 's version of Alfred Pennyworth in Batman . Chibnall originally intended for the episode to become the sixth or seventh in the series , but was brought forward to the fourth because some of the other scripts were not yet completed . It also became one of Chibnall 's harder episodes to write . Before settling on the current title , Chibnall went through numerous working titles , including " The Trouble with Lisa " and " The Long Night of Ianto " . " Cyberwoman " was ultimately chosen because the title " says it all . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 In writing the beginning , Chibnall envisaged Ianto meeting Tanizaki at an airport and then escorting him to a hotel before entering the Hub , however that was cut from the final draft as it would be an expensive sequence to film . Chibnall wanted the episode to take place several weeks after the previous episode , " Ghost Machine " , as to show Gwen knowing all the protocols and how to handle weapons , where as in the last episode , Gwen was still considered a rookie . Despite the episode being about stopping Lisa , Chibnall still wanted the beginning to be a love story between her and Ianto , and show the audience that a half @-@ converted Lisa is still human and the girlfriend Ianto loves . Also , because Ianto is " fundamentally wrong " about thinking Lisa can be saved , Chibnall wanted the audience to sympathise with the character and his motives . 
 The idea of having Lisa fight the pterodactyl , named Myfanwy by the producers , made them laugh , and felt they had to include it . The line where Ianto calls Jack the " biggest monster " was intended to be cut out , but Chibnall decided to keep it because of its impact to the audience . The scene where the team lines up to execute Lisa towards the end was the first scene Chibnall had in mind for the episode , though in the first draft , it was Ianto who killed her . After the episode was written and filmed , Chibnall discovered two main plot holes in the story . The first is that he did not make clear that everything about Lisa , including the scene where she acted human was all part of her plan for her Cyberman @-@ influence to take over , and reflected to adding at least two lines of dialogue to explain her motives clearly . The second was Jack having a cut lip in the end , even though he is immortal and all his wounds would have healed quickly . In the audio commentary for the episode , both Chibnall and actor Gareth David @-@ Lloyd stated the reasoning behind the cut being there is because Jack 's immortal powers would only deal with life @-@ threatening wounds and not minor injuries . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Before filming took place , David @-@ Lloyd met with Caroline Chikezie and got to know each other to help give their respective characters their chemistry . The episode was filmed as part of the third production block of the first series , along with eighth episode " They Keep Killing Suzie " . Director James Strong wanted to film the episode in a sort of real time format . Filming largely took place at the Upper Boat Studios outside Pontypridd , where the Torchwood Hub set is located . The scene where Jack threatens to kill Ianto if he does not kill Lisa was the first scene to be shot . The flashback scene where Ianto finds a half @-@ converted Lisa in Canary Wharf took a full day to film ; it was originally supposed to take only a few hours , but the camera failed to record the scene . It was replaced , but the second camera failed to record also . Eve Myles and Burn Gorman were both trained how to handle guns and a torch like a " secret agent . " Strong noted that they both held the gun and torch in each hand like professionals . 
 The external shots of the Hub were filmed at Roald Dahl Plass in Cardiff , which is what exists above the Hub in the series . Filming the scenes at the Plass took place during the middle of the night , and were disrupted by hooligans . The basement where Ianto holds Lisa was filmed at a cellar in Tredegar House , Newport . The original ending to the episode is where Toshiko hands Ianto coffee while he is cleaning the Hub . However , after it was filmed , Strong decided to cut that scene out , as he felt the overhead shot of the Hub before that scene would have made a more suitable ending . Because it was filmed in only a handful of locations , mostly in the Hub set , and there were only a few guest cast members , " Cyberwoman " was considered one of the cheapest episodes in the first series . 
 = = = Costume and effects = = = 
 The producers noted there were a history of " sexy , pneumatic , hydraulic women " in science fiction , and wanted to " tap into that . " To make the <unk> costume , the props department wanted to make it as " sexy " as they can . Director James Strong wanted to make the costume look " amazing , " but threatening and scary as well . There were discussions about which parts of Lisa would be human , and which parts would be cyborg . Made out of rubber , it was custom made to fit Chikezie as much as possible . It took an entire day for the actress to get her body cast . After the costume was completed , it would take an hour to apply each morning , and an hour to remove by lunch break . Chikezie found it difficult to hear anything from the helmet while shooting scenes . It was also uncomfortable for her , but the producers noted she remained stoic throughout filming . 
 The fight scene between Lisa and Myfanwy was difficult to shoot , as the actress had to interact with a visual effect creature that would not be added until post @-@ production . The producers added a plastic green beak stuck on the end of a stick to be used as a guide . The scene where the team go up on the invisible lift was made by making the platform stationary , but the camera below it would descend , giving the illusion the platform is ascending . The visual effect of the tools used to create Cybermen were reused from the Doctor Who episode " The Age of Steel " , while the UFO footage when the Torchwood team return from the drinks was a tin foil @-@ covered frisbee on a fishing line . 
 = = Broadcast , reception and analysis = = 
