 = = = Ratings and critical reception = = = 
 " Cyberwoman " was first broadcast on BBC Three during the 10 pm time slot on Sunday 5 November 2006 . The episode was seen by 1 @.@ 391 million viewers , the highest viewing on the channel the week it was broadcast . The repeat on terrestrial channel BBC Two on 8 November 2010 , was seen by 2 @.@ 1 million viewers with a 10 % audience share . It was given an Appreciation Index of 84 . 
 Daniel Montesinos @-@ Donaghy of Den of Geek reacted positively towards the episode , stating " surprisingly , it was absolutely brilliant – a mini @-@ tragedy of sorts about secrets , obsession and corruption that finally gave both Gareth David @-@ Lloyd something interesting to do and the series some much @-@ needed focus . Plus , they totally played a Mogwai song ! How often does that happen on television ? " Montesinos @-@ Donaghy felt it was " a step in the right direction , " adding that it has " everything I could have wanted from a Torchwood episode . " 
 Ian Hyland of News of the World disliked the episode , stating " After this week 's ' Cyberwoman ' nonsense , ' Torch Script ' would be a better idea . " <unk> said of the episode , " It 's awful . It 's horrific . It seriously , seriously sucks , " adding " the single nice thing we can find to say is that the concept had potential . " Seb Patrick of Noise to Signal thought , " despite a strong - and somewhat morally ambiguous - ending [ the episode ] really should have delivered in more spectacular fashion than this . " Patrick also criticised Jack 's personality throughout the episode , stating " we wanted a spinoff series about him because he was cocky , cool and downright entertaining - Buzz Lightyear meets Ace Rimmer meets James Bond . We didn 't want some grumpy immortal bastard with a chip on his shoulder . " Despite the mixed reviews however , the series producers and BBC controller of fiction Jane Tranter regard the episode as one of their favourites from the first series . 
 = = = Critical analysis = = = 
 In an essay on evolving symbolism with the Cybermen , Lincoln Geraghty of the University of Portsmouth argues that in " Cyberwoman " , " we see the first female Cyber character on screen ; unable to control her programming she attempts to assimilate her ex @-@ boyfriend and his teammates . Like Maria in Metropolis and the suburban threat seen in The Stepford Wives ( 1975 ) , technology is seen here as even more threatening when linked with the possibility of female reproduction . " 
 Neil Perryman of the University of Sunderland feels this episode is a prime example of transmedia storytelling in Doctor Who and Torchwood , describing the episode and ancillary online material released after its airing being in part an attempt at continuity management . He describes " ... these <unk> have also been used to correct continuity errors that have appeared within the television show . For example , following the broadcast of the Torchwood episode ‘ Cyberwoman ’ ( 13 November 2006 ) , the official Torchwood website provided information about ‘ The Fall of Torchwood One ’ that attempted to correct – via ‘ additive comprehension ’ – what some fans had regarded as a glaring error in the plot . Fans had asked how the eponymous Cyberwoman was not sucked into the void along with the rest of her kin during the climax to the Doctor Who episode ‘ Doomsday ’ ( 8 July 2006 ) and the site retroactively explained away the problem : ‘ The only exceptions were those being converted with material entirely derived from this side of the void ’ , which allowed the events of ‘ Cyberwoman ’ to take place without contradicting what viewers originally saw in the episode . " 
 = Superman ( 1978 film ) = 
 Superman ( informally titled Superman : The Movie in some listings and reference sources ) is a 1978 superhero film directed by Richard Donner . It is based on the DC Comics character of the same name and stars Marlon Brando , Gene Hackman , Christopher Reeve , Margot Kidder , Glenn Ford , Phyllis Thaxter , Jackie Cooper , Trevor Howard , Marc McClure , Terence Stamp , Valerie Perrine , and Ned Beatty . The film depicts Superman 's origin , including his infancy as Kal @-@ El of Krypton and his youthful years in the rural town of Smallville . Disguised as reporter Clark Kent , he adopts a mild @-@ mannered disposition in Metropolis and develops a romance with Lois Lane , while battling the villainous Lex Luthor . 
 Several directors , most notably Guy Hamilton , and screenwriters ( Mario Puzo , David and Leslie Newman , and Robert Benton ) , were associated with the project before Donner was hired to direct . Tom Mankiewicz was drafted in to rewrite the script and was given a " creative consultant " credit . It was decided to film both Superman and Superman II simultaneously , with principal photography beginning in March 1977 and ending in October 1978 . Tensions arose between Donner and the producers , and a decision was made to stop filming the sequel — of which 75 percent had already been completed — and finish the first film . 
 The most expensive film made up to that point , with a budget of $ 55 million , Superman was released in December 1978 to critical acclaim and financial success , earning $ 300 million during its original theatrical run . Reviewers particularly praised Reeve 's performance . It was nominated for three Academy Awards including Best Film Editing , Best Music ( Original Score ) , and Best Sound Mixing , and received a Special Achievement Academy Award for Visual Effects . Groundbreaking in its use of special effects and science fiction / fantasy storytelling , the film 's legacy presaged the mainstream popularity of Hollywood 's superhero film franchises . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the planet Krypton , using evidence provided by scientist Jor @-@ El , the Council sentences attempted insurrectionists General Zod , Ursa , and Non to the Phantom Zone , for which Zod swears revenge on Jor @-@ El and his family . Jor @-@ El , despite his eminence , is unable to convince the Council that Krypton will soon be destroyed when its red supergiant sun goes supernova . To save his infant son , Kal @-@ El , Jor @-@ El launches a spacecraft containing him toward Earth , a planet with a suitable atmosphere where Kal @-@ El 's dense molecular structure will give him superhuman powers . Shortly after the launch , Krypton 's sun explodes , destroying the planet . 
 The ship crash lands on Earth near Smallville , Kansas . Kal @-@ El , who is now three years old , is found by Jonathan and Martha Kent , who are astonished when he is able to lift their truck . They take him to their farm and raise him as their own , naming him Clark after Martha 's maiden name . 
 At 18 , soon after Jonathan 's death due to a heart attack , Clark hears a psychic " call " and discovers a glowing crystal in the remains of his spacecraft . It compels him to travel to the Arctic , where the crystal builds the Fortress of Solitude . Inside , a holographic vision of Jor @-@ El appears and explains Clark 's origins , educating him on his powers and responsibilities . After 12 years of training , with his powers fully developed , he leaves the Fortress wearing a blue suit with the House of El family crest on his chest and becomes a reporter at the Daily Planet in Metropolis . He meets and develops an unrequited romantic attraction to coworker Lois Lane . 
 Lois becomes involved in a helicopter accident where conventional means of rescue are impossible , requiring Clark to use his powers in public for the first time to save her . That night , he thwarts a jewel thief attempting to scale a building using suction cups , captures robbers fleeing police , rescues a girl 's cat from a tree , and rescues Air Force One after it loses an engine , making the mysterious " caped wonder " an instant celebrity . He visits Lois at her home the next night and takes her for a flight over the city , allowing her to interview him for an article in which she names him " Superman " . 
 Meanwhile , criminal genius Lex Luthor has developed a plan to make a fortune in real estate by buying large amounts of barren desert land and then diverting a nuclear missile test flight to the San Andreas Fault . It will sink California and leave Luthor 's desert as the new West Coast of the United States , greatly increasing its value . After his incompetent henchman , Otis , erroneously redirects the first rocket , Luthor 's girlfriend , Eve Teschmacher , successfully changes the course of a second missile while the military is distracted by a roadblock Luthor arranges . 
 Knowing Superman could stop his plan , Luthor lures him to an underground lair and exposes him to Kryptonite . As Superman weakens , Luthor taunts him by revealing that the first missile is a decoy , headed east toward Hackensack , New Jersey , realizing that even Superman can not stop both impacts . Teschmacher is horrified because her mother lives in Hackensack , but Luthor does not care and leaves Superman to a slow death . Knowing his reputation for keeping his word , Teschmacher rescues Superman on the condition that he will deal with the New Jersey missile first . After diverting the eastbound missile into outer space , the other one aimed at the West Coast explodes near the San Andreas Fault . He is able to mitigate the effects of the nuclear explosion , getting rid of the pollution from the fallout and shoring up the crumbling Earth , but the aftershocks are still devastating . 
 While Superman is busy saving others , Lois 's car falls into a crevice that opens due to an aftershock . It quickly fills with dirt and debris and she suffocates to death . Angered at being unable to save her , Superman ignores Jor @-@ El 's warning not to interfere with human history , preferring to heed Jonathan 's advice that he must be on Earth for " a reason " . He accelerates around the Earth , rewinding time , in order to save Lois . He then delivers Luthor and Otis to prison and flies into the sunrise for further adventures . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marlon Brando as Jor @-@ El : Superman 's biological father on Krypton . He has a theory about the planet exploding , yet the Council refuses to listen . He dies as the planet explodes but successfully sends his infant son to Earth as a means to help the innocent . Brando sued the Salkinds and Warner Bros. for $ 50 million because he felt cheated out of his share of the box office profits . This stopped Brando 's footage from being used in Richard Lester 's version of Superman II . 
 Gene Hackman as Lex Luthor : A scientific genius and businessman who is Superman 's nemesis . It is he who discovers Superman 's weakness and hatches a plan that puts millions of people in danger . 
 Christopher Reeve as Clark Kent / Superman : Born on Krypton as Kal @-@ El and raised on Earth , he is a being of immense power , strength and invulnerability who , after realizing his destiny to serve mankind , uses his powers to protect and save others . As a means to protect his identity , he works in Metropolis at the Daily Planet as mild @-@ mannered newspaper reporter Clark Kent and changes his clothes into a red @-@ blue red caped suit with an S shield on its chest and known for his dubbing as " Superman " by Lois . Reeve was picked from over 200 actors who auditioned for the role . 
 Ned Beatty as Otis : Lex Luthor 's bumbling henchman . 
 Jackie Cooper as Perry White : Clark Kent 's hot @-@ tempered boss at the Daily Planet . He assigns Lois to uncover the news of an unknown businessman purchasing a large amount of property in California . Keenan Wynn was originally cast , but dropped out shortly before filming because of heart disease . Cooper , who originally auditioned for Otis , was subsequently cast . 
 Glenn Ford as Jonathan Kent : Clark Kent 's adoptive father in Smallville during his youth . He is a farmer who teaches Clark skills that will help him in the future . He later suffers a fatal heart attack that changes Clark 's outlook on his duty to others . 
 Trevor Howard as the First Elder : Head of the Kryptonian Council , who does not believe Jor @-@ El 's claim that Krypton is doomed . He threatens Jor @-@ El , " Any attempt by you to create a climate of fear and panic amongst the populace must be deemed by us an act of insurrection . " 
 Margot Kidder as Lois Lane : A reporter at the Daily Planet , who becomes a romantic interest to Clark Kent . The producers and director had a very specific concept for Lois : liberated , hard @-@ nosed , witty and attractive . Kidder was cast because her performance had a certain spark and vitality , and because of her strong interaction with Christopher Reeve . Over 100 actresses were considered for the role . Margot Kidder ( suggested by Stalmaster ) , Anne Archer , Susan Blakely , Lesley Ann Warren , Deborah <unk> and Stockard Channing screen tested from March through May 1977 . The final decision was between Channing and Kidder , with the latter winning the role . 
 Jack O 'Halloran as Non : Large and mute , the third of the Kryptonian villains who are sentenced to be isolated in the Phantom Zone . 
 Valerie Perrine as Eve Teschmacher : Lex Luthor 's girlfriend and accomplice . Already cynical of his increasing grandiosity and disturbed by his cruelty , she saves Superman 's life after learning that Luthor has launched a nuclear missile toward her mother 's hometown of Hackensack , New Jersey . She shows a romantic interest in Superman , implied by her fixing her hair before she makes her presence known to him , and then by kissing him before she saves his life . 
 Maria Schell as <unk> @-@ Ah : Like Jor @-@ El , a top Kryptonian scientist ; but she too is not swayed by Jor @-@ El 's theories . 
 Terence Stamp as General Zod : Evil leader of the three Kryptonian criminals who swears vengeance against Jor @-@ El when he is sentenced to the Phantom Zone . 
 Phyllis Thaxter as Martha Kent ( née Clark ) : Clark Kent 's faithful adoptive mother . A kindly woman who dotes on her adoptive son and is fiercely devoted to her husband , Jonathan . She is her son 's emotional support after Clark is devastated by Jonathan 's death . Thaxter was producer Ilya Salkind 's mother @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Susannah York as Lara : Superman 's biological mother on Krypton . She , after learning of Krypton 's fate , has apprehensions about sending her infant son to a strange planet alone . 
 Jeff East as the teenage Clark Kent : As a teenager , he is forced to hide his superhuman abilities , making him unpopular among his classmates and frustrating his efforts to gain the attention of classmate Lana Lang ( Diane Sherry ) . Following the death of his adoptive father , he travels to the Arctic to discover his Kryptonian heritage ( All of East 's dialogue in the film is dubbed over by Christopher Reeve ) . 
 Marc McClure as Jimmy Olsen : A teenage photographer at the Daily Planet . Jeff East , who portrayed the teenage Clark Kent , originally auditioned for this role , but outranked following his portrayal of the teen Clark . 
 Sarah Douglas as Ursa : General Zod 's second in command and consort , sentenced to the Phantom Zone for her unethical scientific experiments . 
 Harry Andrews as the Second Elder : Council member , who urges Jor @-@ El to be reasonable about plans to save Krypton . 
 Kirk Alyn and Noel Neill have cameo appearances as Lois Lane 's father and mother . Alyn and Neill portrayed Superman and Lois Lane in the film serials Superman ( 1948 ) and Atom Man vs. Superman ( 1950 ) , and were the first actors to portray the characters onscreen in a live @-@ action format . Neill reprised her role in the 1950s Adventures of Superman TV series , and also appeared as Lex Luthor 's elderly wife in the opening scene of the film Superman Returns ( 2006 ) . Neill thus not only originated the roles of both Lois and Ellen Lane , but began the tradition of former Lois actresses later portraying Ellen , a tradition followed by Phyllis Coates on Lois & Clark : The New Adventures of Superman , and Teri Hatcher on Smallville . 
 Larry Hagman and Rex Reed also make cameos ; Hagman plays an army major in charge of a convoy that is transporting one of the missiles , and Reed plays himself as he meets Lois and Clark outside the Daily Planet headquarters . A then @-@ unknown John Ratzenberger briefly appears as a missile control technician . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Ilya Salkind had first conceived the idea for a Superman film in late 1973 . In November 1974 , after a long , difficult process with DC Comics , the Superman film rights were purchased by Ilya , his father Alexander Salkind , and their partner Pierre Spengler . DC wanted a list of actors that were to be considered for Superman , and approved the producer 's choices of Muhammad Ali , Al Pacino , James Caan , Steve McQueen , Clint Eastwood and Dustin Hoffman . The filmmakers felt it was best to film Superman and Superman II back @-@ to @-@ back , simultaneously , and to make a negative pickup deal with Warner Bros. William Goldman was approached to write the screenplay , while Leigh Brackett was considered . Ilya hired Alfred Bester , who began writing a film treatment . Alexander felt , however , that Bester was not famous enough , so he hired Mario Puzo ( The Godfather ) to write the screenplay at a $ 600 @,@ 000 salary . Francis Ford Coppola , William Friedkin , Richard Lester , Peter Yates , John Guillermin , Ronald Neame and Sam Peckinpah were in negotiations to direct . Peckinpah dropped out when he produced a gun during a meeting with Ilya . George Lucas turned down the offer because of his commitment to Star Wars . 
 Ilya wanted to hire Steven Spielberg to direct , but Alexander was skeptical , feeling it was best to " wait until [ Spielberg 's ] big fish opens " . Jaws was very successful , prompting the producers to offer Spielberg the position , but by then Spielberg had already committed to Close Encounters of the Third Kind . Guy Hamilton was hired as director , while Puzo delivered his 500 @-@ page script for Superman and Superman II in July 1975 . Jax @-@ Ur appeared as one of General Zod 's henchmen , with Clark Kent written as a television reporter . Dustin Hoffman , who was previously considered for Superman , turned down Lex Luthor . 
 In early 1975 , Brando signed on as Jor @-@ El with a salary of $ 3 @.@ 7 million and 11 @.@ 75 % of the box office gross profits , totaling $ 19 million . He horrified Salkind by proposing in their first meeting that Jor @-@ El appear as a green suitcase or a bagel with Brando 's voice , but Donner used flattery to persuade the actor to portray Jor @-@ El himself . Brando hoped to use some of his salary for a proposed 13 @-@ part Roots @-@ style miniseries on Native Americans in the United States . Brando had it in his contract to complete all of his scenes in 12 days . He also refused to memorize his dialogue , so cue cards were compiled across the set . Fellow Oscar winner Hackman was cast as Lex Luthor days later . The filmmakers made it a priority to shoot all of Brando and Hackman 's footage " because they would be committed to other films immediately " . Though the Salkinds felt that Puzo had written a solid story for the two @-@ part film , they deemed his scripts too long and so hired Robert Benton and David Newman for rewrite work . Benton became too busy directing The Late Show , so David 's wife Leslie was brought in to help her husband finish writing duties . George MacDonald Fraser was later hired to do some work on the script , but he says he did little . 
 Their script was submitted in July 1976 , and carried a camp tone , including a cameo appearance by Telly Savalas as his Kojak character . The scripts for Superman and Superman II were now at over 400 pages combined . Pre @-@ production started at Cinecittà Studios in Rome , with sets starting construction and flying tests being unsuccessfully experimented . " In Italy , " producer Ilya Salkind remembered , " we lost about $ 2 million [ on flying tests ] . " Marlon Brando found out he could not film in Italy because of a warrant out for his arrest , a sexual obscenity charge from Last Tango in Paris . Production moved to England in late 1976 , but Hamilton could not join because he was a tax exile . 
 Mark Robson was strongly considered and was in talks to direct , but after seeing The Omen , the producers hired Richard Donner . Donner had previously been planning Damien : Omen II when he was hired in January 1977 for $ 1 million to direct Superman and Superman II . Donner felt it was best to start from scratch . " They had prepared the picture for a year and not one bit was useful to me . " Donner was dissatisfied with the campy script and brought in Tom Mankiewicz to perform a rewrite . According to Mankiewicz " not a word from the Puzo script was used " . " It was a well @-@ written , but still a ridiculous script . It was 550 pages . I said , ' You can 't shoot this screenplay because you 'll be shooting for five years ' , " Donner continued . " That was literally a shooting script and they planned to shoot all 550 pages . You know , 110 pages is plenty for a script , so even for two features , that was way too much . " Mankiewicz conceived having each Kryptonian family wear a crest resembling a different letter , justifying the ' S ' on Superman 's costume . The Writers Guild of America refused to credit Mankiewicz for his rewrites , so Donner gave him a creative consultant credit , much to the annoyance of the Guild . 
 = = = = Casting of Superman = = = = 
 It was initially decided to first sign an A @-@ list actor for Superman before Richard Donner was hired as director . Robert Redford was offered a large sum , but felt he was too famous . Burt Reynolds also turned down the role , while Sylvester Stallone was interested , but nothing ever came of it . Paul Newman was offered his choice of roles as Superman , Lex Luthor or Jor @-@ El for $ 4 million , turning down all three roles . 
 When it was next decided to cast an unknown actor , casting director Lynn Stalmaster first suggested Christopher Reeve , but Donner and the producers felt he was too young and skinny . Over 200 unknown actors auditioned for Superman . 
 Olympic champion Bruce Jenner had auditioned for the title role . Patrick Wayne was cast , but dropped out when his father John Wayne was diagnosed with stomach cancer . 
 Both Neil Diamond and Arnold Schwarzenegger lobbied hard for the role , but were ignored . James Caan , James Brolin , Lyle Waggoner , Christopher Walken , Nick Nolte , Jon Voight , and Perry King were approached . Kris Kristofferson and Charles Bronson were also considered for the title role . 
 James Caan said he was offered the part but turned it down . " I just couldn 't wear that suit . " 
 " We found guys with fabulous physique who couldn 't act or wonderful actors who did not look remotely like Superman , " creative consultant Tom Mankiewicz remembered . The search became so desperate that producer Ilya Salkind 's wife 's dentist was screen tested . 
 Stalmaster convinced Donner and Ilya to have Reeve screen test in February 1977 . Reeve stunned the director and producers , but he was told to wear a " muscle suit " to produce the desired muscular physique . Reeve refused , undertaking a strict physical exercise regime headed by David Prowse . Prowse had wanted to portray Superman , but was denied an audition by the filmmakers because he was not American . Prowse also auditioned for Non . Reeve went from 188 to 212 pounds during pre @-@ production and filming . Reeve was paid a mere $ 250 @,@ 000 for both Superman and Superman II , while his veteran co @-@ stars received huge sums of money : $ 3 @.@ 7 million for Brando and $ 2 million for Hackman for Superman I. However , Reeve felt , " ' Superman ' brought me many opportunities , rather than closing a door in my face . " Jeff East portrays teenage Clark Kent . East had his voice overdubbed by Reeve . " I was not happy about it because the producers never told me what they had in mind , " East commented . " It was done without my permission but it turned out to be okay . Chris did a good job but it caused tension between us . We resolved our issues with each other years later . " East also tore several thigh muscles when performing the stunt of racing alongside the train . He applied 3 to 4 hours of prosthetic makeup daily to facially resemble Reeve . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on March 28 , 1977 at Pinewood Studios for Krypton scenes , budgeted as the most expensive film ever made at that point . Since Superman was being shot simultaneously with Superman II , filming lasted 19 months , until October 1978 . Filming was originally scheduled to last between seven and eight months , but problems arose during production . John Barry served as production designer , while Stuart Craig and Norman Reynolds worked as art directors . Derek Meddings and Les Bowie were credited as visual effects supervisors . Stuart Freeborn was the make @-@ up artist , while Barry , David Tomblin , John Glen , David Lane , Robert Lynn and an uncredited Peter <unk> and André de Toth directed second unit scenes . Vic Armstrong was hired as the stunt coordinator and Reeve 's stunt double ; his wife Wendy Leech was Kidder 's double . Superman was also the final complete film by cinematographer Geoffrey Unsworth , who died during post @-@ production while working on Tess for director Roman Polanski . The Fortress of Solitude was constructed at Shepperton Studios and at Pinewood 's 007 Stage . Upon viewing the footage of Krypton , Warner Bros. decided to distribute in not only North America , but also in foreign countries . Due to complications and problems during filming , Warner Bros. also supplied $ 20 million and acquired television rights . 
 New York City doubled for Metropolis , while the New York Daily News Building served as the location for the offices of the Daily Planet . Brooklyn Heights was also used . Filming in New York lasted five weeks , during the time of the New York City blackout of 1977 . Production moved to Alberta for scenes set in Smallville , with the cemetery scene filmed in the canyon of Beynon , Alberta , the high school football scenes at Barons , Alberta , and the Kent farm constructed at Blackie , Alberta . Brief filming also took place in Gallup , New Mexico , Lake Mead and Grand Central Terminal . Director Donner had tensions with the Salkinds and Spengler concerning the escalating production budget and the shooting schedule . Creative consultant Tom Mankiewicz reflected , " Donner never got a budget or a schedule . He was constantly told he was way over schedule and budget . At one point he said , ' Why don 't you just schedule the film for the next two days , and then I 'll be nine months over ? ' . " Richard Lester , who worked with the Salkinds on The Three Musketeers and The Four Musketeers , was then brought in as a temporary co @-@ producer to mediate the relationship between Donner and the Salkinds , who by now were refusing to talk to each other . With his relationship with Spengler , Donner remarked , " At one time if I 'd seen him , I would have killed him . " 
 Lester was offered producing credit but refused , going uncredited for his work . Salkind felt that bringing a second director onto the set meant there would be someone ready in the event that Donner could not fulfill his directing duties . " Being there all the time meant he [ Lester ] could take over , " Salkind admitted . " [ Donner ] couldn 't make up his mind on stuff . " On Lester , Donner reflected , " He 'd been suing the Salkinds for his money on Three and Four Musketeers , which he 'd never gotten . He won a lot of his lawsuits , but each time he sued the Salkinds in one country , they 'd move to another , from Costa Rica to Panama to Switzerland . When I was hired , Lester told me , ' Don 't do it . Don 't work for them . I was told not to , but I did it . Now I 'm telling you not to , but you 'll probably do it and end up telling the next guy . ' Lester came in as a ' go @-@ between ' . I didn 't trust Lester , and I told him . He said , ' Believe me , I 'm only doing it because they 're paying me the money that they owe me from the lawsuit . I 'll never come onto your set unless you ask me ; I 'll never go to your dailies . If I can help you in any way , call me . " 
 It was decided to stop shooting Superman II and focus on finishing Superman . Donner had already completed 75 % of the sequel . The filmmakers took a risk : if Superman was a box office bomb , they would not finish Superman II . The original climax for Superman II had General Zod , Ursa and Non destroying the planet , with Superman time traveling to fix the damage . In the original ending for Superman , the nuclear missile that Superman pushed into outer space happens to strike the Phantom Zone , freeing the three Kryptonian supervillains . The final shot was originally going to be General Zod , Non and Ursa all flying towards Earth , in an ominous sequel hook moment . The sequence can be seen in its entirety at the beginning of Donner 's edit of Superman II where it was fully restored . 
 Donner commented , " I decided if Superman is a success , they 're going to do a sequel . If it ain 't a success , a cliffhanger ain 't gonna bring them to see Superman II . " 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Superman is well known for its large @-@ scale visual effects sequences , all of which were created before the digital age . The Golden Gate Bridge scale model stood 70 feet long and 20 feet wide . Other miniatures included the Krypton Council Dome and the Hoover Dam . Slow motion was used to simulate the vast amount of water for the Hoover Dam destruction . The Fortress of Solitude was a combination of a full @-@ scale set and matte paintings . Young Clark Kent 's long @-@ distance football punt was executed with a wooden football loaded into an air blaster placed in the ground . The Superman costume was to be a much darker blue , but the use of blue screen made it transparent . 
 The first test for the flying sequences involved simply catapulting a crash test dummy out of a cannon . Another technique had a remote control cast of Superman flying around . Both were discarded due to lack of movement . High @-@ quality , realistic @-@ looking animation was tried , with speed trails added to make the effect more convincing . 
 As detailed in the Superman : The Movie DVD special effects documentary ' The Magic Behind The Cape ' , presented by optical effects supervisor Roy Field , in the end , three techniques were used to achieve the flying effects . 
 For landings and take @-@ offs , wire flying riggings were devised and used . On location , these were suspended from tower cranes , whereas in the studio elaborate rigs were suspended from the studio ceilings . Some of the wire @-@ flying work was quite audacious considering computer @-@ controlled rigs were not then available — the penultimate shot where Superman flies out of the prison yard for example . Although stuntmen were used , Reeve did much of the work himself , and was suspended as high as 50 ft in the air . <unk> and pulleys were typically used to achieve flying movement , rather than electronic or motorized devices . The thin wires used to suspend Reeve were typically removed from the film in post @-@ production using rotoscope techniques , although this wasn 't necessary in all shots ( in certain lighting conditions or when Superman is very distant in the frame , the wires were more or less imperceptible ) . 
 For stationary shots where Superman is seen flying toward or away from the camera , blue screen matte techniques were used . Reeve would be photographed suspended against a blue screen . While a special device made his cape flap to give the illusion of movement , the actor himself would remain stationary ( save for banking his body ) . Instead , the camera would use a mixture of long zoom @-@ ins and zoom @-@ outs and dolly in / dolly outs to cause him to become larger or smaller in the frame . The blue background would then be <unk> removed and Reeve 's isolated image would be ' inserted ' into a matted area of a background plate shot . The zoom @-@ ins or zoom @-@ outs would give the appearance of flying away or toward the contents of the background plate . The disparity in lighting and color between the matted image and the background plate , the occasional presence of black matte lines ( where the matte area and the matted image – in this case Superman – do not exactly match up ) , and the slightly unconvincing impression of movement achieved through the use of zoom lenses is characteristic of these shots . 
 Where the shot is tracking with Superman as he flies ( such as in the Superman and Lois Metropolis flying sequence ) , front projection was used . This involved photographing the actors suspended in front of a background image dimly projected from the front onto a special screen made by 3M that would reflect light back at many times the original intensity directly into a combined camera / projector . The result was a very clear and intense photographic reproduction of both the actors and the background plate , with far less image deterioration or lighting problems than occur with rear projection . 
 A technique was developed that combined the front projection effect with specially designed zoom lenses . The illusion of movement was created by zooming in on Reeve while making the front projected image appear to recede . For scenes where Superman interacts with other people or objects while in flight , Reeve and actors were put in a variety of rigging equipment with careful lighting and photography . This also led to the creation of the <unk> system . 
 The highly reflective costumes worn by the Kryptonians are made of the same 3M material used for the front projection screens and were the result of an accident during Superman flying tests . " We noticed the material lit up on its own , " Donner explained . " We tore the material into tiny pieces and glued it on the costumes , designing a front projection effect for each camera . There was a little light on each camera , and it would project into a mirror , bounce out in front of the lens , hit the costume , [ and ] millions of little glass heads would light up and bring the image back into the camera . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Jerry Goldsmith , who scored Donner 's The Omen , was originally set to compose Superman . Portions of Goldsmith 's work from Capricorn One were used in Superman 's teaser trailer . He dropped out over scheduling conflicts and John Williams was hired . Williams conducted the London Symphony Orchestra to record the soundtrack . The music was one of the last pieces to come into place . Williams liked that the film did not take itself too seriously and that it had a theatrical camp feel to it . Kidder was supposed to sing " Can You Read My Mind ? , " the lyrics to which were written by Leslie Bricusse , but Donner disliked it and changed it to a composition accompanied by a voiceover . Maureen McGovern eventually recorded the single , " Can You Read My Mind ? , " in 1979 , although the song did not appear on the film soundtrack . It became a mid @-@ chart hit on the Billboard Hot 100 that year ( # 52 ) , spending three weeks at number five on the U.S. Adult Contemporary chart , as well as making lesser appearances on the corresponding Canadian charts . It was also a very minor hit on the U.S. Country chart , reaching # 93 . The score earned John Williams an Academy Award nomination , but he lost to Giorgio Moroder 's score for Midnight Express . 
 = = = = 2000 Rhino Complete album = = = = 
 * Previously unreleased selection 
 * * Contains previously unreleased material 
 = = Themes = = 
 Superman is divided into three basic sections , each having a distinct theme and visual style . The first segment , set on Krypton , is meant to be typical of science fiction films , but also lays the groundwork for an analogy that emerges in the relationship between Jor @-@ El and Kal @-@ El . The second segment , set in Smallville , is reminiscent of 1950s films , and its small @-@ town atmosphere is meant to evoke a Norman Rockwell painting . The third ( and largest ) segment , set mostly in Metropolis , was an attempt to present the superhero story with as much realism as possible ( what Donner called " verisimilitude " ) , relying on traditional cinematic drama and using only subtle humor instead of a campy approach . 
 In each of the three acts , the mythic status of Superman is enhanced by events that recall the hero 's journey ( or monomyth ) as described by Joseph Campbell . Each act has a discernible cycle of " call " and journey . The journey is from Krypton to Earth in the first act , from Smallville to the Fortress of Solitude in the second act , and then from Metropolis to the whole world in the third act . 
 Many have noted the examples of apparent Christian symbolism . Donner , Tom Mankiewicz and Ilya Salkind have commented on the use of Christian references to discuss the themes of Superman . Mankiewicz deliberately fostered analogies with Jor @-@ El ( God ) and Kal @-@ El ( Jesus ) . Donner is somewhat skeptical of Mankiewicz ' actions , joking " I got enough death threats because of that . " 
 Several concepts and items of imagery have been used in Biblical comparisons . Jor @-@ El casts out General Zod from Krypton , a parallel to the casting out of Satan from Heaven . The spacecraft that brings Kal @-@ El to Earth is in the form of a star ( Star of Bethlehem ) . Kal @-@ El comes to Jonathan and Martha Kent , who are unable to have children . Martha Kent states , " All these years how we 've prayed and prayed that the good Lord would see fit to give us a child , " which was compared to the Virgin Mary . 
 Just as little is known about Jesus during his middle years , Clark travels into the wilderness to find out who he is and what he has to do . Jor @-@ El says , " Live as one of them , Kal @-@ El , to discover where your strength and power are needed . But always hold in your heart the pride of your special heritage . They can be a great people , Kal @-@ El , and they wish to be . They only lack the light to show the way . For this reason above all , their capacity for good , I have sent them you , my only son . " The theme resembles the Biblical account of God sending his only son Jesus to Earth in hope for the good of mankind . More were seen when Donner was able to complete Superman II : The Richard Donner Cut , featuring the fall , resurrection and his battle with evil . Another vision was that of The Creation of Adam . 
 The Christian imagery in the Reeve films has provoked comment on the Jewish origins of Superman . Rabbi Simcha Weinstein 's book Up , Up and Oy Vey : How Jewish History , Culture and Values Shaped the Comic Book Superhero , says that Superman is both a pillar of society and one whose cape conceals a " nebbish " , saying " He 's a bumbling , nebbish Jewish stereotype . He 's Woody Allen . " Ironically , it is also in the Reeve films that Clark Kent 's persona has the greatest resemblance to Woody Allen , though his conscious model was Cary Grant 's character in Bringing Up Baby . This same theme is pursued about 1940s superheroes generally in Disguised as Clark Kent : Jews , Comics , and the Creation of the Superhero by Danny Fingeroth . 
 In the scene where Lois Lane interviews Superman on the balcony , Superman replies , " I never lie . " Salkind felt this was an important point in the film , since Superman , living under his secret identity as Clark Kent , is " telling the biggest lie of all time . " His romance with Lois also leads him to contradict Jor @-@ El 's orders to avoid altering human history , time traveling to save her from dying . Superman instead takes the advice of Jonathan Kent , his father on Earth . 
 = = Release = = 
 Superman was originally scheduled to be released in June 1978 , the 40th anniversary of Action Comics 1 , which first introduced Superman , but the problems during filming pushed the film back by six months . Editor Stuart Baird reflected , " Filming was finished in October 1978 and it is a miracle we had the film released two months later . Big @-@ budgeted films today tend to take six to eight months . " Donner , for his part , wished that he had " had another six months ; I would have perfected a lot of things . But at some point , you 've gotta turn the picture over . " Warner Bros. spent $ 7 million to market and promote the film . 
 Superman premiered at the Uptown Theater in Washington , D.C. on December 10 , 1978 , with director Richard Donner and several cast members in attendance . Three days later , on December 13 , it had a European Royal Charity Premiere at the Empire , Leicester Square in London in the presence of HM Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Andrew . It went on to gross $ 134 @.@ 21 million in North America and $ 166 million internationally , totaling $ 300 @.@ 21 million worldwide . Superman was the second highest @-@ grossing film of 1978 ( behind only Grease ) , and became the sixth @-@ highest grossing film of all time after its theatrical run . It was also Warner Bros. ' most successful film at the time . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Based on 53 reviews collected by Rotten Tomatoes , 93 % of reviewers enjoyed Superman , with the consensus " Superman deftly blends humor and gravitas , taking advantage of the perfectly cast Reeve to craft a loving , nostalgic tribute to an American pop culture icon . " By comparison , Metacritic collected an average score of 88 , resulting in " universal acclaim " , based on 12 reviews . The film was widely regarded as one of top 10 films of 1978 . Superman creators Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster gave a positive reaction . Shuster was " delighted to see Superman on the screen . I got chills . Chris Reeve has just the right touch of humor . He really is Superman " . 
 Roger Ebert gave a very positive review . " Superman is a pure delight , a wondrous combination of all the old @-@ fashioned things we never really get tired of : adventure and romance , heroes and villains , <unk> special effects and wit . Reeve is perfectly cast in the role . Any poor choice would have ruined the film " . Ebert placed the film on his 10 best list of 1978 . He would later go on to place it on his " Great Movies " list . James Berardinelli believed " there 's no doubt that it 's a flawed movie , but it 's one of the most wonderfully entertaining flawed movies made during the 1970s . It 's exactly what comic book fans hoped it would be . Perhaps most heartening of all , however , is the message at the end of the credits announcing the impending arrival of Superman II . " Harry Knowles is a longtime fan of the film , but was critical of elements that did not represent the Superman stories as seen in the comics . Dave Kehr felt " the tone , style , and point of view change almost from shot to shot . This is the definitive corporate film . It is best when it takes itself seriously , worst when it takes the easy way out in giggly camp , When Lex Luthor enters the action , Hackman plays the arch @-@ villain like a hairdresser left over from a TV skit . " Neal Gabler similarly felt that the film focused too much on shallow comedy . He also argued that the film should have adhered more to the spirit of Mario Puzo 's original script , and referred to the first three Superman films collectively as " simply puffed @-@ up TV episodes " . 
 = = = Beyond theatrical release = = = 
 The Salkinds prepared a three @-@ hour @-@ plus version for worldwide television reincorporating some 45 minutes of footage and music deleted from the theatrical cut , and specially prepared so that networks and stations can re @-@ edit their own version at their discretion . American Broadcasting Company aired the broadcast television debut of Superman in 1982 , with a majority of the unused footage . A syndicated version of the film aired in local television stations in Los Angeles and Washington , D.C. in the 1990s included two additional scenes never seen before , in addition to what had been previously reinstated . When Michael Thau and Warner Home Video started working on a film restoration in 2000 , some of the extra footage was not added because of poor visual effects . Thau felt " the pace of the film 's storyline would be adversely affected . This included timing problems with John William 's musical score . The cut of the movie shown on TV was put together to make the movie longer when shown on TV because ABC paid per minute to air the movie . The special edition cut is designed for the best viewing experience in the true spirit of movie making . " There was a special test screening of the Special Edition in 2001 in Austin , Texas , on March 23 with plans for a possible wider theatrical release later that year , which did not occur . In May 2001 , Warner Home Video released the special edition on DVD . Director Donner also assisted , working slightly over a year on the project . The release included making @-@ of documentaries directed by Thau and eight minutes of restored footage . 
 Thau explained , " I worked on Ladyhawke and that 's how I met Donner and Tom Mankiewicz . I used to hear those wonderful stories in the cutting room that Tom , Donner and Stuart would tell about Superman and that 's how I kind of got the ideas for the plots of Taking Flight and Making Superman . Donner commented , " There were a few shots where the Superman costume looked green . We went in and cleaned that up , bringing the color back to where it should be . " Thau wanted to make the film shorter , " I wanted to take out the damn flying sequence where Lois is reciting a poem [ " Can You Read My Mind " ] when they 're flying around . I also wanted to take out where it was just generic action . It was like a two @-@ minute car chase . Donner protested and the stuff stayed in . " It was followed by a box set release in the same month , containing " bare bones " editions of Superman II , Superman III and Superman IV : The Quest for Peace . In November 2006 , a four @-@ disc special edition was released , followed by an HD DVD release and Blu @-@ ray . Also available ( with other films ) is the nine @-@ disc " Christopher Reeve Superman Collection " and the 14 @-@ disc " Superman Ultimate Collector 's Edition " . 
 = = = Broadcast television version details = = = 
 When the rights to the first Superman film reverted to the Salkinds in 1981 , it was their intention to prepare a television cut longer than what was released theatrically , for the aforementioned reasons . The so @-@ called " Salkind International Extended Cut " , which ended up running 3 hours , 8 minutes , was shown internationally on television , and it is from this cut that later domestic TV versions were derived . 
 The first network American television broadcast took place on Sunday , February 7 and Monday , February 8 , 1982 on ABC . The principal sponsor for the telecasts was Atari . At the time , ABC had a contract with Alexander Salkind for the television rights to his films . ABC 's 3 @-@ hour @-@ 2 @-@ minute cut of Superman was broadcast over the course of two nights . On the first night it premiered , the film stopped when Lois Lane was falling from the helicopter ( the picture froze , creating a cliffhanger @-@ type of ending for part one ) . The next evening , there was naturally a recap before the film continued . This expanded version was repeated in November of the same year , only this time , shown in one night . The next two ABC showings after that were the original theatrical version . Apparently , in their contract with ABC , the Salkinds were able to get money for every minute of footage shown on TV . So as a result , they crammed in as much footage as possible for the TV networks in order to maximize their revenues . During production of the film , Alexander and Ilya had been relegated to having to sell more and more of their rights back to Warner Bros. in exchange for financial help . Director Richard Donner was not consulted on any of the extended versions . However , due to a clause in his contract , Donner 's name remains in the credits . 
 Also as previously mentioned , some 40 minutes of footage were reinstated for the initial ABC @-@ TV telecasts of the film . Among the highlighted moments : 
 A subplot of an Executioner ( a Kryptonian security officer ) being sent by the council to hunt down and capture Jor @-@ El ( while the beginning of the scene is shown in the 2000 director 's cut restoration , the " payoff " [ with him getting killed ] is not in the latter version ) . 
 When Superman is trying to get to Lex Luthor 's underground hideout , he is subjected to machine gun fire , a giant blow torch , and is frozen in ice . A tiny fraction of this footage was used in the theatrical version Superman II ( directed by Richard Lester ) , in the scene where Superman 's powers are stripped away by the molecule chamber in the Fortress of Solitude . 
 Lex Luthor plays the piano in several scenes ; when he has Otis drop Eve Teschmacher into the lions ' den at the end he is singing " You Must Have Been a Beautiful Baby " . 
 After Superman saves Lois at the end and flies off , he 's seen rescuing Eve Teschmacher from the lions ' den , in which Lex had previously dropped her ; he pointedly notes for Luthor to hear , " By the way , Miss Teschmacher , your mother sends her love , " a reference to Luthor 's boast about Hackensack , NJ . 
 The little girl who sees the teenage Clark Kent running faster than the train is revealed to be Lois Lane , a fact revealed when her parents ( Kirk Alyn and Noel Neill ) talk to her by name . This revelation scene is not present in the shorter theatrical release . Only in the ABC version are young Lois Lane and her father seen in the train . Also in the ABC version , Otis ' walk down the street is longer . 
 Nearly all of John Williams ' score is restored ( some of which was dialed out of the theatrical cut ) . 
 However , at least one noticeable removal occurred : the recording of " Rock Around the Clock " by Bill Haley & His Comets , heard in the original film in the minutes before the death of Glenn Ford 's character , is replaced with a generic piece of instrumental music in the ABC cut . 
 When the rights reverted to Warner Bros. in 1985 , CBS aired the film one last time on network television in its theatrical version . When the movie entered the syndication market in 1988 ( following a play @-@ out run on pay cable ) TV stations were offered the extended cut or the theatrical cut . The stations that showed the extended cut edited the second half to squeeze in commercials and ' What happened yesterday flashbacks ' . 
 In May 1994 ( following a pay cable reissue and obligatory run on USA Network ) , Warner Bros. offered the aforementioned " Salkind International Extended Cut " ( a 3 @-@ hour , 8 @-@ minute version , prepared by the Salkinds , and from which the ABC version was derived ) , which was shown in Los Angeles on KCOP . This version also surfaced outside of Los Angeles . For example , WJLA Channel 7 , an ABC affiliate out of Washington , D.C. , aired the " Salkind International Extended Cut " in July 1994 . Part one aired from 9 : 30 p.m. to 11 : 30 p.m. before breaking for 30 minutes of news . Part two was then aired from 12 : 00 a.m. to 2 : 00 a.m. 
 The extended version has never been broadcast in the United Kingdom . The first showing of the theatrical version on UK television appeared on January 4 , 1983 on ITV . In 1985 , Ireland 's RTÉ television aired the extended versions of Superman and Superman II in one night . The films ran from roughly 3 : 00 until 9 : 00 including the odd commercial and a break for the 6 : 00 news . 
 The quality of the extended network TV version is inferior to any theatrical or current home video release because it was mastered in 16mm ( using the " film chain system " ) and a mono sound mix done , as by the time the extended cut was prepared in 1981 , stereo was not available in television broadcasts . Eight of the 45 minutes of extended scenes that were used in the later 2000 director 's cut restoration were taken from restored elements . 
 There are various extended TV versions each broadcast in various countries . Most of these are in pan and scan , as they were made in the 1980s , when films were not letterboxed to preserve the theatrical aspect ratio on old TVs . None of the various extended versions have ever been made available officially on home video / DVD , although they have been widely bootlegged . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Superman was nominated for three Academy Awards ( Best Film Editing – ( Stuart Baird ) , Best Music ( Original Score ) – ( John Williams ) and Best Sound Mixing – ( Gordon K. McCallum , Graham V. <unk> , Nicolas Le <unk> and Roy <unk> ) ) , and received a Special Achievement Academy Award for its visual effects . Donner publicly expressed disgust that production designer John Barry and cinematographer Geoffrey Unsworth had not been recognized by the Academy . 
 Superman was successful at the 32nd British Academy Film Awards . Reeve won Best Newcomer , while Hackman , Unsworth , Barry and the sound designers earned nominations . The film won the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . At the Saturn Awards , Kidder , Barry , John Williams and the visual effects department received awards , and the film won Best Science Fiction Film . Reeve , Hackman , Donner , Valerie Perrine and costume designer Yvonne Blake were nominated for their work as well . In addition , Williams was nominated at the 36th Golden Globe Awards and won the Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media . In 2007 , the Visual Effects Society listed Superman as the 44th most influential use of visual effects of all time . In 2008 , Empire magazine named it the # 174 greatest film of all @-@ time on its list of 500 . The film also received recognition from the American Film Institute . Superman was selected as the 26th greatest film hero of all time . The film was considered for the AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers list , but did not make it past the ballot . In 2009 , Entertainment Weekly ranked Superman 3rd on their list of The All @-@ Time Coolest Heroes in Pop Culture . 
 With the film 's success , it was immediately decided to finish Superman II . Ilya and Alexander Salkind and Pierre Spengler did not ask Donner to return because Donner had criticized them during the film 's publicity phase . Donner commented in January 1979 , " I 'd work with Spengler again , but only on my terms . As long as he has nothing to say as the producer , and is just liaison between Alexander Salkind and his money , that 's fine . If they don 't want it on those terms , then they need to go out and find another director , it sure as shit ain 't gonna be me . " Kidder , who portrayed Lois Lane , was dissatisfied by the producers ' decision , and also criticized the Salkinds during publicity . As a result , Kidder was only given a cameo appearance for Superman III , and not a main supporting role . Jack O 'Halloran , who portrayed Non , stated , " It was great to work with Donner . Richard Lester was as big an asshole as the Salkinds . " Two more films , Superman III ( 1983 ) and Superman IV : The Quest for Peace ( 1987 ) , were produced . Superman Returns was released in 2006 . Director Bryan Singer credited the 1978 Superman as an influence for Superman Returns , and used restored footage of Brando as Jor @-@ El . Superman II : The Richard Donner Cut also was released in 2006 . 
 The film 's final sequence , which features Superman flying high above the Earth at sunrise , and breaking the fourth wall to smile briefly at the camera , featured at the end of every Superman film starring Reeve and was re @-@ shot with Brandon Routh for Superman Returns . 
 The series was rebooted with Man of Steel in 2013 . 
 Because Superman went into production prior to the releases of Star Wars ( May 1977 ) and Close Encounters of the Third Kind ( November 1977 ) , some observers credit the three films collectively for launching the reemergence of a large market for science fiction films in the 1980s . This is certainly the view of Superman producer Ilya Salkind and some who have interviewed him , as well as of film production assistant Brad Lohan . Other observers of film history tend to credit the resurgence of science fiction films simply to the Lucas and Spielberg productions , and see Superman as the first of the new cycle of films launched by the first two . Ilya Salkind denies any connection between Superman — which began filming in March 1977 — and the other films , stating that " I did not know about ' Star Wars ' ; ' Star Wars ' did not know about ' Superman ' ; ' Close Encounters ' did not know about ' Superman . ' It really was completely independent – nobody knew anything about anybody . " Superman also established the superhero film genre as viable outside the production of low @-@ budget Saturday matinee serials . Director Christopher Nolan cited Richard Donner 's vision and scope of Superman when pitching the concept for Batman Begins to Warner Bros. in 2002 . 
 The movie inspired The Kinks ' 1979 song " ( Wish I Could Fly Like ) Superman " , when the band 's main songwriter , Ray Davies , watched the film in late 1978 . 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes & Villains : 
 Superman – # 26 Hero 
 Lex Luthor – Nominated Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 Can You Read My Mind – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " I 'm here to fight for truth , justice , and the American way . " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years of Film Scores – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Cheers – Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Fantasy Film 
 In 2006 the " Last Son " comic book story arc debuted in Action Comics , co @-@ written by Superman director Richard Donner . 
 = = = Comic book continuity = = = 
 Elements of the Superman mythos which originated in the film have since been incorporated into the regular continuity of the DC Comics universe : 
 The crystalline @-@ based technology of the planet Krypton . 
 Superman 's " S " logo originates as the El family crest . 
 Ursa and Non — characters created specifically for the film — are imprisoned in the Phantom Zone with General Zod . 
 A computer @-@ generated simulacrum of Jor @-@ El survives in the Fortress of Solitude to advise his adult son Kal @-@ El . 
 Clark Kent commences his public superhero career as the adult Superman , rather than the teenage Superboy . 
 Lois Lane first meets Superman when he rescues her as she falls from a disabled helicopter in Metropolis . 
 Lois is the one who first names the hero " Superman " . 
 Jonathan Kent dies of a heart attack , but Martha survives as his widow . 
 Although she is an excellent reporter , Lois frequently misspells words . 
 Smallville is located in the state of Kansas . 
 = Doctor Who campfire trailer = 
 The Doctor Who campfire trailer is a forty @-@ second television trailer which promoted the fourth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . Filmed on one day in a studio , it stars David Tennant and Catherine Tate as the fourth series lead actors : the Tenth Doctor and his companion Donna Noble . The trailer was produced alongside three thematically similar but separate teaser trailers . The teaser trailers premiered in cinemas and on BBC One on 22 March 2008 , and the full trailer premiered on BBC Online on 29 March 2008 . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The forty @-@ second trailer features Donna Noble , portrayed by comedian Catherine Tate , sitting over a camp fire , talking about " creatures of metal , fire , and blood " threatening the universe as shots of the Daleks , Sontarans , and the Ood come into view . She talks about a man called the Doctor ( David Tennant ) , who is portrayed in fleeting glimpses until his name is mentioned , who constantly saves the universe from these threats . Donna ends her narration by saying the Doctor will be back to save them and she will be ready to join him . The trailer ends with the Doctor and Donna simultaneously saying " and just like that , we 'll be gone . " 
 The ten @-@ second teaser trailers simply contain " crowd multiplication " computer @-@ generated shots of the aforementioned aliens . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In a brief to the formerly BBC @-@ owned Red Bee Media , the trailer was intended to re @-@ introduce Donna and emphasise that her relationship to the Doctor was purely platonic , and that the new series would be " bigger and better " than previously . As trailers for series four were also aired in cinemas , creative head Matt <unk> and director Richard Senior decided to take parallels to the positively reviewed cinema advertisement to " Voyage of the Damned " , consisting of iconic shots of the antagonists in the series and a serious tone . 
 Donna 's leading role in " The Runaway Bride " allowed the production team to focus on her status of an everyday person to explain her perception of the Doctor : a magical stranger who always appeared at the time of need . Senior based Donna 's perception of the Doctor on the perception of the criminal mastermind Keyser Söze in the film The Usual Suspects : 
 Keyser Söze is probably one of the most legendary , most mysterious , and coolest characters in modern cinema , and I didn 't think associating the Doctor with those characteristics would do any harm . 
 The script Senior developed with Doctor Who executive producers Russell T Davies and Julie Gardner specified the use of a camp fire ; Senior felt it would be the most adequate image for Donna " telling the legend of the Doctor " . The setting would allow the three antagonists eventually used — the Daleks , the Ood , and the Sontarans — to appear to come out of the flames to create a sense of <unk> , while building suspense in the trailer by showing the Doctor in fleeting glimpses before his full appearance . Inspiration came from the use of scene transitions in the James Bond film series . 
 = = Filming and production = = 
 Filming took place entirely on 12 March 2008 at the Upper Boat Studios in Upper Boat , Rhondda Cynon Taff , Wales , ( 51 ° 34 ′ 33 ″ N 3 ° 18 ′ 00 ″ W ) double @-@ banked with location filming for " The Stolen Earth " ; the filming for the fourth series trailers were scheduled so that it would not interfere with Tennant and Tate 's filming for the series finale . The trailer was filmed entirely on greenscreen , with the separate characters scheduled to record after each other : Tennant recorded from 11am to 1pm ; Tate recorded from 1pm to 3pm ; and the antagonists were filmed from 3pm until 9pm . The material was recorded in high @-@ definition resolution so that the special effects would have a greater resolution ; the trailer itself was transmitted in standard @-@ definition . Editing for the trailer took place over two weeks , before being completed on the day before its transmission . 
 = = Theatrical release = = 
 The trailer was part of an advertising campaign which saw trailers released in front of the films Cloverfield , Juno , Rambo and There Will Be Blood , in early 2008 Odeon , Cineworld and Empire cinemas . The theatrical release of trailers for the fourth series was part of a test agreement between the BBC and Carlton Screen Advertising for promotion of BBC content in cinemas . 
 = Vector space = 
 A vector space ( also called a linear space ) is a collection of objects called vectors , which may be added together and multiplied ( " scaled " ) by numbers , called scalars in this context . <unk> are often taken to be real numbers , but there are also vector spaces with scalar multiplication by complex numbers , rational numbers , or generally any field . The operations of vector addition and scalar multiplication must satisfy certain requirements , called axioms , listed below . 
 Euclidean vectors are an example of a vector space . They represent physical quantities such as forces : any two forces ( of the same type ) can be added to yield a third , and the multiplication of a force vector by a real multiplier is another force vector . In the same vein , but in a more geometric sense , vectors representing displacements in the plane or in three @-@ dimensional space also form vector spaces . Vectors in vector spaces do not necessarily have to be arrow @-@ like objects as they appear in the mentioned examples : vectors are regarded as abstract mathematical objects with particular properties , which in some cases can be visualized as arrows . 
 Vector spaces are the subject of linear algebra and are well characterized by their dimension , which , roughly speaking , specifies the number of independent directions in the space . Infinite @-@ dimensional vector spaces arise naturally in mathematical analysis , as function spaces , whose vectors are functions . These vector spaces are generally endowed with additional structure , which may be a topology , allowing the consideration of issues of proximity and continuity . Among these topologies , those that are defined by a norm or inner product are more commonly used , as having a notion of distance between two vectors . This is particularly the case of Banach spaces and Hilbert spaces , which are fundamental in mathematical analysis . 
 Historically , the first ideas leading to vector spaces can be traced back as far as the 17th century 's analytic geometry , matrices , systems of linear equations , and Euclidean vectors . The modern , more abstract treatment , first formulated by Giuseppe Peano in 1888 , encompasses more general objects than Euclidean space , but much of the theory can be seen as an extension of classical geometric ideas like lines , planes and their higher @-@ dimensional analogs . 
 Today , vector spaces are applied throughout mathematics , science and engineering . They are the appropriate linear @-@ algebraic notion to deal with systems of linear equations ; offer a framework for Fourier expansion , which is employed in image compression routines ; or provide an environment that can be used for solution techniques for partial differential equations . Furthermore , vector spaces furnish an abstract , coordinate @-@ free way of dealing with geometrical and physical objects such as tensors . This in turn allows the examination of local properties of manifolds by <unk> techniques . Vector spaces may be generalized in several ways , leading to more advanced notions in geometry and abstract algebra . 
 = = Introduction and definition = = 
 The concept of vector space will first be explained by describing two particular examples : 
 = = = First example : arrows in the plane = = = 
 The first example of a vector space consists of arrows in a fixed plane , starting at one fixed point . This is used in physics to describe forces or velocities . Given any two such arrows , v and w , the parallelogram spanned by these two arrows contains one diagonal arrow that starts at the origin , too . This new arrow is called the sum of the two arrows and is denoted v + w . In the special case of two arrows on the same line , their sum is the arrow on this line whose length is the sum or the difference of the lengths , depending on whether the arrows have the same direction . Another operation that can be done with arrows is scaling : given any positive real number a , the arrow that has the same direction as v , but is dilated or shrunk by multiplying its length by a , is called multiplication of v by a . It is denoted av . When a is negative , av is defined as the arrow pointing in the opposite direction , instead . 
 The following shows a few examples : if a 
 = 2 , the resulting vector aw has the same direction as w , but is stretched to the double length of w ( right image below ) . Equivalently <unk> is the sum w + w . Moreover , ( − 1 ) v = 
 − v has the opposite direction and the same length as v ( blue vector pointing down in the right image ) . 
 = = = Second example : ordered pairs of numbers = = = 
 A second key example of a vector space is provided by pairs of real numbers x and y . ( The order of the components x and y is significant , so such a pair is also called an ordered pair . ) Such a pair is written as ( x , y ) . The sum of two such pairs and multiplication of a pair with a number is defined as follows : 
 ( x1 , y1 ) + ( x2 , y2 ) 
 = ( x1 + x2 , y1 + y2 ) 
 and 
 a ( x , y ) = 
 ( ax , ay ) . 
 The first example above reduces to this one if the arrows are represented by the pair of Cartesian coordinates of their end points . 
 = = = Definition = = = 
 A vector space over a field F is a set V together with two operations that satisfy the eight axioms listed below . Elements of V are commonly called vectors . Elements of F are commonly called scalars . The first operation , called vector addition or simply addition , takes any two vectors v and w and assigns to them a third vector which is commonly written as v + w , and called the sum of these two vectors . The second operation , called scalar multiplication takes any scalar a and any vector v and gives another vector av . 
 In this article , vectors are distinguished from scalars by boldface . In the two examples above , the field is the field of the real numbers and the set of the vectors consists of the planar arrows with fixed starting point and of pairs of real numbers , respectively . 
 To qualify as a vector space , the set V and the operations of addition and multiplication must adhere to a number of requirements called axioms . In the list below , let u , v and w be arbitrary vectors in V , and a and b scalars in F. 
 These axioms generalize properties of the vectors introduced in the above examples . Indeed , the result of addition of two ordered pairs ( as in the second example above ) does not depend on the order of the summands : 
 ( xv , yv ) + ( <unk> , yw ) 
 = ( <unk> , yw ) + ( xv , yv ) . 
 Likewise , in the geometric example of vectors as arrows , v + w = 
 w + v since the parallelogram defining the sum of the vectors is independent of the order of the vectors . All other axioms can be checked in a similar manner in both examples . Thus , by disregarding the concrete nature of the particular type of vectors , the definition incorporates these two and many more examples in one notion of vector space . 
 Subtraction of two vectors and division by a ( non @-@ zero ) scalar can be defined as 
 v − w 
 = v + ( − w ) , 
 v / a = 
 ( 1 / a ) v. 
 When the scalar field F is the real numbers R , the vector space is called a real vector space . When the scalar field is the complex numbers , it is called a complex vector space . These two cases are the ones used most often in engineering . The general definition of a vector space allows scalars to be elements of any fixed field F. The notion is then known as an F @-@ vector spaces or a vector space over F. A field is , essentially , a set of numbers possessing addition , subtraction , multiplication and division operations . For example , rational numbers also form a field . 
 In contrast to the intuition stemming from vectors in the plane and higher @-@ dimensional cases , there is , in general vector spaces , no notion of nearness , angles or distances . To deal with such matters , particular types of vector spaces are introduced ; see below . 
 = = = Alternative formulations and elementary consequences = = = 
 Vector addition and scalar multiplication are operations , satisfying the closure property : u + v and av are in V for all a in F , and u , v in V. Some older sources mention these properties as separate axioms . 
 In the parlance of abstract algebra , the first four axioms can be subsumed by requiring the set of vectors to be an abelian group under addition . The remaining axioms give this group an F @-@ module structure . In other words , there is a ring homomorphism f from the field F into the endomorphism ring of the group of vectors . Then scalar multiplication av is defined as ( f ( a ) ) ( v ) . 
 There are a number of direct consequences of the vector space axioms . Some of them derive from elementary group theory , applied to the additive group of vectors : for example the zero vector 0 of V and the additive inverse − v of any vector v are unique . Other properties follow from the distributive law , for example av equals 0 if and only if a equals 0 or v equals 0 . 
 = = History = = 
 Vector spaces stem from affine geometry via the introduction of coordinates in the plane or three @-@ dimensional space . Around 1636 , Descartes and Fermat founded analytic geometry by equating solutions to an equation of two variables with points on a plane curve . In 1804 , to achieve geometric solutions without using coordinates , Bolzano introduced certain operations on points , lines and planes , which are predecessors of vectors . His work was then used in the conception of barycentric coordinates by Möbius in 1827 . In 1828 C. V. <unk> suggested the existence of an algebra surpassing not only ordinary algebra but also two @-@ dimensional algebra created by him searching a geometrical interpretation of complex numbers . 
 The definition of vectors was founded on <unk> ' notion of the <unk> , an oriented segment of which one end is the origin and the other a target , then further elaborated with the presentation of complex numbers by <unk> and Hamilton and the introduction of quaternions and <unk> by the latter . They are elements in R2 , R4 , and R8 ; their treatment as linear combinations can be traced back to Laguerre in 1867 , who also defined systems of linear equations . 
 In 1857 , Cayley introduced matrix notation , which allows for a harmonization and simplification of linear maps . Around the same time , Grassmann studied the barycentric calculus initiated by Möbius . He envisaged sets of abstract objects endowed with operations . In his work , the concepts of linear independence and dimension , as well as scalar products , are present . In fact , Grassmann 's 1844 work exceeds the framework of vector spaces , since his consideration of multiplication led him to what are today called algebras . Peano was the first to give the modern definition of vector spaces and linear maps in 1888 . 
 An important development of vector spaces is due to the construction of function spaces by Lebesgue . This was later formalized by Banach and Hilbert , around 1920 . At that time , algebra and the new field of functional analysis began to interact , notably with key concepts such as spaces of p @-@ integrable functions and Hilbert spaces . Vector spaces , including infinite @-@ dimensional ones , then became a firmly established notion , and many mathematical branches started making use of this concept . 
 = = Examples = = 
 = = = Coordinate spaces = = = 
 The most simple example of a vector space over a field F is the field itself , equipped with its standard addition and multiplication . More generally , a vector space can be composed of n @-@ tuples ( sequences of length n ) of elements of F , such as 
 ( a1 , a2 , ... , an ) , where each ai is an element of F. 
 A vector space composed of all the n @-@ tuples of a field F is known as a coordinate space , usually denoted Fn . The case n 
 = 1 is the above @-@ mentioned simplest example , in which the field F is also regarded as a vector space over itself . The case F = 
 R and n = 2 was discussed in the introduction above . 
 = = = Complex numbers and other field extensions = = = 
 The set of complex numbers C , i.e. , numbers that can be written in the form x + iy for real numbers x and y where i is the imaginary unit , form a vector space over the reals with the usual addition and multiplication : ( x + iy ) + ( a + ib ) 
 = ( x + a ) + i ( y + b ) and c ⋅ ( x + iy ) = 
 ( c ⋅ x ) + i ( c ⋅ y ) for real numbers x , y , a , b and c . The various axioms of a vector space follow from the fact that the same rules hold for complex number arithmetic . 
 In fact , the example of complex numbers is essentially the same ( i.e. , it is isomorphic ) to the vector space of ordered pairs of real numbers mentioned above : if we think of the complex number x + i y as representing the ordered pair ( x , y ) in the complex plane then we see that the rules for sum and scalar product correspond exactly to those in the earlier example . 
 More generally , field extensions provide another class of examples of vector spaces , particularly in algebra and algebraic number theory : a field F containing a smaller field E is an E @-@ vector space , by the given multiplication and addition operations of F. For example , the complex numbers are a vector space over R , and the field extension <formula> is a vector space over Q. 
 = = = Function spaces = = = 
 Functions from any fixed set Ω to a field F also form vector spaces , by performing addition and scalar multiplication pointwise . That is , the sum of two functions f and g is the function ( f + g ) given by 
 ( f + g ) ( w ) 
 = f ( w ) + g ( w ) , 
 and similarly for multiplication . Such function spaces occur in many geometric situations , when Ω is the real line or an interval , or other subsets of R. Many notions in topology and analysis , such as continuity , <unk> or differentiability are well @-@ behaved with respect to linearity : sums and scalar multiples of functions possessing such a property still have that property . Therefore , the set of such functions are vector spaces . They are studied in greater detail using the methods of functional analysis , see below . Algebraic constraints also yield vector spaces : the vector space F [ x ] is given by polynomial functions : 
 f ( x ) = 
 r0 + <unk> + ... + rn − <unk> − 1 + <unk> , where the coefficients r0 , ... , rn are in F. 
 = = = Linear equations = = = 
 Systems of homogeneous linear equations are closely tied to vector spaces . For example , the solutions of 
 are given by triples with arbitrary a , b 
 = a / 2 , and c = 
 − 5a / 2 . They form a vector space : sums and scalar multiples of such triples still satisfy the same ratios of the three variables ; thus they are solutions , too . Matrices can be used to condense multiple linear equations as above into one vector equation , namely 
 Ax 
 = 0 @,@ 
 where A = 
 <formula> is the matrix containing the coefficients of the given equations , x is the vector ( a , b , c ) , Ax denotes the matrix product , and 0 
 = ( 0 , 0 ) is the zero vector . In a similar vein , the solutions of homogeneous linear differential equations form vector spaces . For example , 
 f ′ ′ ( x ) + <unk> ′ ( x ) + f ( x ) = 
 0 
 yields f ( x ) = a e − x + bx e − x , where a and b are arbitrary constants , and ex is the natural exponential function . 
 = = Basis and dimension = = 
 Bases allow to represent vectors by a sequence of scalars called coordinates or components . A basis is a ( finite or infinite ) set B 
 = { bi } i ∈ I of vectors bi , for convenience often indexed by some index set I , that spans the whole space and is linearly independent . " Spanning the whole space " means that any vector v can be expressed as a finite sum ( called a linear combination ) of the basis elements : 
 where the ak are scalars , called the coordinates ( or the components ) of the vector v with respect to the basis B , and <unk> ( k = 
 1 , ... , n ) elements of B. Linear independence means that the coordinates ak are uniquely determined for any vector in the vector space . 
 For example , the coordinate vectors e1 
 = ( 1 , 0 , ... , 0 ) , e2 = 
 ( 0 , 1 , 0 , ... , 0 ) , to en 
 = ( 0 , 0 , ... , 0 , 1 ) , form a basis of Fn , called the standard basis , since any vector ( x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) can be uniquely expressed as a linear combination of these vectors : 
 ( x1 , x2 , ... , xn ) = 
 x1 ( 1 , 0 , ... , 0 ) + x2 ( 0 , 1 , 0 , ... , 0 ) + ... + xn ( 0 , ... , 0 , 1 ) 
 = <unk> + <unk> + ... + <unk> . 
 The corresponding coordinates x1 , x2 , ... , xn are just the Cartesian coordinates of the vector . 
 Every vector space has a basis . This follows from Zorn 's lemma , an equivalent formulation of the Axiom of Choice . Given the other axioms of Zermelo – Fraenkel set theory , the existence of bases is equivalent to the axiom of choice . The <unk> lemma , which is weaker than the axiom of choice , implies that all bases of a given vector space have the same number of elements , or cardinality ( cf . Dimension theorem for vector spaces ) . It is called the dimension of the vector space , denoted dim V. If the space is spanned by finitely many vectors , the above statements can be proven without such fundamental input from set theory . 
 The dimension of the coordinate space Fn is n , by the basis exhibited above . The dimension of the polynomial ring F [ x ] introduced above is countably infinite , a basis is given by 1 , x , x2 , ... A fortiori , the dimension of more general function spaces , such as the space of functions on some ( bounded or unbounded ) interval , is infinite . Under suitable regularity assumptions on the coefficients involved , the dimension of the solution space of a homogeneous ordinary differential equation equals the degree of the equation . For example , the solution space for the above equation is generated by e − x and <unk> − x . These two functions are linearly independent over R , so the dimension of this space is two , as is the degree of the equation . 
 A field extension over the rationals Q can be thought of as a vector space over Q ( by defining vector addition as field addition , defining scalar multiplication as field multiplication by elements of Q , and otherwise ignoring the field multiplication ) . The dimension ( or degree ) of the field extension Q ( α ) over Q depends on α . If α satisfies some polynomial equation 
 <unk> + qn − <unk> − 1 + ... + q0 = 
 0 , with rational coefficients qn , ... , q0 . 
 ( " α is algebraic " ) , the dimension is finite . More precisely , it equals the degree of the minimal polynomial having α as a root . For example , the complex numbers C are a two @-@ dimensional real vector space , generated by 1 and the imaginary unit i . The latter satisfies i2 + 1 
 = 0 , an equation of degree two . Thus , C is a two @-@ dimensional R @-@ vector space ( and , as any field , one @-@ dimensional as a vector space over itself , C ) . If α is not algebraic , the dimension of Q ( α ) over Q is infinite . For instance , for α = 
 π there is no such equation , in other words π is transcendental . 
 = = Linear maps and matrices = = 
 The relation of two vector spaces can be expressed by linear map or linear transformation . They are functions that reflect the vector space structure — i.e. , they preserve sums and scalar multiplication : 
 f ( x + y ) 
 = f ( x ) + f ( y ) and f ( a · x ) = 
 a · f ( x ) for all x and y in V , all a in F. 
 An isomorphism is a linear map f : V → W such that there exists an inverse map g : W → V , which is a map such that the two possible compositions f ∘ g : W → W and g ∘ f : V → V are identity maps . Equivalently , f is both one @-@ to @-@ one ( injective ) and onto ( surjective ) . If there exists an isomorphism between V and W , the two spaces are said to be isomorphic ; they are then essentially identical as vector spaces , since all identities holding in V are , via f , transported to similar ones in W , and vice versa via g . 
 For example , the " arrows in the plane " and " ordered pairs of numbers " vector spaces in the introduction are isomorphic : a planar arrow v departing at the origin of some ( fixed ) coordinate system can be expressed as an ordered pair by considering the x- and y @-@ component of the arrow , as shown in the image at the right . Conversely , given a pair ( x , y ) , the arrow going by x to the right ( or to the left , if x is negative ) , and y up ( down , if y is negative ) turns back the arrow v. 
 Linear maps V → W between two vector spaces form a vector space <unk> ( V , W ) , also denoted L ( V , W ) . The space of linear maps from V to F is called the dual vector space , denoted V ∗ . Via the injective natural map V → V ∗ ∗ , any vector space can be embedded into its <unk> ; the map is an isomorphism if and only if the space is finite @-@ dimensional . 
 Once a basis of V is chosen , linear maps f : V → W are completely determined by specifying the images of the basis vectors , because any element of V is expressed uniquely as a linear combination of them . If dim V = dim W , a 1 @-@ to @-@ 1 correspondence between fixed bases of V and W gives rise to a linear map that maps any basis element of V to the corresponding basis element of W. It is an isomorphism , by its very definition . Therefore , two vector spaces are isomorphic if their dimensions agree and vice versa . Another way to express this is that any vector space is completely classified ( up to isomorphism ) by its dimension , a single number . In particular , any n @-@ dimensional F @-@ vector space V is isomorphic to Fn . There is , however , no " canonical " or preferred isomorphism ; actually an isomorphism φ : Fn → V is equivalent to the choice of a basis of V , by mapping the standard basis of Fn to V , via φ . The freedom of choosing a convenient basis is particularly useful in the infinite @-@ dimensional context , see below . 
 = = = Matrices = = = 
 Matrices are a useful notion to encode linear maps . They are written as a rectangular array of scalars as in the image at the right . Any m @-@ by @-@ n matrix A gives rise to a linear map from Fn to Fm , by the following 
 <formula> , where <formula> denotes summation , 
 or , using the matrix multiplication of the matrix A with the coordinate vector x : 
 x ↦ Ax . 
 Moreover , after choosing bases of V and W , any linear map f : V → W is uniquely represented by a matrix via this assignment . 
 The determinant det ( A ) of a square matrix A is a scalar that tells whether the associated map is an isomorphism or not : to be so it is sufficient and necessary that the determinant is nonzero . The linear transformation of Rn corresponding to a real n @-@ by @-@ n matrix is orientation preserving if and only if its determinant is positive . 
 = = = Eigenvalues and eigenvectors = = = 
 <unk> , linear maps f : V → V , are particularly important since in this case vectors v can be compared with their image under f , f ( v ) . Any nonzero vector v satisfying λv 
 = f ( v ) , where λ is a scalar , is called an eigenvector of f with eigenvalue λ . Equivalently , v is an element of the kernel of the difference f − λ · Id ( where Id is the identity map V → V ) . If V is finite @-@ dimensional , this can be rephrased using determinants : f having eigenvalue λ is equivalent to 
 det ( f − λ · Id ) = 
 0 . 
 By spelling out the definition of the determinant , the expression on the left hand side can be seen to be a polynomial function in λ , called the characteristic polynomial of f . If the field F is large enough to contain a zero of this polynomial ( which automatically happens for F algebraically closed , such as F = C ) any linear map has at least one eigenvector . The vector space V may or may not possess an <unk> , a basis consisting of eigenvectors . This phenomenon is governed by the Jordan canonical form of the map . The set of all eigenvectors corresponding to a particular eigenvalue of f forms a vector space known as the <unk> corresponding to the eigenvalue ( and f ) in question . To achieve the spectral theorem , the corresponding statement in the infinite @-@ dimensional case , the machinery of functional analysis is needed , see below . 
 = = Basic constructions = = 
 In addition to the above concrete examples , there are a number of standard linear algebraic constructions that yield vector spaces related to given ones . In addition to the definitions given below , they are also characterized by universal properties , which determine an object X by specifying the linear maps from X to any other vector space . 
 = = = <unk> and quotient spaces = = = 
 A nonempty subset W of a vector space V that is closed under addition and scalar multiplication ( and therefore contains the 0 @-@ vector of V ) is called a linear subspace of V , or simply a subspace of V , when the ambient space is unambiguously a vector space . <unk> of V are vector spaces ( over the same field ) in their own right . The intersection of all subspaces containing a given set S of vectors is called its span , and it is the smallest subspace of V containing the set S. Expressed in terms of elements , the span is the subspace consisting of all the linear combinations of elements of S. 
 A linear subspace of dimension 1 is a vector line . A linear subspace of dimension 2 is a vector plane . A linear subspace that contains all elements but one of a basis of the ambient space is a vector hyperplane . In a vector space of finite dimension n , a vector hyperplane is thus a subspace of dimension n – 1 . 
 The counterpart to subspaces are quotient vector spaces . Given any subspace W ⊂ V , the quotient space V / W ( " V modulo W " ) is defined as follows : as a set , it consists of v + W 
 = { v + w : w ∈ W } , where v is an arbitrary vector in V. The sum of two such elements v1 + W and v2 + W is ( v1 + v2 ) + W , and scalar multiplication is given by a · ( v + W ) = 
 ( a · v ) + W. The key point in this definition is that v1 + W 
 = v2 + W if and only if the difference of v1 and v2 lies in W. This way , the quotient space " forgets " information that is contained in the subspace W. 
 The kernel ker ( f ) of a linear map f : V → W consists of vectors v that are mapped to 0 in W. Both kernel and image im ( f ) = 
 { f ( v ) : v ∈ V } are subspaces of V and W , respectively . The existence of kernels and images is part of the statement that the category of vector spaces ( over a fixed field F ) is an abelian category , i.e. a corpus of mathematical objects and structure @-@ preserving maps between them ( a category ) that behaves much like the category of abelian groups . Because of this , many statements such as the first isomorphism theorem ( also called rank – nullity theorem in matrix @-@ related terms ) 
 V / ker ( f ) ≡ im ( f ) . 
 and the second and third isomorphism theorem can be formulated and proven in a way very similar to the corresponding statements for groups . 
 An important example is the kernel of a linear map x ↦ Ax for some fixed matrix A , as above . The kernel of this map is the subspace of vectors x such that Ax 
 = 0 , which is precisely the set of solutions to the system of homogeneous linear equations belonging to A. This concept also extends to linear differential equations 
 <formula> , where the coefficients ai are functions in x , too . 
 In the corresponding map 
 <formula> , 
 the derivatives of the function f appear linearly ( as opposed to f ′ ′ ( x ) 2 , for example ) . Since differentiation is a linear procedure ( i.e. , ( f + g ) ′ = 
 f ′ + g ′ and ( c · f ) ′ 
 = c · f ′ for a constant c ) this assignment is linear , called a linear differential operator . In particular , the solutions to the differential equation D ( f ) = 
 0 form a vector space ( over R or C ) . 
 = = = Direct product and direct sum = = = 
 The direct product of vector spaces and the direct sum of vector spaces are two ways of combining an indexed family of vector spaces into a new vector space . 
 The direct product <formula> of a family of vector spaces Vi consists of the set of all tuples ( vi ) i ∈ I , which specify for each index i in some index set I an element vi of Vi . Addition and scalar multiplication is performed <unk> . A variant of this construction is the direct sum <formula> ( also called <unk> and denoted <formula> ) , where only tuples with finitely many nonzero vectors are allowed . If the index set I is finite , the two constructions agree , but in general they are different . 
 = = = Tensor product = = = 
 The tensor product V ⊗ F W , or simply V ⊗ W , of two vector spaces V and W is one of the central notions of <unk> algebra which deals with extending notions such as linear maps to several variables . A map g : V × W → X is called bilinear if g is linear in both variables v and w . That is to say , for fixed w the map v ↦ g ( v , w ) is linear in the sense above and likewise for fixed v. 
 The tensor product is a particular vector space that is a universal recipient of bilinear maps g , as follows . It is defined as the vector space consisting of finite ( formal ) sums of symbols called tensors 
 v1 ⊗ w1 + v2 ⊗ w2 + ... + vn ⊗ wn , 
 subject to the rules 
 a · ( v ⊗ w ) 
 = ( a · v ) ⊗ w = 
 v ⊗ ( a · w ) , where a is a scalar , 
 ( v1 + v2 ) ⊗ w 
 = v1 ⊗ w + v2 ⊗ w , and 
 v ⊗ ( w1 + w2 ) = 
 v ⊗ w1 + v ⊗ w2 . 
 These rules ensure that the map f from the V × W to V ⊗ W that maps a tuple ( v , w ) to v ⊗ w is bilinear . The universality states that given any vector space X and any bilinear map g : V × W → X , there exists a unique map u , shown in the diagram with a dotted arrow , whose composition with f equals g : u ( v ⊗ w ) = g ( v , w ) . This is called the universal property of the tensor product , an instance of the method — much used in advanced abstract algebra — to indirectly define objects by specifying maps from or to this object . 
 = = Vector spaces with additional structure = = 
 From the point of view of linear algebra , vector spaces are completely understood insofar as any vector space is characterized , up to isomorphism , by its dimension . However , vector spaces per se do not offer a framework to deal with the question — crucial to analysis — whether a sequence of functions converges to another function . Likewise , linear algebra is not adapted to deal with infinite series , since the addition operation allows only finitely many terms to be added . Therefore , the needs of functional analysis require considering additional structures . 
 A vector space may be given a partial order ≤ , under which some vectors can be compared . For example , n @-@ dimensional real space Rn can be ordered by comparing its vectors <unk> . Ordered vector spaces , for example Riesz spaces , are fundamental to Lebesgue integration , which relies on the ability to express a function as a difference of two positive functions 
 f = f + − f − , 
 where f + denotes the positive part of f and f − the negative part . 
 = = = <unk> vector spaces and inner product spaces = = = 
 " Measuring " vectors is done by specifying a norm , a datum which measures lengths of vectors , or by an inner product , which measures angles between vectors . <unk> and inner products are denoted <formula> and <formula> , respectively . The datum of an inner product entails that lengths of vectors can be defined too , by defining the associated norm <formula> . Vector spaces endowed with such data are known as normed vector spaces and inner product spaces , respectively . 
 Coordinate space Fn can be equipped with the standard dot product : 
 <formula> 
 In R2 , this reflects the common notion of the angle between two vectors x and y , by the law of cosines : 
 <formula> 
 Because of this , two vectors satisfying <formula> are called orthogonal . An important variant of the standard dot product is used in Minkowski space : R4 endowed with the Lorentz product 
 <formula> 
 In contrast to the standard dot product , it is not positive definite : <formula> also takes negative values , for example for <formula> . Singling out the fourth coordinate — corresponding to time , as opposed to three space @-@ dimensions — makes it useful for the mathematical treatment of special relativity . 
 = = = Topological vector spaces = = = 
 Convergence questions are treated by considering vector spaces V carrying a compatible topology , a structure that allows one to talk about elements being close to each other . Compatible here means that addition and scalar multiplication have to be continuous maps . Roughly , if x and y in V , and a in F vary by a bounded amount , then so do x + y and ax . To make sense of specifying the amount a scalar changes , the field F also has to carry a topology in this context ; a common choice are the reals or the complex numbers . 
 In such topological vector spaces one can consider series of vectors . The infinite sum 
 <formula> 
 denotes the limit of the corresponding finite partial sums of the sequence ( fi ) i ∈ N of elements of V. For example , the fi could be ( real or complex ) functions belonging to some function space V , in which case the series is a function series . The mode of convergence of the series depends on the topology imposed on the function space . In such cases , pointwise convergence and uniform convergence are two prominent examples . 
 A way to ensure the existence of limits of certain infinite series is to restrict attention to spaces where any Cauchy sequence has a limit ; such a vector space is called complete . Roughly , a vector space is complete provided that it contains all necessary limits . For example , the vector space of polynomials on the unit interval [ 0 @,@ 1 ] , equipped with the topology of uniform convergence is not complete because any continuous function on [ 0 @,@ 1 ] can be uniformly approximated by a sequence of polynomials , by the Weierstrass approximation theorem . In contrast , the space of all continuous functions on [ 0 @,@ 1 ] with the same topology is complete . A norm gives rise to a topology by defining that a sequence of vectors vn converges to v if and only if 
 <formula> 
 Banach and Hilbert spaces are complete topological vector spaces whose topologies are given , respectively , by a norm and an inner product . Their study — a key piece of functional analysis — focusses on infinite @-@ dimensional vector spaces , since all norms on finite @-@ dimensional topological vector spaces give rise to the same notion of convergence . The image at the right shows the equivalence of the 1 @-@ norm and ∞ <unk> on R2 : as the unit " balls " enclose each other , a sequence converges to zero in one norm if and only if it so does in the other norm . In the infinite @-@ dimensional case , however , there will generally be <unk> topologies , which makes the study of topological vector spaces richer than that of vector spaces without additional data . 
 From a conceptual point of view , all notions related to topological vector spaces should match the topology . For example , instead of considering all linear maps ( also called functionals ) V → W , maps between topological vector spaces are required to be continuous . In particular , the ( topological ) dual space V ∗ consists of continuous functionals V → R ( or to C ) . The fundamental Hahn – Banach theorem is concerned with separating subspaces of appropriate topological vector spaces by continuous functionals . 
 = = = = Banach spaces = = = = 
 Banach spaces , introduced by Stefan Banach , are complete normed vector spaces . A first example is the vector space ℓ p consisting of infinite vectors with real entries x 
 = ( x1 , x2 , ... ) whose p @-@ norm ( 1 ≤ p ≤ ∞ ) given by 
 <formula> for p < ∞ and <formula> 
 is finite . The topologies on the infinite @-@ dimensional space ℓ p are <unk> for different p . E.g. the sequence of vectors xn = 
 ( 2 − n , 2 − n , ... , 2 − n , 0 , 0 , ... ) , i.e. the first 2n components are 2 − n , the following ones are 0 , converges to the zero vector for p 
 = ∞ , but does not for p = 
 1 : 
 <formula> , but <formula> 
 More generally than sequences of real numbers , functions f : Ω → R are endowed with a norm that replaces the above sum by the Lebesgue integral 
 <formula> 
 The space of integrable functions on a given domain Ω ( for example an interval ) satisfying | f | p < ∞ , and equipped with this norm are called Lebesgue spaces , denoted Lp ( Ω ) . These spaces are complete . ( If one uses the Riemann integral instead , the space is not complete , which may be seen as a justification for Lebesgue 's integration theory . ) Concretely this means that for any sequence of Lebesgue @-@ integrable functions f1 , f2 , ... with | fn | p < ∞ , satisfying the condition 
 <formula> 
 there exists a function f ( x ) belonging to the vector space Lp ( Ω ) such that 
 <formula> 
 Imposing <unk> conditions not only on the function , but also on its derivatives leads to Sobolev spaces . 
 = = = = Hilbert spaces = = = = 
 Complete inner product spaces are known as Hilbert spaces , in honor of David Hilbert . The Hilbert space L2 ( Ω ) , with inner product given by 
 <formula> 
 where <formula> denotes the complex conjugate of g ( x ) , is a key case . 
 By definition , in a Hilbert space any Cauchy sequence converges to a limit . Conversely , finding a sequence of functions fn with desirable properties that approximates a given limit function , is equally crucial . Early analysis , in the guise of the Taylor approximation , established an approximation of differentiable functions f by polynomials . By the Stone – Weierstrass theorem , every continuous function on [ a , b ] can be approximated as closely as desired by a polynomial . A similar approximation technique by trigonometric functions is commonly called Fourier expansion , and is much applied in engineering , see below . More generally , and more conceptually , the theorem yields a simple description of what " basic functions " , or , in abstract Hilbert spaces , what basic vectors suffice to generate a Hilbert space H , in the sense that the closure of their span ( i.e. , finite linear combinations and limits of those ) is the whole space . Such a set of functions is called a basis of H , its cardinality is known as the Hilbert space dimension . Not only does the theorem exhibit suitable basis functions as sufficient for approximation purposes , but together with the Gram @-@ Schmidt process , it enables one to construct a basis of orthogonal vectors . Such orthogonal bases are the Hilbert space generalization of the coordinate axes in finite @-@ dimensional Euclidean space . 
 The solutions to various differential equations can be interpreted in terms of Hilbert spaces . For example , a great many fields in physics and engineering lead to such equations and frequently solutions with particular physical properties are used as basis functions , often orthogonal . As an example from physics , the time @-@ dependent Schrödinger equation in quantum mechanics describes the change of physical properties in time by means of a partial differential equation , whose solutions are called wavefunctions . Definite values for physical properties such as energy , or momentum , correspond to eigenvalues of a certain ( linear ) differential operator and the associated wavefunctions are called eigenstates . The spectral theorem decomposes a linear compact operator acting on functions in terms of these eigenfunctions and their eigenvalues . 
 = = = Algebras over fields = = = 
 General vector spaces do not possess a multiplication between vectors . A vector space equipped with an additional bilinear operator defining the multiplication of two vectors is an algebra over a field . Many algebras stem from functions on some geometrical object : since functions with values in a given field can be multiplied pointwise , these entities form algebras . The Stone – Weierstrass theorem mentioned above , for example , relies on Banach algebras which are both Banach spaces and algebras . 
 Commutative algebra makes great use of rings of polynomials in one or several variables , introduced above . Their multiplication is both commutative and associative . These rings and their quotients form the basis of algebraic geometry , because they are rings of functions of algebraic geometric objects . 
 Another crucial example are Lie algebras , which are neither commutative nor associative , but the failure to be so is limited by the constraints ( [ x , y ] denotes the product of x and y ) : 
 [ x , y ] 
 = − [ y , x ] ( <unk> ) , and 
 [ x , [ y , z ] ] + [ y , [ z , x ] ] + [ z , [ x , y ] ] = 
 0 ( Jacobi identity ) . 
 Examples include the vector space of n @-@ by @-@ n matrices , with [ x , y ] 
 = xy − yx , the <unk> of two matrices , and R3 , endowed with the cross product . 
 The tensor algebra T ( V ) is a formal way of adding products to any vector space V to obtain an algebra . As a vector space , it is spanned by symbols , called simple tensors 
 v1 ⊗ v2 ⊗ ... ⊗ vn , where the degree n varies . 
 The multiplication is given by <unk> such symbols , imposing the distributive law under addition , and requiring that scalar multiplication commute with the tensor product ⊗ , much the same way as with the tensor product of two vector spaces introduced above . In general , there are no relations between v1 ⊗ v2 and v2 ⊗ v1 . Forcing two such elements to be equal leads to the symmetric algebra , whereas forcing v1 ⊗ v2 = 
 − v2 ⊗ v1 yields the exterior algebra . 
 When a field , F is explicitly stated , a common term used is F @-@ algebra . 
 = = Applications = = 
 Vector spaces have manifold applications as they occur in many circumstances , namely wherever functions with values in some field are involved . They provide a framework to deal with analytical and geometrical problems , or are used in the Fourier transform . This list is not exhaustive : many more applications exist , for example in optimization . The minimax theorem of game theory stating the existence of a unique payoff when all players play optimally can be formulated and proven using vector spaces methods . Representation theory fruitfully transfers the good understanding of linear algebra and vector spaces to other mathematical domains such as group theory . 
 = = = Distributions = = = 
 A distribution ( or generalized function ) is a linear map assigning a number to each " test " function , typically a smooth function with compact support , in a continuous way : in the above terminology the space of distributions is the ( continuous ) dual of the test function space . The latter space is endowed with a topology that takes into account not only f itself , but also all its higher derivatives . A standard example is the result of integrating a test function f over some domain Ω : 
 <formula> 
 When Ω 
 = { p } , the set consisting of a single point , this reduces to the Dirac distribution , denoted by δ , which associates to a test function f its value at the p : δ ( f ) = 
 f ( p ) . Distributions are a powerful instrument to solve differential equations . Since all standard analytic notions such as derivatives are linear , they extend naturally to the space of distributions . Therefore , the equation in question can be transferred to a distribution space , which is bigger than the underlying function space , so that more flexible methods are available for solving the equation . For example , Green 's functions and fundamental solutions are usually distributions rather than proper functions , and can then be used to find solutions of the equation with prescribed boundary conditions . The found solution can then in some cases be proven to be actually a true function , and a solution to the original equation ( e.g. , using the Lax – Milgram theorem , a consequence of the Riesz representation theorem ) . 
 = = = Fourier analysis = = = 
 Resolving a periodic function into a sum of trigonometric functions forms a Fourier series , a technique much used in physics and engineering . The underlying vector space is usually the Hilbert space L2 ( 0 , 2π ) , for which the functions sin mx and cos mx ( m an integer ) form an orthogonal basis . The Fourier expansion of an L2 function f is 
 <formula> 
 The coefficients am and bm are called Fourier coefficients of f , and are calculated by the formulas 
 <formula> , <formula> 
 In physical terms the function is represented as a superposition of sine waves and the coefficients give information about the function 's frequency spectrum . A complex @-@ number form of Fourier series is also commonly used . The concrete formulae above are consequences of a more general mathematical duality called Pontryagin duality . Applied to the group R , it yields the classical Fourier transform ; an application in physics are reciprocal lattices , where the underlying group is a finite @-@ dimensional real vector space endowed with the additional datum of a lattice encoding positions of atoms in crystals . 
 Fourier series are used to solve boundary value problems in partial differential equations . In 1822 , Fourier first used this technique to solve the heat equation . A discrete version of the Fourier series can be used in sampling applications where the function value is known only at a finite number of equally spaced points . In this case the Fourier series is finite and its value is equal to the sampled values at all points . The set of coefficients is known as the discrete Fourier transform ( DFT ) of the given sample sequence . The DFT is one of the key tools of digital signal processing , a field whose applications include radar , speech encoding , image compression . The JPEG image format is an application of the closely related discrete cosine transform . 
 The fast Fourier transform is an algorithm for rapidly computing the discrete Fourier transform . It is used not only for calculating the Fourier coefficients but , using the convolution theorem , also for computing the convolution of two finite sequences . They in turn are applied in digital filters and as a rapid multiplication algorithm for polynomials and large integers ( Schönhage @-@ Strassen algorithm ) . 
 = = = Differential geometry = = = 
 The tangent plane to a surface at a point is naturally a vector space whose origin is identified with the point of contact . The tangent plane is the best linear approximation , or <unk> , of a surface at a point . Even in a three @-@ dimensional Euclidean space , there is typically no natural way to prescribe a basis of the tangent plane , and so it is conceived of as an abstract vector space rather than a real coordinate space . The tangent space is the generalization to higher @-@ dimensional differentiable manifolds . 
 Riemannian manifolds are manifolds whose tangent spaces are endowed with a suitable inner product . Derived therefrom , the Riemann curvature tensor encodes all curvatures of a manifold in one object , which finds applications in general relativity , for example , where the Einstein curvature tensor describes the matter and energy content of space @-@ time . The tangent space of a Lie group can be given naturally the structure of a Lie algebra and can be used to classify compact Lie groups . 
 = = Generalizations = = 
 = = = Vector bundles = = = 
 A vector bundle is a family of vector spaces parametrized continuously by a topological space X. More precisely , a vector bundle over X is a topological space E equipped with a continuous map 
 π : E → X 
 such that for every x in X , the fiber π − 1 ( x ) is a vector space . The case dim V = 1 is called a line bundle . For any vector space V , the projection X × V → X makes the product X × V into a " trivial " vector bundle . Vector bundles over X are required to be locally a product of X and some ( fixed ) vector space V : for every x in X , there is a neighborhood U of x such that the restriction of π to π − 1 ( U ) is isomorphic to the trivial bundle U × V → U. Despite their locally trivial character , vector bundles may ( depending on the shape of the underlying space X ) be " twisted " in the large ( i.e. , the bundle need not be ( globally isomorphic to ) the trivial bundle X × V ) . For example , the Möbius strip can be seen as a line bundle over the circle S1 ( by identifying open intervals with the real line ) . It is , however , different from the cylinder S1 × R , because the latter is <unk> whereas the former is not . 
 Properties of certain vector bundles provide information about the underlying topological space . For example , the tangent bundle consists of the collection of tangent spaces parametrized by the points of a differentiable manifold . The tangent bundle of the circle S1 is globally isomorphic to S1 × R , since there is a global nonzero vector field on S1 . In contrast , by the hairy ball theorem , there is no ( tangent ) vector field on the 2 @-@ sphere S2 which is everywhere nonzero . K @-@ theory studies the isomorphism classes of all vector bundles over some topological space . In addition to deepening topological and geometrical insight , it has purely algebraic consequences , such as the classification of finite @-@ dimensional real division algebras : R , C , the quaternions H and the <unk> O. 
 The <unk> bundle of a differentiable manifold consists , at every point of the manifold , of the dual of the tangent space , the <unk> space . Sections of that bundle are known as differential one @-@ forms . 
 = = = Modules = = = 
 Modules are to rings what vector spaces are to fields : the same axioms , applied to a ring R instead of a field F , yield modules . The theory of modules , compared to that of vector spaces , is complicated by the presence of ring elements that do not have multiplicative inverses . For example , modules need not have bases , as the Z @-@ module ( i.e. , abelian group ) Z / 2Z shows ; those modules that do ( including all vector spaces ) are known as free modules . Nevertheless , a vector space can be compactly defined as a module over a ring which is a field with the elements being called vectors . Some authors use the term vector space to mean modules over a division ring . The <unk> @-@ geometric interpretation of commutative rings via their spectrum allows the development of concepts such as locally free modules , the algebraic counterpart to vector bundles . 
 = = = <unk> and projective spaces = = = 
 Roughly , affine spaces are vector spaces whose origins are not specified . More precisely , an affine space is a set with a free transitive vector space action . In particular , a vector space is an affine space over itself , by the map 
 V × V → V , ( v , a ) ↦ a + v. 
 If W is a vector space , then an affine subspace is a subset of W obtained by translating a linear subspace V by a fixed vector x ∈ W ; this space is denoted by x + V ( it is a coset of V in W ) and consists of all vectors of the form x + v for v ∈ V. An important example is the space of solutions of a system of inhomogeneous linear equations 
 Ax 
 = b 
 generalizing the homogeneous case b = 
 0 above . The space of solutions is the affine subspace x + V where x is a particular solution of the equation , and V is the space of solutions of the homogeneous equation ( the <unk> of A ) . 
 The set of one @-@ dimensional subspaces of a fixed finite @-@ dimensional vector space V is known as projective space ; it may be used to formalize the idea of parallel lines intersecting at infinity . <unk> and flag manifolds generalize this by <unk> linear subspaces of fixed dimension k and flags of subspaces , respectively . 
 = = = Algebra = = = 
 Artin , Michael ( 1991 ) , Algebra , Prentice Hall , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 510 @-@ 1 
 Blass , Andreas ( 1984 ) , " Existence of bases implies the axiom of choice " , Axiomatic set theory ( Boulder , Colorado , 1983 ) , Contemporary Mathematics 31 , Providence , R.I. : American Mathematical Society , pp. 31 – 33 , MR <unk> 
 Brown , William A. ( 1991 ) , Matrices and vector spaces , New York : M. Dekker , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ 8419 @-@ 5 
 Lang , Serge ( 1987 ) , Linear algebra , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 Lang , Serge ( 2002 ) , Algebra , Graduate Texts in Mathematics 211 ( Revised third ed . ) , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 , MR <unk> 
 Mac Lane , Saunders ( 1999 ) , Algebra ( 3rd ed . ) , pp. 193 – 222 , ISBN 0 @-@ 8218 @-@ 1646 @-@ 2 
 Meyer , Carl D. ( 2000 ) , Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra , SIAM , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 454 @-@ 8 
 Roman , Steven ( 2005 ) , Advanced Linear Algebra , Graduate Texts in Mathematics 135 ( 2nd ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Spindler , Karlheinz ( 1993 ) , Abstract Algebra with Applications : Volume 1 : Vector spaces and groups , CRC , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8247 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 van der Waerden , Bartel <unk> ( 1993 ) , Algebra ( in German ) ( 9th ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 = = = Analysis = = = 
 Bourbaki , Nicolas ( 1987 ) , Topological vector spaces , Elements of mathematics , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Bourbaki , Nicolas ( 2004 ) , Integration I , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Braun , Martin ( 1993 ) , Differential equations and their applications : an introduction to applied mathematics , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 BSE @-@ 3 ( 2001 ) , " Tangent plane " , in <unk> , Michiel , Encyclopedia of Mathematics , Springer , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 010 @-@ 4 
 <unk> , Gustave ( 1966 ) , Topology , Boston , MA : Academic Press 
 Dennery , Philippe ; <unk> , Andre ( 1996 ) , Mathematics for Physicists , Courier Dover Publications , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Dudley , Richard M. ( 1989 ) , Real analysis and probability , The Wadsworth & Brooks / Cole Mathematics Series , Pacific Grove , CA : Wadsworth & Brooks / Cole Advanced Books & Software , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 534 @-@ 10050 @-@ 6 
 Dunham , William ( 2005 ) , The Calculus Gallery , Princeton University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Evans , Lawrence C. ( 1998 ) , Partial differential equations , Providence , R.I. : American Mathematical Society , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8218 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Folland , Gerald B. ( 1992 ) , Fourier Analysis and Its Applications , Brooks @-@ Cole , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 534 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Gasquet , Claude ; <unk> , Patrick ( 1999 ) , Fourier Analysis and Applications : Filtering , Numerical Computation , <unk> , Texts in Applied Mathematics , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 <unk> , Emmanuel C. ; Jervis , Barrie W. ( 2001 ) , Digital Signal Processing : A Practical Approach ( 2nd ed . ) , Harlow , Essex , England : Prentice @-@ Hall ( published 2002 ) , ISBN 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 Krantz , Steven G. ( 1999 ) , A Panorama of Harmonic Analysis , Carus Mathematical Monographs , Washington , DC : Mathematical Association of America , ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 031 @-@ 1 
 Kreyszig , Erwin ( 1988 ) , Advanced Engineering Mathematics ( 6th ed . ) , New York : John Wiley & Sons , ISBN 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Kreyszig , Erwin ( 1989 ) , Introductory functional analysis with applications , Wiley Classics Library , New York : John Wiley & Sons , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 , MR <unk> 
 Lang , Serge ( 1983 ) , Real analysis , Addison @-@ Wesley , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Lang , Serge ( 1993 ) , Real and functional analysis , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Loomis , Lynn H. ( 1953 ) , An introduction to abstract harmonic analysis , Toronto @-@ New York – London : D. Van Nostrand Company , Inc . , pp. x + 190 
 Schaefer , Helmut H. ; Wolff , M.P. ( 1999 ) , Topological vector spaces ( 2nd ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Treves , François ( 1967 ) , Topological vector spaces , distributions and kernels , Boston , MA : Academic Press 
 = = = Historical references = = = 
 Banach , Stefan ( 1922 ) , " Sur les opérations dans les ensembles <unk> et leur application aux équations <unk> ( On operations in abstract sets and their application to integral equations ) " ( PDF ) , Fundamenta Mathematicae ( in French ) 3 , ISSN 0016 @-@ <unk> 
 Bolzano , Bernard ( 1804 ) , <unk> über <unk> <unk> der <unk> ( Considerations of some aspects of elementary geometry ) ( in German ) 
 Bourbaki , Nicolas ( 1969 ) , Éléments d 'histoire des mathématiques ( Elements of history of mathematics ) ( in French ) , Paris : Hermann 
 <unk> , Jean @-@ Luc ( 1995 ) , " A general outline of the genesis of vector space theory " , Historia Mathematica 22 ( 3 ) : 227 – 261 , doi : 10 @.@ 1006 / <unk> , MR <unk> 
 Fourier , Jean Baptiste Joseph ( 1822 ) , Théorie analytique de la <unk> ( in French ) , Chez Firmin Didot , père et fils 
 Grassmann , Hermann ( 1844 ) , Die <unk> <unk> - Ein <unk> Zweig der Mathematik ( in German ) , O. Wigand , reprint : Hermann Grassmann . Translated by Lloyd C. Kannenberg . ( 2000 ) , Kannenberg , L.C. , ed . , Extension Theory , Providence , R.I. : American Mathematical Society , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 8218 @-@ 2031 @-@ 5 
 Hamilton , William Rowan ( 1853 ) , Lectures on <unk> , Royal Irish Academy 
 Möbius , August Ferdinand ( 1827 ) , Der <unk> <unk> : ein neues <unk> zur <unk> <unk> der <unk> ( <unk> calculus : a new utility for an analytic treatment of geometry ) ( in German ) 
 Moore , Gregory H. ( 1995 ) , " The axiomatization of linear algebra : 1875 – 1940 " , Historia Mathematica 22 ( 3 ) : 262 – 303 , doi : 10 @.@ 1006 / <unk> 
 Peano , Giuseppe ( 1888 ) , <unk> <unk> <unk> l <unk> di H. Grassmann <unk> dalle <unk> della Logica <unk> ( in Italian ) , Turin 
 = = = Further references = = = 
 Ashcroft , Neil ; <unk> , N. David ( 1976 ) , Solid State Physics , Toronto : Thomson Learning , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 03 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Atiyah , Michael Francis ( 1989 ) , K @-@ theory , Advanced Book Classics ( 2nd ed . ) , Addison @-@ Wesley , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 201 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 , MR <unk> 
 Bourbaki , Nicolas ( 1998 ) , Elements of Mathematics : Algebra I Chapters 1 @-@ 3 , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 
 Bourbaki , Nicolas ( 1989 ) , General Topology . Chapters 1 @-@ 4 , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Coxeter , Harold Scott MacDonald ( 1987 ) , Projective Geometry ( 2nd ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Eisenberg , Murray ; Guy , Robert ( 1979 ) , " A proof of the hairy ball theorem " , The American Mathematical Monthly ( Mathematical Association of America ) 86 ( 7 ) : 572 – 574 , doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> , JSTOR <unk> 
 Eisenbud , David ( 1995 ) , Commutative algebra , Graduate Texts in Mathematics 150 , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 , MR <unk> 
 <unk> , Derek ( 1996 ) , Classic Set Theory : A guided independent study ( 1st ed . ) , London : Chapman and Hall , ISBN 0 @-@ 412 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Griffiths , David J. ( 1995 ) , Introduction to Quantum Mechanics , Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall , ISBN 0 @-@ 13 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 
 Halmos , Paul R. ( 1974 ) , Finite @-@ dimensional vector spaces , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Halpern , James D. ( Jun 1966 ) , " Bases in Vector Spaces and the Axiom of Choice " , Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society ( American Mathematical Society ) 17 ( 3 ) : 670 – 673 , doi : 10 @.@ 2307 / <unk> , JSTOR <unk> 
 <unk> , Dale ( 1994 ) , Fibre Bundles ( 3rd ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Jost , Jürgen ( 2005 ) , Riemannian Geometry and Geometric Analysis ( 4th ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 3 @-@ 540 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 Kreyszig , Erwin ( 1991 ) , Differential geometry , New York : Dover Publications , pp. xiv + 352 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 
 Kreyszig , Erwin ( 1999 ) , Advanced Engineering Mathematics ( 8th ed . ) , New York : John Wiley & Sons , ISBN 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 <unk> , David ( 1997 ) , Optimization by vector space methods , New York : John Wiley & Sons , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 471 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Mac Lane , Saunders ( 1998 ) , Categories for the Working Mathematician ( 2nd ed . ) , Berlin , New York : Springer @-@ Verlag , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 387 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Misner , Charles W. ; Thorne , Kip ; Wheeler , John Archibald ( 1973 ) , Gravitation , W. H. Freeman , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7167 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 Naber , Gregory L. ( 2003 ) , The geometry of Minkowski spacetime , New York : Dover Publications , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 486 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 , MR <unk> 
 Schönhage , A. ; Strassen , Volker ( 1971 ) , " Schnelle <unk> großer Zahlen ( Fast multiplication of big numbers ) " ( PDF ) , Computing ( in German ) 7 : 281 – 292 , doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / <unk> , ISSN 0010 @-@ <unk> 
 Spivak , Michael ( 1999 ) , A Comprehensive Introduction to Differential Geometry ( Volume Two ) , Houston , TX : Publish or Perish 
 Stewart , Ian ( 1975 ) , Galois Theory , Chapman and Hall Mathematics Series , London : Chapman and Hall , ISBN 0 @-@ 412 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Varadarajan , V. S. ( 1974 ) , Lie groups , Lie algebras , and their representations , Prentice Hall , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 13 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Wallace , <unk> ( Feb 1992 ) , " The JPEG still picture compression standard " , IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics 38 ( 1 ) : xviii – <unk> , doi : 10 @.@ 1109 / 30 @.@ <unk> , ISSN 0098 @-@ <unk> 
 <unk> , Charles A. ( 1994 ) , An introduction to homological algebra , Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics 38 , Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 , OCLC <unk> , MR <unk> 
 = Roger Curtis = 
 Admiral Sir Roger Curtis , 1st Baronet , GCB ( 4 June 1746 – 14 November 1816 ) was an officer of the British Royal Navy , who saw action in several battles during an extensive career that was punctuated by a number of highly controversial incidents . Curtis served during the American Revolutionary War and the French Revolutionary Wars and was highly praised in the former conflict for his bravery under fire at the Great Siege of Gibraltar , where he saved several hundred Spanish lives at great risk to his own . His career suffered however in the aftermath of the Glorious First of June , when he was heavily criticised for his conduct by several influential figures , including Cuthbert Collingwood . His popularity fell further due to his involvement in two highly controversial courts @-@ martial , those of Anthony Molloy in 1795 and James Gambier in 1810 . 
 Ultimately Curtis ' career stalled as more popular and successful officers secured active positions ; during the Napoleonic Wars , Curtis was relegated to staff duties ashore and did not see action . He died in 1816 , his baronetcy inherited by his second son Lucius who later became an Admiral of the Fleet . Modern historians have viewed Curtis as an over @-@ cautious officer in a period when dashing , attacking tactics were admired . Contemporary opinion was more divided , with some influential officers expressing admiration of Curtis and others contempt . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Roger Curtis was born in 1746 to a gentleman farmer of Wiltshire , also named Roger Curtis , and his wife <unk> Blachford . In 1762 at 16 , Curtis travelled to Portsmouth and joined the Royal Navy , becoming a midshipman aboard HMS Royal Sovereign in the final year of the Seven Years ' War . Curtis did not see any action before the Treaty of Paris in 1763 , and was soon transferred aboard HMS Assistance for service off West Africa . Over the next six years , Curtis moved from Assistance to the guardship HMS Augusta at Portsmouth and then to the sloop HMS Gibraltar in Newfoundland . In 1769 , Curtis joined the frigate HMS Venus under Samuel Barrington before moving to the ship of the line HMS Albion in which he was promoted to lieutenant . 
 Shortly after his promotion , Curtis joined the small brig HMS Otter in Newfoundland and there spent several years operating off the Labrador coastline , becoming very familiar with the local geography and the Inuit peoples of the region . In a report he wrote for Lord Dartmouth , Curtis opined that although the inland regions of Labrador were barren , the coast was an ideal place for a seasonal cod fishery . He also formed a good opinion of the native people , applauding their healthy and peaceful lifestyle . Curtis made numerous exploratory voyages along the Labrador coast and formed close links with the Inuit tribes and Moravian missionaries in the region . His notes and despatches were presented to the Royal Academy by Daines Barrington in 1774 , although accusations later surfaced that many of his observations were plagiarised from the notes of a local officer , Captain George Cartwright . 
 During his time in Canadian waters , Curtis became friends with Governor Molyneux Shuldham who became Curtis ' patron and in 1775 assisted his transfer into HMS Chatham off New York . The following year , with the American Revolutionary War underway , Curtis was promoted to commander and given the sloop HMS Senegal . Curtis performed well in his new command and a year later was again promoted after being noticed by Lord Howe . Howe made Curtis captain of his own flagship HMS Eagle , and the men became close friends . 
 = = American Revolutionary War = = 
 In 1778 , Curtis returned to Britain in Eagle , but refused to carry out an order to sail the ship to the Far East , a refusal which earned the enmity of Lord Sandwich . In December of the same year he was married to Jane Sarah Brady . As punishment for his disobedience Curtis was unemployed for the next two years , before he secured the new frigate HMS Brilliant for service in the Mediterranean in 1780 . Ordered to Gibraltar , Brilliant was attacked by a superior Spanish squadron close to the fortress and was forced to escape to British @-@ held Minorca . Curtis 's first lieutenant Colin Campbell complained extensively about his captain 's refusal to leave port while enemy shipping passed by the harbour , but Curtis was waiting for a 25 @-@ ship relief convoy which he met and safely convoyed into Gibraltar , bringing supplies to the defenders of the Great Siege of Gibraltar then in progress . 
 Although Curtis was personally opposed to British possession of Gibraltar , he took command of a marine unit during the siege , and in the attack by Spanish gunboats and floating batteries in September 1782 , Curtis took his men into the harbour in small boats to engage the enemy . During this operation , Curtis witnessed the destruction of the batteries by British fireships and was able to rescue hundreds of burnt and drowning Spanish sailors from the water . This rescue effort was carried out in close proximity to the enemy force and in constant danger from the detonation of burning Spanish ships , which showered his overcrowded boats with debris and caused several casualties amongst his crews . When Lord Howe relieved the siege , he brought the much @-@ celebrated Curtis back to Britain , where he was knighted for his service and became a society figure , featuring in many newspaper prints . He came under attack however from Lieutenant Campbell , who published a pamphlet accusing him of indecision and a lack of nerve during his time in Brilliant . 
 During 1783 , Curtis was sent to Morocco to renew treaties with the country and then remained in Gibraltar , accepting the Spanish peace treaty delegates at the war 's end . Brilliant was paid off in 1784 , although Curtis remained in employment during the peace , commanding HMS Ganges as guardship at Portsmouth . In 1787 he was placed on half @-@ pay , although it has been speculated that during this period he conducted a secret mission to Scandinavia to ensure British supplies on naval materials from the region in the event of war . In the Spanish armament of 1790 , Curtis was briefly made flag captain of HMS Queen Charlotte under Howe , but soon transferred to HMS Brunswick . As captain of Brunswick , Curtis had to deal with an outbreak of a deadly and infectious fever . He was successful in controlling the disease and later published and advisory pamphlet on techniques for other officers to follow when faced with contagion aboard their ships . 
 = = French Revolutionary War service = = 
 In 1793 at the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars , Curtis returned to Queen Charlotte and joined Lord Howe at the head of the Channel Fleet . In May 1794 , Howe led the fleet to sea to search for a French grain convoy and after a month of fruitless searching , discovered that the French Atlantic Fleet under Villaret de Joyeuse had left harbour and was sailing to meet the convoy . Howe gave chase and gradually closed on Villaret 's rearguard , fighting two inconclusive actions during the Atlantic campaign of May 1794 . On 1 June 1794 , Howe caught the French fleet and brought them to battle in the battle of the Glorious First of June . The action was hard fought and Curtis ' ship was heavily engaged , fighting several French ships of the line simultaneously . 
 In the closing stages of the battle , the aged Howe retired to his cabin and Curtis was given responsibility for the flagship and consequently the fleet over the next day . Exactly how much of what transpired was Curtis 's fault has never been established , but in a series of unusual decisions the British failed to pursue the defeated French fleet , allowing many battered French ships to escape . Even more controversially , a despatch was sent to the Admiralty concerning the action which praised certain officers and excluded others . The awards presented to the captains who had served at the battle were given based on the praise each captain received in this report , and those omitted were excluded from the medal celebrating the victory and other honours . Although Howe had ultimate responsibility for the despatch , many blamed Curtis for this slight and he was rumoured to have taken the decision to abandon pursuit and subsequently penned the report himself in Howe 's name . 
 Curtis 's subsequent actions increased the distrust felt by his fellow officers . While Curtis was granted a baronetcy for his role in the action , another captain , Anthony Molloy , faced a court martial and national disgrace for what was considered to be his failure to engage the enemy during the battle . Curtis stood as prosecutor in the case , and Molloy was subsequently dismissed from his ship and effectively from the service as the result of Curtis 's prosecution . Cuthbert Collingwood , one of the captains overlooked by the despatch , subsequently described Curtis as " an artful , <unk> creature , whose fawning insinuating manners creeps into the confidence of whoever he attacks and whose rapacity <unk> 'd grasp all honours and all profits that come within his view " . 
 During the two years following the battle , Curtis had brief periods in command of HMS Canada , HMS Powerful , HMS Invincible and HMS Formidable . In 1796 , he was promoted to rear @-@ admiral and raised his flag on HMS Prince . In Prince , Curtis led the blockade of Brest when most of the fleet was paralysed by the Spithead Mutiny . He was also in overall command of the naval operations which succeeded in destroying or driving off much of the French force sent to support the Irish Rebellion of 1798 culminating in the Battle of Tory Island , at which he was not present . Later in the year he joined Lord St Vincent off Cadiz with a squadron of eight ships of the line , and was soon afterwards made a vice @-@ admiral . In 1799 , he retired ashore . 
 = = Staff service = = 
 Curtis 's remaining career was based at a series of shore stations , initially at Cape Town between 1800 and 1803 , which he reportedly hated . In 1804 he was promoted to full admiral , and subsequently employed in Britain from 1805 to 1807 as part of the " Commission for revising the civil affairs of His Majesty 's navy " . This latter role was an important position and Curtis performed well , introducing many beneficial reforms to the service . In 1802 Curtis 's eldest son Roger , a post captain in the navy , died suddenly while on duty . In 1809 , after 40 years of naval service , Curtis took his final command , that of Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Portsmouth . In 1810 , he performed his last significant duty , when he presided over the highly controversial court martial examining the conduct of Lord Gambier at the Battle of Basque Roads . At the battle , Gambier had failed to support Captain Lord Cochrane and missed an opportunity to destroy the French Brest Fleet . Infuriated , Cochrane attempted to block the proposed vote of thanks awarded to Gambier for the reduced victory from Parliament . Gambier responded by demanding a court martial to pass judgement on his actions . Gambier and Curtis had fought together at the Glorious First of June and had been friends for many years , and Curtis could be counted on by those in authority to " show strong partiality in favour of the accused . " Under instructions from the Admiralty , Curtis and the other officers judging the case found in Gambier 's favour and the trial inevitably ended with the court pronouncing that Gambier 's behaviour " was marked by zeal , judgement , ability , and an anxious attention to the welfare of his majesty 's service " . 
 Curtis retired after the trial and died six years later after a peaceful retirement , followed a year later by his wife . In 1815 , shortly before his death , he was made a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath . His surviving son , Lucius Curtis , inherited the baronetcy . Lucius was an experienced post captain who had lost his ship at the Battle of Grand Port but was exonerated at the subsequent court martial and eventually became an Admiral of the Fleet . Roger Curtis 's highly controversial career was noted for a number of prominent public disputes , that resulted in bitterness between Curtis and several of his fellow officers . He was however , brave and resourceful : his actions at Gibraltar even prompted the naming of the Curtis Group , an archipelago of small islands in the Bass Strait between Australia and Tasmania : The islands were apparently given the name because of their physical similarity to Gibraltar . Modern authors have criticised Curtis for his caution at a time when officers were applauded for bravery , but contemporary opinion was more divided : despite his many detractors , Horatio Nelson , who knew him well from their service together in the Mediterranean , described him as " an able officer and conciliating man " . 
 = = Named in his honour = = 
 Port Curtis in Queensland , Australia , was named after him by Matthew Flinders . Curtis had assisted Matthew Flinders with repairs to his ship the HMS Investigator in Cape Town in October 1801 . 
 = = = Book sources = = = 
 Clowes , William Laird ( 1997 ) [ 1900 ] . The Royal Navy , A History from the Earliest Times to 1900 , Volume V. Chatham Publishing . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 014 @-@ 0 . 
 Editor : Gardiner , Robert ( 2001 ) [ 1996 ] . Fleet Battle and Blockade . Caxton Editions . ISBN 1 @-@ 84067 @-@ 363 @-@ X. 
 Editor : Gardiner , Robert ( 2001 ) [ 1998 ] . The Victory of Seapower . Caxton Editions . ISBN 1 @-@ 84067 @-@ 359 @-@ 1 . 
 James , William ( 2002 ) [ 1827 ] . The Naval History of Great Britain . Conway Maritime Press . 
 The Naval Chronicle , Volume 6 . J. Gould . 1801 . ( reissued by Cambridge University Press , 2010 . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 108 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 ) 
 = = = Web sources = = = 
 " Curtis , Sir Roger " . Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , ( subscription required ) , Roger Knight . 
 " Curtis , Sir Roger " . Dictionary of Canadian Biography , William H. Whiteley . 
 = Sena Kobayakawa = 
 Sena Kobayakawa ( Japanese : <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Kobayakawa Sena ) , commonly referred to just as Sena ( <unk> ) , is a fictional character who is the protagonist in the manga and anime series Eyeshield 21 , created by Riichiro Inagaki and Yusuke Murata . In the series , he is a first @-@ year Japanese high @-@ school student who becomes a gofer to avoid being bullied . His running ability improves and he is noticed by Yoichi Hiruma , the American football team 's captain , who gets him to join the Deimon Devil Bats as the team 's running back under the name " Eyeshield 21 " . Sena has appeared in other media from the series , including video games , original video animations ( OVAs ) and light novels . 
 When he created a protagonist to the series , Inagaki intended to create a " wimp " who is a good athlete , then he decided the series main theme , American football , and eventually created Sena . In the 2003 anime OVA which preceded the anime series , he is voiced by Romi Park ; however , she was replaced by Miyu Irino in the 2005 Japanese anime television series . In the English adaptation , he is voiced by Yuri Lowenthal . Sena has been well received by manga and anime publications . Merchandise has been created for the character , including action figures , cosplay pieces and resin and ceramic statues . 
 = = Development and voice portrayal = = 
 When Inagaki was planning the Eyeshield 21 series , he wanted to create a " protagonist that was wimpy at the beginning , yet could perform outstandingly in a sports game " ; from this premise , he choose American football as the main theme , eventually creating Sena . Inagaki has said that he is a fan of the St. Louis Rams and Marshall Faulk ( a running back on the Rams ) . Inagaki said that seeing how Faulk ran inspired him to create the character . He chose Sena 's name as an homage to the Brazilian Formula One driver Ayrton Senna . 
 In the first adaptation of the Eyeshield 21 manga , a 2003 Jump Festa OVA titled The Phantom Golden Bowl , he was voiced by voice actress Romi Park . The subsequently adaptation , however , do not used Park rather Miyu Irino was chosen to be Sena 's voice actor . Kokoro Kikuchi provided his voice while his younger self . In the English dubbing , the role has been played by Yuri Lowenthal . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Eyeshield 21 = = = 
 Because of his diminutive stature and weak appearance , Sena is bullied by his classmates in primary school ; he is protected by Mamori Anezaki , his only friend . A new student , Riku <unk> , teaches Sena how to outsprint his tormentors . Sena uses his running ability to be a gofer , which allows him to improve his running and dodging ability . Soon after entering senior high school Sena is coerced into playing American football by Yoichi Hiruma , who recognizes Sena 's running ability and forces him to join the American football club , the Deimon Devil Bats . To conceal his identity Sena and to keep him from being recruited by other teams , Sena wears a green eyeshield and Hiruma picks the alias " Eyeshield 21 " after a famous Japanese athlete in the United States . 
 The Deimon Devil Bats enter the spring tournament ; they lose to the Ojo White Knights , but Sena decides to stay on the team because he finds it fun . They train for the autumn tournament , hoping to be the best team in Tokyo and advance to the Kanto tournament and the Christmas Bowl ( between the best high @-@ school American football teams in Japan ) . Despite Hiruma 's desire to keep the identity of Eyeshield 21 a secret , Sena reveals his identity to his teammates when they are training in the United States . He later reveals his identity to Mamori and everyone against Bando Spiders , when Hayato Akaba claims to be Eyeshield 21 . Sena eventually beats Akaba , claiming the title of Eyeshield 21 . At the Kanto tournament , after defeating Shinryuji Naga , his rival Ojo White Knights ' Seijuro Shin , and the <unk> Dinosaurs , Sena is the tournament 's MVP and the Devil Bats win the chance to play in the Christmas Bowl . 
 In the big game , Sena proves his right to the name by defeating Takeru Yamato — the original Eyeshield 21 — and winning the championship . After winning the Christmas Bowl , Sena is asked to create a national team with Monta , Yamato and Taka <unk> . The four split up to find players for a Japanese team for the International Youth American Football tournament . They advance to the finals against the U.S. , and the game ends in a tie . Two years later , Sena plays for Notre Dame in the U.S. during the last half of his last year in Deimon . He returns to Japan to attend Enma College , opposing some of his former teammates ( students at other colleges ) as they compete to play in the Rice Bowl ( the game between the best college American @-@ football teams ) . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 Sena has made several appearances outside the Eyeshield 21 anime and manga . He appears in both of the original video animations produced for the series : helping the Deimon Devil Bats to defeat the <unk> Boarders in the Golden Bowl in the first OVA , and surviving on a desert island ( after Hiruma leaves him and his teammates to train ) in the second . As the series ' title character , Sena is playable in all Eyeshield 21 games . These usually feature the manga 's original story , but Eyeshield 21 : Devilbats Devildays features other storylines . In Eyeshield 21 : Max Devil Power ! , Sena can play for teams other than the Devil Bats . He also appears in the crossover games Jump Super Stars and Jump Ultimate Stars as a supporting character . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of Sena has been well received by manga readers and as the series continued he went on to become one of the most popular characters among the Eyeshield 21 reader base , having consistently placed near the top of the Weekly Shōnen Jump character popularity polls of the series . In the first poll he placed first , and second in two others ( behind Hiruma ) . He was also chosen by the readers the one who would win a " Stars Showdown " against Seijuro Shin , as well as the best running back in the series . In an interview , Miyu Irino said about Sena : " he can be pathetic and weak " but " in case of emergency " Sena can be " incredibly cool " . Merchandise based on his character has been released , including action figures , cosplay pieces and resin and ceramic statues . 
 Several publications for manga and anime have commented on Sena 's character . Ain 't It Cool News ' Scott Green qualified Sena as " a rather likable put upon hero and visually interesting lead " . Carlo Santos of Anime News Network ( ANN ) noted Sena fell into " the archetypal shōnen protagonist " and " the underdog who falls and gets up over and over again " mold , but praised Sena , calling him " the polar opposite of those talkative , obnoxious , up @-@ and @-@ <unk> ' em heroes that populate so many other series " . Writing for Mania.com , Jarred Pine also called Sena an archetypical character , but noted him as a " very likeable " character . Pine praised his debut , saying that it " was a memorable one , as it was both intense and hilarious " . Later , he stated that a lead you can cheer for is essential to a sports manga , commenting that Sena " fills that role quite well . " The contrast with " Sena 's hard effort and Hiruma 's trickery and devilish nature " was also praised by Pine . His doormat characteristics was initially " worrying " according to Manga Life 's Kevin Hill who said he became " far more likeable " once he meets up Hiruma and Kurita . Zac Bertschy of ANN said that Sena , " unlike so many other shōnen sports heroes , stops moping around and doubting himself and generally tries his <unk> " ; he is " introspective , kind , and resourceful , something most shōnen heroes can 't claim by the third volume of their respective series " . 
 = Butthole Surfers = 
 Butthole Surfers is an American rock band formed by Gibby Haynes and Paul Leary in San Antonio , Texas in 1981 . The band has had numerous personnel changes , but its core lineup of Haynes , Leary , and drummer King Coffey has been consistent since 1983 . Teresa Nervosa served as second drummer from 1983 to 1985 , 1986 to 1989 , and 2009 . The band has also employed a variety of bass players , most notably Jeff Pinkus . 
 Rooted in the 1980s hardcore punk scene , Butthole Surfers quickly became known for their chaotic and disturbing live shows , black comedy , and a sound that incorporated elements of psychedelia , noise rock , punk and , later , electronica , as well as their use of sound manipulation and tape editing . Butthole Surfers have a well @-@ reported appetite for psychoactive drugs , an evident influence on their sound . 
 Although they were respected by their peers and attracted a devoted fanbase , Butthole Surfers had little commercial success until 1996 's Electriclarryland . The album contained the hit single " Pepper " which climbed to number one on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks chart that year . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1976 – 1981 ) = = = 
 Butthole Surfers formed at Trinity University in San Antonio , Texas during the late 1970s , when students Gibson " Gibby " Haynes and Paul Leary Walthall ( later just Paul Leary ) met for the first time . Though it was their overall strangeness and shared taste in non @-@ mainstream music that caused them to become friends , both appeared to be headed for very conventional careers . Haynes , as captain of Trinity 's basketball team , as well as the school 's " Accountant of the Year " , soon graduated to a position with a respected Texas accounting firm , while Leary remained in college working on his MBA degree . 
 In 1981 , Haynes and Leary published the magazine Strange <unk> , which featured photos of abnormal medical ailments , coupled with fictitious , humorous explanations for the diseases . After being caught with one of these pictures at work , Haynes left the accounting firm and moved to Southern California . Leary , at the time one semester shy of his degree , dropped out of college and followed Haynes . After a brief period spent selling homemade clothes and linens emblazoned with Lee Harvey Oswald 's image , the pair returned to San Antonio , and launched the band that would eventually become Butthole Surfers . 
 = = = Early years ( 1981 – 1984 ) = = = 
 Haynes and Leary played their debut show at a San Antonio night club , The Bonham Exchange , in 1981 ; at that time they had not yet settled on the band name " Butthole Surfers " . By 1982 , the band were backed by the sibling rhythm section composed of bassist Quinn Mathews and his brother , drummer Scott Mathews . The band did not gain a following in San Antonio , and purchased a van to return to California later that summer . 
 During a brief concert at the Tool and Die club in San Francisco , Dead Kennedys frontman and Alternative Tentacles overseer Jello Biafra witnessed their performance and became a fervent fan . Biafra invited the group to open for Dead Kennedys and T.S.O.L. at the Whisky a Go Go in Los Angeles , and soon made an offer that would launch their recording career ; if they could get someone to lend them studio time , Alternative Tentacles would reimburse the studio when the album was complete . The band then returned to San Antonio to record at BOSS Studios ( a.k.a. Bob O 'Neill 's Sound Studios , a.k.a. the Boss ) . However , the Mathews brothers did not enter the studio with Haynes and Leary ; the two had quit following a physical altercation between Scott Mathews and Haynes . The bass position was taken over by Bill Jolly , who would play on Butthole Surfers ' next two releases , and a number of drummers participated . The last of these , King Coffey ( born Jeffrey Coffey ) , is still with the band to this day . 
 Released on Alternative Tentacles in July 1983 , the resulting EP , Butthole Surfers ( also known as Brown Reason to Live and Pee Pee the Sailor ) , offered songs with provocatively absurd titles like " The Shah Sleeps in Lee Harvey 's Grave " and " Bar @-@ B @-@ Q Pope " , alternately sung by Haynes and Leary . ( Haynes would become the band 's primary singer by the time of their first LP . ) The album cover , like the many bizarre illustrations that would accompany Surfers ' succeeding work , was designed by the band itself . <unk> with humor , Butthole Surfers laid the foundation for what was to come . It influenced at least one future superstar in Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain , who listed it as one of his ten favorite albums in his Journals . Cobain later went on to list the album " Pee Pee the Sailor " by Butthole Surfers as one of the fifty most influential albums for Nirvana 's sound . Cobain would later meet his wife , Courtney Love of Hole , at a Butthole Surfers / L7 concert in 1991 . 
 Soon after the release of Butthole Surfers , the band recruited a second drummer , Teresa Nervosa ( born Teresa Taylor ) , who had played with Coffey in a number of high school marching bands in the Texas ' Fort Worth and Austin areas . She and Coffey would drum in unison on separate , stand @-@ up kits , adding to the spectacle of Surfers ' ever @-@ evolving stage show . Though Nervosa and Coffey repeatedly referred to themselves , and were referred to , as siblings , it has since been revealed that the two only presented themselves as such due to their similar appearances , and are not actually related . With her arrival , the band 's core " classic lineup " — Haynes , Leary , Coffey , and Nervosa — was in place . With the exception of a number of different bass players and Nervosa 's brief sabbatical from late 1985 to 1986 , it remained largely unchanged until her final departure in 1989 . In 2008 , she returned to the band — their website announced 2009 tour dates including " Teresa Taylor " . 
 In 1984 the band returned to BOSS Studios to record enough material for two full @-@ length albums . Both were originally offered to Alternative Tentacles , with the first being Psychic ... Powerless ... Another Man 's Sac . Before either album could be released , though , Alternative Tentacles had to acquire the master tapes from Bob O 'Neill , BOSS Studios ' namesake and owner . He refused to release them until he 'd been reimbursed for the sessions , and Alternative Tentacles couldn 't immediately afford to pay . After months of waiting , the band issued the concert recording Live <unk> on Alternative Tentacles out of financial desperation in September 1984 . Mostly made up of live performances of songs from their debut , it prompted some critics and fans to joke that they had released the same album twice . Meanwhile , Bob O 'Neill was preparing to release Psychic ... on his own Ward 9 label to recoup his expenses . 
 = = = Legend grows ( 1984 – 1987 ) = = = 
 With some members working as <unk> , the group was apparently not thrilled with the album being released on Ward 9 . Terry Tolkin , a friend and their east coast booking agent , signed the band to Corey Rusk 's then @-@ nascent Touch and Go Records in Detroit . Psychic ... Powerless ... Another Man 's Sac was released in 1984 . Building on their first EP , the band made psychedelia a much bigger part of their sound on this release , which made full use of the tape editing , non @-@ traditional instrumentation , and sound modulation that came to define their studio recordings . 
 Just before Psychic ... ' s release , and with new bassist Terence Smart in tow ( the first of many through 1986 ) , the band commenced their first nationwide tour . It was on this outing that they truly established a national presence , starting at Touch and Go 's early headquarters in Detroit before heading to New York City , where they impressed members of Sonic Youth , as well as <unk> ( and future Butthole Surfers ) bassist Kramer . They then crisscrossed the country for several months , including a show in Seattle , that made a fan of future Soundgarden guitarist Kim Thayil . While in San Francisco at the end of the tour , and without a place to live , the band collectively decided to move to <unk> ( a small town outside Athens , Georgia ) , where they admittedly made a hobby of stalking members of R.E.M .. They purportedly planned to leave a van parked in front of Michael Stipe 's house , with " Michael Stipe / Despite the Hype / I Still Wanna Suck / Your Big Long Pipe " painted on the side . Smart quit after falling in love with a friend of the band , and Trevor Malcolm , a young Canadian musician recommended by Touch and Go , replaced him on bass . 
 Word was spreading about the band 's bizarre stage show by the time they hit the road again , resulting in ever @-@ larger audiences at their concerts . Not long after Malcolm 's arrival , the band recorded their act for posterity by filming two concerts at Detroit 's Traxx club . Some of this footage was eventually packaged as Blind Eye Sees All , their only official video release to date . They purchased their first 8 @-@ track recorder at this time , and used it to record two songs later used on the A @-@ side of Cream Corn from the Socket of Davis . 
 Reportedly unhappy with life in the band , Malcolm quit in mid @-@ 1985 . A friend of the band 's from Athens , Juan Molina , was brought in for a brief U.S. tour , but was not interested in becoming a full @-@ time member . Without a permanent bassist and a quickly approaching European tour looming — the band 's first — they contacted Kramer , who quickly agreed to join . Meanwhile , their second LP , which had been submitted to Alternative Tentacles as Rembrandt Pussy Horse , was still in limbo . The reasons for Alternative Tentacles ' actions are unclear , but it is known that the label delayed a decision for about a year before ultimately refusing to publish it . While waiting , the band released the four @-@ song Cream Corn from the Socket of Davis EP on Touch and Go in late 1985 . Once Alternative Tentacles finally declined , the group went back into the studio to record two new tracks to replace " Two Part " and " Tornadoes " , which were originally intended for Rembrandt ... before appearing on the Cream Corn ... EP 's B @-@ side . 
 Following the European tour , Butthole Surfers experienced more upheaval when Nervosa left around Christmas 1985 , as she was tired of the living conditions associated with constant touring and had a desire to be with family . She was replaced by another female drummer , <unk> <unk> , who was dubbed Cabbage Gomez , Jr. in the press soon after joining the band . Cabbage had previously performed with Kathleen Lynch ( a.k.a. Kathleen , a.k.a. Ta @-@ Da the Shit Lady ) in the band <unk> Stars ; Lynch gained fame as Butthole Surfers ' infamous naked dancer from 1986 to 1989 . Kramer also left during this period and was replaced by Jeff Pinkus , who gave the band 's bass position its longest period of stability by staying until 1994 . 
 Their second LP was finally issued as Rembrandt Pussyhorse on Touch and Go in April 1986 . Coming out some two years after the original sessions , it featured a different mix and song selection than Alternative Tentacles ' unreleased version . Best known for its minimalist reworking of The Guess Who 's " American Woman " , it is one of the most experimental albums in Butthole Surfers ' heavily experimental career . Following a particularly out @-@ of @-@ control tour , even by Butthole Surfers ' standards , the band semi @-@ settled in Austin , Texas in the summer of 1986 . Nervosa rejoined them ( Cabbage having been fired months earlier ) , and they went to work on crafting their first home studio in a rental house on the outskirts of town . Before long , they started a leisurely recording session for their third full @-@ length project . Released in March 1987 , Locust Abortion Technician is one of the heaviest Butthole Surfers albums , and it is often considered their finest to date . Harnessing aspects of punk , heavy metal , and psychedelia , its unique sound produced a number of grinding , slower @-@ paced songs , arguably making it an early precursor of grunge . 
 = = = Evolution ( 1987 – 1991 ) = = = 
 Around the time of Locust Abortion Technician 's debut , the group bought a home in Driftwood , Texas , approximately 30 miles ( 48 km ) outside Austin . It was a ranch house built into the side of a hill , with 5 acres ( 20 @,@ 000 m2 ) of surrounding property . As with the rental home , the compound was turned into a de facto recording studio . They did not live together in the new house for long , though , with Coffey being the first to move out and get his own place . They all had separate residences by 1991 . 
 In early 1988 , Butthole Surfers were ready to record a new album and wanted to use a modern studio for the first time , choosing a state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art facility in Texas . The following sessions took only one week , as the band had been performing most of the material for years . The band opted to follow this album 's blueprint on future projects . In contrast , songs on their earlier recordings had undergone far more in @-@ studio development and experimentation . Pinkus has expressed the opinion that the later , better @-@ organized sessions stifled much of the spontaneous creativity that had propelled their earlier releases . 
 Hairway to Steven was issued in April , and marked a midway point between the band 's experimental roots , and the more accessible recordings that would follow . While half of the material is as extreme sounding as their earlier work , other songs are more conventional . This was the first Butthole Surfers album to make extensive use of acoustic guitar . Hairway to Steven did not have song titles when first released , and instead represented each track with an absurdist , often scatological , cartoon . The band traveled widely in support of the album over the next year , including a very successful tour of Europe ( helped in part by the influence of new UK distributor Blast First ) . Like their studio recordings , their live shows were beginning to lose much of their earlier chaos . 
 While touring during the winter of 1988 , Butthole Surfers used a portable DAT recorder to tape various concerts . The strongest of these recordings were packaged as Double Live , a limited edition double album released on vinyl and cassette in 1989 , and on CD the following year . This was the first release on the band 's Latino Buggerveil label . Though the album , as of spring 2007 , is out of print , its songs are available as free MP3 downloads on the band 's official website . Issued in response to widespread , for @-@ profit bootlegging of their live shows , it contained performances of songs from all of their previous studio albums and EPs . 
 Double Live was to be the last Butthole Surfers album to feature Nervosa , who left early in 1989 . Shortly after leaving , she was diagnosed with an aneurysm , and was forced to undergo brain surgery . She further began to suffer from strobe light @-@ induced seizures . In 1991 , Nervosa ( who has gone by Teresa Taylor since her retirement ) had a small role in Richard Linklater 's film <unk> . She was employed at the Texas School for the Blind and Visually Impaired as recently as 1995 . 
 Butthole Surfers did not seek to replace her at the time , and opted to continue as a quartet . Following a final EP for Touch and Go — 1989 's <unk> — the band left their longtime recording partners to sign with longtime supporter Terry Tolkin at Rough Trade Records who had also brought them to Touch and Go , for a reportedly generous one @-@ album deal . Prior to the new LP 's debut , Rough Trade talked the band into first releasing 1990s The Hurdy Gurdy Man , which previewed material from the coming release . The same year , Rough Trade issued Digital Dump by The <unk> , Haynes and Pinkus 's psychedelic house music side project . 
 piouhgd ( pronounced " <unk> " , as in " pissed off " ) was the band 's fifth full @-@ length studio album , and their first for Rough Trade . Released in April 1991 , it featured more electronic instrumentation , but was largely viewed as a disappointment in comparison to past recordings . Both Haynes and Leary have since expressed displeasure with the album . Regardless , the band was invited to be part of that summer 's inaugural Lollapalooza tour . Around this time Haynes collaborated with Ministry , contributing vocals on their 1991 single " Jesus Built My <unk> " , which was later included on 1992 's Psalm 69 : The Way to Succeed and the Way to Suck Eggs . 
 = = = Mainstream recognition ( 1991 – 1999 ) = = = 
 Rough Trade filed for bankruptcy in 1991 , but not before releasing Leary 's solo project , The History of Dogs . The following year , Butthole Surfers shocked many fans and critics by signing with the major label Capitol Records . Capitol immediately reissued piouhgd and paired the band with their first big @-@ name producer , John Paul Jones , best known as the bassist for Led Zeppelin . The fruit of their partnership , 1993 's Independent Worm Saloon , featured a more straightforward rock approach at Jones 's insistence . This paid off for Butthole Surfers , giving them their first minor radio hit , " Who Was in My Room Last Night ? " . It reached number 24 on Billboard 's Modern Rock Tracks singles chart , while the album peaked at number 124 on the Billboard 200 . Two of the new songs were featured on episodes of MTV 's Beavis and Butt @-@ head . Legendary guitarist and huge influence on Butthole Surfers , Helios Creed played guitar on two of the songs from the record , " The Annoying Song " and " Clean It Up " . 
 When Pinkus left in 1994 , the remaining members enlisted a series of fill @-@ in musicians , and continued to tour sporadically , even as all three pursued side projects . Haynes was working with Johnny Depp , Bill Carter , Sal <unk> , Flea , and others in a new group , P. In 1993 , Haynes played with this band in Los Angeles ' Viper Room , on the night the actor River Phoenix died of a drug overdose . Meanwhile , Leary was building a reputation as a skilled music producer , while Coffey set up his own record label Trance Syndicate . According to Leary and industry insiders , Haynes was increasingly dependent on hard drugs at this time , though Haynes has downplayed their concerns . 
 In 1995 , the band contributed a cover of the Underdog theme song to be included on the tribute album Saturday Morning : Cartoons ' Greatest Hits , produced by Ralph Sall for MCA . Later that year , Haynes 's side project , P , issued an eponymous LP on Capitol , while Coffey 's Trance Syndicate label released the first Butthole Surfers compilation album . Titled The Hole Truth ... and Nothing Butt , it was mostly live tracks recorded at different venues from 1985 to 1991 . In December , Butthole Surfers initiated what would become an extended legal battle with Touch and Go . At first they were seeking to increase their profits from the albums released by the label , because the label chose a strategy of non @-@ promotion . The case quickly became a fight for all ownership rights that dragged on for more than three years . 
 In 1996 , Capitol released Butthole Surfers ' Electriclarryland , which climbed to number 31 on the Billboard 200 ; the single " Pepper " topped the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . Their songs started appearing on the soundtracks of major Hollywood movies , including Baz Luhrmann 's Romeo + Juliet and John Carpenter 's Escape from L.A. Despite improved sales with their second Capitol album , the group 's relationship with the label was increasingly troubled . A planned 1998 project , After the Astronaut , was scrapped and Butthole Surfers acrimoniously split with their manager , Tom Bunch . In 1999 , Butthole Surfers won their lawsuit against Touch and Go . Despite the outcome , several of Butthole Surfers ' peers in the alternative music community , including Fugazi and Minor Threat lead singer Ian MacKaye , criticized them for having pursued the lawsuit . Haynes and others said they wouldn 't have initiated the proceedings if they felt Rusk 's dealings had been honorable . Rusk provided the band with indecipherable accounting statements . Rusk continued to insist his actions were honest even though the U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit found otherwise . With the case resolved , the band reissued Psychic ... Powerless ... Another Man 's Sac , Rembrandt Pussyhorse ( with the Cream Corn ... EP ) , Locust Abortion Technician , and Hairway to Steven on their Latino Buggerveil label . 
 = = = Recent years ( 2000 – present ) = = = 
 In 2000 , the band hired Nathan Calhoun as bassist . Having resolved their dispute with Capitol , Butthole Surfers re @-@ recorded most of After the Astronaut 's songs for Weird Revolution , on the Hollywood Records / <unk> Records imprint . The album was released in August 2001 , and reached number 130 on the Billboard 200 . It was their most electronic album to date , and the single " The Shame of Life " peaked at number 24 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . 
 Since then , the group has released two compilations on Latino Buggerveil : 2002 's Humpty Dumpty LSD is a compilation of studio outtakes , while 2003 's Butthole Surfers / Live <unk> , combines their first two Alternative Tentacles EPs . In 2004 , Haynes formed Gibby Haynes and His Problem , who released an eponymous album on <unk> Records later that year . While promoting the side project , Haynes indicated that another Butthole Surfers studio album was likely , and remarked that it would be " noisy " . However , no release date has been announced . 
 The band reunited with Jeff Pinkus and Teresa Nervosa for a tour of the east coast and Europe in Summer 2008 with the Paul Green School of Rock All Stars . It was the first time the reunited line up played together since 1989 . The group performed at the All Tomorrow 's Parties festival curated by Melvins and Mike Patton . The group 's appearance at All Tomorrow 's Parties led to a dispute with ATP founder and organizer Barry Hogan , who told a reporter for the Village Voice that Butthole Surfers ( along with Killing Joke and The Black Lips ) would never play the festival again . The reunited 86 @-@ 89 " classic " lineup continued to tour into 2009 , with stops in the United States & Canada . 
 In Austin , Texas during their last scheduled show for the North American / Canada 2008 @-@ 2009 tour on October 31 , 2009 Haynes said " We played our first show as the Butthole Surfers in Austin . And this may be our last . " Haynes has not yet clarified this statement . Recently , Paul Leary and King Coffey have both stated that the band will tour again if they can pull off another album . Currently , Paul Leary is producing the debut album from Carny . Butthole Surfers played two shows in Austin at Scoot Inn during Halloween 2010 . A report in The New York Times suggested that , even though Butthole Surfers had not released an album of new material since 2001 , the " songs are practically incidental to the spectacle " after seeing them perform along with psychedelic band <unk> in Brooklyn . 
 The line @-@ up of Haynes , Leary , Pinkus and Coffey did a 12 @-@ show tour of mostly western U.S. States and one appearance in Canada from August 26 , 2011 to September 11 , 2011 . 
 As of 2016 the group are on hiatus , with Leary saying : " I just don ’ t want to play live anymore . It ’ s not fun , I don ’ t like touring . That hour on stage is a whole lot of fun , but the other 23 hours off stage just fucking suck . " 
 = = Name = = 
 The band did not begin as Butthole Surfers , although they did have a song of that title , possibly an early version of 1984 's " Butthole Surfer " . This changed at their first paid concert , when an announcer forgot what the band was called and used the song title for the group 's name . They decided to keep the moniker , and have largely been billed as such ever since . Prior to that , Butthole Surfers performed under a different name at every live show . Early aliases included The Dick Clark Five , Nine cm Worm Makes Own Food , The Vodka Family Winstons , <unk> <unk> , Ed Asner Is Gay , Fred Astaire 's Asshole , The Right To Eat Fred Astaire 's Asshole , The <unk> Right To Eat Fred Astaire 's Asshole , and many others . 
 The name has long been a source of trouble for the band . Many clubs , newspapers , radio , and TV stations refuse to print or mention their full name , and instead opted to use " B.H. Surfers " , or other abbreviations . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 In the 1980s , Butthole Surfers earned a reputation for their disturbing live performances that were both decadent and violent . As a result , they began to attract a wide range of curiosity seekers within a few years of their debut , in addition to traditional fans of punk rock who had supported them from the beginning . A staged reproduction of the band 's live show was filmed for 1988 's Bar @-@ B @-@ Que Movie , a short Super 8 mm film movie directed by Alex Winter , who is best known as " Bill S. Preston , Esq . " from Bill & Ted 's Excellent Adventure . Bar @-@ B @-@ Que Movie is a spoof of 1974 's The Texas Chain Saw Massacre , and the film ends with a music video @-@ style performance of the song " Fast " ( a.k.a. " Fart Song " ) , featuring Haynes , Leary , Coffey , Nervosa , and Jeff Pinkus , as well as dancer Kathleen Lynch . The track displayed many of the band 's stage gimmicks , such as the burning cymbal , strobe lights , films , and smoke . 
 By the time Lynch left in 1989 , Butthole Surfers ' stage show had become more predictable , with previously random <unk> being done at the same point in each night 's performance . Teresa Nervosa quit for good around the same time , and King Coffey became the band 's sole percussionist . Strobe lights , smoke machines , and even Gibby Haynes ' burning cymbal are still part of the presentation , but the chaotic spontaneity of their 1980s performances is no longer on display . 
 = = = Appearance = = = 
 Lead vocalist and saxophonist Haynes ( who sometimes sang through a bullhorn ) , guitarist Paul Leary , dual drummers Coffey and Nervosa ( the latter briefly replaced by Cabbage ) , and whichever bassist happened to be filling in at the time , had a visual aspect . As with their music , their appearance was exceptionally non @-@ conventional in the early days , including sideways mohawks , dreadlocks , unnaturally colored hair , and the like . 
 Known for taking the stage at early concerts with hundreds of <unk> attached to his hair and clothes , Haynes would often strip throughout a show until he was down to his underwear , or less , by the end . Other attire included flasher @-@ style trench coats over his nakedness , ridiculously home @-@ styled wigs and cross @-@ dressing ; often enjoying a skirt made of an American flag and a large ' 60s torpedo @-@ style stuffed bra . At other times he would hide condoms full of stage blood in his clothes and repeatedly fall to the floor , appearing to bleed profusely . Some of Haynes ' other favorite tricks involved throwing handfuls of photocopied cockroach images into the crowd , rolls and rolls of toilet paper tossed across the audience , as well as filling an inverted cymbal with lighter fluid , setting it ( and sometimes his hand ) on fire , and repeatedly hitting it with a mallet . As previously mentioned he would sing through almost anything that would alter his voice , including toilet paper rolls and megaphones early on , which eventually evolved into " Gibby 's kit " , a.k.a. " <unk> , " a rack of vocal effects stacked as high as he could reach , before which he would often stand for the majority of the show in later performances . He also often utilized various foot switches which would be used to activate certain vocal effects , and when thought to be dancing during some performances he would actually be stepping on his various pedals . Adding to the spectacle were Coffey and Nervosa , who played in unison on stand @-@ up drum kits ; behind which they would collapse onto the floor and out of <unk> , to collect their breath and strength before rising just in time to play the next song . Finally , the whole band would often tear apart stuffed animals while on stage . 
 In 1986 , they first met Lynch ( a.k.a. Kathleen , a.k.a. Ta @-@ Da the Shit Lady ) , who was then working at a strip club called Sex World in New York City . Though never an official member , she became Butthole Surfers ' famous " naked dancer " , performing intermittently with them through 1989 . One show in Washington , D.C. with GWAR saw Kathleen take the stage to dance in nothing but gold body paint and antique wooden snow shoes . At another particularly wild concert in 1986 , Haynes and Lynch , by now completely bald , reportedly engaged in sexual intercourse while on stage , as Leary used a screwdriver to vandalize the club 's speakers . This came after only five songs , during which time Haynes had started a small fire . 
 = = = Equipment = = = 
 Butthole Surfers began to take the collection of visual equipment seriously following Coffey 's recruitment in 1983 , when he added a clear plastic drum fitted with a strobe light to their show . Shortly afterwards , the band purchased what was reported as several thousand dollars worth of stolen strobe lights at a bargain rate , and their visual equipment soon took up more space than their instruments . Smoke machines were later added . Equally memorable was the band 's propensity for projecting a variety of films behind them as they played , beginning with one 16 @-@ millimeter projector , before adding others . This set @-@ up allowed them to play a number of overlapping movies at the same time which were often strangely angled , upside down or played in reverse . Combined with the increasing number of strobe lights , the effect created a visually disorienting atmosphere , which occasionally caused epileptic seizures in audience members . The films ' subject matter were often as disturbing as the manner in which they were played ; with images of accidents , nuclear explosions , meat processing , spiders and scorpions stalking prey , gory drivers education films , and penis reconstruction surgery . Not all of the movies were horrific , and they often included nature , wildlife , and aquatic footage ; as well as a color negative of a Charlie 's Angels episode . 
 = = Band members = = 
 Though Butthole Surfers have been through numerous official and unofficial members since 1981 , current members Gibby Haynes , Paul Leary , and King Coffey have been together since 1983 . 
 = = = Timeline = = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Psychic ... Powerless ... Another Man 's Sac ( 1984 ) 
 Rembrandt Pussyhorse ( 1986 ) 
 Locust Abortion Technician ( 1987 ) 
 Hairway to Steven ( 1988 ) 
 piouhgd ( 1991 ) 
 Independent Worm Saloon ( 1993 ) 
 Electriclarryland ( 1996 ) 
 Weird Revolution ( 2001 ) 
 = Kevin Durant = 
 Kevin Wayne Durant ( born September 29 , 1988 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Golden State Warriors of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . Durant has won an NBA Most Valuable Player Award , four NBA scoring titles , the NBA Rookie of the Year Award , and an Olympic gold medal . He has also been selected to six All @-@ NBA teams and seven All @-@ Star teams . 
 Durant was a heavily recruited high school prospect . He played one season of college basketball for the University of Texas , where he won numerous year @-@ end awards and became the first ever freshman to be named Naismith College Player of the Year . In the 2007 NBA draft , he was selected with the second overall pick by the Seattle SuperSonics . After his rookie season , the team relocated to Oklahoma City and became the Thunder . Durant helped lead Oklahoma City to the 2012 NBA Finals , losing to the Miami Heat in five games . He played nine seasons for the Thunder organization before joining the Warriors in 2016 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Durant was born on September 29 , 1988 in Washington , D.C. to Wanda ( née Durant ) and Wayne Pratt . When Durant was an infant , his father deserted the family ; Wanda and Wayne eventually divorced , and Durant ’ s grandmother Barbara Davis helped raise him . By age 13 , his father re @-@ entered his life and traveled the country with him to basketball tournaments . Durant has one sister , Brianna , and two brothers , Tony and <unk> . Growing up , Durant wanted to play for his favorite team , the Toronto Raptors , which included his favorite player , Vince Carter . He played Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) basketball for several teams in the Maryland area and was teammates with future National Basketball Association ( NBA ) players Michael Beasley , Greivis Vasquez , and Ty Lawson , the former of whom Durant remains friends with to this day . During this time , he began wearing # 35 as his jersey number in honor of his AAU coach , Charles Craig , who was murdered at the age of 35 . 
 After playing two years of high school basketball at National Christian Academy and one year at Oak Hill Academy , Durant transferred to Montrose Christian School for his senior year , growing five inches before the start of the season and beginning the year with a height of six feet , seven inches . Prior to the start of the season , he committed to the University of Texas . At the conclusion of the year , he was named the Washington Post All @-@ Met Basketball Player of the Year , as well as the Most Valuable Player of the 2006 McDonald 's All @-@ American Game . He was widely regarded as the second @-@ best high school prospect of 2006 . 
 = = College career = = 
 For the 2006 – 07 college season , Durant averaged 25 @.@ 8 points , 11 @.@ 1 rebounds , and 1 @.@ 3 assists per game and led all freshmen in scoring . The Longhorns finished the year with a 25 – 10 record overall and a 12 – 4 record in conference . Awarded a fourth seed in the NCAA Tournament , Texas won their first round match @-@ up against New Mexico State but were upset in the second round by USC despite a 30 point and 9 rebound performance from Durant . Durant earned a number of season @-@ end awards and honors , including being named the Naismith College Player of the Year , becoming the first ever freshman to win the award . On April 11 , he officially declared for the 2007 NBA draft . His jersey was later retired by the Longhorns . 
 = = = College career statistics = = = 
 Cited from ESPN . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Seattle SuperSonics ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Durant was selected with the second overall pick in the 2007 NBA draft by the Seattle SuperSonics . In his first career game , he registered 18 points , 5 rebounds , and 3 steals against the Denver Nuggets . On November 16 , he made the first game @-@ winning shot of his career in a game against the Atlanta Hawks . At the conclusion of the season , he was named the NBA Rookie of the Year behind averages of 20 @.@ 3 points , 4 @.@ 4 rebounds , and 2 @.@ 4 assists per game . He joined Carmelo Anthony and LeBron James as the only teenagers in league history to average at least 20 points per game over an entire season . 
 = = = Oklahoma City Thunder ( 2008 – 2016 ) = = = 
 = = = = Breakthrough ( 2008 – 10 ) = = = = 
 Following Durant 's debut season , the SuperSonics relocated from Seattle to Oklahoma City , becoming the Thunder and switching to new colors blue , orange , and yellow . The team also drafted UCLA guard Russell Westbrook , who would form an All @-@ Star combination with Durant in later years . At the 2009 NBA All @-@ Star Weekend , Durant set a Rookie Challenge record with 46 points . By the conclusion of the year , he had raised his scoring average by five points from the prior season to 25 @.@ 3 points per game , and was considered a strong candidate for the Most Improved Player Award , eventually finishing third in the voting . 
 During the 2009 – 10 season , Durant was selected to his first NBA All @-@ Star Game . Behind his play , the Thunder improved their record by 27 wins from the previous year and defied expectations to make the playoffs . With a scoring average of 30 @.@ 1 points per game , he became the youngest @-@ ever NBA scoring champion and was selected to his first All @-@ NBA team . In his playoff debut , he scored 24 points in a Game 1 loss against the Los Angeles Lakers . Oklahoma City would go on to lose the series in six games , but the team 's performance led sports analysts to label them as an upcoming title contender . 
 = = = = Deep playoff runs ( 2010 – 13 ) = = = = 
 Prior to the start of the 2010 – 11 season , Durant announced via Twitter that he had signed a five @-@ year contract extension with the Thunder worth approximately $ 86 million . For the second consecutive year , he led the NBA in scoring , averaging 27 @.@ 7 points a game . Behind his leadership , the Thunder won 55 games and earned the fourth seed in the Western Conference . In the playoffs , Oklahoma City defeated the Denver Nuggets and Memphis Grizzlies en route to a Conference Finals match @-@ up versus the Dallas Mavericks , losing in five games . 
 On February 19 of the lockout @-@ shortened 2011 – 12 season , Durant recorded his first career 50 point game , scoring 51 points against the Denver Nuggets . At the All @-@ Star Game , he scored 36 points and was awarded his first NBA All @-@ Star Game Most Valuable Player Award . He finished the year with a scoring average of 28 points per game , representing his third straight scoring title . Behind his play , the Thunder won 47 games and entered the playoffs as the Western Conference 's second seed . In Game 1 of the first round against the Mavericks , Durant hit a game @-@ winner with 1 @.@ 5 seconds remaining . Oklahoma City would go on to defeat Dallas , the Lakers , and the San Antonio Spurs before losing to the Miami Heat in the Finals . For the series , Durant led all players with 30 @.@ 6 points per game , doing so on a 54 @.@ 8 shooting rate . 
 With a scoring average of 28 @.@ 1 points per game to finish the 2012 – 13 season , Durant failed to defend his scoring title ; however , with a 51 percent shooting rate , a 41 @.@ 6 percent three point shooting rate , and a 90 @.@ 5 free throw shooting rate , he became the youngest player in NBA history to join the 50 – 40 – 90 club . Finishing the year with a 60 – 22 record , Oklahoma City earned the first seed in the Western Conference . In the first round of the playoffs against the Houston Rockets , Russell Westbrook tore his meniscus , forcing him to miss the remainder of the postseason . Without Westbrook , Durant was given more responsibility , averaging a career @-@ high 30 @.@ 8 points per game throughout the playoffs , but Oklahoma City were eventually eliminated in the second round by the Memphis Grizzlies . 
 = = = = MVP season ( 2013 – 14 ) = = = = 
 In January of the 2013 – 14 season , Durant averaged 35 @.@ 9 points per game while scoring 30 or more points in 12 straight games , including a career @-@ high 54 points against the Golden State Warriors . The Thunder finished the season with 59 wins and Durant was voted the NBA Most Valuable Player behind averages of 32 points , 7 @.@ 4 rebounds , and 5 @.@ 5 assists per game . In the first round of the playoffs , he had a series of inconsistent performances against the Grizzlies and the Thunder fell behind 3 – 2 , prompting The Oklahoman to dub him " Mr. Unreliable " . He responded by scoring 36 points in a Game 6 victory . Oklahoma City eventually eliminated Memphis and the Los Angeles Clippers before losing to the eventual champion Spurs in the Conference Finals . 
 = = = = Injury @-@ riddled season ( 2014 – 15 ) = = = = 
 Prior to the start of the 2014 – 15 season , Durant was diagnosed with a Jones fracture in his right foot and was ruled out for six to eight weeks . He subsequently missed the first 17 games of the year , making his season debut for the Thunder on December 2 against the New Orleans Pelicans . On December 18 , he injured his ankle against the Golden State Warriors , returning to action on December 31 against the Phoenix Suns to score a season @-@ high 44 points . He then sprained his left big toe in late January . On February 22 , he was sidelined again after undergoing a minor procedure to help reduce pain and discomfort in his surgically repaired right foot , and on March 27 , he was officially ruled out for the rest of the season after deciding to undergo foot surgery . In just 27 games , he averaged 25 @.@ 4 points , 6 @.@ 6 rebounds and 4 @.@ 1 assists per game . 
 = = = = Final season with Oklahoma City ( 2015 – 16 ) = = = = 
 On October 30 , 2015 , in a double @-@ overtime win over the Orlando Magic , Durant and Russell Westbrook became the first pair of teammates to each score at least 40 points in a single game since Michael Jordan and Scottie Pippen accomplished the feat in 1996 . Durant had 43 and Westbrook had 48 as the Thunder defeated the Magic 139 – 136 . Durant missed six games between November 13 and November 22 with a hamstring injury , returning to action November 23 to score 27 points against the Utah Jazz . On December 10 , he recorded his seventh career triple @-@ double with 25 points , 12 rebounds and 10 assists in a 107 – 94 win over the Atlanta Hawks . On December 27 , Durant recorded 26 points and 10 assists in a 122 – 112 win over the Denver Nuggets . In that game , Durant and Westbrook became the first teammates to each have at least 25 points and 10 assists in a regulation game since Utah 's John Stockton ( 31 points , 11 assists ) and Karl Malone ( 27 points , 10 assists ) on February 2 , 1996 . On January 4 , he was named NBA Western Conference co @-@ Player of the Month for December alongside Westbrook . On January 26 , he scored a season @-@ high 44 points in a 128 – 122 overtime win over the New York Knicks . On February 2 , he was named NBA Western Conference Player of the Month for January . On March 22 , in a win over the Houston Rockets , Durant tied a career high by scoring at least 20 points for the 56th consecutive game . He passed that mark two days later with 20 points against the Utah Jazz . On April 9 , he scored 31 points against the Sacramento Kings , recording a mark of at least 20 points in 63 straight games , tying Kobe Bryant ( 2005 – 07 ) for the longest such streak . Two days later , he scored 34 points against the Los Angeles Lakers , setting the record at 64 straight games with at least 20 points . 
 The Thunder finished the regular season as the third seed in the Western Conference with a 55 – 27 record . In the first round of the playoffs , the Thunder faced the sixth @-@ seeded Dallas Mavericks , and in a Game 2 loss on April 18 , Durant scored 21 points but made just 7 @-@ of @-@ 33 shots in the worst postseason shooting performance , both by percentage and number of misses , of his career . Durant 's 26 misses were the most in his 716 @-@ game career , including the regular @-@ season and the playoffs . After defeating the Mavericks 4 – 1 , the Thunder moved on to face the San Antonio Spurs in the second round . In Game 4 of the series , Durant tied his playoff career high with 41 points to help the Thunder even the series at 2 – 2 . The Thunder defeated the Spurs 4 – 2 and advanced to the Western Conference Finals where they faced the Golden State Warriors . Despite going up 3 – 1 in the conference finals , the Thunder were defeated 4 – 3 by the Warriors to be eliminated from the playoffs . 
 = = = Golden State Warriors ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On July 4 , 2016 , Durant announced his intentions to sign with the Golden State Warriors . The move was received negatively by the public and NBA analysts , with many comparing the move to LeBron James ' 2010 off @-@ season departure from the Cleveland Cavaliers to join the Miami Heat . On July 7 , he was officially introduced by the Warriors organization and signed a two @-@ year , $ 54 @.@ 3 million contract , with a player option after the first year . 
 = = National team career = = 
 In February 2007 , Durant received an invitation to the United States national team training camp . Despite a strong performance , he was cut from Team USA when the roster was trimmed to its twelve @-@ player limit . Coach Mike Krzyzewski cited the experience of the remaining players as the deciding factor in making the cut . Durant was finally selected to the national team at the 2010 FIBA World Championship and became their leader as other All @-@ Stars were unavailable , a role he downplayed . At the tournament , he led Team USA to its first FIBA World Championship since 1994 , earning MVP honors in the process . His final averages for the competition were 22 @.@ 8 points , 6 @.@ 1 rebounds , 3 @.@ 1 assists , and 1 @.@ 4 steals per game over nine games . 
 At the 2012 Olympics , Durant set the record for total points scored in an Olympic basketball tournament . With averages of 19 @.@ 5 points , 5 @.@ 8 rebounds , 2 @.@ 6 assists , and 1 @.@ 6 steals per game , he helped the national team go undefeated en route to a gold medal . In the tournament 's final game , he led all scorers with 30 points . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 Standing 6 feet 9 inches tall ( 2 @.@ 06 m ) and weighing 240 pounds ( 109 kg ) , Durant plays mostly at the small forward position . His career averages are 27 @.@ 4 points , 7 rebounds , and 3 @.@ 7 assists per game . He has earned All @-@ NBA honors six times ( 2009 – 14 , 2016 ) and was voted Rookie of the Year in his debut season . He has won an MVP Award and finished second in the voting three times , a trend he has expressed frustration over . 
 Described as a " scoring prodigy " by John Hollinger , Durant regularly finishes as one of the NBA 's points leaders and has won the scoring title four times . A strong outside shooter , he is one of only seven members of the 50 – 40 – 90 club , and his 2013 campaign was called " one of the greatest shooting seasons in league history " by Grantland 's Zach Lowe . One of the biggest reason 's for Durant 's shooting prowess is his seven @-@ foot , four inch wingspan , which helps him get his shot off cleanly over most defenders . He is also a strong finisher at the rim , converting on 72 @.@ 2 percent of shots in the paint in 2012 . Early in his career , he was criticized for his slim build , defense , and passing . Over time , he grew as a playmaker , increasing his assist numbers every year from 2010 to 2014 . He also showed defensive improvement , with opponents averaging just <unk> points per isolation play against him in 2014 , the best success rate for defensive players who faced at least 100 isolations that season . 
 = = Off the court = = 
 Durant describes himself as a " high school kid " and enjoys playing video games in his spare time . He is very close with his mother , Wanda , a relationship that was detailed in the Lifetime movie The Real MVP : The Wanda Pratt Story . A Christian , Durant goes to chapel before every game and has religious tattoos on his stomach , wrist , and back . He owns several properties in the Oklahoma City area and listed his primary residence , located in the affluent Club Villa neighborhood , for sale for $ 1 @.@ 95 million in 2013 . That same year , he opened a restaurant , KD 's Southern Cuisine , in the <unk> neighborhood and became engaged to Monica Wright , a WNBA player . In 2016 , he was a credentialed photographer for the The Players ' Tribune at Super Bowl 50 . 
 Durant was formerly represented by agents Aaron Goodwin and Rob Pelinka . He left Pelinka in 2013 and signed with the Roc Nation group , headed by Jay @-@ Z. Durant has endorsement deals with Nike , Sprint , Gatorade , Panini , General Electric , and 2K Sports . In 2012 , he tried his hand at acting , appearing in the children 's film Thunderstruck . In 2013 , he earned $ 35 million , making him the fourth @-@ highest @-@ earning basketball player that year . In an interview with Sports Illustrated , Durant claimed that , despite his high earnings potential , " global marketing and all that stuff " does not interest him . 
 One of the most popular players in the league , Durant 's jersey regularly ranks as one of the NBA 's best @-@ selling and he is consistently one of the top All @-@ Star vote @-@ getters . He has developed a reputation for his kind demeanor ; in 2013 , Foot Locker released a series of commercials calling him the " nicest guy in the NBA " , and he has become a beloved figure in Oklahoma City , known for his " nice escapades " toward the Thunder 's staff . In 2014 , he partnered with KIND snacks and launched <unk> to show " being kind is not a sign of weakness . " 
 Throughout his career , Durant has participated in philanthropic causes . In 2013 , he pledged $ 1 million to the American Red Cross for the victims of the 2013 Moore tornado . His generosity inspired the Thunder and Nike to match his donation . He is also a spokesperson for the Washington , D.C. branch of P <unk> Records , a nationwide non @-@ profit after @-@ school music program . 
 = = NBA career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Playoffs = = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 = = = NBA = = = 
 Cited from Basketball Reference 's Kevin Durant page unless noted otherwise . 
 NBA Most Valuable Player : 2014 
 7x NBA All @-@ Star : 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 , 2015 , 2016 
 5x All @-@ NBA First Team : 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2013 , 2014 
 All @-@ NBA Second Team : 2016 
 4x NBA scoring champion : 2010 , 2011 , 2012 , 2014 
 NBA All @-@ Star Game MVP : 2012 
 NBA Rookie of the Year : 2008 
 All @-@ Rookie First Team : 2008 
 NBA Rookie Challenge MVP : 2009 
 = = = United States National Team = = = 
 Cited from USA Basketball 's Kevin Durant page unless noted otherwise . 
 Olympic gold medalist : 2012 
 FIBA World Championship gold medalist : 2010 
 FIBA World Championship Most Valuable Player : 2010 
 = = = College = = = 
 Naismith College Player of the Year : 2007 
 NABC Division I Player of the Year : 2007 
 AP Player of the Year : 2007 
 AP All @-@ America 1st Team : 2007 
 Oscar Robertson Trophy : 2007 
 Adolph Rupp Trophy : 2007 
 John R. Wooden Award : 2007 
 Big 12 Player of the Year : ( 2007 ) 
 USBWA National Freshman of the Year : ( 2007 ) 
 = HMS Dorsetshire ( 40 ) = 
 HMS Dorsetshire ( pennant number 40 ) was a heavy cruiser of the County class of the Royal Navy , named after the English county , now usually known as Dorset . The ship was a member of the Norfolk sub @-@ class , of which Norfolk was the only other unit ; the County class comprised a further eleven ships in two other sub @-@ classes . Dorsetshire was built at the Portsmouth Dockyard ; her keel was laid in September 1927 , she was launched in January 1929 , and was completed in September 1930 . Dorsetshire was armed with a main battery of eight 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) guns , and had a top speed of 31 @.@ 5 knots ( 58 @.@ 3 km / h ; 36 @.@ 2 mph ) . 
 Dorsetshire served initially in the Atlantic Fleet in the early 1930s , before moving to the Africa Station in 1933 , and then to the China Station in late 1935 . She remained there until the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , when she was transferred to the South Atlantic . There , she reinforced the search for the German raider Admiral Graf Spee . In late May 1941 , Dorsetshire took part in the final engagement with the battleship Bismarck , which ended when Dorsetshire was ordered to close and torpedo the crippled German battleship . She joined searches for the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper in August and the auxiliary cruiser Atlantis in November . 
 In March 1942 , Dorsetshire was transferred to the Eastern Fleet to support British forces in the recently opened Pacific Theatre of the war . At the end of the month , the Japanese fast carrier task force — the Kido Butai — launched the Indian Ocean raid . On 5 April , Japanese aircraft spotted Dorsetshire and her sister Cornwall while en route to Colombo ; a force of dive bombers then attacked the two ships and sank them . More than 1 @,@ 100 men were rescued the next day , out of a combined crew of over 1 @,@ 500 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Dorsetshire was at maximum 193 @.@ 67 metres ( 635 @.@ 4 ft ) long overall , and had a beam of 20 @.@ 12 m ( 66 @.@ 0 ft ) and a draught of 6 @.@ 37 m ( 20 @.@ 9 ft ) . She displaced 9 @,@ 925 to 9 @,@ 975 long tons ( 10 @,@ 084 to 10 @,@ 135 t ) at standard displacement , in compliance with the tonnage restriction of the Washington Naval Treaty , and up to 13 @,@ 425 long tons ( 13 @,@ 640 t ) at full combat load . Dorsetshire was propelled by four Parsons steam turbines that drove four screw propellers . Steam was provided by eight oil @-@ fired 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . The turbines were rated at 80 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 60 @,@ 000 kW ) and produced a top speed of 32 @.@ 3 kn ( 59 @.@ 8 km / h ; 37 @.@ 2 mph ) . The ship had a capacity of 3 @,@ 210 t ( 3 @,@ 160 long tons ; 3 @,@ 540 short tons ) of fuel oil as built , which provided a cruising radius of 12 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 23 @,@ 200 km ; 14 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 710 officers and enlisted men . 
 Dorsetshire was armed with a main battery of eight BL 8 @-@ inch ( 20 cm ) Mk VIII 50 @-@ cal. guns in four twin turrets , in two superfiring pairs forward and aft . As built , the cruiser had a secondary battery that included four 4 in ( 100 mm ) dual @-@ purpose guns ( DP ) in single mounts . She also carried four QF 2 @-@ pounder anti @-@ aircraft guns , also in single mounts . Her armament was rounded out by eight 21 in ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes mounted in two quadruple launchers . 
 In 1931 , <unk> began to carry a seaplane ; a catapult was installed the following year to allow her to launch the aircraft while underway . In 1937 , her secondary battery was overhauled . Eight QF 4 @-@ inch Mk V DP guns in twin turrets replaced the single mounts , and the single 2 @-@ pounders were replaced with eight twin @-@ mounts . During World War II , her anti @-@ aircraft battery was strengthened by the addition of nine 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) guns . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Dorsetshire was laid down at the Portsmouth Dockyard on 21 September 1927 and was launched on 21 January 1929 . After completing fitting @-@ out work on 30 September 1930 she was commissioned into the Royal Navy . Upon commissioning , Dorsetshire became the flagship of the 2nd Cruiser Squadron . In 1931 , she was part of the Atlantic Fleet during the Invergordon Mutiny . During the incident , some of her men initially refused to assemble for duty but after an hour and a half , the ship 's officers had restored order and no further unrest troubled Dorsetshire during the mutiny . From 1933 – 1935 , she served on the Africa Station as the flagship for the squadron ; she was replaced by Amphion . By September 1935 , Dorsetshire was assigned to the China Station . From 1 – 4 February 1937 , Dorsetshire , the aircraft carrier Hermes and the cruiser Cumberland participated in an exercise to test the defences of Singapore against a hypothetical Japanese attack . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 At the start of World War II in September 1939 , Dorsetshire was still on the China Station . In October , Dorsetshire — with other Royal Navy ships — was sent to South American waters in pursuit of the German heavy cruiser Admiral Graf Spee , which was attacking British merchant traffic in the area . Dorsetshire was assigned with her sister ship Cornwall and the aircraft carrier Eagle . Dorsetshire had just arrived in Simonstown , South Africa , from Colombo on 9 December , with orders to proceed to Tristan da Cunha and then to Port Stanley in the Falkland Islands to relieve Exeter . After departing Simonstown she received the order to join the hunt for Admiral Graf Spee . She left South Africa on 13 December in company with the cruiser Shropshire and was in transit on 17 December when the Germans scuttled Admiral Graf Spee following the Battle of the River Plate . 
 Exeter had been badly damaged in the battle with Admiral Graf Spee , and Dorsetshire escorted her back to Britain in January 1940 , before returning to South American waters to search for German supply ships . On 11 February , her reconnaissance aircraft spotted the German supply freighter Wakama twelve miles off the coast of Brazil , which was promptly scuttled by her crew . Dorsetshire arrived on the scene shortly thereafter , picked up ten officers and thirty @-@ five crewmen and sank Wakama to prevent her from being a navigational hazard . The following month , the President of Panama , Augusto Samuel Boyd , sent a formal complaint to the British government protesting against Dorsetshire 's violation of the Pan @-@ American Security Zone in the Wakama incident . 
 In May , Dorsetshire underwent a short refit in Simonstown , before returning to Britain for a more thorough overhaul . On 23 June , she set out from Freetown to watch the French battleship Richelieu , which left Dakar for Casablanca two days later . While en route , Dorsetshire rendezvoused with the aircraft carrier Hermes off Dakar . Richelieu was ordered to return to Dakar by Admiral François Darlan later that day and she arrived on 27 June . Dorsetshire continued to monitor the French Navy off Dakar and on 3 July , the French submarines Le Héros and Le Glorieux attempted to intercept her . Dorsetshire was able to evade their attacks through high @-@ speed manoeuvres . On 5 July , Hermes and the Australian cruiser HMAS Australia joined her there . On 7 July , the squadron was ordered to issue an ultimatum to the French fleet , to either surrender and be interned under British control or to scuttle their ships ; the French refused , so a fast sloop was sent in to drop depth charges under the stern of Richelieu to disable her screws . 
 On 4 September , she was dry @-@ docked at Durban and on the 20th she arrived back in Simonstown . She sailed for Sierra Leone the next day . Operating in the Indian Ocean , on 18 November she bombarded Zante in Italian Somaliland . On 18 December she departed to join the search for the heavy cruiser Admiral Scheer , which had recently sunk the British refrigerator ship Duquesa in the South Atlantic . The British were unsuccessful in their search and Admiral Scheer remained at large . 
 = = = = Bismarck = = = = 
 In late May 1941 , Dorsetshire was one of the ships deployed to hunt the German battleship Bismarck in the North Atlantic . Dorsetshire had been escorting a convoy to Sierra Leone on 26 May , when she received the order to leave the convoy and join the search for Bismarck ; she was some 360 nautical miles ( 670 km ; 410 mi ) south of Bismarck 's location . Dorsetshire steamed at top speed , though heavy seas later in the night forced her to reduce to 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) and later to 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . By 08 : 33 , Dorsetshire encountered the destroyer Cossack , which had been engaging Bismarck throughout the night . The German battleship 's gun flashes could be seen , only six miles away , by 08 : 50 . 
 Shortly thereafter , Dorsetshire took part in the Bismarck 's last battle ; after the battleships HMS Rodney and King George V neutralised Bismarck 's main battery early in the engagement , Dorsetshire and other warships — including her sister Norfolk — closed in to join the attack . Dorsetshire opened fire at a range of 20 @,@ 000 yards ( 18 @,@ 000 m ) but poor visibility forced her to check her fire for lengthy periods . In the course of the engagement , she fired 254 shells from her main battery . In the final moments of the battle , she was ordered to move closer and torpedo Bismarck and fired three torpedoes , two of which hit the crippled battleship . The Germans had by this time detonated scuttling charges , which with the damage inflicted by the British , caused Bismarck to rapidly sink at 10 : 40 . 
 Admiral John Tovey , the British commander , ordered Dorsetshire and the destroyer Maori to pick up survivors . A reported U @-@ boat sighting forced the two ships to break off the rescue effort , after picking up only 110 men : 85 aboard Dorsetshire and 25 aboard Maori . Rodney , King George V and the destroyers Sikh , Zulu and Cossack had meanwhile begun to steam north @-@ west to return to Scapa Flow . After abandoning the rescue effort , Dorsetshire and Maori caught up with the rest of the fleet shortly after 12 : 00 . Late that night , as the fleet steamed off Britain , Dorsetshire was detached to stop in the Tyne . She had suffered no casualties in the battle with Bismarck . 
 = = = = Deployment to South Africa and the Indian Ocean = = = = 
 In late August , Dorsetshire participated in the search for the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper . Dorsetshire , Eagle and the light cruiser Newcastle left Freetown on 29 August , though they were unable to locate the German raider . On 4 November , Dorsetshire and the auxiliary cruiser Canton , were sent to investigate reports of a German surface raider in the South Atlantic but neither ship found anything . In November – December , WS @-@ 24 , a convoy of 10 troop transport ships , steamed out from Halifax , Canada en route to Basra , Iraq . After arriving in Cape Town on 9 December , Dorsetshire took over the escort duties and the convoy was diverted to Bombay , where it arrived on 24 December . 
 Dorsetshire was deployed in November , to join the search for the German commerce raider Atlantis , that had been attacking Allied shipping off the coast of Africa . Admiral Algernon Willis formed Task Force 3 , with Dorsetshire and HMS Devonshire to patrol likely refuelling locations for Atlantis . On 1 December , Dorsetshire intercepted the German supply ship Python , based on Ultra intelligence . The German ship was refuelling a pair of U @-@ boats — U @-@ A and U @-@ 68 — in the South Atlantic . The U @-@ boats dived while Python tried to flee . U @-@ A fired five torpedoes at Dorsetshire but all missed her due to her evasive manoeuvres . Dorsetshire fired a salvo to stop Python and the latter 's crew abandoned the ship , after detonating scuttling charges . Dorsetshire left the Germans in their boats , since the U @-@ boats still presented too much of a threat for the British to pick up the Germans . 
 = = = = Loss = = = = 
 In 1942 , Dorsetshire , under the command of Augustus Agar , was assigned to the Eastern Fleet in the Indian Ocean . In March , Dorsetshire was assigned to Force A , which was commanded by Admiral James Somerville , with the battleship Warspite and the carriers Indomitable and Formidable . Somerville received reports of an impending Japanese attack in the Indian Ocean — the Indian Ocean raid — and so he put his fleet to sea on 31 March . Having not encountered any hostile forces by 4 April , he withdrew to refuel . Dorsetshire and her sister ship Cornwall were sent to Colombo to replenish their fuel . 
 The next day , she and Cornwall were spotted by reconnaissance aircraft from the heavy cruiser Tone . The two British cruisers were attacked by a force of fifty @-@ three Aichi D3A Val dive bombers 320 km ( 200 mi ) southwest of Ceylon . In the span of about eight minutes , Dorsetshire was hit by ten 250 lb ( 110 kg ) and 550 lb ( 250 kg ) bombs and several near misses ; she sank stern first at about 13 : 50 . One of the bombs detonated an ammunition magazine and contributed to her rapid sinking . Cornwall was hit eight times and sank bow first about ten minutes later . Between the two ships , 1 @,@ 122 men out of a total of 1 @,@ 546 were picked up by the cruiser Enterprise and the destroyers Paladin and Panther the next day . 
 = = Acclaimed model = = 
 Between 1947 and 1949 , renowned marine model maker Norman A. Ough made a model depicting HMS Dorsetshire undergoing refit in No. 14 Dry Dock , Portsmouth . The model is held by the Imperial War Museum . 
 = Sue Ellen Ewing = 
 Sue Ellen Ewing ( maiden name Shepard ) is a fictional character and one of the female leads in the CBS primetime soap opera Dallas and its continuation series . Sue Ellen is portrayed by actress Linda Gray , and has appeared on the show since its pilot episode , first broadcast on April 2 , 1978 . Dallas follows the trials of the wealthy Ewing family in the city of Dallas , Texas , into which Sue Ellen married when she wed the notoriously evil J. R. Ewing . Gray played Sue Ellen until the twelfth season of Dallas , when her character finally leaves Texas after beating J.R. at his own game , seen in the episode " Reel Life " . However , Gray later returned for the series finale " Conundrum Part II " , the subsequent Dallas <unk> ( " J.R. Returns " and " War of the Ewings " ) , and the reunion special entitled Dallas Reunion : The Return to Southfork , which aired in 2004 , and reunited her with former castmates . 
 Sue Ellen 's storylines in the first season focus on the character 's bout with alcohol and her slowly deteriorating relationship with her husband . The final episode of the season focused on the birth of her son with J.R. , John Ross Ewing III . While her relationship with J.R. is not always harmonious , it 's a significant aspect of her overall character . As the series progressed , Sue Ellen came into her own as an individual character . The actress has said of her character 's personality : " I never wanted her to be boring . She was never boring before – she started out kind of boring , but I think that 's the kiss of death because people will expect her to be interesting . " Gray later described Sue Ellen as being , " one of the most interesting characters on TV in the 1980s . She was the original Desperate Housewife . She led the way for all those girls . " 
 For her work as Sue Ellen , Gray was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the category " Best Actress in a Drama Series " in 1981 ( Barbara Bel Geddes who played Miss Ellie Ewing was also nominated in that category for Dallas that year ) . Gray was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award in both 1980 and 1981 in the category of " Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series – Drama " respectively . In 2010 , TNT ( sister company to Warner Bros. Television , the current copyright owners of the series ) announced they were producing a new , updated Dallas series . It is a continuation of the original series and will primarily center around Sue Ellen and J.R. ' s son John Ross Ewing III , and Bobby and Pamela 's son Christopher Ewing , though various stars of the original series will be reprising their roles . Gray agreed to return to the new series and once again assumed the role of Sue Ellen . 
 = = Character portrayal and development = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 When Gray originally tested for Dallas , the role of Sue Ellen was merely that of a background character . The actress recounts that the part was a " mere walk @-@ on " and there hadn 't been any need for a formal audition . In fact , Gray had to do an impromptu audition over the telephone because the role was not considered important enough to bring in another actor to test for the part , though the actress later stated that Newhart innkeeper Mary <unk> was also considered to play the character while the producers were casting the show . In an interview with TV Guide , Gray confirmed : " She [ <unk> ] had the part . Victoria Principal was a brunette , and so was I , and Mary was a blonde , and [ the producers ] wanted that [ visual ] contrast . But the casting director [ who had only recently tapped me to play a transsexual on All That Glitters ] kept bugging them until they finally said , ' OK , we 'll read her . ' " Once the show was picked up for a full season , Gray and fellow actor Steve Kanaly ( Ray Krebbs ) were both upgraded to starring roles . 
 After staying with the show for eight seasons , Gray ran into trouble when she requested the producers of the show to adjust her contract to allow her to direct , as did the contracts of male co @-@ stars Duffy and Hagman . The request initially led to producers ' firing the actress from the serial , though the decision was later reversed when Dallas star Larry Hagman threatened to quit the show unless Gray were rehired . Gray stated in an interview with TV Guide , " The producers said , ' But you 're doing so well . ' I thought , ' Oh , look out ! I 'm on the warpath now . ' It was a struggle , though , because it was a man 's show . And they fired me . When I finally told Larry , he went with me into the office and said , ' If she doesn 't come back , I don 't come back . I can 't be playing J.R. Ewing without Sue Ellen . ' He was very loyal and , honestly , a very smart businessman . He knew that truly , it was a huge relationship to the show . " We 'll drink to that ! " 
 The actress also recounted the story to Alan Mercer of Dazzling <unk> , saying : " I told them I don 't want any more money . I just want to direct one episode in the next two year cycle . I didn 't think that was so horrible . I didn 't want to direct six episodes . They still said no . Basically , I was fired at the end of year eight . So , I said good @-@ bye , and Larry said ' see you next season . ' I told him I won 't be coming back . He said , " What ! ? ! " I told him , " They fired me because I want to direct one episode , and if that 's their stance , I 'm out of here . " He was stunned and he said if you go I go . He denies that to this day . He really went to bat for me . " Gray remained a member of the principal cast until she left the show in its twelfth season . Her departure came as a surprise , but her publicist said that after eleven years on the show , she wished to pursue other things . 
 In 2010 , TNT ( sister company to Warner Bros. Television , the current copyright owners of the series ) announced they were producing a continuation Dallas . The new series will primarily center around Sue Ellen and J.R. ' s son John Ross Ewing III , and Bobby Ewing 's adopted son Christopher Ewing , though various stars of the original series will be reprising their roles . Gray has agreed to return to the new series , once again to play Sue Ellen . 
 = = = Characterization = = = 
 In 1979 , Gray spoke with TV Guide ( Canada ) and recounted : " At first , they had no idea what to do with the part . Sue Ellen 's lines ran to ' More coffee , darling ? ' and ' I have a headache . ' Victoria Principal and Patrick Duffy were the goody @-@ goodies . Jim Davis and Barbara Bel Geddes were parental . Hagman was the villain . And I was the redhead on the couch . " However , Gray was upgraded to a starring role once Dallas was picked up for a full season following the five episode arc miniseries . The actress later stated that on @-@ screen husband Larry Hagman had criticized one of her performances early on during the start of the series , and called it " terrible " , though he denied it . She joked , " I 'm sorry . He said it to me loud and clear , and made me feel terrible , and it started one of our first fights on the way back [ to the motel where everyone was staying ] . I swear to you — he devastated me . Then , years later , he said , ' Oh , I didn 't mean that . ' I could have killed him ! " 
 Throughout the serial , Sue Ellen often suffered emotional abuse from her husband J.R. , who was the primary antagonist of the show . Linda Gray described Sue Ellen as being , " one of the most interesting characters on TV in the 1980s . She was the original Desperate Housewife . She led the way for all those girls . " She also added , " The more successful we became , the more glamorous and fashionable the clothes became . We set fashion trends in the 80s . Those shoulder pads did get a bit wild . They had to make doors bigger in the end . " In an interview with The Telegraph , she said : " It was kind of exciting . I played this neurotic , psychotic , alcoholic weirdo . But I still say she was the most interesting female on television in the eighties . " The character of Sue Ellen has gone through an addiction to alcohol , which she returned to every time something went extremely wrong with her life . Gray was particularly fond of doing these scenes . She commented , 
 I loved my drunk scenes . I know that may sound very strange to people ! I got to just let go and just do a down and dirty version of Sue Ellen . It was like , ' Just let me at it and roll those cameras ' . I remember being in makeup for 20 minutes , which normally took two hours . They put some kind of gel in my hair and some very light makeup and I loved it . I said , " Just let me go , please don 't edit me , just let me go . ' " She added , " It was just one of those charming , charming , charming times where I just got to blow it out . I just wanted Sue Ellen to be raw unlike any other time in her life , where she was the victim and she was this and she was that ; J.R. Ewing would do something and she would react , he would do something and she would have an affair or drink or whatever . This was just like , ' Let me go . Let Sue Ellen out of that <unk> 
 In an interview with Digital Spy , Gray said of her character 's persona : 
 I never wanted her to be boring . She was never boring before – she started out kind of boring , but I think that 's the kiss of death because people will expect her to be interesting . By interesting , that doesn 't mean she 's drunk . I had to do a lot of thinking about what we would do with her . Where would she be now ? I did a lot of homework finding out where she would be and what Texas women are like now . What has she gone through in her life ? What has she come to grips with ? What does she like about herself ? What doesn 't she like about herself ? What kind of impact is she going to make on her life , on John Ross 's life , on her future ? Who is she ? 
 = = Character Arc = = 
 = = = Original Series = = = 
 When the 20 @-@ year @-@ old Sue Ellen Shepard wins the title of Miss Texas in 1967 , she meets her future husband , J.R. Ewing , who is a judge for the pageant . After a courtship , they marry on February 15 , 1970 , but after several years , their marriage deteriorates , due in large part to J.R. ' s numerous extramarital affairs and his disinterest in her . In 1978 , a lonely Sue Ellen begins an affair with J.R. ' s nemesis , Cliff Barnes . Shortly thereafter , Sue Ellen finds herself pregnant and believes that Cliff is the father because she and J.R. had been married for years without conceiving , and by this point , they barely had marital relations . Sue Ellen believes she loves Cliff , but is unable to leave J.R. To console herself , she starts drinking heavily during her pregnancy . Worried about the safety of her unborn child , J.R. has Sue Ellen committed to a sanitarium in 1979 , to gain sobriety . However , Sue Ellen manages to continue drinking , and escapes from the sanitarium drunk and crashes a car . While in the hospital , she gives birth to a son , John Ross Ewing III . After her son 's birth , Sue Ellen becomes severely depressed and shows no interest in the child . 
 She then begins an affair with rodeo cowboy Dusty Farlow , and enters into psychiatric treatment . Eventually , she gains the strength to connect with her child . After Cliff sues for paternity of the baby , tests reveal that J.R. is in fact the biological father . Sue Ellen , meanwhile , makes plans to leave J.R. for Dusty ; however , Dusty is reportedly killed in a plane crash , and this news sends Sue Ellen back to the bottle . In 1981 , Sue Ellen learns that Dusty is in fact alive , but has been horribly crippled as a result of the plane crash . Nonetheless , Sue Ellen remains dedicated to her love for him , and leaves J.R. , taking their son with her to live at the Southern Cross Ranch , the home of Dusty 's father , Clayton Farlow . Sue Ellen divorces J.R. and gains custody of John Ross , but her relationship with Dusty ends when he regains the use of his legs and decides to resume his life 's passion as a rodeo cowboy . 
 Sue Ellen then moves back to Dallas with her son and enters into another short @-@ lived romance with J.R. ' s enemy , Cliff Barnes . When J.R. gets wind of this , he becomes jealous and courts Sue Ellen himself in an effort to win back custody of his son , and , in the process , obtain his voting shares in Ewing Oil , the family oil company . In 1982 , J.R. and Sue Ellen remarry , but their happiness is short @-@ lived as J.R. quickly returns to his philandering ways and Sue Ellen catches him in bed with oil tycoon Holly Harwood . However , Sue Ellen decides to remain married to J.R. , in name only , but moves out of his bedroom . In 1983 , Sue Ellen enters into an affair with college student , Peter Richards , who had been her son 's camp counselor . In 1984 , Sue Ellen miscarries a child , but doesn 't know whether J.R. or Peter is the father . When J.R. learns of Sue Ellen 's affair , he arranges for Peter to be arrested on trumped @-@ up drug charges and blackmails him to leave Dallas for good . 
 In 1986 , Sue Ellen goes into business by buying a partnership interest in a lingerie company . She successfully lures J.R. ' s latest mistress , Mandy Winger , away from J.R. by offering her a promising career as model and then as an actress . Sue Ellen and J.R. enjoy a brief reconciliation , however , J.R. ' s desire to regain Ewing Oil by having an affair with Kimberly <unk> destroys what is left of their marriage . Sue Ellen decides to leave J.R. for good , but he manages to take John Ross away and put him into hiding in a boarding school . Sue Ellen and her new lover , Nicholas Pearce , confront J.R. at his penthouse and demand he tell them where he hid John Ross . A scuffle breaks out between J.R. and Nicholas , which results in Nicholas ' being thrown over the balcony and killed . In response , Sue Ellen shoots J.R. three times ; however , he lives and neither she nor J.R. is indicted for any crimes . 
 In 1988 , Sue Ellen divorces J.R. for a second time . Deciding to get revenge on him , she decides to make a feature film exposé on her life with J.R. , with the help of screenwriter Don Lockwood . She and Don soon become romantically involved and , in 1989 , Sue Ellen moves to London with Lockwood , but not before blackmailing J.R. by threatening to release the film , which would destroy his reputation . In 1991 , J.R. learns that Sue Ellen and Don Lockwood have married . John Ross , her son by J.R. , later joins her and Don in London . Sue Ellen appears in the final episode of the series during J.R. ' s dream in which she is a successful actress married to her previous love , Nicholas Pearce . In 1996 , when her marriage to Don is in trouble , Sue Ellen returns to Dallas with her son , after J.R. was reportedly killed in a car accident . When J.R. is discovered alive , Sue Ellen reconciles with him . However , upon learning that J.R. faked his death to manipulate his family , Sue Ellen becomes partners with Bobby in the family company , Ewing Oil , to spite J.R. In the 1998 Sue Ellen becomes ceo of Ewing Oil 
 = = = Dallas ( 2012 TV series ) = = = 
 Sue Ellen has become a powerful woman in Dallas , leading successful fundraising campaigns and making connections with influential Texans . Her success has led her to run for Governor of Texas , with campaign backers already lining up to support her . But despite this success , Sue Ellen harbors deep regret for her mistakes as a mother raising John Ross and will do anything to make things right for him . Upon seeing J.R. for the first time in years , there is a brief moment of romantic tension and nostalgia . However , Sue Ellen becomes wary of J.R. ' s claims of having changed when Cliff Barnes returns to town . Then when a colleague and occasional lover of John Ross 's , Veronica Martinez , is pushed off a balcony and killed , Sue Ellen bribes the medical examiner into ruling the death a suicide and finds herself looking for support from Harris Ryland , Ann 's ex @-@ husband . Harris later plans to use Sue Ellen 's sure win to his advantage and desiring to run a clean office , Sue Ellen seeks Ann 's help who later gets a recording of Harris admitting to his crimes and placing him into a spot of submission . 
 In the second season , Harris again gains the upper hand when he offers Ann information about their kidnapped daughter in exchange for the tape , Sue Ellen tells Ann to go ahead . However , her secret bribery comes out on the eve of the election and she loses the election and twelve donors towards her foundation . Facing the possibility of jail and the overall humiliation and disgrace , she pours herself a glass of wine ( in the original series , her favorite tipple was Vodka ) . Yet , before she can drink it J.R. and John Ross arrive , with J.R. vowing to make things right by her and reminding her that she is a strong woman . After they leave she dumps out the wine and instead seeks comfort in Ann . J.R. through means of blackmail is able to get the charges dropped and after thanking him , Sue Ellen invites him in for tea , a spark of their past romance being seemingly reignited . Later she comes to the aid of John Ross and helps him in securing control of the newly established Ewing Energies , by pushing his ex @-@ girlfriend Elena Ramos out of the company . Despite pleas from Bobby , Ann , and Christopher she does so . 
 Then when J.R. is murdered , Sue Ellen becomes heart broken and relapses after his memorial service . She reads a letter he wrote to her and spends the night alone in his room . At his funeral , she reads the letter aloud in which J.R. declares his undying love to Sue Ellen and asks her for another chance . Heartbroken , Sue Ellen reveals her own unresolved feelings for J.R. and declares that had he not been murdered she would have happily reunited with him . She then collapses at his casket and says he was the love of her life . 
 Soon after , Sue Ellen 's alcoholism returns , and her struggles with it become a recurring theme in the third season , putting a strain on her relationship with her son . Eventually she learns the truth about the circumstances surrounding J.R 's death , and is angered at both Bobby and Bum that she had been kept in the dark about his illness and his final plan , although she makes amends . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For her work as Sue Ellen , Gray was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the category " Best Actress in a Drama Series " in 1981 ( Barbara Bel Geddes who played Miss Ellie Ewing was also nominated in that category for Dallas that year ) . Gray was also nominated for a Golden Globe Award in both 1980 and 1981 in the category of " Best Performance by an Actress in a Television Series - Drama " respectively . The character of Sue Ellen was well received by television critics . The Biography Channel said , " Who could ever forget Dallas with the gin @-@ swilling Sue Ellen Ewing , replete with shoulder pads long before Dynasty , staggering around Southfork Ranch with a permanently tearful expression as she suffered the brunt of J.R. Ewing 's evil ways ? " The Boulevard Magazine said , 
 It may be 2009 and seventeen years since the primetime drama Dallas went off the air , but memories of the Ewing family still linger . Corruption and betrayal , lies , greed , affairs and scandal – all were just part of another day at the Southfork Ranch . At the center of it all was one of our favorite Ewings , the person we couldn 't help but root for each week as she drank and slept her way through one ordeal after another . This , of course , was the tortured and ( sometimes ) villainous Sue Ellen Shepard Ewing , former Texas beauty queen and trophy wife of the womanizing rogue J.R. Ewing , played to perfection by actress Linda Gray . 
 = United States v. Kagama = 
 United States v. Kagama , 118 U.S. 375 ( 1886 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case that upheld the constitutionality of the Major Crimes Act of 1885 . This Congressional act gave the federal courts jurisdiction in certain cases of Indian @-@ on @-@ Indian crimes , even if the crimes were committed on an Indian reservation . Kagama , a Yurok Native American ( Indian ) accused of murder , was selected as a test case by the Department of Justice to test the constitutionality of the Act . 
 The importance of the ruling in this case was that it tested the constitutionality of the Act and confirmed Congress ' authority over Indian affairs . Plenary power over Indian tribes , supposedly granted to the U.S. Congress by the Commerce Clause of the Constitution , was not deemed necessary to support the Supreme Court in this decision ; instead , the Court found the power in the tribes ' status as dependent domestic nations . This allowed Congress to pass the Dawes Act the following year . The case has been criticized by legal scholars as drawing on powers that are not granted to Congress by the Constitution . It remains good law , despite that criticism . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Crow Dog and the Major Crimes Act of 1885 = = = 
