 A large number of civilian prisoners had been detained by the Japanese on Luzon , mostly in internment camps scattered throughout the island . The largest of these was located on the campus of the Agricultural College of the Philippines at Los Baños , some forty miles ( 64 km ) south @-@ east of Manila . General Douglas MacArthur had tasked the 11th Airborne Division with rescuing the Los Baños internees on 3 February , but the division 's ongoing combat operations around the Genko Line left it unable to divert any resources at that time . All that could be accomplished during February was to gather information , primarily through liaison with the guerilla groups operating in Southern Luzon and around Los Baños . Maj. Gen. Swing and his command staff were briefed daily by the officer working with the guerilla groups , Major Vanderpool . From the guerillas and a few civilians that had escaped the camp , Vanderpool established that it was surrounded by two barbed @-@ wire fences approximately six feet tall . Several guard towers and bunkers dotted its perimeter , each containing at least two guards . Prisoners left each morning under armed guard to gather food supplies and firewood from a nearby town . Vanderpool was informed that the camp 's population consisted of American civilians in three distinct groups : Protestant missionaries and their families ; Roman Catholic nuns and priests ; and professional workers such as doctors and engineers , and their families . The latter group included several hundred women and children . While all the inmates appeared to be in good health , many had become weak from food rationing . 
 On 20 February , Maj. Gen. Swing was finally able to release sufficient troops for a raid on the Los Baños camp , and a four @-@ phase plan was devised by Major Vanderpool and the divisional staff officers . The divisional reconnaissance platoon would travel across a nearby lake and move to the outskirts of the camp , securing a large adjacent field as the drop zone for a company of paratroopers . Having landed , the paratroopers would eliminate Japanese resistance in the area , secure the camp , and prepare for its evacuation . Fifty @-@ four amphibious Amtracs would transport two additional companies of paratroopers to the lake shore , where a beachhead would be established while the Amtracs continued to the camp to evacuate its occupants . Simultaneously , a task force consisting of a reinforced infantry battalion , two battalions of heavy artillery and a tank destroyer battalion would advance down Highway 1 towards Los Baños to interdict any Japanese attempts to interfere . 
 Assisted by a group of guerrillas , on the night of 21 February the divisional reconnaissance platoon made their way to the lake and collected ten canoes . Despite navigational difficulties , the platoon came ashore near Los Baños at 02 : 00 the following morning , and after securing the paratroopers ' drop zone , concealed themselves in the jungle near the camp . During the afternoon B Company of the 1st Battalion , 511th PIR was transferred to the airfield from which they would be deployed , while the rest of the battalion rendezvoused with the <unk> convoy . At 07 : 00 on the morning of 23 February , B Company took off in ten C @-@ 47 Skytrain transport aircraft , arriving over their drop zone shortly afterwards . As the first paratroopers landed , the reconnaissance platoon and the supporting guerilla fighters opened fire on the camp 's defences , using Bazooka rounds to penetrate the concrete pillboxes , and then entered the camp to engage its garrison . The paratroopers soon joined the battle , and by 07 : 30 the Japanese guards had been overcome and the internees were being rounded up and readied for evacuation . At the lakeshore the 511th 's other two companies had secured their beachhead , and the convoy of Amtracs reached the camp without incident . Priority during loading was given to the women , children and wounded ; some of the able @-@ bodied men walked alongside the Amtracs as they returned to the beach . The first evacuation convoy left the camp at approximately 10 : 00 , with B Company , the reconnaissance platoon and the guerrillas remaining behind to provide a rearguard . By 11 : 30 all of the civilians had been evacuated , and at 13 : 00 the <unk> convoy returned for the rearguard , with the last paratroopers leaving the beach at approximately 15 : 00 . Meanwhile , on Highway 1 , the taskforce that had been deployed to protect the operation met heavy Japanese resistance and suffered several casualties , but was able to block Japanese forces that advanced on the camp , before retreating back to American lines . The raid had been a complete success , liberating 2 @,@ 147 civilians . 
 = = = Southern Luzon and Aparri = = = 
 On the day that the Los Baños internees were freed , the headquarters of Sixth United States Army assigned the 11th Airborne Division the task of destroying all Japanese formations in southern Luzon , south of Manila . The bulk of the division moved south the following day , with the 187th GIR and the 511th PIR advancing abreast . The 188th GIR was detached from the main advance by Maj. Gen. Swing ; it was to eliminate all Japanese units still operating in the Pico de Loro hills along the southern shore of Manila Bay . These forces belonged to the 80 @,@ 000 @-@ strong <unk> Group , one of three groups of the Japanese Fourteenth Area Army under General Tomoyuki Yamashita . It would take until the end of April for the 11th Airborne Division — often acting in conjunction with Filipino soldiers , the recognized guerillas and elements of the 1st Cavalry Division — to subdue the <unk> Group . Conducting combat operations was extremely difficult in the mountainous terrain , and many Japanese units elected to fight to the death rather than surrender . However , all organized resistance in southern Luzon ended on 1 May , when the division captured Mount <unk> near the city of Lipa . The 11th Airborne established a base centered around the former Japanese airstrip on the outskirts of Lipa , the runway of which was lengthened by the 127th Airborne Engineer Battalion to accommodate C @-@ 47 transport aircraft . Once the engineering work was completed , the division 's combat troops participated in several refresher @-@ training courses . 
 The 11th Airborne 's next operation took place on 23 June in the province of Aparri in northern Luzon . By this time the only Japanese forces remaining on the island were positioned to the far north and belonged to the 52 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Shobu Group . This last of General Yamashita 's three groups proved to be the most tenacious , forcing Lieutenant @-@ General Walter Krueger , commander of the Sixth United States Army , to commit four infantry divisions , an armored task force , and a large band of the Filipino soldiers under the Philippine Commonwealth Army and Philippine Constabulary units and the recognized guerrillas . While these forces pinned down the Japanese , the 37th Infantry Division began an advance northwards , defeating a weaker formation and encircling the main Japanese force . To ensure the success of the 37th 's drive , Krueger called for an airborne force to land near Aparri and move southwards to meet the advancing 37th . 
 The 11th Airborne Division was to drop a battalion @-@ sized combat team on <unk> Airfield , approximately ten miles ( 16 km ) south of Aparri . It would then advance southwards , eliminating all Japanese resistance , until it linked up with the leading elements of the 37th Infantry Division . To accomplish this Maj. Gen. Swing formed a special unit – Gypsy Task Force – comprising the 1st Battalion of the 511th Parachute Infantry Regiment , G and I Companies of the regiment 's 2nd Battalion , an artillery battery from the 457th Parachute Field Artillery Battalion , and a platoon of engineers and miscellaneous signal and medical detachments . Gypsy Task Force would be transported by fifty @-@ four C @-@ 47 Skytrain and thirteen C @-@ 46 Commando aircraft , as well as six Waco CG @-@ 4A Gliders which would land jeeps and supplies for the task force . On 21 June , a detachment of pathfinders from the division was flown in to secure <unk> Airfield , and two days later the transport aircraft carrying the troops of Gypsy Task Force were escorted by fighters to the area . At 09 : 00 the pathfinder detachment set off colored smoke to mark the drop @-@ zone , but fierce winds and uneven ground around the airfield proved hazardous to the parachutists , causing two deaths and seventy injuries during the drop . Despite these casualties the force was rapidly concentrated , and began its advance southwards . Japanese resistance was stiff , forcing the airborne troops to rely on flamethrowers to eliminate bunkers and fortifications along their route . After three days of fighting and having eliminated a significant portion of Shobu Group , the task force encountered the lead elements of the 37th Infantry Division . Although Shobu Group would continue its resistance until September , its encirclement marked the 11th Airborne Division 's final combat operation of the war . 
 = = Post @-@ World War II = = 
 = = = Occupation of Japan = = = 
 General MacArthur made plans to use the 11th Airborne Division in the invasion of Japan ; it was to remain as Sixth Army 's operational reserve , to be committed if required . However , with the end of hostilities in the Pacific Theater shortly after the detonation of two nuclear weapons over Hiroshima and Nagasaki , the division was instead selected by General MacArthur to lead the American forces that would occupy Japan . The divisional staff received orders to this effect on 11 August 1945 , and the division was transported to Okinawa on 12 August ; an operation that involved 99 B @-@ 24 Liberator bombers , 350 C @-@ 46 Commando and 150 C @-@ 47 Dakota transport aircraft to airlift 11 @,@ 100 men , 120 vehicles and approximately 1 @.@ 16 million pounds ( 530 @,@ 000 kg ) of equipment . The 11th Airborne remained on Okinawa for several weeks before , on 28 August , it was ordered to land at Atsugi Airfield outside of Yokohama , on the main Japanese home island of Honshū . Its instructions were to secure the surrounding area , evacuate all Japanese civilians and military personnel within a radius of three miles ( 5 km ) , and finally occupy Yokohama itself . A large number of C @-@ 54 Skymaster transport aircraft were made available , with the first — carrying Swing and his divisional staff — landing at Atsugi Airfield at 06 : 00 on 30 August . It took a week to fully assemble the division , and by 13 September it had been joined by the 27th Infantry Division , which was airlifted into Japan at the same time . The 11th Airborne Division was later moved from Yokohama to northern Japan , and established camps along the coast of Honshu and on the island of Hokkaido . 
 = = = Training and first inactivation = = = 
 Occupation duties in Japan continued until May 1949 , when the 11th Airborne was relieved and recalled to the United States . The division was transferred to Camp Campbell in Kentucky and became a training formation , with several of its subordinate units inactivated including the 188th Glider Infantry Regiment . Training continued until the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950 . For service in Korea , the 187th Glider Infantry Regiment — now renamed the 187th Airborne Infantry Regiment — and the 674th Airborne Field Artillery Battalion were detached from the division and re @-@ formed as a separate Regimental Combat Team ( RCT ) . The 187th RCT saw two years of fighting in Korea , conducting two airborne operations as well as operating as conventional infantry . The rest of the division continued its training role , processing and training approximately thirteen thousand recalled reservists between September and December 1950 alone . The 187th RCT remained in Korea until 1 October 1953 , when it was transferred to Japan for two years until being replaced by the 508th RCT . The 187th returned to the United States on 17 July 1955 , but as a unit independent of its parent division . 
 The 11th Airborne Division was sent to Germany in early 1956 as part of Operation Gyroscope , to replace the 5th Infantry Division stationed in Augsburg and Munich . As the division was en route , the 187th RCT was relocated to Fort Campbell , taking over the camps that the 11th had recently vacated . In July that year the 187th , along with the 508th ARC , was transferred to the newly reactivated 101st Airborne Division . 
 As the American Army began to restructure its organisation ( known as the Pentomic Concept ) , the battalions of the 187th were re @-@ designated as Airborne Battle Groups . In early 1957 the 1st Airborne Battle Group , 187th Infantry transferred to Augsburg to join its former parent formation , where it was reintegrated into the 11th Airborne Division . The 2nd Airborne Battle Group , 187th Infantry remained with the 101st until 1964 while the 3rd Battalion was inactivated . However , the 11th Division was itself inactivated in Augsburg on 1 July 1958 , and the 1st Airborne Battle Group was instead moved to the 24th Infantry Division . 
 = = = Reactivation ( 11th Air Assault Division ) and inactivation = = = 
 In the early 1960s , the United States Army began to explore alternative means for conducting future combat operations . One of the many ideas resulting from that effort was the concept of helicopter assault . To test this concept 's feasibility , the 11th Airborne Division was reactivated on 1 February 1963 and renamed the 11th Air Assault Division ( Test ) . This was done on the recommendation of the U.S. Army Tactical Mobility Requirements Board , also known as the ' Howze Board ' after its president Lieutenant General Hamilton H. Howze . 
 The 11th never existed as a full division during the test period . Although the intent was to create three air assault brigades , the reality was an air assault brigade ( which was also parachute @-@ qualified ) , an airmobile brigade , and both ground and air artillery elements ( the air artillery was provided by armed helicopters known as ARA ) . There was also an aviation group to control the helicopters assigned to the division - the 11th Aviation Group , consisting of the 227th , 228th , and 229th Aviation Battalions . Elements of its original combat units – the 187th Airborne Infantry , the 188th Airborne Infantry and the 511th Airborne Infantry – were also reformed under the new division . 
 For the next two years , the 11th Air Assault Division developed and refined air assault tactics and the equipment required to operate effectively in the role . The 187th and 188th tested helicopters during various exercises , ranging from command and control maneuvers to scouting , screening and aerial resupply , to assess their ability to perform as combat aircraft . However , the division was inactivated for the final time on 29 June 1965 , with its personnel and equipment being merged with the 2nd Infantry Division to form the newly raised 1st Cavalry Division ( Airmobile ) . The colors of the 1st Cavalry Division , at that time assigned to Korea , were transferred to Fort Benning , while those of the 2nd Infantry Division were moved to Korea . 
 An earlier predecessor to the current Air Assault Badge was worn by troops of 11th who qualified for it by making three helicopter rappels from 60 feet ( 18 m ) and three from 120 feet ( 37 m ) . Soldiers were also required to be knowledgeable of aircraft safety procedures ; familiar with aircraft orientation ; proficient in hand and arm signals and combat assault operations ; able to prepare , inspect and rig equipment for external sling loads ; and able to lash down equipment inside helicopters . The badge was first awarded in early 1964 and was only authorized for wear by soldiers within the 11th . 
 = Thraliana = 
 The Thraliana was a diary kept by Hester Thrale and is part of the genre known as table talk . Although the work began as Thrale 's diary focused on her experience with her family , it slowly changed focus to emphasise various anecdotes and stories about the life of Samuel Johnson . The work was used as a basis for Thrale 's Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson , but the Thraliana remained unpublished until 1942 . The anecdotes contained within the work were popular with Thrale 's contemporaries but seen as vulgar . Among 20th century readers , the work was popular , and many literary critics believe that the work is a valuable contribution to the genre and for providing information about Johnson 's and her own life . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hester Thrale , when still Hester Lynch Salusbury , spent her youth writing letters and keeping journals . Her talents at writing won her the respect of her uncles , Sir Robert Cotton and Sir Thomas Salusbury , who later appointed her their heir . When Thrale was older , she became close to Johnson . It was natural to her to keep a detailed collection of anecdotes and stories of their time together , as of everything she experienced . The two initially bonded after Thrale gave birth to her first child , <unk> , in 1766 . 
 However , there were problems between Thrale and Johnson , along with " his defenders " during his life and in criticism since then , over their " gradual estrangement " from each other after the death of her husband . These problems were then heightened by her marriage to Gabriel Piozzi . After Johnson 's death , Thrale felt isolated because she believed that Johnson 's previous friends along with the public as a whole did not accept her , and some went so far as to claim she abandoned Johnson in his final moments . In particular , James Boswell , who resented Thrale and felt himself as her literary competitor , began to exploit the falling out between Thrale and Johnson 's friends in order to promote his Life of Samuel Johnson . 
 After the birth of <unk> , Thrale began to document the various moments in her daughter 's life in a " baby book " called The Children 's Book . The work eventually expanded to include documentation of the whole family and was retitled the Family Book . To encourage his wife 's writing her husband Henry Thrale gave her six blank diary books , with the title Thraliana on the cover , in 1776 . The work was intended as an Ana , which she admits her fascination with in the Thraliana : " I am grown quite mad after these French Anas ; <unk> is in itself so seducing " . After searching for English models for writing her Ana , she settled on used John Selden 's Table Talk , William Camden 's Remains , and Joseph Spence 's Anecdotes as her guides . In May 1778 , she was given by Johnson a manuscript of Spence 's Anecdotes , but her first years of the Ana were written without an exact model . 
 Before the Thraliana , Thrale kept two sets of anecdotes : the first was devoted to Samuel Johnson and the other for miscellaneous events . She relied on these , along with her memory , to write the early portions of her work . Boswell , when trying to find information for his own work , wrote : " Mr. Thrale told me , I am not sure what day , that there is a Book of <unk> kept int heir Family , in which all Mr. Johnson 's sayings and all that they can collect about him is put down ... I must try to get this <unk> Miscellany , to assist me in writing Mr. Johnson 's Life , if Mrs. Thrale does not intend to do it herself . " After Johnson 's death , Thrale used the Thraliana to create the Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson ( 1786 ) . The manuscript passed through many hands and was owned by A. Edward Newton until his death in autumn 1940 . The Thraliana was eventually published in 1942 , and it was produced by the Clarendon Press in England while its editor , Katharine Balderston , was prohibited from travelling across the ocean from Wellesley College because of World War II . 
 = = Ana = = 
 Thrale explains that her book is not for " diary @-@ keeping in the strict sense " when she writes : " It is many Years since Doctor Samuel Johnson advised me to get a little Book , and write in it all the little Anecdotes which might come to my Knowledge , all the Observations I might make or hear ; all the Verses never likely to be published , and in fine ev 'ry thing which struck me at the Time . Mr Thrale has now treated me with a Repository , - and provided it with the pompous Title of Thraliana ; I must endeavour to fill it with Nonsense new and old . " These encouraging remarks from Johnson set the theme of the work as it became a new " <unk> " collection . In particular , she transferred her previous notes and <unk> about Johnson 's life into the collection . 
 In a 6 September 1777 letter , Johnson told Thrale to be " punctual in annexing the dates . Chronology you know is the eye of history " . However , the system of Ana allowed Thrale to group items by theme instead of by topics , like " Odd medical Stories " , to organize anecdotes , quotations , and stories . When Henry Thrale died while Thrale was writing Volume Three , the work became a diary for Thrale to discuss her thoughts and feelings after her loss . This volume soon began to describe Thrale 's feelings for Gabriel Piozzi . Throughout the Thraliana , Thrale examines how others view her , which reveals her anxieties that she had about how she was perceived . This is especially true when she writes : " Life has been to me nothing but a perpetual <unk> carried on in all parts of the World - not to make Friends neither - for I have certainly found very few - but to keep off Enemies " . Thrale initially did not want to write in the sixth volume of the Thraliana , but did so because " Johnson said that Pleasure might one day be made from such Nonsense , so I 'll e 'en finish this last Volume of <unk> & store up no more Stuff " . However she did not stop journal writing after she finished but continued to write for the remainder of her life . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Thrale 's anecdotes were popular when they were first published in various works , but many readers initially thought that her " relaxed and natural style " was vulgar . However , Martine <unk> points out that this style helped win over 20th century readers even though the work suffered from " unevenness " . Katherine Balderston regards the work as " what was almost , if not quite , the first English ana " . James Clifford declared that " there is much valuable evidence about the great man , " Samuel Johnson , within the Thraliana . He also stated that the work , along with her Anecdotes of the Late Samuel Johnson , " established her reputation as a bluestocking writer of the late eighteenth century . Edward Bloom et al. claim that the Thraliana , as with her letters , lays " bare a woman 's psychology " . 
 = Nelson 's Pillar = 
 Nelson 's Pillar ( also known as the Nelson Pillar or simply The Pillar ) was a large granite column capped by a statue of Horatio Nelson , built in the centre of what was then Sackville Street ( later renamed O 'Connell Street ) in Dublin , Ireland . Completed in 1809 when Ireland was part of the United Kingdom , it survived until March 1966 , when it was severely damaged by explosives planted by Irish republicans . Its remnants were later destroyed by the Irish Army . 
 The decision to build the monument was taken by Dublin Corporation in the euphoria following Nelson 's victory at the Battle of Trafalgar in 1805 . The original design by William Wilkins was greatly modified by Francis Johnston , on grounds of cost . The statue was sculpted by Thomas Kirk . From its opening on 29 October 1809 the Pillar was a popular tourist attraction , but provoked aesthetic and political controversy from the outset . A prominent city centre monument honouring an Englishman rankled as nationalist sentiment grew , and throughout the 19th century there were calls for it to be removed , or replaced with a memorial to an Irish hero . 
 Parts of central Dublin were destroyed during the 1916 Easter Rising , but although it was near the rebels ' headquarters , the Pillar remained unscathed . It remained in the city as Ireland became an independent Free State in 1922 , and a republic in 1949 . The chief legal barrier to its removal was the trust created at the Pillar 's inception , the terms of which gave the trustees a duty in perpetuity to preserve the monument . Successive Irish governments failed to deliver legislation overriding the trust . Although influential literary figures such as James Joyce , W. B. Yeats and Oliver St. John Gogarty defended the Pillar on historical and cultural grounds , pressure for its removal intensified in the years preceding the 50th anniversary of the Rising , and its sudden demise was , on the whole , well received by the public . Although it was widely believed that the action was the work of the Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) , the police were unable to identify any of those responsible . 
 After years of debate and numerous proposals , the site was occupied in 2003 by the Spire of Dublin , a slim needle @-@ like structure rising almost three times the height of the Pillar . In 2000 a former republican activist gave a radio interview in which he admitted planting the explosives in 1966 , but after questioning him the police decided not to take action . Relics of the Pillar are found in Dublin museums and appear as decorative stonework elsewhere , and its memory is preserved in numerous works of Irish literature . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Sackville Street and Blakeney = = = 
 The redevelopment of Dublin north of the River Liffey began in the early 18th century , largely through the enterprise of the property speculator Luke Gardiner . His best @-@ known work was the transformation in the 1740s of a narrow lane called Drogheda Street , which he demolished and turned into a broad thoroughfare lined with large and imposing town houses . He renamed it Sackville Street , in honour of Lionel Sackville , 1st Duke of Dorset , who served as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland from 1731 to 1737 and from 1751 to 1755 . After Gardiner 's death in 1755 Dublin 's growth continued , with many fine public buildings and grand squares , the city 's status magnified by the presence of the Parliament of Ireland for six months of the year . The Acts of Union of 1800 , which united Ireland and Great Britain under a single Westminster polity , ended the Irish parliament and presaged a period of decline for the city . The historian Tristram Hunt writes : " [ T ] he capital 's dynamism vanished , absenteeism returned and the big houses lost their patrons " . 
 The first monument in Sackville Street was built in 1759 in the location where the Nelson Pillar would eventually stand . The subject was William Blakeney , 1st Baron Blakeney , a Limerick @-@ born army officer whose career extended over more than 60 years and ended with his surrender to the French after the Siege of Minorca in 1756 . A brass statue sculpted by John van Nost the younger was unveiled on St Patrick 's Day , 17 March 1759 . Donal Fallon , in his history of the Pillar , states that almost from its inception the Blakeney statue was a target for vandalism . Its fate is uncertain ; Fallon records that it might have been melted down for cannon , but it had certainly been removed by 1805 . 
 = = = Trafalgar = = = 
 On 21 October 1805 , a Royal Naval fleet commanded by Vice Admiral Lord Nelson defeated the combined fleets of the French and Spanish navies in the Battle of Trafalgar . At the height of the battle Nelson was mortally wounded on board his flagship , HMS Victory ; by the time he died later that day , victory was assured . 
 Nelson had been hailed in Dublin seven years earlier , after the Battle of the Nile , as defender of the Harp and Crown , the respective symbols of Ireland and Britain . When news of Trafalgar reached the city on 8 November , there were similar scenes of patriotic celebration , together with a desire that the fallen hero should be commemorated . The mercantile classes had particular reason to be grateful for a victory that restored the freedom of the high seas and removed the threat of a French invasion . Many of the city 's population had relatives who had been involved in the battle : up to one @-@ third of the sailors in Nelson 's fleet were from Ireland , including around 400 from Dublin itself . In his short account of the Pillar , Dennis Kennedy considers that Nelson would have been regarded in the city as a hero , not just among the Protestant Ascendancy but by many Catholics among the rising middle and professional classes . 
 The first step towards a permanent memorial to Nelson was taken on 18 November 1805 by the city aldermen , who after sending a message of congratulation to King George III , agreed that the erection of a statue would form a suitable tribute to Nelson 's memory . On 28 November , after a public meeting had supported this sentiment , a " Nelson committee " was established , chaired by the Lord Mayor . It contained four of the city 's Westminster MPs , alongside other city notables including Arthur Guinness , the son of the brewery founder . The committee 's initial tasks were to decide precisely what form the monument should take and where it should be put . They had also to raise the funds to pay for it . 
 = = Inception , design and construction = = 
 At its first meeting the Nelson committee established a public subscription , and early in 1806 invited artists and architects to submit design proposals for a monument . No specifications were provided , but the contemporary European vogue in commemorative architecture was for the classical form , typified by Trajan 's Column in Rome . Monumental columns , or " pillars of victory " , were uncommon in Ireland at the time ; the Cumberland Column in Birr , County Offaly , erected in 1747 , was a rare exception . From the entries submitted , the Nelson committee 's choice was that of a young English architect , William Wilkins , then in the early stages of a distinguished career . Wilkins 's proposals envisaged a tall Doric column on a plinth , surmounted by a sculpted Roman galley . 
 The choice of the Sackville Street site was not unanimous . The Wide Streets Commissioners were worried about traffic congestion , and argued for a riverside location visible from the sea . Another suggestion was for a seaside position , perhaps Howth Head at the entrance to Dublin Bay . The recent presence of the Blakeney statue in Sackville Street , and a desire to arrest the street 's decline in the post @-@ parliamentary years , were factors that may have influenced the final selection of that site which , Kennedy says , was the preferred choice of the Lord Lieutenant . 
 By mid @-@ 1807 , fundraising was proving difficult ; sums raised at that point were well short of the likely cost of erecting Wilkins 's column . The committee informed the architect with regret that " means were not placed in their hands to enable them to gratify him , as well as themselves , by executing his design precisely as he had given it " . They employed Francis Johnston , architect to the City Board of Works , to make cost @-@ cutting adjustments to Wilkins 's scheme . Johnston simplified the design , substituting a large functional block or pedestal for Wilkins 's delicate plinth , and replacing the proposed galley with a statue of Nelson . Thomas Kirk , a sculptor from Cork , was commissioned to provide the statue , to be fashioned from Portland stone . 
 By December 1807 the fund stood at £ 3 @,@ 827 , far short of the estimated £ 6 @,@ 500 required to finance the project . Nevertheless , by the beginning of 1808 the committee felt confident enough to begin the work , and organised the laying of the foundation stone . This ceremony took place on 15 February 1808 — the day following the anniversary of Nelson 's victory at the Battle of Cape St Vincent in 1797 — amid much pomp , in the presence of the new Lord Lieutenant , the Duke of Richmond , along with various civic dignitaries and city notables . A memorial plaque eulogising Nelson 's Trafalgar victory was attached to the stone . The committee continued to raise money as construction proceeded ; when the project was complete in the autumn of 1809 , costs totalled £ 6 @,@ 856 , but contributions had reached £ 7 @,@ 138 , providing the committee with a surplus of £ 282 . 
 When finished , the monument complete with its statue rose to a height of 134 feet ( 40 @.@ 8 m ) . The four sides of the pedestal were engraved with the names and dates of Nelson 's greatest victories . A spiral stairway of 168 steps ascended the hollow interior of the column , to a viewing platform immediately beneath the statue . According to the committee 's published report , 22 @,@ 090 cubic feet ( 626 m3 ) of black limestone and 7 @,@ 310 cubic feet ( 207 m3 ) of granite had been used to build the column and its pedestal . The Pillar opened to the public on 21 October 1809 , on the fourth anniversary of the Battle of Trafalgar ; for ten pre @-@ decimal pence , visitors could climb to a viewing platform just below the statue , and enjoy what an early report describes as " a superb panoramic view of the city , the country and the fine bay " . 
 = = History 1809 – 1966 = = 
 = = = 1809 – 1916 = = = 
 The Pillar quickly became a popular tourist attraction ; Kennedy writes that " for the next 157 years its ascent was a must on every visitor 's list " . Yet from the beginning there were criticisms , on both political and aesthetic grounds . The September 1809 issue of the Irish Monthly Magazine , edited by the revolution @-@ minded Walter " Watty " Cox , reported that " our independence has been wrested from us , not by the arms of France but by the gold of England . The statue of Nelson records the glory of a mistress and the transformation of our senate into a discount office " . In an early ( 1818 ) history of the city of Dublin , the writers express awe at the scale of the monument , but are critical of several of its features : its proportions are described as " ponderous " , the pedestal as " unsightly " and the column itself as " clumsy " . However , the Hibernian Magazine thought the statue was a good likeness of its subject , and that the Pillar 's position in the centre of the wide street gave the eye a focal point in what was otherwise " wastes of pavements " . 
 By 1830 , rising nationalist sentiment in Ireland made it likely that the Pillar was " the Ascendancy 's last hurrah " — Kennedy observes that it probably could not have been built at any later date . Nevertheless , the monument often attracted favourable comment from visitors ; in 1842 the writer William Makepeace Thackeray noted Nelson " upon a stone @-@ pillar " in the middle of the " exceedingly broad and handsome " Sackville Street : " The Post Office is on his right hand ( only it is cut off ) ; and on his left , ' Gresham 's ' and the ' Imperial Hotel ' " . A few years later , the monument was a source of pride to some citizens , who dubbed it " Dublin 's Glory " when Queen Victoria visited the city in 1849 . 
 Between 1840 and 1843 Nelson 's Column was erected in London 's Trafalgar Square . With an overall height of 170 feet ( 52 m ) it was taller than its Dublin equivalent and , at £ 47 @,@ 000 , much more costly to erect . It has no internal staircase or viewing platform . The London column was the subject of an attack during the Fenian dynamite campaign in May 1884 , when a quantity of explosives was placed at its base but failed to detonate . 
 In 1853 the queen attended the Dublin Great Industrial Exhibition , where a city plan was displayed that envisaged the removal of the Pillar . This proved impossible , as since 1811 legal responsibility for the Pillar had been vested in a trust , under the terms of which the trustees were required " to embellish and uphold the monument in perpetuation of the object for which it was subscribed " . Any action to remove or <unk> the Pillar , or replace the statue , required the passage of an Act of Parliament in London ; Dublin Corporation ( the city government ) had no authority in the matter . No action followed the city plan suggestion , but the following years saw regular attempts to remove the monument . A proposal was made in 1876 by Alderman Peter <unk> , a former Lord Mayor , to replace the " unsightly structure " with a memorial to the recently deceased Sir John Gray , who had done much to provide Dublin with a clean water supply . The Corporation was unable to advance this idea . 
 In 1882 the Moore Street Market and Dublin City Improvement Act was passed by the Westminster parliament , overriding the trust and giving the Corporation authority to <unk> the Pillar , but subject to a strict timetable , within which the city authorities found it impossible to act . The Act lapsed and the Pillar remained ; a similar attempt , with the same result , was made in 1891 . Not all Dubliners favoured demolition ; some businesses considered the Pillar to be the city 's focal point , and the tramway company petitioned for its retention as it marked the central tram terminus . " In many ways " , says Fallon , " the pillar had become part of the fabric of the city " . Kennedy writes : " A familiar and very large if rather scruffy piece of the city 's furniture , it was The Pillar , Dublin 's Pillar rather than Nelson 's Pillar ... it was also an outing , an experience " . The Dublin sculptor John Hughes invited students at the Metropolitan School of Art to " admire the elegance and dignity " of Kirk 's statue , " and the beauty of the silhouette " . 
 In 1894 there were some significant alterations to the Pillar 's fabric . The original entry on the west side , whereby visitors entered the pedestal by a flight of steps taking them down below street level , was replaced by a new ground level entrance on the south side , with a grand porch . The whole monument was surrounded by heavy iron railings . In the new century , despite the growing nationalism within Dublin — 80 per cent of the Corporation 's councillors were nationalists of some description — the pillar was liberally decorated with flags and streamers to mark the 1905 Trafalgar centenary . The changing political atmosphere had long been signalled by the arrival in Sackville Street of further monuments , all celebrating distinctively Irish heroes , in what the historian Yvonne Whelan describes as defiance of the British Government , a " challenge in stone " . Between the 1860s and 1911 , Nelson was joined by monuments to Daniel O 'Connell , William Smith O 'Brien and Charles Stewart Parnell , as well as Sir John Gray and the temperance campaigner Father Matthew . Meanwhile , in 1861 , after decades of construction , the Wellington Monument in Dublin 's Phoenix Park was completed , the foundation stone having been laid in 1817 . This vast obelisk , 220 feet ( 67 m ) high and 120 feet ( 37 m ) square at the base , honoured Arthur Wellesley , 1st Duke of Wellington , Dublin @-@ born and a former Chief Secretary for Ireland . Unlike the Pillar , Wellington 's obelisk has attracted little controversy and has not been the subject of physical attacks . 
 = = = Easter Rising , April 1916 = = = 
 On Easter Monday , 24 April 1916 , units of the Irish Volunteers and the Irish Citizen Army seized several prominent buildings and streets in central Dublin , including the General Post Office ( GPO ) in Sackville Street , one of the buildings nearest the Pillar . They set up headquarters at the GPO where they declared an Irish Republic under a provisional government . One of the first recorded actions of the Easter Rising occurred near the Pillar when lancers from the nearby Marlborough Street barracks , sent to investigate the disturbance , were fired on from the GPO . They withdrew in confusion , leaving four soldiers and two horses dead . 
 During the days that followed , Sackville Street and particularly the area around the Pillar became a battleground . According to some histories , insurgents attempted to blow up the Pillar . The accounts are unconfirmed and were disputed by many that fought in the Rising , on the grounds that the Pillar 's large base provided them with useful cover as they moved to and from other rebel positions . By Thursday night , British artillery fire had set much of Sackville Street ablaze , but according to the writer Peter De Rosa 's account : " On his pillar , Nelson surveyed it all serenely , as though he were lit up by a thousand lamps " . The statue was visible against the fiery backdrop from as far as Killiney , 9 miles ( 14 km ) away . 
 By Saturday , when the provisional government finally surrendered , many of the Sackville Street buildings between the Pillar and the Liffey had been destroyed or badly damaged , including the Imperial Hotel that Thackeray had admired . Of the GPO , only the façade remained ; against the tide of opinion Bernard Shaw said the demolition of the city 's classical architecture scarcely mattered : " What does matter is the Liffey slums have not been demolished " . An account in a New York newspaper reported that the Pillar had been lost in the destruction of the street , but it had sustained only minor damage , chiefly bullet marks on the column and statue itself — one shot is said to have taken off Nelson 's nose . 
 = = = In an independent Ireland = = = 
 After the Anglo @-@ Irish war of 1919 – 21 and the treaty that followed , Ireland was partitioned ; Dublin became the capital of the Irish Free State , a Dominion within the British Commonwealth of Nations . From December 1922 , when the Free State was inaugurated , the Pillar became an issue for the Irish rather than the British government . In 1923 , when Sackville Street was again in ruins during the Irish Civil War , The Irish Builder and Engineer magazine called the original siting of the Pillar a " blunder " and asked for its removal , a view echoed by the Dublin Citizens Association . The poet William Butler Yeats , who had become a member of the Irish Senate , favoured its re @-@ erection elsewhere , but thought it should not , as some wished , be destroyed , because " the life and work of the people who built it are part of our tradition . " 
 Sackville Street was renamed O 'Connell Street in 1924 . The following year the Dublin Metropolitan Police and the Dublin Civic Survey demanded legislation to allow the Pillar 's removal , without success . Pressure continued , and in 1926 The Manchester Guardian reported that the Pillar was to be taken down , " as it was a hindrance to modern traffic " . Requests for action — removal , destruction or the replacement of the statue with that of an Irish hero — continued up to the Second World War and beyond ; the main stumbling blocks remained the trustees ' strict interpretation of the terms of the trust , and the unwillingness of successive Irish governments to take legislative action . In 1936 the magazine of the ultra @-@ nationalist Blueshirts movement remarked that this inactivity showed a failure in the national spirit : " The conqueror is gone , but the scars which he left remain , and the victim will not even try to remove them " . 
 By 1949 the Irish Free State had evolved into the Republic of Ireland and left the British Commonwealth , but not all Irish opinion favoured the removal of the Pillar . That year the architectural historian John Harvey called it " a grand work " , and argued that without it , " O 'Connell Street would lose much of its vitality " . Most of the pressure to get rid of it , he said , came from " traffic maniacs who ... fail to visualise the chaos which would result from creating a through current of traffic at this point " . In a 1955 radio broadcast Thomas Bodkin , former director of the National Gallery of Ireland , praised not only the monument , but Nelson himself : " He was a man of extraordinary gallantry . He lost his eye fighting bravely , and his arm in a similar fashion " . 
 On 29 October 1955 , a group of nine students from University College Dublin obtained keys from the Pillar 's custodian and locked themselves inside , with an assortment of equipment including flame throwers . From the gallery they hung a poster of Kevin Barry , a Dublin Irish Republican Army ( IRA ) volunteer executed by the British during the War of Independence . A crowd gathered below , and began to sing the Irish rebel song " Kevin Barry " . Eventually members of the Gardaí ( Irish police ) broke into the Pillar and ended the demonstration . No action was taken against the students , whose principal purpose , the Gardaí claimed , was publicity . 
 In 1956 , members of the Fianna Fáil party , then in opposition , proposed that the statue be replaced by one of Robert Emmet , Protestant leader of an abortive rebellion in 1803 . They thought that such a gesture might inspire Protestants in Northern Ireland to fight for a reunited Ireland . In the North the possibility of dismantling and re @-@ erecting the monument in Belfast was raised in the Stormont parliament , but the initiative failed to gain the support of the Northern Ireland government . 
 In 1959 a new Fianna Fáil government under Seán Lemass deferred the question of the Pillar 's removal on the grounds of cost ; five years later Lemass agreed to " look at " the question of replacing Nelson 's statue with one of Patrick Pearse , the leader of the Easter Rising , in time for the 50th anniversary of the Rising in 1966 . An offer from the Irish @-@ born American trade union leader Mike Quill to finance the removal of the Pillar was not taken up , and as the anniversary approached , Nelson remained in place . 
 = = Destruction = = 
 Shortly after 1 : 30 on the morning of 8 March 1966 , a powerful explosion destroyed the upper portion of the Pillar and brought Nelson 's statue crashing to the ground amid hundreds of tons of rubble . O 'Connell Street was almost deserted at the time , although a dance in the nearby Hotel Metropole 's ballroom was about to end and bring crowds on to the street . There were no casualties — a taxi @-@ driver parked close by had a narrow escape — and damage to property was relatively light given the strength of the blast . What was left of the Pillar was a jagged stump , 70 feet ( 21 m ) high . 
 In the first government response to the action the Justice minister , Brian Lenihan , condemned what he described as " an outrage which was planned and committed without any regard to the lives of the citizens " . This response was considered " tepid " by The Irish Times , whose editorial deemed the attack " a direct blow to the prestige of the state and the authority of the government " . Kennedy suggests that government anger was mainly directed at what they considered a distraction from the official 50th anniversary celebrations of the Rising . 
 The absence of the pillar was regretted by some who felt the city had lost one of its most prominent landmarks . The Irish Literary Association was anxious that , whatever future steps were taken , the lettering on the pedestal should be preserved ; the Irish Times reported that the Royal Irish Academy of Music was considering legal measures to prevent removal of the remaining stump . Reactions among the general public were relatively light @-@ hearted , typified by the numerous songs inspired by the incident . These included the immensely popular " Up Went Nelson " , set to the tune of " The Battle Hymn of the Republic " and performed by a group of Belfast schoolteachers , which remained at the top of the Irish charts for eight weeks . An American newspaper reported that the mood in the city was one of gaiety , with shouts of " Nelson has lost his last battle ! " Some accounts relate that the Irish president , Éamon de Valera , phoned The Irish Press to suggest the headline : " British Admiral Leaves Dublin By Air " — according to the senator and presidential candidate David Norris , " the only recorded instance of humour in that lugubrious figure " . 
 The Pillar 's fate was sealed when Dublin Corporation issued a " dangerous building " notice . The trustees agreed that the stump should be removed . A last @-@ minute request by the Royal Institute of the Architects of Ireland for an injunction to delay the demolition on planning grounds was rejected by Justice Thomas Teevan . On 14 March the Army destroyed the stump by a controlled explosion , watched at a safe distance by a crowd who , the press reported , " raised a resounding cheer " . There was a scramble for souvenirs , and many parts of the stonework were taken from the scene . Some of these relics , including Nelson 's head , eventually found their way into museums ; parts of the lettered stonework from the pedestal are displayed in the grounds of the Butler House hotel in Kilkenny , while smaller remnants were used to decorate private gardens . Contemporary and subsequent accounts record that the army 's explosion caused more damage than the first , but this , Fallon says , is a myth ; damage claims arising from the second explosion amounted to less than a quarter of the sum claimed as a result of the original blast . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Investigations = = = 
 It was initially assumed that the monument was destroyed by the IRA . The Guardian reported on 9 March that six men had been arrested and questioned , but their identities were not revealed and there were no charges . An IRA spokesman denied involvement , stating that they had no interest in demolishing mere symbols of foreign domination : " We are interested in the destruction of the domination itself " . In the absence of any leads , rumours suggested that the Basque separatist movement ETA might be responsible , perhaps as part of a training exercise with an Irish republican splinter group ; in the mid @-@ 1960s the explosives expertise of ETA was generally acknowledged . 
 No further information was forthcoming until 2000 , when during a Raidió Teilifís Éireann interview a former IRA member , Liam Sutcliffe claimed he had placed the bomb which detonated in the Pillar . In the 1950s Sutcliffe was associated with a group of dissident volunteers led by Joe Christle ( 1927 – 98 ) , who had been expelled from the IRA in 1956 for " recklessness " . In early 1966 Sutcliffe learned that Christle 's group was planning " Operation Humpty Dumpty " , an attack on the Pillar , and offered his services . According to Sutcliffe , on 28 February he placed a bomb within the Pillar , timed to go off in the early hours of the next morning . The explosive was a mixture of gelignite and ammonal . It failed to detonate ; Sutcliffe says that he returned early the next morning , recovered the device and redesigned its timer . On 7 March , shortly before the Pillar closed for the day , he climbed the inner stairway and placed the refurbished bomb near to the top of the shaft before going home . He learned of the success of his mission the next day , he says , having slept undisturbed through the night . Following his revelations , Sutcliffe was questioned by the police but not charged . He did not name others involved in the action , apart from Christle and his brother . 
 = = = Replacements = = = 
 On 29 April 1969 the Irish parliament passed the Nelson Pillar Act , terminating the Pillar Trust and vesting ownership of the site in Dublin Corporation . The trustees received £ 21 @,@ 170 in compensation for the Pillar 's destruction , and a further sum for loss of income . In the debate , Senator Owen Sheehy @-@ Skeffington argued that the Pillar had been capable of repair and should have been re @-@ assembled and rebuilt . 
 For more than twenty years the site stood empty , while various campaigns sought to fill the space . In 1970 the Arthur Griffith Society suggested a monument to Arthur Griffith , founder of Sinn Féin , and Pearse , whose centenary would fall in 1979 , was the subject of several proposals . None of these schemes were accepted by the Corporation . A request in 1987 by the Dublin Metropolitan Streets Commission that the Pillar be rebuilt — with a different statue — was likewise rejected . In 1988 , as part of the city 's 1,000th anniversary celebrations , the Smurfit Millennium Fountain was erected close to the site . This was commissioned by a Dublin businessman Michael Smurfit in memory of his father ; it incorporated a bronze statue of a woman , sculpted by Éamonn O 'Doherty . The monument , known colloquially as the Anna Livia , was not universally appreciated ; O 'Doherty 's fellow @-@ sculptor Edward Delaney called it an " atrocious eyesore " . 
 1988 saw the launch of the Pillar Project , aimed at encouraging artists and architects to bring forward new ideas for an appropriate permanent memorial to replace Nelson . Suggestions included a 110 metres ( 360 ft ) flagpole , a triumphal arch modelled on the Paris Arc de Triomphe , and a " Tower of Light " with a platform that would restore Nelson 's view over the city . In 1997 Dublin Corporation announced a formal design competition for a monument to mark the new millennium in 2000 . The winning entry was Ian Ritchie 's Spire of Dublin , a plain , needle @-@ like structure rising 120 metres ( 390 ft ) from the street . The design was approved ; on 22 January 2003 it was completed , despite some political and artistic opposition . During the excavations preceding the Spire 's construction , the foundation stone of the Nelson Pillar was recovered . Press stories that a time capsule containing valuable coins had also been discovered fascinated the public for a while , but proved illusory . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The destruction of the Pillar brought a temporary glut of popular songs , including " Nelson 's Farewell " , by The Dubliners , in which Nelson 's airborne demise is presented as Ireland 's contribution to the space race . During its more than 150 years , the Pillar was an integral if controversial part of Dublin life , and was often reflected in Irish literature of the period . James Joyce 's novel Ulysses ( 1922 ) is a meticulous depiction of the city on a single day , 16 July 1904 . At the base of the Pillar trams from all parts of the city come and go ; meanwhile the character Stephen Dedalus fantasises a scene involving two elderly spinsters , who climb the steps to the viewing gallery where they eat plums and spit the stones down on those below , while gazing up at " the one @-@ handled adulterer " . 
 Joyce shared Yeats 's view that Ireland 's association with England was an essential element in a shared history , and asked : " Tell me why you think I ought to change the conditions that gave Ireland and me a shape and a destiny ? " Oliver St. John Gogarty , in his literary memoir As I Was Going Down Sackville Street , considers the Pillar " the grandest thing we have in Dublin " , where " the statue in whiter stone gazed forever south towards Trafalgar and the Nile " . That Pillar , says Gogarty , " marks the end of a civilization , the culmination of the great period of eighteenth century Dublin " . Yeats 's 1927 poem " The Three Monuments " has Parnell , Nelson and O 'Connell on their respective monuments , mocking Ireland 's post @-@ independence leaders for their rigid morality and lack of courage , the obverse of the qualities of the " three old rascals " . A later writer , Brendan Behan , in his Confessions of an Irish Rebel ( 1965 ) wrote from a nationalist perspective that Ireland owed Nelson nothing and that Dublin 's poor regarded the Pillar as " a <unk> at their own helplessness in their own country " . In his poem " Dublin " ( 1939 ) , written as the remaining vestiges of British overlordship were being removed from Ireland , Louis MacNeice envisages " Nelson on his pillar / Watching his world collapse " . Austin Clarke 's 1957 poem " Nelson 's Pillar , Dublin " scorns the various schemes to remove the monument and concludes " Let him watch the sky / With those who rule . Stone eye / And telescopes can prove / Our blessings are above " . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers and journals = = = = 
 = = = = Online = = = = 
 = Oakwood Cemetery ( Troy , New York ) = 
 Oakwood Cemetery is a nonsectarian rural cemetery in northeastern Troy , New York , United States . It operates under the direction of the Troy Cemetery Association , a non @-@ profit board of directors that deals strictly with the operation of the cemetery . It was established in 1848 in response to the growing rural cemetery movement in New England and went into service in 1850 . The cemetery was designed by architect John C. Sidney and underwent its greatest development in the late 19th century under superintendent John Boetcher , who incorporated rare foliage and a clear landscape design strategy . Oakwood was the fourth rural cemetery opened in New York and its governing body was the first rural cemetery association created in the state . 
 It features four man @-@ made lakes , two residential structures , a chapel , a crematorium , 24 mausolea , and about 60 @,@ 000 graves , and has about 29 miles ( 47 km ) of roads . It is known both for its dense foliage and rolling lawns , and has historically been used as a public park by Lansingburgh and Troy residents . Oakwood was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1984 . 
 Prominent Americans such as Uncle Sam Wilson , Russell Sage , and Emma Willard , at least fourteen members of the United States House of Representatives , and the founders of both Troy and Lansingburgh are buried at Oakwood . The cemetery has been said to be " one of New York State 's most distinguished and well @-@ preserved nineteenth @-@ century rural cemeteries . " It also offers a famous panoramic view of the Hudson River Valley that is said to be the " most concentrated and complete overview of American history anywhere in America " . 
 = = History = = 
 The first rural cemetery in the United States — Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge , Massachusetts — was developed in the 1830s . Rural cemeteries are burial grounds typically located on the fringe of a city that offer a natural setting for interment of the dead . The development of rural cemeteries followed closely with the English garden movement of the early 19th century . 
 The Troy Cemetery Association was formed on September 9 , 1848 ; John Paine , D. Thomas Vail , Isaac <unk> , George M. Tibbits , John B. Gale , and Stephen E. Warren were elected its trustees . It was the first rural cemetery association incorporated under an 1847 law authorizing the incorporation of such associations . The trustees appointed a committee to report on an eligible location for a cemetery and on September 5 , 1849 , the first parcel of land was purchased . On October 16 , 1850 , the land of the cemetery was consecrated and Oakwood became the fourth rural cemetery founded in New York . The Association is made up of lot owners who are elected by fellow lot owners ; the position is voluntary and receives no pay . 
 Oakwood was designed by John C. Sidney , a Philadelphia engineer familiar with cemetery design , with the help of Garnet Douglass Baltimore , the first African American to earn a degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute . The plan consisted of roads , man @-@ made lakes , dense vegetation , and rolling hills , covering about 300 acres ( 120 ha ) , including the modern sections A through Q. Sidney also designed the original superintendent 's house and receiving tomb , neither of which exist today . For all Sidney 's extensive planning , the first plots were laid out in a seemingly haphazard manner by the first superintendent , Robert Fergusson . 
 Although Sidney was the architect of the cemetery , it was superintendent John Boetcher that gave Oakwood its charm . Boetcher became superintendent in 1871 and continued in the position until 1898 . At the beginning of his tenure , Oakwood was said to be quite crude . During Boetcher 's tenure Oakwood 's most important icons were built : the Earl Chapel and Crematorium , the Warren Chapel Mortuary , the keeper 's house , the office lodge , numerous mausolea , and both the 101st Street and 114th Street entrances ( including a bridge over the Troy and Boston Railroad on Oakwood 's western border to the 101st Street entrance ) . Boetcher incorporated exceptional landscape design techniques during his tenure ; Oakwood developed shifting landscape scenery : some areas are dominated by flowing lawns while others comprise dense foliage . Boetcher brought in rare and foreign plants to help beautify the cemetery , including umbrella pines and Colorado blue spruce . 
 In 1869 , the City of Troy bought the property of the Third Street Burying Ground for the site of a new city hall . This was the burial site for many of Troy 's earliest inhabitants ; the City had bought lot number 102 in Section N for re @-@ interment of 146 graves . The Vanderheyden family and Jacob Lansing , founders of Troy and Lansingburgh respectively , were re @-@ interred in Oakwood from private , family cemeteries . With these re @-@ interments , the graves within Oakwood span the entire the history of Troy . Although it was a cemetery by definition , Oakwood quickly became a place for recreation and was used in its early days as a public park . In response to its popularity , many memorials include benches in their design , aimed to invite visitors to rest while enjoying their visit . So popular was Oakwood that in 1908 the Association began a stage service between the Oakwood Avenue and 114th Street entrances . 
 A 325 @-@ acre ( 132 ha ) section of Oakwood was nominated for the National Register of Historic Places in August 1984 and was added to the Register on October 10 , 1984 . The cemetery originally owned about 110 acres ( 45 ha ) on the east side of Oakwood Avenue , but sold the land in two transactions in the 2000s ( decade ) . The land deals were made to increase the Association 's operating income . As of 2009 , the cemetery contained roughly 60 @,@ 000 graves and its numbers continue to grow . The Association expects to be able to accept interments until at least the early 23rd century . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Oakwood is built on an escarpment that rises east of the fluvial plain surrounding the Hudson River , opposite the confluence of the Hudson and Mohawk . It is in eastern Lansingburgh , within the northeast section of the city of Troy . Its western edge is dominated by a steep , densely vegetated hill that descends to the city below while the central and eastern portions of the cemetery comprise rolling hills graced with trees and vegetation that include four man @-@ made ponds created by damming local streams . The property is generally long and thin , running approximately north @-@ south along Oakwood Avenue ( New York Route 40 ) . 
 The cemetery covers 352 acres ( 142 ha ) of which 325 acres ( 132 ha ) contribute to the listing on the National Register of Historic Places . In the east @-@ west direction , the cemetery extends from Gurley Avenue and the bed of the old Troy and Boston Railroad on the west , to Oakwood Avenue on the east . The northern boundary is Farrell Road Extension and the southern boundary is a line that extends due east from a point just south of 101st Street , to Oakwood Avenue . 
 The cemetery is split into sections for ease of finding graves which , for the most part , follow an alphabetic ( e.g. Section K ) or alphanumeric ( e.g. Section D @-@ 3 ) naming system , though there are some that follow a numeric scheme . The sections are split by paved and gravel roads and pedestrian paths that total 29 miles ( 47 km ) . 
 There are three operating entrances to the cemetery . The main entrance is on Oakwood Avenue at the southern tip of the property ; it is flanked by the keeper 's house . The 114th Street entrance is marked only by a gate and connects to Gurley Avenue . The 101st Street entrance passes the office lodge . 
 = = Landmarks = = 
 The large amount of space in rural cemeteries permits the use of sculpture in a way that the crowded churchyard has never allowed . Many rural cemeteries , including Oakwood , subsequently became virtual outdoor sculpture museums , displaying the works of well @-@ known contemporary sculptors as memorials to the deceased . Oakwood is home to thousands of individual statues and sculptures as well as 24 private mausolea . Because of its popularity as a public park , many memorials included benches to invite visitors to rest while investigating the large , hilly property . 
 Many historically important sculptors are represented on the grounds of Oakwood . Robert E. <unk> , creator of the memorial urn for A. J. Downing on the National Mall in Washington , D. C. , sculpted the memorial for Major General George H. Thomas , which incorporates a white marble sarcophagus topped with a bald eagle . William Rinehart 's final work , a life @-@ size sculpture of Julia Taylor Paine , resides in Oakwood . J. Massey Rhind , known for his statue of Crawford W. Long in the National Statuary Hall Collection , is the artist behind the Robert Ross Monument . The Ross Monument shows Ross defending a ballot box , honoring his martyrdom , which resulted from his active work against election corruption in Troy . Joseph Fuller 's grave is marked by an elaborately carved Celtic Cross — one of the first in the cemetery — and is based on another monument that Fuller saw while visiting Ireland . 
 One of the most significant monuments is that to Major General John E. Wool . The 75 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 23 @.@ 0 m ) monolithic obelisk which was a technological marvel in its day is constructed from granite quarried and shaped by the <unk> Granite Company of <unk> , Maine , and at 650 tons was believed to be the largest shaft quarried in the United States up to that time . It was transported to Troy by boat and brought to the cemetery on rollers . This and the many other obelisks in the cemetery exhibit the sentiment and taste of the Victorian and Edwardian eras . 
 In 1862 the Troy Cemetery Association set aside an area in Section P , called the Soldiers ' Plot , for deceased Army and Navy officers and soldiers from Rensselaer County . 
 = = = Gardner Earl Memorial Chapel and Crematorium = = = 
 The most significant building on the property is the Gardner Earl Memorial Chapel and Crematorium , a Richardsonian Romanesque structure built between 1887 and 1889 , which sits near the edge of the escarpment about 300 feet ( 91 m ) above the Hudson . The building was financed by William S. Earl , a successful Troy manufacturer , as a memorial to his son who became ill and died on a trip to Europe in March 1887 . The deceased son was an early promoter of cremation and was himself cremated in Buffalo . 
 The building consists of a 90 @-@ foot ( 27 m ) bell tower with an 18 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) square base on the south side , connected by a triple @-@ arched loggia to a chapel and crematorium on the north side . The floor plan of the entire building measures 136 by 70 feet ( 41 by 21 m ) . The exterior is covered by a pink @-@ tinted Westerly granite and the foundation sits completely on bedrock . 
 The interior is noted for its sumptuous and intricate design . The original furnace room was transformed into an elaborately designed reception room in 1889 , the furnaces having been moved into a separate room . This features significant use of marble , from Siena , Japan , and Africa , on its walls , floors , and molding . The Troy Daily Times stated on November 7 , 1889 , that , " the chapel is a model of architectural and mechanical skill , " and that the chapel 's reception room " is certainly the equal , and possibly in respect to artistic detail and <unk> of execution , the superior of any church interior in the land . " 
 The interior of the chapel is marked by quartered oak ceilings , bluestone floors , and five original Tiffany stained glass windows . The chancel contains an onyx altar and mosaic floor made of more than twenty colors of marble . 
 The Earl Crematorium was listed in its own right on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003 and was designated a National Historic Landmark on March 5 , 2012 . 
 = = = Warren Family Mortuary Chapel = = = 
 The Warren Family Mortuary Chapel is a stone chapel built on a knoll near the center of the cemetery . It was designed by Henry Dudley of New York City and built in 1860 in the English country Gothic style , complete with a nave and transept floor plan . A tower was added in 1883 , with great care placed on finding building material that matched the earlier structure . The Chapel contains stained glass windows above the altar designed by artist Robert Walter Weir . Former member of the United States House of Representatives Joseph Mabbett Warren ( 1813 – 1896 ) is interred in the chapel . 
 = = = Vanderheyden Bell = = = 
 The Vanderheyden Bell , a memorial itself , is located northeast of the Earl Crematorium . It is a bronze , cast bell weighing more than 3 @,@ 000 pounds ( 1 @,@ 400 kg ) . Its original home was under a log shelter on the premises . At some point , it was placed into storage . In 1971 it was resurrected and hung among four redwood posts , becoming an additional " tower " on the property . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Oakwood is home to 24 mausolea and burial vaults exhibiting a wide range of architectural styles including Greek Revival , Egyptian Revival , Roman Revival , Gothic Revival , Romanesque , and Palladian . These structures are scattered throughout the grounds , some clustered , some not . They house the remains of some of Troy 's wealthier and more important historical figures . 
 The Cannon Mausoleum is mainly Greek Revival to look at , but also has Romanesque aspects , such as a cruciform floor plan and a domed roof . The <unk> Mausoleum is a simplified Greek Revival structure , with a bronze door in the Art Nouveau style displaying an angel surrounded by lilies . The Tracy Mausoleum , incorporating the most eclectic mix of design influences on the property , has a rock @-@ faced stone exterior covered with foliate carvings . It displays a combination of Romanesque , Moorish , and Baroque elements , and is topped with a " beehive " roof — one of its more recognizable design features . The Tibbits Mausoleum , Vail Vault , and Gale <unk> are all done in the Gothic Revival style . The Kemp Mausoleum is the Palladian representative on site and the Paine Mausoleum is another eclectic design , octagonal in shape , and flanked by benches . 
 The Sage Mausoleum , built of Westerly granite , exhibits obvious Greek influences and is intentionally not marked . Russell Sage , the wealthy financier and member of the United States House of Representatives from Troy , is interred alone ; his second wife Margaret decided to be buried with her parents in Syracuse . To the left of the memorial is a bench that contains a relief of Medusa on the center of the back , complete with snakes as hair . 
 = = = The Panorama = = = 
 The Panorama is an 84 @-@ inch ( 210 cm ) panoramic photograph created by local photographer Tom Wall and set in acrylic on a steel stand in the cemetery 's northwestern section . It sits at the edge of a bluff directly overlooking the grounds of Lansingburgh High School and <unk> Middle School . The photograph spans a 100 @-@ mile ( 160 km ) view and contains labels and notes — referred to by the Troy Cemetery Association as " cliff notes " — about the history of objects shown in the photograph . From this point , one can view Albany and the Empire State Plaza ( most notably the Corning Tower and Alfred E. Smith Building ) , the Helderberg Escarpment , South Troy , downtown Troy , Lansingburgh , Watervliet , Green Island , Cohoes , the Cohoes Falls , Waterford , the Hudson River , the confluence of the Mohawk and Hudson Rivers , and the eastern terminus of the Erie Canal . The Troy Cemetery Association claims that the view offers the " most concentrated and complete overview of American history anywhere in America " . It shows evidence of paleolithic rocks , Native Americans , the Dutch , the British , the French and Indian Wars , the American Revolution , the Industrial Revolution , and the " Way West " movement resulting in the creation of the Erie Canal and Champlain Canal . 
 = = Notable interments = = 
 There are a number of historically prominent figures buried at Oakwood . At least fourteen members of the United States House of Representatives ( all from New York ) are buried there , including E. Harold Cluett , John Paine Cushman , John Dean Dickinson , William Henry Draper , Edward Whitford Greenman , Job Pierson , Russell Sage , Dean Park Taylor , John Richardson Thurman , George Tibbits , Martin Ingham Townsend , Henry Vail , Joseph Mabbett Warren ( also the mayor of Troy ) , and <unk> Wickes . The cemetery also has its fair share of military men , such as J. B. Carr , a general during the Civil War ; John Augustus Griswold , a promoter of ironclad ships and manufacturer of iron panels for the USS Monitor ; Commodore Cicero Price ( 1805 @-@ 1888 ) , who served in the American Civil War and commanded the East India Squadron ; George Henry Thomas , a general during the American Civil War , nicknamed the " Rock of Chickamauga " ; and John E. Wool , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the American forces during the Mexican @-@ American War . 
 As previously mentioned , the founders of Troy and Lansingburgh , Jacob D. Vanderheyden and Abraham Jacob Lansing respectively , were both re @-@ interred at Oakwood , having been moved there from downtown in 1869 . Some of education 's finest teachers are also buried there , including Amos Eaton , a well @-@ known botanist and geologist and founder of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute ; Mary Warren , founder of America 's first educational institution for " problem children " ; and Emma Willard , pioneer of women 's education and founder of the Troy Female Seminary , which was later renamed Emma Willard School in her honor . Finally , Oakwood is also the final resting place of Samuel Wilson , the progenitor of America 's national symbol , Uncle Sam . 
 = Guinea @-@ Bissau women 's national football team = 
 Guinea @-@ Bissau women 's national football team is a FIFA @-@ recognised team representing Guinea @-@ Bissau in international association football matches . Guinea @-@ Bissau have played in two FIFA @-@ recognised matches , both in 2006 against Guinea . The country also has a national under @-@ 17 side which participated in the 2012 Confederation of African Football qualifiers for the FIFA U @-@ 17 Women 's World Cup . Football is the most popular women 's sport in the country . A women 's football programme was established in 2004 , followed by the creation of a women 's national league . 
 = = Team = = 
 In 1985 , few countries had women 's national football teams . While the sport gained popularity worldwide in the ensuing years , Guinea @-@ Bissau 's team only began play more than two decades later . By the end of 2006 , the team had played in two FIFA @-@ recognised matches . The first was on 28 October 2006 against Guinea in Bissau , which ended in a 1 @-@ 1 tie after Guinea @-@ Bissau led 1 @-@ 0 at half @-@ time . On 12 November 2006 , the team played in their second FIFA @-@ recognised match in Conakry , where Guinea @-@ Bissau lost to Guinea 1 @-@ 3 . At the time , the team held three training sessions a week . The team has not participated in some of the major international and regional football competitions , including the Women 's World Cup , the 2010 African Women 's Championship and the 2011 All @-@ Africa Games . 
 The team 's average FIFA world ranking since 2006 is 119th . Its highest @-@ ever ranking was 92nd in December 2009 , and its lowest ranking was 144th in December 2007 . Guinea @-@ Bissau 's best @-@ ever rise in the rankings came in March 2008 , when the team climbed 23 places compared to its previous FIFA ranking . In March 2012 , the team was ranked the 135th in the world by FIFA and 30th in the Confederation of African Football . In June 2012 , they moved up five spots to 130th in the world but fell to the 33rd in Africa . 
 Guinea @-@ Bissau has a FIFA recognised under @-@ 17 football team , which was established in 2006 but did not play any matches that year . The team competed in the Confederation of African Football qualifiers for the FIFA U @-@ 17 World Cup to be held in Azerbaijan in September 2012 . They did not advance beyond regional qualifiers . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The development of women 's football in Africa faces several challenges , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women , inequalities and human rights abuses targeting women . Many quality football players leave to seek greater opportunities in Europe or the United States . Funding for women 's football in Africa is also an issue : Most of the financial assistance for women 's football comes from FIFA , not the national football associations . 
 Guinea @-@ Bissau won its independence in 1974 , the same year its national football federation , Federação de Futebol da <unk> @-@ Bissau , was founded . The federation became a FIFA affiliate in 1986 . Women 's football is provided for in the constitution of Federação de Futebol da <unk> @-@ Bissau , and the organisation has four full @-@ time staff members focusing on it . 
 Football is the country 's most popular sport for women , and is supported by football programmes in schools . A national women 's football programme was established in 2004 . By 2006 , the country had 80 total football clubs , five of which were mixed and three of which were for women only . There were 380 registered female players , and a women 's teams played in a national football championship . Three years later , there were 24 active women 's teams in Guinea @-@ Bissau . 
 = Spring Brook ( Lackawanna River ) = 
 Spring Brook ( also known as Spring Brook Creek ) is a tributary of the Lackawanna River in Lackawanna County and Luzerne County , in Pennsylvania , in the United States . It is approximately 17 miles ( 27 km ) long and flows through Covington Township , Spring Brook Township , and Moosic in Lackawanna County and Pittston Township in Luzerne County . The watershed of the stream has an area of 57 @.@ 2 square miles ( 148 km2 ) . It is designated as a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery above Interstate 476 and as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery below it . A section is also designated as Class A Wild Trout Waters . The stream 's tributaries include Panther Creek , Plank Bridge Creek , Rattlesnake Creek , Green Run , Monument Creek , and Covey Swamp Creek . It has a relatively high level of water quality and is very slightly acidic , with a pH of 6 @.@ 4 to 6 @.@ 9 . 
 The upper reaches of the watershed of Spring Brook are mountainous and swampy . Further downstream , the stream flows through a water gap in the Moosic Mountains . Sandstone , shale , and some coal are present in the vicinity of the stream . It has been channelized in a concrete channel for part of its length and is the main source of flooding in Spring Brook Township , Lackawanna County . The stream is the second @-@ largest tributary of the Lackawanna River . Reservoirs on Spring Brook include the Spring Brook Intake , the Nesbitt Reservoir , the Watres Reservoir . There are three dams on the stream . The watershed is mainly forested , with only a small amount of urban land . 
 In the past , industries in the watershed of Spring Brook included timbering , coal mining , and agriculture . Two railroads also passed through the watershed in the early 1900s , at least one of which was established by the 1880s . The stream 's watershed has served as a water supply since at least the early 1900s and still serves as a water supply for the Lackawanna Valley . Several bridges have also been constructed across the stream in the 20th century . The stream has been part of several studies since 1970 . Part of its length is navigable by kayaking , paddling , and rafting . 
 = = Course = = 
 Spring Brook begins near Interstate 380 in Covington Township , Lackawanna County . It flows south for a short distance before meandering west for a few miles , crossing Interstate 380 and entering Spring Brook Township . The stream then turns south for several tenths of a mile before turning northwest for several tenths of a mile . It turns southwest before turning north @-@ northwest and flowing around The Hogback . On the northern side of that hill , the stream turns south and then northwest , entering the Watres Reservoir . The stream exits the reservoir on its western side and flows northwest for a few miles , passing Pinnacle Hill and receiving the tributaries Panther Creek and Plank Bridge Creek from the left . It eventually bends east and enters the Nesbitt Reservoir after crossing Pennsylvania Route 502 . Here , it receives the tributary Rattlesnake Creek from the right and flows between high hills . On the northern side of the reservoir , the stream flows north , receiving the tributary Green Run from the right before turning west @-@ southwest . A few miles further downstream , it passes through the Spring Brook Intake before exiting Lackawanna County . 
 Upon exiting Lackawanna County , Spring Brook enters Pittston Township , Luzerne County . It receives the tributary Monument Creek from the left and turns north @-@ northwest for a few miles , flowing alongside Pennsylvania Route 502 . On this stretch , it leaves behind the hills that it flows through , crosses Pennsylvania Route 502 , and exits Luzerne County . Upon exiting Luzerne County , the stream enters Moosic , Lackawanna County and continues flowing north @-@ northwest and receives the tributary Covey Swamp Creek from the right . The stream then turns west @-@ southwest for a short distance before turning south and then west , crossing Interstate 81 . It then turns northwest for a few tenths of a mile , crossing US Route 11 before reaching its confluence with the Lackawanna River . 
 Spring Brook joins the Lackawanna River 3 @.@ 62 miles ( 5 @.@ 83 km ) upriver of its mouth . 
 = = = Tributaries = = = 
 Spring Brook has numerous named tributaries : Panther Creek , Plank Bridge Creek , Rattlesnake Creek , Green Run , Monument Creek , and Covey Swamp Creek . Panther Creek joins Spring Brook 10 @.@ 40 miles ( 16 @.@ 74 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 7 @.@ 18 square miles ( 18 @.@ 6 km2 ) . Plank Bridge Creek joins Spring Brook 8 @.@ 65 miles ( 13 @.@ 92 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 1 @.@ 26 square miles ( 3 @.@ 3 km2 ) . Rattlesnake Creek joins Spring Brook 7 @.@ 96 miles ( 12 @.@ 81 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 9 @.@ 18 square miles ( 23 @.@ 8 km2 ) . Green Run reaches its confluence with Spring Brook 6 @.@ 48 miles ( 10 @.@ 43 km ) upstream of its mouth . Its watershed has an area of 4 @.@ 32 square miles ( 11 @.@ 2 km2 ) . Spring Brook also has numerous unnamed tributaries . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 Spring Brook experiences noticeable flow loss . As of 2009 , it has high levels of sodium and alkalinity . <unk> Township and the borough of Moosic have permits to discharge stormwater into it . However , the water quality and habitat quality of the stream are relatively <unk> . The stream has relatively high water quality even where it flows through a concrete channel . In a study by the Susquehanna River Basin Commission , it was found not to fail any water quality standards either during base flow or storm flow conditions . However , a study from the previous year found concentrations of sodium and alkalinity exceeding the threshold for concern . In the early 1900s , Spring Brook was a clear stream in its upper reaches . However , by the time it reached the property of the Du Pont Powder Company , it was affected by slush pumped into it by the Pennsylvania Coal Company . 
 Between 1971 and 1990 , the streamflow of Spring Brook ranged from 0 @.@ 900 to 27 @.@ 0 cubic feet per second . The discharge ranged from 0 @.@ 06 to 22 cubic feet per second in the 1970s . The gage height of the stream in the 1970s ranged from 4 @.@ 72 to 6 @.@ 35 feet ( 1 @.@ 44 to 1 @.@ 94 m ) . The peak annual discharge of the stream at its mouth has a 10 percent chance of reaching <unk> cubic feet per second . It has a 2 percent chance of reaching 10 @,@ 900 cubic feet per second and a 1 percent chance of reaching 14 @,@ 700 cubic feet per second . The peak annual discharge has a 0 @.@ 2 percent chance of reaching 29 @,@ 500 cubic feet per second . 
 The concentration of dissolved oxygen in Spring Brook at the community of Spring Brook was measured to be 10 @.@ 6 milligrams per liter in 1975 . The concentration of hydrogen ions was measured to range from 0 @.@ 00013 to 0 @.@ <unk> milligrams per liter in the 1970s . The concentration of carbon dioxide ranged from 2 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 2 milligrams per liter and the bicarbonate concentration ranged from 9 to 12 milligrams per liter . The sulfate concentration in Spring Brook ranged from 12 @.@ 0 to 19 @.@ 0 milligrams per liter . The chloride concentration ranged between 3 @.@ 7 and 8 @.@ 0 milligrams per liter . 
 The concentration of organic nitrogen in Spring Brook at the community of Spring Brook was measured to be 0 @.@ 09 milligrams per liter in 1975 . The concentration of ammonia in the form of nitrogen was measured to be 0 @.@ 040 milligrams per liter . The concentration of nitrates in the form of nitrogen was 0 @.@ 74 milligrams per liter and the concentration of nitrites in the form of nitrogen ranged from 0 @.@ 045 to 0 @.@ 29 milligrams per liter in 1971 . 
 The concentration of sodium and potassium ( as Na ) in Spring Brook ranged from 1 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 9 milligrams per liter . The concentration of magnesium ranged from 0 @.@ 90 to 1 @.@ 60 milligrams per liter and the calcium concentration ranged from 7 @.@ 30 to 8 @.@ 80 milligrams per liter . The concentration of recoverable iron in the stream was measured to be 60 micrograms per liter in 1975 . 
 The concentration of alkalinity in the waters of Spring Brook between the Watres Dam and the Nesbitt Reservoir is 11 milligrams per liter . In the 1970s , the stream 's pH ranged from 6 @.@ 4 to 6 @.@ 9 . The total concentration of water hardness ranged from 23 to 28 milligrams per liter . The turbidity of the stream at the community of Spring Brook was one measured to be less than 5 Jackson Turbidity Units . The specific conductance of the stream ranged from 60 to 78 micro @-@ siemens per centimeter at 25 ° C ( 77 ° F ) during five measurements in the 1970s . The concentration of dissolved solids in the stream was measured to be 54 milligrams per liter in 1975 . 
 = = Geography , geology , and climate = = 
 The elevation near the mouth of Spring Brook is 617 feet ( 188 m ) above sea level . The elevation of the stream 's source is approximately 1 @,@ 860 feet ( 570 m ) above sea level . The gradient of the creek is 77 @.@ 3 feet ( 23 @.@ 6 m ) per mile . 
 The topography of the watershed of Spring Brook is mainly mountainous , with swampy land in its upper reaches . Some bogs are also present in this area . Wetlands near the stream 's headwaters include the Yostville marshes . In the stream 's middle and lower reaches , its valley is flanked by steep , high mountains . Its channel is sinuous and flows through rock formations consisting of sandstone and shale . There is also some coal in the lower reaches of the watershed . There are some culm dumps along the stream between Pennsylvania Route 502 and US Route 11 . 
 Spring Brook flows across the Pocono Plateau and passes through the Moosic Mountains via a water gap known as the Spring Brook Gap . Its mouth is in the Lackawanna Valley . In its lower reaches , the stream is channelized in a large open concrete channel . A number of bank stabilization projects have been done on the stream from Berlin Village downstream to its mouth . Some land in the vicinity of the stream is designated as a 100 year floodplain . 
 There are a number of dams on Spring Brook . One of these is the Spring Brook Intake Dam , which was determined in 1980 to be in good condition . Another is the Nesbitt Dam and a third is the Watres Dam . 
 Most of the Group A and Group B soils in Spring Brook Township , Lackawanna County are located along Spring Brook . These soils groups consist mainly of Pope soils . 
 The average annual rate of precipitation in the watershed of Spring Brook is between 35 and 40 inches ( 89 and 102 cm ) . The water temperature of the stream at the community of Spring Brook ranged from 8 @.@ 0 to 15 @.@ 5 ° C ( 46 @.@ 4 to 59 @.@ 9 ° F ) in five measurements during the 1970s . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 The watershed of Spring Brook has an area of 57 @.@ 2 square miles ( 148 km2 ) . The watershed is in southern Lackawanna County and northeastern Luzerne County . It is in the lower part of the Lackawanna River watershed , in its south @-@ central and southwestern section . The watershed is part of the North Pocono Watershed region of the Lackawanna River watershed . The mouth of the stream is in the United States Geological Survey quadrangle of Avoca . However , its source is in the quadrangle of Moscow . The creek mainly flows in a northwesterly direction . 
 Spring Brook is the second @-@ largest tributary of the Lackawanna River , after Roaring Brook . It is a third @-@ order stream . A significant portion of the watershed is forested . However , some residential areas , such as Yostville , Maple Lake , and Spring Brook Village are in the stream 's vicinity . The stream also flows through an urban area in Moosic . Its headwaters are near Yostville . However , only a few square miles of the watershed is urban . Approximately 60 percent of the stream 's watershed is owned by the Theta Company as of 2006 . 
 Reservoirs and ponds in the watershed of Spring Brook include the Spring Brook Intake , the Nesbitt Reservoir , the Watres Reservoir , and Maple Lake . The first three are used as drinking water reservoirs and the lakes also serve as flood protection . The Pennsylvania American Water Company owns all four lakes and several hundred acres of the surrounding land . There are flood levees at the mouth of the stream . There is some evidence of coal mining on a ridge overlooking the area in the stream 's vicinity . However , residential encroachment on the stream 's floodplain is a more significant environmental concern . 
 Spring Brook is the main source of flooding in Spring Brook Township , Lackawanna County . 
 = = History and industries = = 
 Spring Brook was entered into the Geographic Names Information System on August 2 , 1979 . Its identifier in the Geographic Names Information System is <unk> . 
 Spring Brook provided power for early lumbering in Spring Brook Township , Lackawanna County . In the early 1900s , the main industries in the watershed of Spring Brook included coal mining and agriculture . The Pennsylvania Coal Company historically had a washery that discharged into the stream . The Du Pont Powder Company also operated in the watershed at that time . A railroad line along the stream was present by the 1880s . The Wilkes @-@ Barre and Eastern Railroad also crossed the stream 's watershed and the Scranton and Spring Brook Railroad followed the stream between Rockdale and its mouth . During this time period , major communities in the watershed included Moosic , which had a population of <unk> at the time . The main stem and several tributaries were also historically used as a water supply by the Spring Brook Water Supply Company . The stream is still used as an important water supply in the Lackawanna Valley , as of 2001 . Together with Roaring Brook and Stafford Meadow Brook , it serves as a water supply to a substantial part of the valley . Some areas of the watershed have been subjected to extensive timbering programs as recently as 2001 . The Nesbitt Water Filtration Plant is in the watershed , in Pittston Township , Luzerne County . It is owned by the Pennsylvania American Water Company . 
 Spring Brook flooded during Hurricane Diane in 1955 , reaching a discharge of 10 @,@ 300 cubic feet per second ( 290 m3 / s ) near Moosic and destroying three homes and inundating the basements and first floors of many others . The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection constructed a levee on the stream after this flooding event . The stream also experienced bank failure during floods in October 1985 and January 1996 . It also flooded homes and trailers in its vicinity . 
 A two @-@ span steel stringer / multi @-@ beam or girder bridge carrying Main Street / State Route 3024 over Spring Brook was built in 1956 . It is 111 @.@ 9 feet ( 34 @.@ 1 m ) long and is situated in Moosic . Another bridge of the same type was built over the stream in 1957 . This bridge is 155 @.@ 8 feet ( 47 @.@ 5 m ) long and is in Pittston Township . A two @-@ span prestressed box beam or girders bridge was built over the stream in Moosic in 1958 . It is 138 @.@ 1 feet ( 42 @.@ 1 m ) long and carries Pennsylvania Route 502 . Another bridge of the same type ( but with only one span ) was built in Moosic in 1959 and repaired in 1985 . It carries US Route 11 and is 67 @.@ 9 feet ( 20 @.@ 7 m ) long . In 1961 , a two @-@ span steel stringer / multi @-@ beam or girder bridge was built over the stream in Moosic . It is 180 @.@ 1 feet ( 54 @.@ 9 m ) long and carries Pennsylvania Route 502 . A prestressed box beam carrying Pennsylvania Route 502 over the stream was constructed in 1987 . This bridge is in Pittston Township and has a length of 27 @.@ 9 feet ( 8 @.@ 5 m ) . 
 Spring Brook has been studied several times . It was studied by the United States Geological Survey from 1971 to 1975 , by Daniels ( working for the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission ) in 1976 , by Rider and Blacksmith ( working for the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection ) in 1985 , by Copeland ( working for the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission ) in 1992 , by <unk> ( working for the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission ) in 1993 , and Popp and <unk> in 2003 . The stream is on the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Bureau of Abandoned Mine Restoration 's priority list for restoration . 
 = = Biology = = 
 The drainage basin of Spring Brook is designated as a High @-@ Quality Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery from its headwaters downstream to the Northeast Extension of the Pennsylvania Turnpike ( Interstate 476 ) . From that point downstream to its mouth , the drainage basin of the stream is designated as a Coldwater Fishery and a Migratory Fishery . Wild trout naturally reproduce in Spring Brook from its headwaters downstream to its mouth . A 2 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 4 @-@ kilometer ) section of the stream from the Watres Dam downstream to the Nesbitt Reservoir is considered by the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission to be Class A Wild Trout Waters for both brook trout and brown trout . The tributaries Green Run and Panther Creek are Class A Wild Trout Waters for brook trout and part of the tributary Rattlesnake Creek is Class A Wild Trout Waters for both brook trout and brown trout . 
 Numerous macroinvertebrate species have been observed in Spring Brook . A total of 18 genera are from the orders Ephemeroptera , Plecoptera , and Trichoptera . A short distance upstream of the Watres Reservoir , the most common genera taxa were the family Chironomidae and the genera <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . Of a 200 @-@ individual sample , 34 , 28 , 25 , and 20 individuals of each taxon have been observed , respectively . Slightly less common are the genera <unk> , <unk> , Leuctra , and <unk> . Of the 200 @-@ individual sample , 15 , 13 , 11 , and 10 individuals of each taxon have been observed , respectively . Still less common are the genera <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Agapetus , <unk> , and <unk> . In the 200 @-@ individual sample , 8 , 6 , 5 , 4 , 4 , 3 , 2 , and 2 individuals of each taxon have been observed , respectively . Only one individual each of the genera <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Tabanus , and <unk> were observed . 
 The wetlands at the headwaters of Spring Brook are home to boreal forest trees . These include black spruce , paper birch , and tamarack . Huckleberry , lady 's slipper , leather leaf , mountain laurel , pitcher plant , and rhododendron plants inhabit bogs in the area . 
 The modified Hilsenhoff Biotic Index value of Spring Brook a short distance upstream of the Watres Reservoir is 2 @.@ 56 . The modified EPT Index value at this location is 15 . The taxa richness value is 26 . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 A trail known as the Spring Brook / Wilkes @-@ Barre and Eastern Greenway was proposed in the Lackawanna River Watershed Conservation Plan in 2001 . There are plans for trails on the flood levee at the stream 's mouth and on the old Wilkes @-@ Barre and Eastern Railroad corridor . 
 A stretch of at least 7 miles ( 11 km ) of Spring Brook are navigable by kayaking , paddling , or rafting . This stretch runs from the Nesbitt Reservoir to Moosic . The difficulty of the stream ranges from Class II to Class IV . 
 Spring Brook is an approved trout stream . In 1996 , it was opened for trout fishing on April 29 . 
 = Surrounded ( Björk album ) = 
 Surrounded is the third box set by Icelandic musician Björk . It was released on 27 June 2006 through One Little Indian . It is a collection of seven of her studio albums , issued in the DualDisc format — one side contains the original <unk> , while the other one includes their remastered versions in surround sound , in tandem with music videos and additional features . While the box set did not impact any record charts , music critics gave mixed to positive reviews to Surrounded . Most of them were positive towards its packaging and affirmed it was an effective showcase of Björk 's catalogue . Nonetheless , criticism was targeted towards its opportunistic nature and technicalities . 
 = = Content and release = = 
 Surrounded compiles reissues of five of Björk 's studio albums — Debut ( 1993 ) , Post ( 1995 ) , Homogenic ( <unk> ) , Vespertine ( 2001 ) and Medúlla ( 2004 ) — in addition to Selmasongs ( 2000 ) , and Drawing Restraint 9 ( 2005 ) , her soundtrack albums . They are pressed in <unk> , which possess both a CD side and a DVD side . The former contains each album as originally released , whereas they appear remastered in both DTS and Dolby 5 @.@ 1 on the latter . Paul ' P @-@ Dub ' Walton was the project 's sound engineer , having been responsible for the remasters . Ken Richardson of Sound and Vision described Richardson 's work on the box set as a " truly surrounding mix " , adding it provides " authority " to Björk 's " fragile " voice , while making " the icy electronics warm up in the newly expansive atmosphere . " The DVD sides incorporate the music videos of each album 's singles , the exceptions being the discs for Selmasongs and Drawing Restraint 9 do not include any visuals , but the latter features an extra track — " <unk> " . The collection is bundled in M / M Paris @-@ designed " hot metallic pink packaging " , which Kurt <unk> of MTV says " is a work of art in and of itself " , and Mark Pytlik characterised as a continuation of Björk 's " <unk> of the physical artifact " . The albums are accompanied by their original artwork . Surrounded was released in the United Kingdom on 27 June 2006 ; its components were also made available individually . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Surrounded elicited mixed to positive reviews from music critics . George Lang , writing in The Oklahoman , recommended the boxset to fans of Björk , commending its inclusion of the artist 's videography . On behalf of the San Francisco Chronicle , Aidin Vaziri praised the sound quality and packaging , but was ambivalent towards the collection 's price and opined that the " quality of the music is wildly inconsistent " . Sound and Vision evaluated the sound of the remasters positively ; according to reviewer Ken Richardson , they are " never less than excellent " . Although he drew praise to the bonus features , he noted the " static " menus of the DVDs . The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune found it suitable for " completists with high @-@ end audio gear " ; The Buffalo News said the boxset " should help put this clearly brilliant artist in both proper context and proper light . " Ryan Dombal of Entertainment Weekly assessed it as a " luxurious treat " and reckoned it " revitalizes some of the most ambitious pop music of the last 13 years " , despite finding the compendium antithetical to Björk 's " relevant " status . The remasters of Vespertine and Medúlla were singled out in the review . 
 Heather Phares of AllMusic described the boxset as " beautifully packaged " and practical , whereas The Austin Chronicle reviewer Melanie Haupt denoted the technical problems adjacent to the DualDisc , stating , " The work and its evolution speaks for itself . ( ... ) Too bad the hardware doesn 't . " Mark Pytlik 's review for Pitchfork Media contextualized Surrounded in a flurry of Björk releases . He stated it is not worth purchasing , adding that " she 's pretty much guaranteed to come back with another one that 's bigger and better in a few years ' time anyway . " Global Rhythm 's Jeff Tamarkin viewed the inclusion of " the more sonically pedestrian original recordings " as unnecessary , complimenting the remasters and videos . 
 = The Boat Race 1937 = 
 The 89th Boat Race took place on 24 March 1937 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . In a race umpired by the former Cambridge rower and coach Harold Rickett , Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 22 minutes 39 seconds . It was their first success since the 1923 race and ended Cambridge 's record streak of 13 wins . The victory took the overall record in the event to 47 – 41 in Cambridge 's favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1936 race by five lengths , and led overall with 47 victories to Oxford 's 40 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . The Light Blues had won thirteen consecutive races coming into this year 's event . 
 Cambridge were coached by J. Beresford Jr , J. R. F. Best , F. E. Hellyer ( who had rowed for the Light Blues in the 1910 and 1911 races ) and Kenneth Payne ( who rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races , and had coached Oxford in the 1935 and 1936 races ) . Oxford 's coaches were P. C. Mallam ( a four @-@ time Dark Blue who had rowed in the 1921 , 1922 , 1923 and 1924 races ) , Guy Oliver Nickalls ( who had rowed three times between 1921 and 1923 ) and William Rathbone ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1926 and 1927 races ) . The umpire for the race was the former Cambridge rower Harold Rickett who had rowed for the Light Blues three times , in the 1930 , 1931 and 1932 races . He had also coached them for the 1933 race . 
 The special correspondent for The Observer suggested that the race would be the finest for some years , concluding that " a win for Oxford would do much good to English rowing " . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Oxford crew weighed an average of 12 st 13 @.@ 5 lb ( 82 @.@ 1 kg ) , 7 @.@ 75 pounds ( 3 @.@ 5 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Cambridge saw three rowers return to the crew with Boat Race experience , including McAllister <unk> who was taking part in his third consecutive event . Oxford 's boat contained four former Blues , including David Michael De Rueda Winser who was also making his third appearance in the Boat Race . Oxford 's number six Jan Sturrock won a silver medal at the 1936 Summer Olympics in the Men 's coxless fours . His crew @-@ mate John Cherry , and Cambridge 's Thomas Cree , Hugh Mason and <unk> all rowed in the Men 's eight for Great Britain in the 1936 Games , finishing fourth . Cambridge 's Cree and cox T. H. Hunter were the only non @-@ British participants registered , both of whom hailed from Australia . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . In calm weather , umpire Rickett started the race at 11 : 35 a.m. A false start ensued , with Rickett failing to hear Oxford state that they were not ready to start . Rickett restarted the race and , out @-@ rating their opponents , Cambridge were half a length ahead after the first minute . They held the same advantage by Craven Steps , but a spurt from Oxford 's stroke A. B. Hodgson saw the Dark Blues draw level . Following some errant steering from Cambridge 's cox Hunter , Oxford pulled away to lead by a canvas @-@ length by the time the crews passed the Mile Post . 
 As they passed the Crab Tree pub , the Cambridge stroke R. J. L. <unk> put in a spurt which made little difference as Oxford continued to lead by Harrods Furniture Depository . Steering away from the Light Blues to avoid a collision , Oxford lost their lead as the crews passed under Hammersmith Bridge level . Another spurt from <unk> saw the Light Blues a third of a length up by the Doves pub as the crews headed into Chiswick Reach . This time it was Oxford 's turn to steer clear of a collision , losing most of their lead by Chiswick Steps , but heading over towards the Middlesex shore , they caught the best of the tide . The Dark Blues passed below Barnes Bridge three @-@ quarters of a length ahead , and although Cambridge burst to out @-@ rate Oxford by three strokes per minute , they failed to make any impression and Oxford pulled further ahead . 
 Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 22 minutes 39 seconds , securing their first victory since the 1923 race . It was both the slowest winning time and the narrowest margin of victory since 1877 . It was declared by former Oxford rower E. P. Evans as being " one of the most exciting races ever seen on the tideway " and " a truly magnificent victory for the Oxford crew " . The rowing correspondent in The Times stated that " not since 1921 has there been such a great race " . He went on to suggest " it was one of the greatest races " . 
 = Gabor B. Racz = 
 Gábor Béla <unk> ( born 1937 ) , is a board @-@ certified anesthesiologist and professor emeritus at Texas Tech University Health Science Center ( TTUHSC ) in Lubbock , Texas , where he is also Chairman Emeritus of the Department of Anesthesiology and Co @-@ Director of Pain Services . He has worked in the field of chronic back pain and complex regional pain syndrome ( <unk> ) . 
 In 1982 , he designed the Racz catheter , a flexible , spring @-@ wound catheter with a small fluoroscopic probe . In 1989 , he developed epidural lysis of adhesions , sometimes referred to as percutaneous <unk> , or simply the Racz procedure . It is a minimally invasive , percutaneous intervention for treating chronic spinal pain often due to scarring after post lumbar surgery syndrome , sometimes called failed back surgery , and also low back and radicular pain from spinal stenosis , a disease of aging . The procedure is somewhat similar to an epidural and is used when conventional methods have failed . The Racz procedure may employ the use of a wire @-@ bound catheter to mechanically break @-@ up or dissolve scar tissue , also called epidural adhesions or fibrosis , which have formed around the nerve roots , and allows for local anesthetics , saline and steroids to be injected into the affected area . 
 Racz was born in Hungary and , as a young man , had aspirations to become a medical doctor . He was a second @-@ year medical student in November 1956 when he was forced to flee Hungary after the Soviets invaded Budapest in response to the Hungarian Revolution . He eventually arrived in England and resumed his education . He graduated from the University of Liverpool School of Medicine , and worked in the UK until 1963 at which time he moved to the United States . He completed his anesthesiology residency at SUNY Upstate Medical University in Syracuse , New York . He also worked as an associate attending anesthesiologist and respiratory consultant for other hospitals including the Veterans Administration Hospital , and the UHS Chenango Memorial Hospital in Norwich , New York before moving to Lubbock , Texas where he became the first Chairman of Anesthesiology for the then @-@ new Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center ( TTUHSC ) . Racz is also one of the founders of the World Institute of Pain . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Racz was born in Hungary to parents with a financially meager background which he attributed in part to his family 's resistance to join the Communist party . He attended Semmelweis University Medical School , and it was during his second year there that the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 had begun . After seeing hundreds of injured people , he volunteered to help at the hospital . He said he received a signed directive to drive a truck and deliver sugar to the medical school clinics which he believed motivated the Hungarian Secret Police to seek him out for questioning . He also recalled a shooting incident where a bullet missed his head by " a few inches " . 
 On November 27 , 1956 , he fled from Budapest to Austria with his future wife Enid , his sister , brother @-@ in @-@ law , and a few others after the Soviets invaded the city . He had no prior intention to leave Hungary until he learned from his mother that the Hungarian Secret Police were looking for him . Racz said if they found him , " That would have meant the end of my dreams to become a doctor . Perhaps I would have ended up in prison . Not that I had done anything but many other people ended up in prison following 1956 without committing any crime . " He arrived in the Austrian town of Eisenstadt where buses were waiting to take refugees to their new homes . Racz chose the bus to England , and he along with his family and other members of his group were transported to a military base in the Midlands . 
 In 1957 , as a former Hungarian medical student , Racz received a scholarship to attend second @-@ year medical school in Liverpool , England . In 1962 , he graduated from the University of Liverpool School of Medicine with Bachelor of Medicine ( M.B. ) and Bachelor of Surgery ( <unk> ) degrees . Ian <unk> and his wife helped Racz get his start as a doctor by providing him with rent @-@ free lodging so he could finish his education . He said their generosity became a lifelong example in that " one must study and pass on knowledge and help the next generation . " Racz later served as house surgeon and physician at the Royal Southern Hospital in Liverpool . 
 = = Career in the United States = = 
 In 1963 , Racz moved to the United States for an anesthesiology residency at SUNY Upstate Medical University in Syracuse , New York . Upon completion , he worked in several positions at SUNY , including associate attending anesthesiologist and respiratory consultant in the neurological head injury unit as well as a consultant for the Veterans Administration Hospital , and the UHS Chenango Memorial Hospital in Norwich , New York . 
 In 1977 , Racz joined the then @-@ new Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center ( TTUHSC ) and was designated as the Center 's first Chairman of Anesthesiology . He held that position until March 1 , 1999 . His work from 1977 to 2006 not only included treating patients , he also served as acting director of pain services at TTUHSC , and oversaw the expansion of operations and future development of the Messer @-@ Racz International Pain Center named in recognition of Racz 's work and the Messer family 's financial contributions . In 2015 , Racz held the designation of Professor and Chairman Emeritus , Director of Pain Services for Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center . 
 Throughout his career , Racz has also conducted research and co @-@ authored articles with other experts in pain management to improve diagnosis and treatment of complex regional pain syndromes ( <unk> ) , a long @-@ term disorder of the nervous system which is a challenging pain problem that is often misunderstood and misdiagnosed . 
 = = = Recognition and awards = = = 
 In 1996 , Racz was the first recipient of the Grover E. Murray Professorship , TTUHSC 's highest award . In December 1998 , the University Medical Center named him to a $ 1 million endowed chair in recognition of his work at TTUHSC and the University Medical Center . In 2004 , he received the Lifetime Achievement Award presented by the American Society of Interventional Pain Physicians . The New York / New Jersey Societies of Interventional Pain Physicians awarded Racz a lifetime achievement award in October , 2012 . 
 = = Racz catheter and procedure = = 
 Racz 's work with nerve <unk> , spinal cord <unk> , <unk> <unk> , and a wide range of other pain management procedures is being used in interventional pain practices throughout the world . He developed new designs in medical equipment and devices . 
 In 1982 , Racz designed the Racz catheter , a flexible , spring @-@ wound catheter with a small fluoroscopic probe . In 1989 , he developed epidural lysis of adhesions , a minimally invasive , percutaneous procedure also known as the " Racz procedure " , which is somewhat similar to an epidural . It is used to treat patients with chronic low back pain due to post lumbar surgery syndrome , sometimes called failed back surgery , which involves scar tissue that has formed around the nerve root . It is also used to treat protruding or herniated disks , fractures , degeneration or radicular pain from spinal stenosis , a disease of aging . 
 The Racz procedure employs a wire @-@ bound or spring loaded catheter to mechanically break @-@ up or dissolve scar tissue , also called epidural adhesions or fibroids , that have formed around the nerve roots , and allows for local anesthetics , saline and steroids to be injected into the affected area . This procedure was assigned a Current Procedural Terminology ( <unk> ) code in 2000 . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 Racz has published in many forms . Among his works are : 
 Racz G. , 1985 : <unk> In The Operating Room : An Introductory <unk> by May , <unk> . , J. E. <unk> , D. <unk> And G. Racz . Vi <unk> . Raven Press Books , Ltd : New York , N.Y. , Usa . Illus . Paper . Vi <unk> 
 Racz , Gabor B. 1989 Techniques of <unk> Gabor Racz ( Ed . ) , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4899 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 ( Print ) 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 4899 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 ( Online ) , Current Management of Pain , Vol . 4 , Springer U.S. 
 Racz , Gabor B. , ( Ed . ) , ( 2012 ) Epidural Lysis of <unk> and <unk> <unk> , Pain Management : Current Issues and Opinions , by Gabor B. Racz , Miles R. Day , James E. <unk> , Jeffrey P. Smith , Jared Scott , Carl E. Noe , <unk> Nagy and Hana <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 953 @-@ 307 @-@ 813 @-@ 7 , <unk> , DOI : 10 @.@ <unk> / <unk> . 
 = Castle Rising ( castle ) = 
 Castle Rising is a ruined medieval fortification in the village of Castle Rising , Norfolk , England . It was built soon after 1138 by William d 'Aubigny II , who had risen through the ranks of the Anglo @-@ Norman nobility to become the Earl of Arundel . With his new wealth , he constructed Castle Rising and its surrounding deer park , a combination of fortress and palatial hunting lodge . It was inherited by William 's descendants before passing into the hands of the de Montalt family in 1243 . The <unk> later sold the castle to Queen Isabella , who lived there after her fall from power in 1330 . Isabella extended the castle buildings and enjoyed a regal lifestyle , entertaining her son , Edward III , on several occasions . After her death , it was granted to Edward , the Black Prince , to form part of the Duchy of Cornwall . 
 During the 15th century , the castle became increasingly valued for its hunting facilities rather than its military defences . It fell into disrepair and , despite the construction of new living quarters and service facilities , by the middle of the 16th century it was derelict . Henry VIII sold the property to Thomas Howard , the Duke of Norfolk , and most of the castle buildings were demolished . It was not until the 19th century , when Mary and Fulke Greville Howard inherited the property , that the castle was renovated and restored . Victorian scholars examined the site , and it was opened to the public . In 1958 the castle passed into the custody of the state , which carried out further stabilisation work and a programme of archaeological investigation . In 1998 English Heritage passed the management of the site back to its current owner , Baron Howard of Rising , who continues to operate the castle as a tourist attraction . 
 Castle Rising comprises three baileys , each defended by large earthworks , covering a total area of 5 hectares ( 12 acres ) , which historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham consider to be among the most impressive in Britain . In the inner bailey is the great keep , probably modelled on that of Norwich Castle . It features extensive Romanesque designs , including pilaster buttresses and arcading . Historians Beric Morley and David Gurney believe this to be " one of the finest of all Norman keeps " , and its military utility and political symbolism have been extensively discussed by academics . The castle was originally surrounded by a carefully managed landscape , from the planned town in front of the castle , to the deer park and rabbit warrens that stretched out behind it , intended to be viewed from the lord 's chamber in the great keep . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 12th – 13th centuries = = = 
 Castle Rising was built soon after 1138 by William d 'Aubigny II , an upwardly mobile Anglo @-@ Norman noble who owned the surrounding manor of <unk> . William married Adeliza of Louvain , the widow of King Henry I in that year , and became the Earl of Arundel in 1139 . This transformed his social position , and one chronicler at Waltham Holy Cross complained how he " became intolerably puffed up ... and looked down upon every other eminence in the world except the King " . With his new wealth , William built Castle Rising and New Buckenham Castle in Norfolk , and expanded Arundel Castle in West Sussex . 
 The castle was located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) from the port of King 's Lynn . In the 12th century it would have typically have been reached by boat , through a channel in the marshy Babingley River that ran nearby . Following the Norman conquest of England , the land had been granted to Bishop Odo , the Earl of Kent , who may have used it as an administrative centre ; there were many Saxo @-@ Norman buildings on the site of the later castle . Although Norfolk was a prosperous region during this period , the location of the castle was not strategically important : its only militarily significance would have been as a regional muster point , and the surrounding lands were thinly populated , with poor , acidic agricultural soil . The attraction of the site to William is believed to have been that it was a relatively cheap and easy place in which to build a substantial new building and establish a large hunting park . Historian Richard Hulme argues that William essentially built " a palatial hunting lodge " on the site . 
 Massive resources were required to construct Castle Rising , which included three baileys with large earthwork defences and a stone keep , with an adjacent deer park just behind the castle . As part of the project , the existing settlement was moved away to the north , where it became a planned settlement adjacent to the new castle . A pre @-@ existing Norman chapel on the site , built around 1100 , was encircled by the castle defences , and the new parish church of St Lawrence was built in the town instead , although it is possible that this church also pre @-@ dates the castle . William received permission from King Stephen to open a mint at the castle in 1145 and , probably linked to this development , settled a community of Jews in the town . 
 It is uncertain how often William actually stayed at his new castle . He and his wife probably preferred to reside in their estates around Arundel in the south of England , and both William and his descendants chose New Buckingham Castle , rather than Castle Rising , to serve as the caput , or main castle , for their Norfolk landholdings . 
 A prolonged civil war known as the Anarchy broke out in England from 1138 until 1154 , between the followers of King Stephen and the Empress Matilda , only ending when Matilda 's son , Henry II , finally inherited the kingdom . Despite William having backed Stephen during the war , after the end of the conflict he proved a loyal supporter of Henry and was allowed to retain his possessions . Henry clamped down on the operation of the regional mints , however , and closed the facility at Castle Rising ; the local Jews resettled in King 's Lynn . A second , rapid phase of construction work on the castle then occurred , probably in the 1170s in response to a major rebellion against Henry II . William supported the King , and fought against the rebels at the Battle of Fornham in neighbouring Suffolk . Around this time the height of the earth defences was doubled and the internal level of the west bailey raised to form a platform . 
 The castle was inherited by William d 'Albini III , and in turn by his son , William IV , and grandson , William V. William V died in 1224 , leaving it to his brother Hugh . Probably by this time the chapel inside the castle walls had fallen out of use as a religious building , and was instead employed for secular purposes . The top 3 @.@ 7 metres ( 12 ft ) of the keep 's walls are distinctively different from the rest of the building , and one theory to explain this is that the castle keep was not in fact completed during William II 's lifetime , and that the final work on walls was carried out between 1200 and 1230 by his descendants . Hugh died childless in 1243 , and the castle then passed to Roger de Montalt . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 The <unk> were a prominent baronial family , but they had few other estates in the region and their family fortunes declined . In 1327 , Roger de Montalt 's younger brother , Robert , who was childless , sold the reversion of his rights in the castle to the Crown in 1327 for 10 @,@ 000 marks – effectively selling it to the Crown with a life @-@ time lease for him and his wife Emma . An alternative theory to explain the different style of stonework along the top of the keep is that the building was completed under William d 'Albini II , but had become dilapidated by the start of the 14th century , requiring extensive repairs by Robert . The forebuilding of the keep was raised in height at one end around this time and a new , peaked roof added to it , and an imposing , timber @-@ framed , brick kitchen was built in the inner bailey . 
 At the time of Robert 's agreement with the Crown , the government of England was controlled by Roger Mortimer and Queen Isabella of France , who was ruling as regent in the name of her young son , Edward III . Isabella fell from power when Edward toppled Mortimer in a coup d 'état in 1330 , but after a short period of house arrest she led a relatively normal life , enjoying considerable status as the King 's mother . Edward granted Isabella several royal castles in England , including Castle Rising . Robert had died in 1329 and in 1331 Emma sold her rights to the castle to Isabella for £ 400 . 
 From then on , Isabella used Castle Rising as one of her main residences until her death in 1358 . Isabella was a wealthy woman , as the King granted her a yearly income of £ 3 @,@ 000 , which by 1337 had increased to £ 4 @,@ 000 . She enjoyed a regal lifestyle in Norfolk , maintaining minstrels , huntsmen and grooms , and received visits from Edward and the royal household on at least four occasions . Despite her large income , Isabella ran up long @-@ standing debts with the local merchants near the castle . Around the time that she took over the castle , a new set of buildings were constructed in the central bailey , including a west range containing a residential suite , a new private chapel , and a south range linking to various service buildings ; the existing kitchen was reused . The great hall was reroofed , although Isabella lived in the west range , using the keep only for formal occasions or as accommodation for very senior guests . A brick wall around the outside of the inner bailey may have been built around this time to provide additional security . 
 The castle then passed to Isabella 's grandson , Edward the Black Prince . Edward III had decreed in 1337 that his son would inherit the castle after Isabella 's death , complete with the surrounding manor and the right to part of the tolls from King 's Lynn , although these brought in only a relatively modest £ 100 a year . As part of this arrangement , the King declared the castle to be a permanent part of the Duchy of Cornwall , an estate traditionally assigned for the use of the Prince of Wales . The Prince undertook repairs to the castle during the 1360s , including spending £ 81 on repairing the " <unk> Tower " in 1365 , although it is uncertain which part of the castle this refers to . The Prince died in 1376 , returning the Duchy of Cornwall to the control of the Crown , and during this time Castle Rising appears to have been maintained in good condition . It was ordered on several occasions during the 1380s to raise local forces to counter the threat of a French invasion , and may have been equipped with two cannons . If not built by Isabella , the brick wall around the inner bailey may have been constructed during this period . 
 Under Richard II , the rights to the castle changed hands several times , despite Edward 's charter having made it a permanent part of the Duchy . Richard 's government gave the castle to John , the Duke of Brittany , in 1378 , in exchange for the Château de Brest . Richard subsequently gave the reversion of the castle first to his uncle Thomas , Duke of Gloucester , in 1386 , and then to another uncle , Edmund , Duke of York in 1397 . Shortly after Richard was overthrown , the courts declared these grants to have been illegal , and returned the castle to the Duchy in 1403 , then in the possession of the future Henry V. 
 = = = 15th – 18th centuries = = = 
 In the 15th and early 16th centuries , Castle Rising continued to be owned by the Duchy of Cornwall . Although the castle 's military defences were mobilised by Henry VI in 1461 during the Wars of the Roses , it became increasingly more prominent as a hunting facility . The role of the constable of the castle was often combined with that of the surveyor or ranger of Rising Chase , the parkland around the castle . The castle may have been a prestigious location during this period , although its facilities were not as extensive as those of other castles and manors known for their hunting . Senior visitors to the castle included Mary Tudor , Queen of France , and Charles Brandon , the Duke of Suffolk , and its constables included nobles such as Lord Ralph de Cromwell and John de Vere , the Earl of Oxford . 
 Minor repairs on the castle were carried out during the period , including to the castle bridge , but the state of the property gradually declined . The old kitchens were removed in the early 15th century , and a new , larger facility constructed in their place . Once built , however , the new kitchens , along with the rest of the buildings in the inner bailey , were left to deteriorate . Reports in 1482 stated that the buildings were no longer weatherproof , and a survey carried around between 1503 and 1506 described the castle as " <unk> <unk> " , and noted that the roof of the keep was rotten . This last survey urged that existing repair works on the buildings in the bailey be completed , but suggested that it might not be worth repairing the keep because of the excessive cost . 
 Despite these challenges , fresh construction work was carried out around this time . The southern range and the kitchen were pulled down , and replaced with a new set of lodgings for guests , complete with stables , although the resulting buildings were not particularly robust . Problems reappeared , and a survey between 1542 and 1543 noted that , with the exception of the new lodgings , the castle was in " greate ruin and decaye " . The roof of the keep had by now collapsed , as probably had the floors of the great hall and chamber . The survey costed the necessary repairs to the crumbling walls around the inner bailey at £ 100 . At around this time , the forebuilding of the keep was adapted to form a separate , smaller , set of chambers , and at some point after this a passageway was dug out of the walls to link these to the kitchens in the keep , by @-@ passing the now floor @-@ less rooms of the keep . 
 In 1544 Henry VIII bequeathed the castle to Thomas Howard , the Duke of Norfolk , but the property continued to decline . By the 1570s the castle and its earthworks had been allowed to become infested with rabbits , whose warrens caused extensive damage ; a survey suggested that fully renovating the castle would cost £ 2 @,@ 000 , and that even if it were pulled down and sold for the value of its materials , it would only realise £ 66 . At the end of the century , the inner bailey was finally cleared of most of its buildings ; the new lodgings were pulled down , along with most of the west range and the old Norman chapel , leaving only the ruined keep , alongside the latrines and the newer chapel , although what these last two were then used for is uncertain . The foundations of the old chapel were slowly covered up by the earth defences . 
 During the 17th century , the ground floor of the keep – made of hardened gravel – was dug up , probably to reuse for surfacing roads or pathways . The apartments in the forebuilding were abandoned and this part of the keep fell into decay as well . In 1644 , the lands surrounding the castle were <unk> , bringing an end to Castle Rising Chase . In 1705 stone was stripped from the castle to help repair a nearby sluice gate . 
 = = = 19th – 21st centuries = = = 
 Castle Rising continued to be owned by the Howard family , and in the 19th century it was inherited by Mary Howard , and her husband Fulke Greville Howard . Fulke began to undertake restoration work , excavating the basement of the keep in 1822 and repairing some of the stonework . The ground level of the inner bailey , which had built up over the years , was lowered by about 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) : according to the contemporary archaeologist Henry Harrod , this process required thousands of loads of earth to be dug out and removed . A great deal of medieval archaeological evidence was destroyed in the process , but the work uncovered the old Norman chapel and Harrod excavated the building in 1851 . Mary continued the excavation work on the castle site after Fulke 's death , and restored the stonework of the chapel . 
 Initially the chapel was believed to be of Anglo @-@ Saxon origin and to have been buried under the earthworks when they were first constructed . An argument then ensued between the antiquarian William Taylor , who championed the Anglo @-@ Saxon dating for the site , and Harrod , who insisted that the chapel was in fact Norman in origin ; the issue was not settled until later in the 20th century , when the Norman date was confirmed . By 1900 the castle was open to the public , overseen by a caretaker who lived in one corner of the keep , the section of which had been reroofed and turned into an apartment . 
 By 1958 the castle 's condition had deteriorated and the Ministry of Works took legal custody of the site , although it continued to be owned by the Howard family . Conservation work took place during the 1960s , stabilising the stonework of the keep . Archaeological investigations were then carried out , focusing on the keep in 1970 , the church and the earthwork defences during 1971 and 1972 , and the inner bailey from 1973 to 1976 . This research centred on archaeological excavations and the recording of remains ; as with similar castles investigated during this period , the site was then preserved as a monument , and grass lawns laid down around the remaining stonework and foundations . Further excavations were carried out in 1987 during the construction of the ticket office beside the castle . 
 English Heritage took over control of the castle in 1983 and continued to operate it as a tourist attraction . In the 21st century the castle is protected by UK law as an ancient monument and a grade I listed building . It remains in the custody of English Heritage , but since 1998 has been managed by its owner , Baron Howard of Rising . 
 = = Architecture and landscape = = 
 = = = Landscape = = = 
 The fortification of Castle Rising was constructed in a carefully designed landscape . In front of the castle was the town of Castle Rising , moved to its new site when the castle was built . The settlement appears to have been laid out to a grid @-@ plan design , possibly bounded by ditches ; with the castle positioned just behind it , in a similar fashion to that at New Buckenham and Malton Castle . A dovecot and a religious house were founded nearby ; both of these were important symbols of lordship at the time , and were considered essential parts of a properly established castle . 
 The castle 's deer park , which merged into the larger Rising Chase , was positioned behind the castle in a similar way to that at Devizes Castle . The castle effectively formed an interface between the town and the park ; the great hall in the keep faced the settlement , and the lord 's chamber overlooked the park , creating a symbolic divide between the public and private aspects of the building . 
 Rising Chase was around 16 miles ( 26 km ) in circumference , enclosing around 20 square miles ( 52 km2 ) . It utilised marginal farm @-@ land , which may have contributed to its design ; the heathland and light woodland south of the castle would have been ideal for grazing deer . The park was also designed with aesthetics in mind , being shaped so that its boundaries stretched beyond the horizon when viewed from the keep , in a similar design to that at Framlingham , Ludgershall and Okehampton Castles . Indeed , while the park would originally have provided the castle venison and other products , it was probably more ornamental than practical in character , including a space of open grazing in the centre of the park , designed to be visible from the castle chamber . The castle also incorporated a large rabbit warren , an important source of food and fur in this period , which stretched 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) away south @-@ west from the castle . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 = = = = Baileys = = = = 
 Castle Rising is made up of two rectangular baileys to the west and east , and an oval inner bailey in the middle , each with their own substantial earthwork defences and ditches . The earthworks of Castle Rising cover a total area of 5 hectares ( 12 acres ) , and are considered by historians Oliver Creighton and Robert Higham to be among the most impressive in Britain . The interior of the western bailey has been levelled up to form a platform , and is no longer directly connected to the rest of the castle . The eastern bailey is 82 metres ( 269 ft ) by 59 metres ( 194 ft ) across , and formed a protective buffer , covering the entrance way to the inner bailey . 
 A stone bridge connects the eastern bailey to the inner bailey , and is 24 metres ( 79 ft ) across , still retaining some of its original stonework at its base , although the remainder of it has since been rebuilt many times . The bridge leads onto a stone gatehouse , dating from around 1138 ; when it was first built it was substantially taller and longer than today . It was originally equipped with a portcullis , and a stone barbican was later built outside it for additional protection . 
 Beyond the gatehouse is the inner bailey , which forms a ringwork 73 metres ( 240 ft ) by 60 metres ( 200 ft ) in size , with a circumference of 320 metres ( 1 @,@ 050 ft ) ; the banks are now 18 metres ( 59 ft ) high from the bottom of the defensive ditch , although they were originally only half this height . It is uncertain what was placed around the top of this bank when it first built ; there may have been a wooden palisade , or possibly a timber revetment . Some of the remains of the 14th @-@ century brick wall , built on an additional 1 metre ( 3 ft 3 in ) layer of limed sand for stability , have survived along part of the bank . There were three towers built along the walls during the medieval period , two of which have left their mark in the earth banks ; the location of the third is uncertain . 
 The main architectural focus of the inner bailey was the great keep , but it also contained a Norman chapel and , from at least the 14th century onwards , a complex of smaller residential and service buildings . The visible stone foundations on the north side of the keep belong to the chapel and range built for Queen Isabella around 1330 . The bailey well can also still be seen . 
 On the north side of the bailey are the remains of the Norman chapel , which comprised a nave , a square tower and an apsidal chancel , 12 @.@ 7 metres by 6 metres ( 42 ft by 20 ft ) , 4 metres square ( 13 ft square ) and 4 @.@ 6 metres by 4 metres ( 15 ft by 13 ft ) respectively . It was built from local grey sandstone , and Roman tiles from one of the nearby villas were used to construct its roof and incorporated into the walls . Originally the tower would have had a church bell , and the casting pit for this is buried under the floor of the nave . A stone bench runs around the base of the walls , and in the 19th century there was also a stone base for a font in the nave , but this has since been lost . A piece of early medieval graffiti , possibly depicting a Norman soldier , has survived on the south exterior wall . A fireplace was added to the chapel during the Tudor period , although this was only in use for a few years before being abandoned . 
 = = = = Keep = = = = 
 Historians Beric Morley and David Gurney consider Castle Rising to have " one of the finest of all Norman keeps " . It is an early example of the longer , oblong form of these buildings , called a hall @-@ keep , and would have taken huge resources to erect . Externally , it resembles Henry I 's keeps at Norwich and Falaise , although Norwich appears to have inspired the latter design , and Rising 's internal layout was probably based on that at Norwich as well . In imitating Norwich , which was then the only royal castle in the county , Castle Rising may have been intended to symbolise D 'Albini 's loyalty to the Crown during the troubled years of the Anarchy . 
 The keep is built from courses of local , brown <unk> rubble with oolite ashlar facings , and is strengthened with intramural timbers , laid down within the stone walls to reinforce the structure . Its main body is 24 metres ( 79 ft ) by 21 metres ( 69 ft ) wide , with walls approximately 15 metres ( 49 ft ) high , with a forebuilding running along the east side . It has prominent pilaster buttresses , giving the keep what Sidney Toy describes as an " impression of strength and dignity " ; the corners have clasping buttresses , forming four turrets . There is extensive Romanesque detail on the outside of the keep , including arcading along the west side and decorative stonework on the forebuilding . 
 The interior of the keep is divided by an internal wall to improve its structural strength , the division running north @-@ south through the building . The basement of the keep has two main sections , the north room 18 metres ( 59 ft ) by 8 metres ( 26 ft ) , with pillars supporting the great hall above , and the south chamber 18 metres ( 59 ft ) by 5 metres ( 16 ft ) in size . The forebuilding leads from the ground to the first floor , up a passageway 2 @.@ 4 metres ( 7 ft 10 in ) wide with 34 steps and through three arched doorways . At the top is a waiting room ; the glazed windows are a mixture of Tudor and more modern insertions . 
 On the first floor is the great hall , 14 metres ( 46 ft ) by 7 metres ( 23 ft ) , now floorless and open to the sky . Its original entrance way was blocked up by a chimney when the forebuilding was converted into a separate apartment in the Tudor period , and an additional entrance way inserted into the castle wall . The fireplace itself was later filled in with Tudor tiles around 1840 . A mural passageway , dug out in the Tudor period , leads through to the kitchen and service quarters . On the southern side is the great chamber with a large , original 12th @-@ century fireplace , and a mixture of original tri @-@ lobed windows and 19th @-@ century additions . At the far end of the great chamber is an ornate chapel , with Norman arcading and arching . The keep was originally built to have been relatively self @-@ contained , and would not have needed many additional outbuildings to function as a residence . 
 The second floor of the keep is limited in space , and contains only one small room above the chapel which was possibly used the chaplain or by castle guards . The forebuilding was later equipped with an additional room on this level , 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) by 4 @.@ 8 metres ( 16 ft ) , which remained inhabited longer than the rest of the castle keep , and which contains a 19th @-@ century fireplace . The upper 3 @.@ 7 metres ( 12 ft ) of the keep 's walls are different in design to the main body of the building ; as described above , this may be the result of either a final phase of construction between 1200 and 1230 , or a period of repair and renovation shortly after 1300 . 
 = = = Utility and symbolism = = = 
 Many 20th @-@ century historians have stressed the potential military strength of Castle Rising ; R. Allen Brown , for example , concluded that " defence ... was the overwhelming consideration in [ its ] design and construction " , and argued that the keep would have been used as a final refuge in the case of attack during a siege . Beric Morley and David Gurney believe that the military strength of the castle could not have failed to impress contemporaries . Sidney Toy suggested that the forebuilding would have made an effective defensive feature , enabling the defenders to attack intruders as they made their way up the stairs , with Morley and Gurney describing it as " a deadly and near impregnable approach to the castle 's interior " . 
 Despite this , the defensive qualities of Castle Rising have since been extensively debated . The historian Robert Liddiard argues that the large windows at Castle Rising would have been a significant weakness , as it would have been easy to fire arrows through them from the bailey , and George Garnett has questioned the utility of the defensive arrow slits , which he suggests were not well positioned or designed . The whole site was also overlooked by higher ground , which Liddiard considers would have been a key defensive weakness . 
 Great keeps such as Castle Rising 's were also important ceremonially and symbolically in the 12th century , however , and historian Thomas Heslop has described Castle Rising as " a fortress palace " , with the keep forming the palace , and the surrounding earthworks the more practical defences . They reflected lordly status : typically their owners had recently advanced up the social scale , as with William d 'Aubigny , and were keen to impress others with their new authority . 
 With this in mind , the positioning of Castle Rising may have exposed it to higher ground , but it also made it strikingly prominent across the valley . The whole entrance to the castle was also designed to communicate to a visitor the status of the castle lord . As they came through the gatehouse and past the earthworks into the bailey , the south side of the forebuilding - deliberately facing the entrance - would have been revealed , covered in fashionable carving and decorative features . Visitors would then have walked up the stairs of the forebuilding , have paused in a waiting room , originally largely open to the elements , before being allowed through a decorative entrance door . The doorway led into the great hall , from where the lord , possibly sat in a throne alcove to the left , would have met the visitor . 
 = = = Ceremonial entrance = = = 
 = Tarbosaurus = 
 Tarbosaurus ( / <unk> / TAR @-@ bə @-@ SAWR @-@ əs ; meaning " alarming lizard " ) is a genus of tyrannosaurid theropod dinosaur that flourished in Asia about 70 million years ago , at the end of the Late Cretaceous Period . Fossils have been recovered in Mongolia , with more fragmentary remains found further afield in parts of China . 
 Although many species have been named , modern paleontologists recognize only one , T. bataar , as valid . Some experts see this species as an Asian representative of the North American genus Tyrannosaurus ; this would make the genus Tarbosaurus redundant . Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus , if not synonymous , are considered to be at least closely related genera . Alioramus , also from Mongolia , is thought by some authorities to be the closest relative of Tarbosaurus . 
 Like most known tyrannosaurids , Tarbosaurus was a large bipedal predator , weighing up to five tonnes and equipped with about sixty large teeth . It had a unique locking mechanism in its lower jaw and the smallest forelimbs relative to body size of all tyrannosaurids , renowned for their disproportionately tiny , two @-@ fingered forelimbs . 
 Tarbosaurus lived in a humid floodplain criss @-@ crossed by river channels . In this environment , it was an apex predator at the top of the food chain , probably preying on other large dinosaurs like the hadrosaur Saurolophus or the sauropod Nemegtosaurus . Tarbosaurus is represented by dozens of fossil specimens , including several complete skulls and skeletons . These remains have allowed scientific studies focusing on its phylogeny , skull mechanics , and brain structure . 
 = = Description = = 
 Although slightly smaller than Tyrannosaurus , Tarbosaurus was one of the largest tyrannosaurids . The largest known individuals were between 10 and 12 m ( 33 and 39 ft ) long . The mass of a fully grown individual is considered comparable to or slightly smaller than Tyrannosaurus , often estimated to be around 4 – 5 metric tons . 
 The largest known Tarbosaurus skull is more than 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) long , larger than all other tyrannosaurids except Tyrannosaurus . The skull was tall , like that of Tyrannosaurus , but not as wide , especially towards the rear . The unexpanded rear of the skull meant that Tarbosaurus eyes did not face directly forwards , suggesting that it lacked the binocular vision of Tyrannosaurus . Large fenestrae ( openings ) in the skull reduced its weight . Between 58 and 64 teeth lined its jaws , slightly more than in Tyrannosaurus but fewer than in smaller tyrannosaurids like Gorgosaurus and Alioramus . Most of its teeth were oval in cross section , although the teeth of the premaxilla at the tip of the upper jaw had a D @-@ shaped cross section . This heterodonty is characteristic of the family . The longest teeth were in the maxilla ( upper jaw bone ) , with crowns up to 85 millimeters ( 3 @.@ 3 in ) long . In the lower jaw , a ridge on the outer surface of the angular bone articulated with the rear of the dentary bone , creating a locking mechanism unique to Tarbosaurus and Alioramus . Other tyrannosaurids lacked this ridge and had more flexibility in the lower jaw . 
 Tyrannosaurids varied little in body form , and Tarbosaurus was no exception . The head was supported by an S @-@ shaped neck , while the rest of the vertebral column , including the long tail , was held horizontally . Tarbosaurus had tiny forelimbs , <unk> to body size the smallest of all members of the family . The hands had two clawed digits each , with an additional <unk> third metacarpal found in some specimens , similar to closely related genera . Holtz has suggested that Tarbosaurus also has a theropod reduction of fingers IV @-@ I " developed further " than in other tyrannosaurids , as the second metacarpal in the Tarbosaurus specimens he studied is less than twice the length of the first metacarpal ( other tyrannosaurids have a second metacarpal about twice the length of the first metacarpal ) . Also , the third metacarpal in Tarbosaurus is proportionally shorter than in other tyrannosaurids ; in other tyrannosaurids ( like Albertosaurus and Daspletosaurus ) , the third metacarpal is often longer than the first metacarpal , while in the Tarbosaurus specimens studied by Holtz , the third metacarpal is shorter than the first . 
 In contrast to the forelimbs , the three @-@ toed hindlimbs were long and thick , supporting the body in a bipedal posture . The long , heavy tail served as a counterweight to the head and torso and placed the center of gravity over the hips . 
 = = Classification and systematics = = 
 Tarbosaurus is classified as a theropod in the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae within the family Tyrannosauridae . Other members include Tyrannosaurus and the earlier Daspletosaurus , both from North America , and possibly the Mongolian genus Alioramus . Animals in this subfamily are more closely related to Tyrannosaurus than to Albertosaurus and are known for their robust build with proportionally larger skulls and longer femurs than in the other subfamily , the Albertosaurinae . 
 Tarbosaurus bataar was originally described as a species of Tyrannosaurus , an arrangement that has been supported by some more recent studies . Others prefer to keep the genera separate , while still recognizing them as sister taxa . A 2003 cladistic analysis based on skull features instead identified Alioramus as the closest known relative of Tarbosaurus , as the two genera share skull characteristics that are related to stress distribution and that are not found in other tyrannosaurines . If proven , this relationship would argue against Tarbosaurus becoming a synonym for Tyrannosaurus and would suggest that separate tyrannosaurine lineages evolved in Asia and North America . The two known specimens of Alioramus , which show juvenile characteristics , are not likely juvenile individuals of Tarbosaurus because of their much higher tooth count ( 76 to 78 teeth ) and their unique row of bony bumps along the top of their snouts . 
 The discovery of Lythronax <unk> , a much earlier tyrannosaurine further reveals the close relationship between Tyrannosaurus and Tarbosaurus , and it was discovered that Lythronax is a sister taxon to a clade consisting of Campanian genus Zhuchengtyrannus , and Maastrichtian genera Tyrannosaurus and Tarbosaurus . Further studies of Lythronax also suggest that the Asian tyrannosauroids were part of one evolutionary radiation . 
 Below is the cladogram of Tyrannosauridae based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Loewen et al. in 2013 . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 In 1946 , a joint Soviet @-@ Mongolian expedition to the Gobi Desert in the Mongolian Ömnögovi Province turned up a large theropod skull and some vertebrae in the Nemegt Formation . In 1955 , Evgeny Maleev , a Soviet paleontologist , made this specimen the holotype ( PIN 551 @-@ 1 ) of a new species , which he called Tyrannosaurus bataar . The specific name is a misspelling of the Mongolian <unk> / <unk> ( " hero " ) . In the same year , Maleev also described and named three new theropod skulls , each associated with skeletal remains discovered by the same expedition in 1948 and 1949 . The first of these ( PIN 551 @-@ 2 ) was named Tarbosaurus efremovi , a new generic name composed of the Ancient Greek <unk> / <unk> ( " terror " , " alarm " , " awe " , or " reverence " ) and σαυρος / sauros ( " lizard " ) , and the species named after Ivan <unk> , a Russian paleontologist and science fiction author . The other two ( PIN 553 @-@ 1 and PIN 552 @-@ 2 ) were also named as new species and assigned to the North American genus Gorgosaurus ( G. lancinator and G. novojilovi , respectively ) . All three of these latter specimens are smaller than the first . 
 A 1965 paper by A.K. Rozhdestvensky recognized all of Maleev 's specimens as different growth stages of the same species , which he believed to be distinct from the North American Tyrannosaurus . He created a new combination , Tarbosaurus bataar , to include all the specimens described in 1955 as well as newer material . Later authors , including Maleev himself , agreed with Rozhdestvensky 's analysis , although some used the name Tarbosaurus efremovi rather than T. bataar . American paleontologist Kenneth Carpenter re @-@ examined the material in 1992 . He concluded that it belonged to the genus Tyrannosaurus , as originally published by Maleev , and lumped all the specimens into the species Tyrannosaurus bataar except the remains that Maleev had named Gorgosaurus novojilovi . Carpenter thought this specimen represented a separate , smaller genus of tyrannosaurid , which he called Maleevosaurus novojilovi . George Olshevsky created the new generic name <unk> ( after Genghis Khan ) for Tyrannosaurus bataar in 1995 , while also recognizing Tarbosaurus efremovi and Maleevosaurus novojilovi , for a total of three distinct , contemporaneous genera from the Nemegt Formation . A 1999 study subsequently reclassified Maleevosaurus as a juvenile Tarbosaurus . All research published since 1999 recognizes only a single species , which is either called Tarbosaurus bataar or Tyrannosaurus bataar . 
 After the original Russian @-@ Mongolian expeditions in the 1940s , Polish @-@ Mongolian joint expeditions to the Gobi Desert began in 1963 and continued until 1971 , recovering many new fossils , including new specimens of Tarbosaurus from the Nemegt Formation . Expeditions involving Japanese and Mongolian scientists between 1993 and 1998 , as well as private expeditions hosted by Canadian paleontologist Phil Currie around the turn of the 21st century , discovered and collected further Tarbosaurus material . More than 30 specimens are known , including more than 15 skulls and several complete postcranial skeletons . 
 Tarbosaurus fossils are only found around the Gobi Desert of Mongolia and China , both of which ban their export , though some specimens have been looted by private collectors . A recent $ 1 million smuggling deal was uncovered when suspicions were raised about a catalog put out by Heritage Auctions for an event in New York City on May 20 , 2012 . By Mongolian law , any specimen found in the Gobi Desert was to rest at an appropriate Mongolian institution and there was little reasonable doubt that the Tarbosaurus bataar advertised on the catalog was a stolen one . The president of Mongolia and many paleontologists raised objections to the sale which led to a last @-@ minute investigation that confirmed that it was a specimen that can only be found in the Gobi Desert , rightfully belonging to Mongolia . During the court case ( United States v. One Tyrannosaurus <unk> Skeleton ) , Eric <unk> , the smuggler , pleaded guilty to illegal smuggling and the dinosaur was returned to Mongolia in 2013 , where it is temporarily displayed on <unk> Square , the center of the city of Ulaanbaatar . 
 = = = Synonyms = = = 
 Chinese paleontologists discovered a partial skull and skeleton of a small theropod ( IVPP <unk> ) in the Xinjiang Autonomous Region of China in the mid @-@ 1960s . In 1977 , Dong Zhiming described this specimen , which was recovered from the <unk> Formation in Shanshan County , as a new genus and species , Shanshanosaurus <unk> . Gregory Paul recognized Shanshanosaurus as a tyrannosaurid in 1988 , referring it to the now @-@ defunct genus Aublysodon . Dong and Currie later re @-@ examined the specimen and deemed it to be a juvenile of a larger species of tyrannosaurid . These authors refrained from assigning it to any particular genus but suggested Tarbosaurus as a possibility . 
 Albertosaurus <unk> , Tyrannosaurus <unk> , Tyrannosaurus <unk> and Chingkankousaurus fragilis were considered synonyms of Tarbosaurus in the second edition of the Dinosauria , but Chingkankousaurus has been assessed as dubious by Brusatte et al . ( 2013 ) . 
 Named in 1976 by Sergei Kurzanov , Alioramus is another genus of tyrannosaurid from slightly older sediments in Mongolia . Several analyses have concluded Alioramus was quite closely related to Tarbosaurus . It was described as an adult , but its long , low skull is characteristic of a juvenile tyrannosaurid . This led Currie to speculate that Alioramus might represent a juvenile Tarbosaurus , but he noted that the much higher tooth count and row of crests on top of the snout suggested otherwise . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Like several other large tyrannosaurids , Tarbosaurus is known from relatively abundant and well @-@ preserved fossil material . In fact , one quarter of all fossils collected from the Nemegt Formation belong to Tarbosaurus . Although Tarbosaurus has not been studied as thoroughly as the North American tyrannosaurids , the available material has allowed scientists to draw limited conclusions about its biology . 
 In 2001 , Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior . Since stress fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by regular behavior than other types of injuries . None of the eighteen Tarbosaurus foot bones examined in the study was found to have a stress fracture , but one of the ten examined hand bones was found to have one . Stress fractures in the hands have special behavioral significance compared to those found in the feet since stress fractures there can be obtained while running or during migration . Hand injuries , by contrast , are more likely to be obtained while in contact with struggling prey . The presence of stress fractures and tendon avulsions in general provide evidence for a " very active " predation @-@ based diet rather than obligate scavenging . 
 In 2012 , bite marks on two fragmentary gastralia of the holotype specimen of the large <unk> Deinocheirus mirificus were reported . The size and shape of the bite marks match the teeth of Tarbosaurus , the largest known predator from the Nemegt Formation . Various types of feeding traces were identified ; punctures , gouges , striae , fragmentary teeth , and combinations of the above marks . The bite marks probably represent feeding behavior instead of aggression between the species , and the fact that bite marks were not found elsewhere on the body indicates the predator focused on internal organs . Tarbosaurus bite marks have also been identified on hadrosaur and sauropod fossils , but theropod bite marks on bones of other theropods are very rare in the fossil record . 
 = = = Skull mechanics = = = 
 The skull of Tarbosaurus was completely described for the first time in 2003 . Scientists noted key differences between Tarbosaurus and the North American tyrannosaurids . Many of these differences are related to the handling of stress by the skull bones during a bite . When the upper jaw bit down on an object , force was transmitted up through the maxilla , the primary tooth @-@ bearing bone of the upper jaw , into surrounding skull bones . In North American tyrannosaurids , this force went from the maxilla into the fused nasal bones on top of the snout , which were firmly connected in the rear to the lacrimal bones by bony struts . These struts locked the two bones together , suggesting that force was then transmitted from the nasals to the lacrimals . 
 Tarbosaurus lacked these bony struts , and the connection between the nasals and lacrimals was weak . Instead , a backwards projection of the maxilla was massively developed in Tarbosaurus and fit inside a sheath formed from the lacrimal . This projection was a thin , bony plate in North American tyrannosaurids . The large backwards projection suggests that force was transmitted more directly from the maxilla to the lacrimal in Tarbosaurus . The lacrimal was also more firmly anchored to the frontal and prefrontal bones in Tarbosaurus . The well @-@ developed connections between the maxilla , lacrimal , frontal and prefrontal would have made its entire upper jaw more rigid . 
 Another major difference between Tarbosaurus and its North American relatives was its more rigid mandible ( lower jaw ) . While many theropods , including North American tyrannosaurids , had some degree of flexibility between the bones in the rear of the mandible and the dentary in the front , Tarbosaurus had a locking mechanism formed from a ridge on the surface of the angular , which articulated with a square process on the rear of the dentary . 
 Some scientists have hypothesized that the more rigid skull of Tarbosaurus was an adaptation to hunting the massive <unk> sauropods found in the Nemegt Formation , which did not exist in most of North America during the Late Cretaceous . The differences in skull mechanics also affect tyrannosaurid phylogeny . Tarbosaurus @-@ like articulations between the skull bones are also seen in Alioramus from Mongolia , suggesting that it , and not Tyrannosaurus , is the closest relative of Tarbosaurus . Similarities between Tarbosaurus and Tyrannosaurus might therefore be related to their large size , independently developed through convergent evolution . 
 = = = Brain structure = = = 
 A Tarbosaurus skull found in 1948 by Soviet and Mongolian scientists ( PIN 553 @-@ 1 , originally called Gorgosaurus lancinator ) included the skull cavity that held the brain . Making a plaster cast , called an endocast , of the inside of this cavity allowed Maleev to make preliminary observations about the shape of a Tarbosaurus brain . A newer polyurethane rubber cast allowed a more detailed study of Tarbosaurus brain structure and function . 
 Tyrannosaurus rex brain structure has also been analyzed , and Tarbosaurus was similar , differing only in the positions of some cranial nerve roots , including the trigeminal and accessory nerves . Tyrannosaurid brains were more similar to those of crocodilians and other reptiles than to birds . The total brain volume for a 12 meter ( 40 ft ) Tarbosaurus is estimated at only 184 cubic centimeters ( 11 @.@ 2 cu in ) . The large size of the olfactory bulbs , as well as the terminal and olfactory nerves , suggest that Tarbosaurus had a keen sense of smell , as was also the case with Tyrannosaurus . The vomeronasal bulb is large and differentiated from the olfactory bulb , indicating a well @-@ developed Jacobsen 's organ , which was used to detect pheromones . This may imply that Tarbosaurus had complex mating behavior . The auditory nerve was also large , suggesting good hearing , which may have been useful for auditory communication and spatial awareness . The nerve had a well @-@ developed vestibular component as well , which implies a good sense of balance and coordination . In contrast , the nerves and brain structures associated with eyesight were smaller and undeveloped . The midbrain tectum , responsible for visual processing in reptiles , was very small in Tarbosaurus , as were the optic nerve and the oculomotor nerve , which controls eye movement . Unlike Tyrannosaurus , which had forward @-@ facing eyes that provided some degree of binocular vision , Tarbosaurus had a narrower skull more typical of other tyrannosaurids in which the eyes faced primarily sideways . All of this suggests that Tarbosaurus relied more on its senses of smell and hearing than on its eyesight . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Most specimens of Tarbosaurus represent adult or subadult individuals ; juveniles remain very rare . Nevertheless , the 2006 discovery of a juvenile skeleton including a complete , 290 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 95 ft ) long skull provides information on the life history of this dinosaur . This individual probably was aged 2 to 3 years at the time of death . Compared with adult skulls , the juvenile skull was weakly constructed and the teeth were thin , indicating different food preferences in juveniles and adults that reduced competition between different age groups . 
 = = = Skin impressions and footprints = = = 
 Skin impressions were recovered from a large skeleton at the Bugiin Tsav locality that was previously destroyed by poachers . These impressions show non @-@ overlapping scales with an average diameter of 2 @.@ 4 mm and pertain to the thoracic region of the individual , although the exact position can not be assessed any longer due to the destruction of the skeleton . 
 Phil Currie and colleagues ( 2003 ) described two footprints from the Nemegt locality that probably pertain to Tarbosaurus . These tracks represents natural casts , which means that only the sandy infill of the tracks and not the tracks itself are preserved . The better preserved tracks feature skin impressions over large areas on and behind the toe impressions that are similar to those discovered in Bugiin Tsav . They also feature vertical parallel slide marks that were left by scales when the foot was pushed into the ground . The track measures 61 centimeters ( 24 in ) in length , thus representing a large individual . The second track , although even larger , was affected by erosion and does not show any detail . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The vast majority of known Tarbosaurus fossils were recovered from the Nemegt Formation in the Gobi Desert of southern Mongolia . This geologic formation has never been dated radiometrically , but the fauna present in the fossil record indicate it was probably deposited during the early Maastrichtian stage , at the end of the Late Cretaceous about 70 million years ago . The <unk> Formation , in which Shanshanosaurus remains were discovered , is also Maastrichtian in age . 
 Nemegt sediments preserve large river channels and soil deposits that indicate a far more humid climate than those suggested by the underlying Barun Goyot and Djadochta Formations . However , caliche deposits indicate at least periodic droughts . Sediment was deposited in the channels and floodplains of large rivers . The rock facies of this formation suggest the presence of mudflats , and shallow lakes . Sediments also indicate that there existed a rich habitat , offering diverse food in abundant amounts that could sustain massive Cretaceous dinosaurs . 
 Occasional mollusk fossils are found , as well as a variety of other aquatic animals like fish and turtles . Crocodilians included several species of <unk> , a genus with teeth adapted for crushing shells . Mammal fossils are exceedingly rare in the Nemegt Formation , but many birds have been found , including the enantiornithine <unk> and the <unk> <unk> , as well as <unk> , an early representative of the still @-@ existing Anseriformes ( waterfowl ) , a bird order . Scientists have described many dinosaurs from the Nemegt Formation , including ankylosaurids such as Tarchia , and pachycephalosaur Prenocephale . By far the largest predator known from the formation , adult Tarbosaurus most likely preyed upon large hadrosaurs such as Saurolophus and Barsboldia , or sauropods such as Nemegtosaurus , and Opisthocoelicaudia . Adults would have received little competition from small theropods such as the small tyrannosaurid Alioramus , troodontids ( Borogovia , <unk> , <unk> ) , oviraptorosaurs ( <unk> , <unk> , Rinchenia ) or Bagaraatan , sometimes considered a basal tyrannosauroid . Other theropods , like the gigantic Therizinosaurus , may have been herbivorous , and ornithomimosaurs such as <unk> , Gallimimus , and gigantic Deinocheirus might have been omnivores that only took small prey and were therefore no competition for Tarbosaurus . However , as in other large tyrannosaurids as well as modern Komodo dragons , juveniles and subadult Tarbosaurus may have filled niches between the massive adults and these smaller theropods . 
 = Yugoslav submarine Hrabri = 
 The Yugoslav submarine Hrabri was the first of the Hrabri @-@ class diesel @-@ electric submarines built by the Vickers @-@ Armstrong Naval Yard on the River Tyne in the United Kingdom , for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) . Launched in 1927 , her design was based on that of the British L @-@ class submarine of World War I , and she was built using parts originally assembled for a submarine of that class which was never completed . She was armed with six bow @-@ mounted 533 mm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes , two 102 mm ( 4 in ) guns and one machine gun , and could dive to 60 metres ( 200 ft ) . 
 Prior to World War II she participated in several cruises to Mediterranean ports . During the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia in April 1941 , she was captured by Italian forces . She was given the number N3 but was not commissioned and was scrapped later in 1941 due to her poor condition . 
 = = Description and construction = = 
 Yugoslav naval policy in the interwar period lacked direction until the mid @-@ 1920s , although it was generally accepted that the Adriatic coastline was effectively a sea frontier that the naval arm was responsible for securing with the limited resources made available to it . In 1926 , a modest ten @-@ year construction program was initiated to build up a force of submarines , coastal torpedo boats , torpedo bombers and conventional bomber aircraft to perform this role . The Hrabri @-@ class submarines were one of the first new acquisitions aimed at developing a naval force capable of meeting this challenge . 
 Hrabri ( Brave ) was built for the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( later Yugoslavia ) by the Vickers @-@ Armstrong Naval Yard on the River Tyne in the United Kingdom . Her design was based on that of the British L @-@ class submarine of World War I , and she was built using parts originally assembled for HMS L @-@ 67 , which was never completed . Along with her sister submarine <unk> , she had an overall length of 72 @.@ 05 metres ( 236 ft 5 in ) , a beam of 7 @.@ 32 m ( 24 ft 0 in ) , and a surfaced draught of 3 @.@ 96 m ( 13 ft 0 in ) . Her surfaced displacement was 975 long tons ( 991 t ) or 1 @,@ 164 long tons ( 1 @,@ 183 t ) submerged , and her crew consisted of 45 officers and enlisted men . She had an operational depth of 60 m ( 200 ft ) . 
 The Hrabri @-@ class had two shafts driven by two diesel engines ( when surfaced ) or two electric motors ( when submerged ) . The diesel engines were rated at 2 @,@ 400 bhp ( 1 @,@ 800 kW ) and the electric motors at 1 @,@ 600 shp ( 1 @,@ 200 kW ) , and they were designed to reach a top speed of 15 @.@ 7 knots ( 29 @.@ 1 km / h ; 18 @.@ 1 mph ) under diesel power while surfaced , and 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) on their electric motors when submerged . They were armed with six bow @-@ mounted 533 mm ( 21 in ) torpedo tubes , and carried twelve torpedoes . They were also equipped with two 102 mm ( 4 in ) deck guns ( one forward and one aft of the conning tower ) , and one machine gun . Their radius of action was 3 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 000 km ; 4 @,@ 400 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = Service career = = 
 Hrabri was launched in 1927 as the first submarine of the navy of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes , which later became the Royal Yugoslav Navy . Along with Nebojša , she left the Tyne in late January 1928 . In company with the Yugoslav submarine tender Hvar , the two submarines arrived in the Bay of Kotor on the southern Adriatic coast on 8 April 1928 . In May and June 1929 , Hrabri , Nebojša , Hvar and six torpedo boats accompanied the light cruiser Dalmacija on a cruise to Malta , the Greek island of Corfu in the Ionian Sea , and Bizerte in the French protectorate of Tunisia . According to the British naval attaché , the ships and crews made a very good impression while visiting Malta . 
 In June and July 1930 , Hrabri , Nebojša and the fleet auxiliary Sitnica again cruised the Mediterranean , visiting Alexandria and Beirut . In 1932 , the British naval attaché reported that Yugoslav ships engaged in few exercises or manoeuvres due to reduced budgets . In 1934 , Hrabri visited Valletta in Malta and the Kelibia Roads off the coast of Tunisia , and in August 1935 , Hrabri again visited Malta , this time in company with the more modern French @-@ designed submarine Osvetnik . In August and September 1937 , Hrabri , along with the other French @-@ made submarine Smeli and the depot ship Zmaj , visited Greece , including the port of Piraeus , and the islands of Crete and Corfu . 
 When the German @-@ led Axis invasion of Yugoslavia began on 6 April 1941 , she was located in the Bay of Kotor along with the three other submarines of the flotilla . On 10 April , Hrabri and Osvetnik received orders for an operation against the Italian enclave of Zara on the Dalmatian coastline , but the mission did not proceed . She was later captured by the Italian XVII Corps at the Bay of Kotor . She was given the number N3 but was not commissioned and was scrapped later that year due to her poor condition . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Periodicals = = = 
 = = = Websites = = = 
 = Jereboam O. Beauchamp = 
 Jereboam Orville Beauchamp ( / <unk> <unk> <unk> / ; September 6 , 1802 – July 7 , 1826 ) was an American lawyer who murdered the Kentucky legislator Solomon P. Sharp ; the crime is known as the Beauchamp – Sharp Tragedy . In 1821 , Sharp had been accused in Bowling Green , Kentucky by Anna Cooke of fathering her illegitimate child ; it was stillborn . [ a ] Sharp denied paternity , and public opinion favored him . In 1824 , Beauchamp married Cooke , who was sixteen years older than he . She asked him to kill Sharp to defend her honor . 
 When Sharp campaigned in 1825 for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives , opponents revived the story of his alleged illegitimate child by Cooke . They distributed campaign literature claiming the child was mulatto . Enraged , Beauchamp renewed his intention to avenge his wife 's honor . In the early morning of November 7 , 1825 , he tricked Sharp to open the door at his home in Frankfort , and fatally stabbed him . 
 Beauchamp was convicted of the murder and sentenced to hang . The morning of the execution , he and his wife attempted a double suicide by stabbing themselves with a knife she had smuggled into prison . She was successful ; he was not . Beauchamp was rushed to the gallows before he could bleed to death , and was hanged on July 7 , 1826 . The bodies of Jereboam and Anna Beauchamp were arranged in an embrace and buried in a single coffin , as they had requested . The Beauchamp – Sharp Tragedy inspired fictional works such as Edgar Allan Poe 's unfinished play , Politian , and Robert Penn Warren 's World Enough and Time ( 1950 ) . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jereboam Beauchamp was born September 6 , 1802 , in the area that is now Simpson County , Kentucky . He was the second son of Thomas and Sally ( Smithers ) Beauchamp . Both parents were devout Christians . He was named after a paternal uncle , Jereboam O. Beauchamp , a state senator from Washington County . 
 Beauchamp was educated at Dr. Benjamin Thurston 's academy in Barren County , Kentucky until the age of sixteen . Recognizing that his father could not sufficiently provide for the family , Beauchamp found work as a shopkeeper to earn money for his education . While he saved money , he did not have enough time to pursue his studies . Recommended by Thurston , Beauchamp became preceptor of a school . After saving more money , he returned to Thurston 's school as a student . He later worked for the school as an usher . 
 By age eighteen , Beauchamp had finished his preparatory studies . After observing the lawyers practicing in Glasgow and Bowling Green , he decided to pursue a career in the legal profession . 
 He particularly admired Solomon Sharp , a young lawyer in his thirties in Bowling Green , with whom Beauchamp hoped to study . In 1820 , Beauchamp became disenchanted with Sharp when rumors surfaced that he had fathered an illegitimate child with Anna Cooke , a planter 's daughter who lived in Bowling Green . Sharp denied paternity of the child , which was stillborn . 
 = = Courtship of Anna Cooke = = 
 Beauchamp left Bowling Green to live at his father 's plantation in Simpson County , Kentucky , where he convalesced from an illness . He learned that Cooke had become a recluse nearby at her mother 's plantation after her public disgrace . Having heard from a mutual friend about her beauty and accomplishments , he decided to meet Cooke . At first , she rejected all attention , but gradually received Beauchamp under his guise of borrowing books from her library . The two eventually became friends , and , in 1821 , began courting . Beauchamp was eighteen years old ; Cooke was at least thirty @-@ four . 
 When he proposed marriage that year , Cooke told Beauchamp she would marry him on the condition that he kill Sharp . Beauchamp consented . Against Cooke 's advice , Beauchamp traveled immediately to the capital of Frankfort , where Sharp had recently been appointed attorney general by the governor . 
 = = Challenges = = 
 According to Beauchamp 's account , he found Sharp and challenged him to a duel , but Sharp refused because he was not armed . <unk> a knife , Beauchamp took out a second knife and offered it to Sharp , who again declined the challenge . When Beauchamp challenged him a third time , Sharp tried to flee , but Beauchamp caught him by the collar . Sharp fell to his knees and begged Beauchamp to spare his life . Beauchamp kicked him , cursed him for a coward , and threatened to horsewhip him until he agreed to a duel . The next day , Beauchamp looked for Sharp in the streets of Frankfort , but was told he had left for Bowling Green . He went to Bowling Green , only to learn that Sharp was not there . Finally he returned to the home of Anna Cooke . 
 Following Beauchamp 's failed attempt , Cooke decided to lure Sharp to her house and kill him herself . Beauchamp wanted to take action to defend her honor , but she was determined to act for herself . He began teaching her to shoot a gun . Learning that Sharp was in Bowling Green , Cooke sent him a letter condemning Beauchamp 's attempt on his life and asking to see him again . Sharp suspected a trap , but replied that he would meet her at the planned time . Hoping to kill Sharp before the meeting , Beauchamp traveled to Bowling Green , but found his target had already left for Frankfort . He had eluded the trap . Beauchamp decided to finish his legal studies in Bowling Green and wait for Sharp to return there . 
 Beauchamp was admitted to the bar in April 1823 . He and Anna Cooke married in June 1824 . Still determined to defend the honor of his wife , Beauchamp devised a ruse to lure Sharp to Bowling Green . He wrote letters to Sharp under various pseudonyms , each asking for his help in some sort of legal matter , and each sent from a different post office . When Sharp failed to respond , Beauchamp decided to go to Frankfort again and confront him . 
 = = Murder of Solomon Sharp = = 
 In Frankfort in 1825 , Sharp was in the middle of a bitter political battle known as the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy . He identified with the New Court , or Relief party , which promoted a legislative agenda favorable to debtors . In opposition was the Old Court , or Anti @-@ Relief party , which worked to secure the rights of creditors to collect debts . Sharp had served as the state 's attorney general under New Court governors John Adair , whose term lasted until August 1824 , and Joseph Desha , who succeeded him in office . The New Court party 's power was beginning to wane . 
 In 1825 , Sharp resigned to run for a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives . During the heated campaign , opponents raised the issue of his alleged seduction of Anna Cooke . Old Court partisan John U. Waring had handbills distributed that alleged that Sharp had denied paternity of Cooke 's illegitimate child because it was a mulatto and likely fathered by a Cooke family slave . Sharp won the election , defeating John J. Crittenden . 
 Whether Sharp had made the claim is uncertain , but Beauchamp believed he had . He planned to murder him and flee with Anna to Missouri . He would murder Sharp in the early morning of November 7 , 1825 , when the new legislature convened its session , as he hoped that suspicion would fall on Sharp 's political enemies . Three weeks prior to that date , Beauchamp sold his property , telling his friends that he was planning to move to Missouri . He hired laborers to help load his wagons two days before the planned murder . 
 Beauchamp 's plan was complicated by a warrant sworn out against him by Ruth Reed . She sued him for support of her illegitimate son , born on June 10 , 1824 , claiming he was the father . Beauchamp later said he had ignored the warrant , dated October 25 , 1825 , on the advice of a friend who termed it harassment . He also said he had arranged for the warrant , as an excuse to be in Frankfort to kill Sharp . The historian Fred Johnson says that Beauchamp likely added the warrant into his story after the fact , as a means of damage control . It hardly looked good for him to have committed the act for which he ostensibly killed Sharp . 
 In preparation , Beauchamp packed a change of clothes , a black mask , and a knife with poison on the tip , to be used as the murder weapon . Finding all the inns filled when he arrived at Frankfort , he took lodging at the residence of Joel Scott , warden of the state penitentiary . Between nine and ten o 'clock that evening , Beauchamp went to Sharp 's home . Dressed in disguise , he carried his usual clothes and buried them along the bank of the Kentucky River for retrieval following the murder . Discovering that Sharp was not home , Beauchamp looked for him in the city , finding him at a local tavern . He returned to Sharp 's house to wait for him , and saw him return at midnight . 
 At two o 'clock in the morning , Beauchamp thought the household was quiet . In his Confession , he described the murder of Sharp : 
 I put on my mask , drew my dagger and proceeded to the door ; I knocked three times loud and quick , Colonel Sharp said ; " Who 's there " - " Covington , " I replied . Quickly Sharp 's foot was heard upon the floor . I saw under the door as he approached without a light . I drew my mask over my face and immediately Colonel Sharp opened the door . I advanced into the room and with my left hand I grasped his right wrist . The violence of the grasp made him spring back and trying to disengage his wrist . He said , " What Covington is this . " I replied John A. Covington . " I don 't know you , " said Colonel Sharp , I know John W. Covington . " Mrs. Sharp appeared at the partition door and then disappeared , seeing her disappear I said in a persuasive tone of voice , " Come to the light Colonel and you will know me , " and pulling him by the arm he came readily to the door and still holding his wrist with my left hand I stripped my hat and handkerchief from over my forehead and looked into Sharp 's face . He knew me the more readily I imagine , by my long , bush , curly suit of hair . He sprang back and exclaimed in a tone of horror and despair , " Great God it is him , " and as he said that he fell on his knees . I let go of his wrist and grasped him by the throat dashing him against the facing of the door and muttered in his face , " die you villain . " As I said that I plunged the dagger to his heart . 
 Sharp died within moments . Fleeing the scene , Beauchamp went to the river to retrieve his clothes , where he changed and sank his disguise in the river with a stone . He returned to his room at the house of Joel Scott . 
 When the Scott family awoke the next morning , Beauchamp emerged from his quarters . He feigned surprise when told of the murder and was apparently believed at the time . After being told there were no suspects yet , he called for his horse and began his return trip of four days to Bowling Green . Arriving , he told his wife Anna that Sharp was dead . The next morning , a posse from Frankfort arrived and told Beauchamp that he was under suspicion for the murder . He agreed to return with the men to Frankfort and face the charge . 
 = = Trial for murder = = 
 Beauchamp arrived in Frankfort on November 15 , 1825 . New Court partisans talked of Sharp 's murder as the work of the Old Court party , just as Beauchamp had hoped . One suspect was Waring , who had printed the handbills critical of Sharp . Known as a violent man , he had both political and personal motivation for the crime . He was cleared of suspicion when investigators learned that , at the time of the murder , Waring was in Fayette County recovering from unrelated injuries . 
 Suspicion moved to Beauchamp , as he was loyal to the Old Court Party , and was known to hate Sharp for his political principles . People knew of Sharp 's earlier alleged involvement with Anna Cooke before her marriage to Beauchamp . Witnesses placed Beauchamp in Frankfort the night of the killing , and his host , Joel Scott , said that he had heard Beauchamp leave the house during the night . After presenting preliminary testimony , Commonwealth 's Attorney Charles Bibb asked for additional time to assemble more witnesses . Beauchamp assented to the request . A second delay pushed the hearings back to mid @-@ December . 
 The dagger taken from Beauchamp at his arrest did not match the wound on Sharp 's body . ( In his Confession , Beauchamp claimed to have buried the murder weapon by the bank of the river near where the murder took place . That knife was never found . ) Beauchamp 's shoe did not match a track found outside Sharp 's house the morning of the murder . The posse lost a handkerchief found at the scene of the crime and believed to belong to the murderer . ( Beauchamp later claimed to have stolen and burned it after the posse had gone to sleep one night . ) 
 Several witnesses testified against him . The widow Eliza Sharp testified that the voice of the killer was distinct . A test was devised allowing Mrs. Sharp to hear Beauchamp 's voice ; she immediately identified it as that of the killer . ( Beauchamp claimed he had disguised his voice on the night of the murder and thought Mrs. Sharp would not recognize it . ) Patrick Henry Darby , an Old Court partisan , claimed that in 1824 , he had a chance encounter with the man he now knew as Beauchamp . Darby said the man – a stranger to him at the time – had asked for Darby 's help in prosecuting an unspecified claim against Sharp . The man then identified himself as the husband of Anna Cooke and said he intended to kill Sharp . Based on the circumstantial evidence , Beauchamp was held for trial at the next term of the circuit court in March 1826 . 
 Beauchamp 's uncle Jereboam assembled a legal team for his nephew that included former U.S. Senator John Pope . The grand jury convened in March and returned an indictment against Beauchamp for Sharp 's murder . Giving Beauchamp the time he requested to gather witnesses , the court scheduled a special session in May specifically for his trial . 
 Beauchamp 's trial began May 8 , 1826 . After a change of venue was denied , Beauchamp pleaded innocent to the charge against him . A jury was empaneled , and testimony began May 10 . Eliza Sharp recounted the events of the night of the murder and reiterated that Beauchamp 's voice was that of the murderer . John Lowe , a magistrate of Simpson County , testified that he had heard Beauchamp threaten to kill Sharp , and said that on Beauchamp 's return from Frankfort , he saw him waving a red flag and heard him tell his wife that he had " gained the victory . " Patrick Darby repeated his testimony of the 1824 meeting between him and Beauchamp . Darby said that Beauchamp had told him that Sharp offered him one thousand dollars , a slave girl , and 200 acres ( 0 @.@ 81 km2 ) of land if he and his wife Anna would leave him ( Sharp ) alone . As Sharp had apparently reneged on the promise , Beauchamp told Darby he was going to kill the man . Other witnesses testified that Beauchamp habitually referred to Sharp 's friend , John W. Covington , as " John A. Covington " , the name used by the murderer to gain entry to Sharp 's house . 
 Testimony in the trial concluded on May 15 , 1826 ; summations concluded four days later . Despite the lack of physical evidence , the jury deliberated only an hour before convicting Beauchamp of Sharp 's murder . He was sentenced to death by hanging on June 26 of that year . Beauchamp requested a stay of execution to write a justification for his actions . The stay was granted , and the execution was rescheduled for July 7 , 1826 . Though Anna Beauchamp was questioned , a charge against her for being an accessory to the crime was dismissed . 
 = = Execution by hanging = = 
 While imprisoned and awaiting execution , Beauchamp wrote a confession . He accused Patrick Darby of perjury with regard to the alleged 1824 meeting between them . Many believed Beauchamp 's accusation was meant to curry favor with New Court governor Joseph Desha – who considered Darby a political enemy – and to secure a pardon from him . When Beauchamp finished the confession in mid @-@ June 1826 , his uncle , Senator Beauchamp , took it to the state printer for immediate publication . An Old Court supporter , the printer refused to publish it . 
 Anna Beauchamp joined her husband in his cell in the dungeon ; the only entry was through a trap door at the top of the room . During their incarceration , they tried to bribe a guard into allowing them to escape . When that failed , they tried to pass a letter to Senator Beauchamp asking for help to escape , an attempt which likewise failed . Both the senator and the younger Beauchamp asked for a pardon from Governor Desha , but to no avail . Beauchamp 's final request to Desha for a stay of execution was rejected July 5 , 1826 . With the last hope exhausted , the couple attempted a double suicide by drinking a vial of laudanum which Anna had smuggled into the cell . Both survived . The following morning , Jereboam and Anna were put on suicide watch and threatened with separation . 
 The night before the execution , Anna took a second dose of laudanum but was unable to keep it down . On July 7 , 1826 , the morning of the scheduled execution , Anna asked the guard to give her privacy to dress . Once the guard left , Anna revealed to Beauchamp that she had smuggled in a knife , and she and her husband stabbed themselves . Anna was taken to a nearby house to be treated by doctors . 
 Too weak to stand or walk , Beauchamp was loaded onto a cart to be conveyed to the gallows . He begged to see Anna , but the guards told him she was not seriously injured . The guards finally allowed him to see Anna , and Beauchamp was angered that they had underplayed her critical condition . He stayed with her until he could no longer feel her pulse ; then the guards took him to the gallows to be hanged before he died of his stab wounds . 
 Beauchamp asked to see Patrick Darby , who was among the assembled 5 @,@ 000 spectators . Beauchamp smiled and offered his hand , but Darby declined the gesture . Beauchamp publicly denied that Darby had any involvement with Sharp 's murder , but accused him of having lied about their 1824 meeting . Darby denied the death march accusation and tried to get Beauchamp to retract it , but the prisoner was moved on to the gallows . 
 Two men supported Beauchamp as the noose was put around his neck . He asked for a drink of water , and the band to play " Bonaparte 's Retreat from Moscow " . At his signal , the cart moved out from under him , and he died after a brief struggle . His father requested his body . Following Beauchamp 's earlier instructions , he had the bodies of Jereboam and Anna arranged in an embrace and buried them in the same coffin . A poem written by Anna was etched on their double tombstone . 
 Senator Beauchamp eventually found a publisher for his nephew 's Confession . The first printing ran on August 11 , 1826 . Sharp 's brother , Dr. Leander Sharp , attempted to counter Beauchamp 's Confession with Vindication of the Character of the late Col. Solomon P. Sharp , which he wrote in 1827 . In this book , Dr. Sharp claimed to have seen a " first version " of the confession in which Beauchamp implicated Darby . Darby threatened to sue Dr. Sharp if he published Vindication , and John Waring threatened to kill him if he did so . Sharp did not release the manuscript and hid it in his house . The completed printed version was found in 1877 during a remodel of Sharp 's house . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Edgar Allan Poe 's play , Politian , was based on the events above . 
 Robert Penn Warren 's World Enough and Time was also inspired by them . 
 = M @-@ 88 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 88 is a state trunkline highway in the U.S. state of Michigan . It runs between US Highway 31 ( US 31 ) and US 131 / M @-@ 66 in the Lower Peninsula . Running from Mancelona to Eastport , M @-@ 88 also goes through the communities of Bellaire and Central Lake . The highway is completely within Antrim County and is known by the street name of " Scenic Highway " outside of the various communities along its routing . 
 M @-@ 88 is an original trunkline dating back to the 1919 signing of the state system . An extension in the 1920s and paving in the late 1930s created the highway as it exists today . The highway was not listed on the National Highway System , nor is it included in the Lake Michigan Circle Tour . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 88 starts in the community of Eastport at an intersection four blocks east of the Grand Traverse Bay of Lake Michigan next to Barnes County Park . From its start , it runs east along the northern end of Torch Lake . M @-@ 88 zig @-@ zags south and east along Scenic Highway to the community of Central Lake . In Central Lake it runs south along Main Street , following the western shore of Intermediate Lake . South of Intermediate Lake , M @-@ 88 crosses the Intermediate River on a historic designation @-@ eligible Depression @-@ era bridge along Bridge Street in Bellaire . This section of M @-@ 88 is just west of the Antrim County Airport before the highway turns east on Cayuga Street in downtown and south on Division Street . The Bellaire section of the trunkline is the location of the highest traffic levels along the highway . The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) measures the annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) in traffic surveys . The 2007 survey showed that 5 @,@ 200 vehicles used the section of roadway on the average day in Bellaire . 
 South of Bellaire , M @-@ 88 passes the Chief Golf Course and the Legend , Summit and Bellaire golf clubs . M @-@ 88 crosses the Shanty Creek , which is the namesake of a resort in the area . South of the Bellaire Golf Club , M @-@ 88 turns eastward again , passing south of Schuss Mountain , another resort . This section of trunkline is used by 3 @,@ 300 vehicles in the 2007 AADT survey . Past Schuss Mountain , M @-@ 88 turns east at Alden highway and enters the community of Mancelona , passing the Fairview Cemetery . The highway runs along on State Street into downtown . M @-@ 88 ends at an intersection with US 131 / M @-@ 66 running along Williams Street , and State Street continues eastward as C @-@ 38 . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 88 was first designated by July 1 , 1919 along its current routing between Mancelona and Bellaire . It was extended in 1927 through Central Lake to end in Eastport . It was used as a temporary routing of US 31 between Eastport and Bellaire while the Elk Rapids to Eastport section of US 31 was reconstructed . The first sections of roadway were paved near Bellaire in late 1936 . Paving was completed on the entire highway by late 1940 No changes have been made to the highway since . None of the highway was added to the National Highway System , a system of strategically important highways . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Antrim County . 
 = The Inner Circle ( The Office ) = 
 " The Inner Circle " is the twenty @-@ third episode of the seventh season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 149th episode overall . The episode originally aired on May 5 , 2011 , on NBC . The episode also marked Will Ferrell 's final appearance as Deangelo , having signed up for four episodes . Cody Horn also makes her first guest appearance for the series as Jordan Garfield . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , new office manager Deangelo begins picking favorites among the staff , revealing his true management style . After he only picks men to join his " inner circle " , many of the female staffers begin to believe he is sexist . 
 The episode was written by Charlie Grandy and directed by Matt Sohn . The episode marks the first episode since Steve Carell left the series as a series regular . " The Inner Circle " received mixed reviews from critics , with many commenting on Ferrell 's performance , with opinions ranging from positive to negative . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 90 million households and received a 3 @.@ 5 Nielsen rating and 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 marking a drop in the ratings from the previous episode , " Goodbye , Michael " . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 New office manager Deangelo ( Will Ferrell ) picks favorites among the staff , including Kevin ( Brian Baumgartner ) , Jim ( John Krasinski ) , a sycophantic Gabe ( Zach Woods ) , and Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) , who is attending business school thanks to Deangelo . He is also favorable towards Ryan ( B. J. Novak ) , who he believes is the head of the customer service department , and Kelly 's ( Mindy Kaling ) direct supervisor . Kelly is initially irate at the situation , but Ryan agrees to be a more dutiful boyfriend in exchange for Kelly keeping up the charade . Andy ( Ed Helms ) desperately aspires to join the inner circle , while Deangelo repeatedly attempts to win over Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , who is still apathetic toward the new boss . Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) sees his style as sexist , as every member of the inner circle is male , which Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) agrees to , as Deangelo has repeatedly been acting coldly towards her . To prove to the staff that he 's not sexist , <unk> hires a woman named Jordan Garfield ( Cody Horn ) , who turns out to have no business experience ( having previously worked in Anthropologie ) over other qualified candidates , including a friend of Pam 's . Kelly later attempts to tell Deangelo the truth about Ryan 's actual position as a temp worker , but Deangelo simply appoints Ryan as the department head rather than figuring out the truth . 
 Jim is kicked out of the inner circle after pointing out what the women of the office had said , and an enthusiastic Andy ( having previously denounced Deangelo after admitting that he was sexist ) replaces him . Pam interrupts a mock basketball session the inner circle is having in the office in order to quiet it down , and an annoyed Deangelo <unk> Jim back into the circle . Jim instead challenges him to try a real dunk , which Deangelo claims he can do , at the warehouse basketball hoop downstairs . Deangelo brings everyone down to the warehouse , including Dwight , who Deangelo finally loses his temper with and directly orders him downstairs or be fired , and attempts to dunk from the free @-@ throw line , only to severely injure himself by crashing down with the basketball stand on top of him . He is quickly taken to the hospital , leaving Dunder Mifflin Scranton without a manager . 
 At the end of the episode , Deangelo makes it back to the office , still in his hospital gown , with an IV tube trailing from his arm . His attempts to tell a bar joke come out as random gibberish . Gabe and Jim lead him out of the office after Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) calls for an ambulance . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by supervising producer Charlie Grandy , his sixth writing credit of the series . It was directed by the series ' cinematographer Matt Sohn , his second directing credit of the series . This is the first episode of The Office without former lead actor Steve Carell as Michael Scott . The feeling during filming was initially " weird " , but the mood eventually changed to " very hopeful , excited and anticipatory feeling " according to Office showrunner Paul Lieberstein . The episode marked the final appearance in Will Ferrell 's four @-@ episode arc on the series after first appearing in " Training Day " . The episode is also the first appearance of Cody Horn as Jordan Garfield , Deangelo 's executive assistant , and the first of three new roles since Carell 's departure . The role was originally said to be recurring at first with a chance of her becoming a series regular . She eventually did not return for the eighth season . In the final scene , Krasinski can be seen breaking character and putting his head down . 
 The official website for The Office included three cut scenes from " The Inner Circle " within a week of its release . In the first 38 second clip , Deangelo invites Dwight on a weekend trip to a Los Lobos concert which Dwight declines once he learns he can 't drive the bus . In a talking head , Dwight reveals that Deangelo makes his skin crawl . In the second 144 second clip , Andy tries to become Deangelo 's new executive assistant while in a talking head Pam decides to give up trying to impress Deangelo . It is also revealed in the same talking head that Michael named his new dog after Pam . In the third 82 second clip , Jim attempts to get back into the inner circle . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on May 5 , 2011 , " The Inner Circle " was viewed by an estimated 6 @.@ 90 million households and received a 3 @.@ 5 rating / 10 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 5 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a 17 % drop in the ratings from the previous episode , " Goodbye , Michael " , but marked a rise from the last regular episode , " Michael 's Last Dundies " . The episode tied for first in its timeslot beating Bones which received a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 9 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , CSI : Crime Scene Investigation which received a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 6 % share and Nikita which received a 0 @.@ 8 rating / 2 % share . The episode also tied for first in its timeslot with Grey 's Anatomy . " The Inner Circle " was the fifth most @-@ watched scripted show for the week of broadcast among adults aged 18 – 49 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed reviews from critics . The A.V. Club writer Myles McNutt compared the episode to " Training Day " commenting that " ' The Inner Circle ' is more successful than that episode [ " Training Day " ] on some levels " , but " both episodes suffer from the same problem : They ’ re simply not very funny or meaningful , which I 'd argue is even more problematic for " The Inner Circle " given its position in the season . " He ultimately gave the episode a C- . TV Squad writer Joel Keller wrote that while " the episode did have its funny moments " , " overall , you can just feel that the show has changed in a very fundamental way " . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix criticized the writers for still not finding Deangelo 's character out commenting that " the fact that the writers so clearly had no idea what to do with Ferrell doesn 't fill me with confidence for whatever guest stars turn up in the final episodes – nor do I feel especially great right now about the idea of an outside character coming in as the permanent new regional manager . " 
 IGN reviewer Cindy White praised the writing for Deangelo 's character saying that " Ferrell is much better carrying the show on his own than being second banana to Carell . It seemed like he was having more fun with the role in this episode " . She ultimately gave the episode a 7 @.@ 0 / 10 . New York 's Phoebe Reilly wrote that " while it was nice to see the staff responding to someone new , it didn 't feel like enough to make an audience antsy to come back after a long summer . " Hillary Busis of Entertainment Weekly also gave the episode a mediocre review commenting that " judging by tonight 's episode alone , the transition from the Carell era to the post @-@ Carell era is going to be shaky , to say the least " . " The Inner Circle " was voted the fourth lowest @-@ rated episode out of 24 from the seventh season , according to an episode poll at the fansite OfficeTally . In another poll , the episode was voted the third lowest @-@ rated episode out of 24 episode out of 24 from the seventh season and was rated 6 @.@ 86 out of 10 . 
 = Aaliyah = 
 Aaliyah Dana Haughton ( / <unk> / ; January 16 , 1979 – August 25 , 2001 ) was an American singer , dancer , actress , and model . She was born in Brooklyn , New York , and raised in Detroit , Michigan . At the age of 10 , she appeared on the television show Star Search and performed in concert alongside Gladys Knight . At age 12 , Aaliyah signed with Jive Records and her uncle Barry Hankerson 's Blackground Records . Hankerson introduced her to R. Kelly , who became her mentor , as well as lead songwriter and producer of her debut album , Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number . The album sold three million copies in the United States and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . After facing allegations of an illegal marriage with R. Kelly , Aaliyah ended her contract with Jive and signed with Atlantic Records . 
 Aaliyah worked with record producers Timbaland and Missy Elliott for her second album , One in a Million ; it sold 3 million copies in the United States and over eight million copies worldwide . In 2000 , Aaliyah appeared in her first film , Romeo Must Die . She contributed to the film 's soundtrack , which spawned the single " Try Again " . The song topped the Billboard Hot 100 solely on airplay , making Aaliyah the first artist in Billboard history to achieve this goal . " Try Again " earned Aaliyah a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female R & B Vocalist . After completing Romeo Must Die , Aaliyah filmed her role in Queen of the Damned . She released her third and final album , Aaliyah , in July 2001 . 
 On August 25 , 2001 , Aaliyah and eight others were killed in a plane crash in the Bahamas after filming the music video for the single " Rock the Boat " . The pilot , Luis Morales III , was unlicensed at the time of the accident and had traces of cocaine and alcohol in his system . Aaliyah 's family later filed a wrongful death lawsuit against Blackhawk International Airways , which was settled out of court . Aaliyah 's music has continued to achieve commercial success with several posthumous releases . Aaliyah has sold an estimated 24 to 32 million albums worldwide . She has been credited for helping redefine contemporary R & B , pop and hip hop , earning her the nicknames " Princess of R & B " and " Queen of Urban Pop " . She is listed by Billboard as the tenth most successful female R & B artist of the past 25 years and 27th most successful R & B artist in history . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Aaliyah Dana Haughton was born on January 16 , 1979 , in Brooklyn , New York , and was the younger child of Diane and Michael Haughton . She was African American , and had Native American ( Oneida ) heritage from a grandmother . Her name has been described as a female version of the Arabic " Ali " ; however , the original Arabic and Jewish name " Aliya ( Hebrew : <unk> ) " derived from the Hebrew word " aliyah ( Hebrew : <unk> ) " , and meant " highest , most exalted one , the best . " Regardless of origin , the singer was highly fond of her Semitic name , expressing support by calling it " beautiful " and asserting that she was " very proud of it , " and she thus spent her entire life striving to live up to her name every day . At a young age , Aaliyah was enrolled in voice lessons by her mother . She started performing at weddings , church choir and charity events . When she was five years old , her family moved to Detroit , Michigan , where she was raised along with her older brother , Rashad . She attended a Catholic school , <unk> Elementary , where in first grade , she received a part in the stage play Annie . From then on , she was determined to become an entertainer . In Detroit , her father began working in the warehouse business , one of his brother @-@ in @-@ law Barry Hankerson 's widening interests . Her mother stayed home and raised Aaliyah and her brother . 
 Throughout her life , she had a good relationship with her brother , which traced back to their childhood as Rashad reflected that growing up with Aaliyah was " amazing " . He recalled her running around their home singing and that never being annoying due to her having a " beautiful voice " . She and her brother became close with their cousin Jomo Hankerson , since growing up , they lived " about five blocks apart " . Jomo walked Aaliyah and Rashad to their home from school when their mother was not able to pick them up and recalled the Haughton household being filled with music . Aaliyah 's family was very close due to the struggles of her grandparents and when the <unk> moved to Detroit , the <unk> were ready to take them in if necessary . These same bonds led to ties in the music industry , under the Blackground Records label . 
 Aaliyah 's mother was a vocalist , and her uncle , Barry Hankerson , was an entertainment lawyer who had been married to Gladys Knight . As a child , Aaliyah traveled with Knight and worked with an agent in New York to audition for commercials and television programs , including Family Matters ; she went on to appear on Star Search at the age of ten . Aaliyah chose to begin auditioning while her mother made the decision to have her surname dropped . She auditioned for several record labels and at age 11 appeared in concerts alongside Knight . She had several pet animals in during her childhood , which included ducks , snakes and iguanas . Her cousin Jomo had a pet alligator , which Aaliyah felt was too much , remarking , " that was something I wasn 't going to stroke . " 
 Her grandmother died in 1991 . Years after her death , Aaliyah said her grandmother supported everyone in the family and always wanted to hear her sing , as well as admitting that she " spoiled " her and her brother Rashad " to death . " She also enjoyed Aaliyah 's singing and would have Aaliyah to sing for her . Aaliyah stated that she thought of her grandmother whenever she fell into depression . Aaliyah 's hands reminded her of her aunt , who died when she was " very young " and Aaliyah referred to her as an " amazingly beautiful woman " . 
 = = Education = = 
 Aaliyah attended Detroit schools growing up and believed she was well @-@ liked , but got teased for her short stature . She recalled coming into her own prior to age 15 and grew to love her height . Her mother would tell her to be happy that she was small and compliment her . Other children disliked Aaliyah , but she did not stay focused on them . " You always have to deal with people who are jealous , but there were so few it didn 't even matter . The majority of kids supported me , which was wonderful . When it comes to dealing with negative people , I just let it in one ear and out the other . Those people were invisible to me . " Even in her adult life , she considered herself small . She had " learned to accept and love " herself and added : " ... the most important thing is to think highly of yourself because if you don 't , no one else will " . 
 During her audition for acceptance to the Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts Aaliyah sung the song " Ave Maria " in its entirety in the Italian language . 
 Aaliyah , who maintained a perfect 4 @.@ 0 grade point average when graduating from Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts , felt education was important . She saw fit to keep her grades up despite the pressures and time constraints brought on her during the early parts of her career . She labeled herself as a perfectionist and recalled always being a good student . Aaliyah reflected : " I always wanted to maintain that , even in high school when I first started to travel . I wanted to keep that 4 @.@ 0 . Being in the industry , you know , I don 't want kids to think , ' I can just sing and forget about school . ' I think it 's very important to have an education , and even more important to have something to fall back on . " She did this in her own life , as she planned to " fall back on " another part of the entertainment industry . She believed that if she could teach music history or open her own school to teach that or drama if she did not make a living as a recording artist because , as she reasoned , " when you pick a career it has to be something you love " . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1991 – 95 : Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number = = = 
 After Hankerson signed a distribution deal with Jive Records , he signed Aaliyah to his Blackground Records label at the age of 12 . Hankerson later introduced her to recording artist and producer R. Kelly , who became Aaliyah 's mentor , as well as lead songwriter and producer of the album , which was recorded when she was 14 . Aaliyah 's debut album , Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number , was released under Jive and Blackground Records ; the album debut at number 24 on the Billboard 200 chart , selling 74 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It ultimately peaked at number 18 on the Billboard 200 and sold over three million copies in the United States , where it was certified two times Platinum by the RIAA . In Canada , the album sold over 50 @,@ 000 copies and was certified gold by the CRIA . Aaliyah 's debut single , " Back & Forth " , topped the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart for three weeks and was certified Gold by the RIAA . The second single , a cover of The Isley Brothers ' " At Your Best ( You Are Love ) " , peaked at number six on the Billboard Hot 100 and was also certified Gold by the RIAA . The title track , " Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number " , peaked at number 75 on the Hot 100 . Additionally , she released " The Thing I Like " as part of the soundtrack to the 1994 film A Low Down Dirty Shame . 
 Age Ain 't Nothing But a Number received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Some writers noted that Aaliyah 's " silky vocals " and " sultry voice " blended with Kelly 's new jack swing helped define R & B in the 1990s . Her sound was also compared to that of female quartet En Vogue . Christopher John Farley of Time magazine described the album as a " beautifully restrained work " , noting that Aaliyah 's " girlish , breathy vocals rode calmly on R. Kelly 's rough beats " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic felt that the album had its " share of filler " , but described the singles as " slyly seductive " . He also claimed that the songs on the album were " frequently better " than that of Kelly 's second studio album , 12 Play . The single " At Your Best ( You Are Love ) " was criticized by Billboard for being out of place on the album and for its length . 
 = = = 1996 – 99 : One in a Million = = = 
 In 1996 , Aaliyah left Jive Records and signed with Atlantic Records . She worked with record producers Timbaland and Missy Elliott , who contributed to her second studio album , One in a Million . Missy Elliott recalled Timbaland and herself being nervous to work with Aaliyah , since Aaliyah had already released her successful début album while Missy Elliott and Timbaland were just starting out . Missy Elliott also feared she would be a diva , but reflected that Aaliyah " came in and was so warming ; she made us immediately feel like family . " The album yielded the single " If Your Girl Only Knew " , which topped the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs for two weeks . It also generated the singles " Hot Like Fire " and " 4 Page Letter " . The following year , Aaliyah was featured on Timbaland & Magoo 's debut single , " Up Jumps da Boogie " . One in a Million peaked at number 18 on the Billboard 200 , selling 3 million copies in the United States and over eight million copies worldwide . The album was certified double platinum by the RIAA on June 16 , 1997 , denoting shipments of two million copies . The month prior to One in a Millions release , on May 5 , 1997 , music publisher Windswept Pacific filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court against Aaliyah claiming she had illegally copied Bobby Caldwell 's " What You Won 't Do for Love " for the single " Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number " . 
 Aaliyah attended the Detroit High School for the Fine and Performing Arts , where she majored in drama and graduated in 1997 with a 4 @.@ 0 GPA . Aaliyah began her acting career that same year ; she played herself in the police drama television series New York Undercover . During this time , Aaliyah participated in the Children 's Benefit Concert , a charity concert that took place at the Beacon Theatre in New York . Aaliyah also became the spokesperson for Tommy Hilfiger Corporation . In 1997 Aaliyah performed the Christmas carol What Child Is This at the annual holiday special Christmas in Washington . She contributed on the soundtrack album for the Fox Animation Studios animated feature Anastasia , performing a cover version of " Journey to the Past " which earned songwriters Lynn Ahrens and Stephen Flaherty a nomination for the Academy Award for Best Original Song . Aaliyah performed the song at the 1998 Academy Awards ceremony and became the youngest singer to perform at the event . The song " Are You That Somebody ? " was featured on the Dr. Dolittle soundtrack , which earned Aaliyah her first Grammy Award nomination . The song peaked at number 21 on the Hot 100 . 
 = = = 2000 : Romeo Must Die = = = 
 In 1999 , Aaliyah landed her first film role in Romeo Must Die , released March 22 , 2000 . Aaliyah starred opposite martial artist Jet Li , playing a couple who fall in love amid their warring families . It grossed US $ 18 @.@ 6 million in its first weekend , ranking number two at the box office . Aaliyah purposely stayed away from reviews of the film to " make it easier on " herself , but she heard " that people were able to get into me , which is what I wanted . " In contrast , some critics felt there was no chemistry between her and Jet Li , as well as viewing the film was too simplistic . This was echoed by Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times , who wrote that while Aaliyah was " a natural " and the film was conceived as a spotlight for both her and Li , " they have so little chemistry together you 'd think they 're putting out a fire instead of shooting off sparks . Her role was well received by Glen Oliver by IGN who liked that she did not portray her character " as a victimized female " but instead " as a strong female who does not come across as an over @-@ the @-@ top Women 's Right Advocate . " 
 In addition to acting , Aaliyah served as an executive producer of the film 's soundtrack , where she contributed four songs . " Try Again " was released as a single from the soundtrack ; the song topped the Billboard Hot 100 , making Aaliyah the first artist to top the chart based solely on airplay ; this led the song to be released in a 12 " vinyl and 7 " single . The music video won the Best Female Video and Best Video from a Film awards at the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards . It also earned her a Grammy Award nomination for Best Female R & B Vocalist . The soundtrack went on to sell 1 @.@ 5 million copies in the United States . 
 = = = 2001 : Aaliyah = = = 
 After completing Romeo Must Die , Aaliyah began to work on her second film , Queen of the Damned . She played the role of an ancient vampire , Queen Akasha , which she described as a " manipulative , crazy , sexual being " . Prior to her death , she expressed the possibility of recording songs for the film 's soundtrack and welcomed the possibility of collaborating with Jonathan Davis . She was scheduled to film for the sequels of The Matrix as the character Zee . 
 In May 2001 , Shaquille O 'Neal admitted that his remarks where he claimed to have engaged in sexual intercourse with Aaliyah , Cindy Crawford and Venus Williams were false after making the allegations during an appearance on a radio station and apologized to the three . All three denied the claims . The following month , June 2001 , Aaliyah posed for a photo shoot with Eric Johnson . Johnson kept the images in his " private personal archive " for thirteen years before providing digital copies of 13 Aaliyah photographs to an online photography magazine and authorizing the publication to use the photographs for a story they were doing on Aaliyah . Not long after , he filed a lawsuit claiming ABC had infringed his rights since the corporation authorized further reproduction by reproducing them online . 
 Aaliyah released her self @-@ titled album , Aaliyah , in July 2001 . It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling 187 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The first single from the album , " We Need a Resolution " , peaked at number 59 on the Billboard Hot 100 . She finished recording the album in March 2001 after a year of recording tracks that began in March of the previous year . At the time she started recording the album , Aaliyah 's publicist disclosed the album 's release date as most likely being in October 2000 . Filming for Queen of the Damned delayed the release of Aaliyah . Aaliyah enjoyed balancing her singing and acting careers . Though she called music a " first " for her , she also had been acting since she was young and had wanted to begin acting " at some point in my career , " but " wanted it to be the right time and the right vehicle " and felt Romeo Must Die " was it " . 
 Aaliyah was released five years after One in a Million . Aaliyah had not intended for the albums to have such a gap between them . " I wanted to take a break after One in a Million to just relax , think about how I wanted to approach the next album . Then , when I was ready to start back up , " Romeo " happened , and so I had to take another break and do that film and then do the soundtrack , then promote it . The break turned into a longer break than I anticipated . " Connie Johnson of the Los Angeles Times argued that Aaliyah having to focus on her film career may have caused her to not give the album " the attention it merited . " Collaborator Timbaland concurred , stating that he was briefly in Australia to work on the album while Aaliyah was filming and did not feel the same production had gone into Aaliyah as One in a Million had . He also said Virgin Records had rushed the album and Aaliyah had specifically requested Missy Elliott and Timbaland work on Aaliyah with her . 
 The week after Aaliyah 's death , her third studio album , Aaliyah , rose from number 19 to number one on the Billboard 200 . " Rock the Boat " was released as a posthumous single . The music video premiered on BET 's Access Granted ; it became the most viewed and highest rated episode in the history of the show . The song peaked at number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 and number two on the Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It was also included on the Now That 's What I Call Music ! 8 compilation series ; a portion of the album 's profits was donated to the Aaliyah Memorial Fund . Promotional posters for Aaliyah that had been put up in major cities such as New York and Los Angeles became makeshift memorials for grieving fans . 
 " More than a Woman " and " I Care 4 U " were released as posthumous singles and peaked within the top 25 of the Billboard Hot 100 . The album was certified double Platinum by the RIAA and sold 2 @.@ 95 million copies in the United States . " More than a Woman " reached number one on the UK singles chart making Aaliyah the first deceased artist to reach number one on the UK singles chart . " More than a Woman " was replaced by George Harrison 's " My Sweet Lord " which is the only time in the UK singles chart 's history where a dead artist has replaced another dead artist at number one . In July 2001 , she allowed MTV 's show Diary behind @-@ the @-@ scenes access to her life and stated " I am truly blessed to wake up every morning to do something that I love ; there is nothing better than that . " She continued , " Everything is worth it – the hard work , the times when you 're tired , the times when you are a bit sad . In the end , it 's all worth it because it really makes me happy . I wouldn 't trade it for anything else in the world . I 've got good friends , a beautiful family and I 've got a career . I thank God for his blessings every single chance I get . " 
 Aaliyah was signed to appear in several future films , including Honey , a romantic film titled Some Kind of Blue , and a Whitney Houston @-@ produced remake of the 1976 film Sparkle . Whitney Houston recalled Aaliyah being " so enthusiastic " about the film and wanting to appear in the film " so badly " . Houston also voiced her belief that Aaliyah was more than qualified for the role and the film was shelved after she died , since Aaliyah had " gone to a better place " . Studio officials of Warner Brothers stated that Aaliyah and her mother had both read the script for Sparkle . According to them , Aaliyah was passionate about playing the lead role of a young singer in a girl group . The film was released in 2012 , eleven years after Aaliyah 's death . Before her death , Aaliyah had filmed part of her role in The Matrix Reloaded and was scheduled to appear in The Matrix Revolutions as Zee . Aaliyah told Access Hollywood that she was " beyond happy " to have landed the role . The role was subsequently recast to Nona Gaye . Aaliyah 's scenes were included in the tribute section of the Matrix Ultimate Collection series . 
 In November 2001 , Ronald Isley stated that Aaliyah and the Isley Brothers had discussed a collaboration prior to her death . She had previously covered the Isley Brothers ' single " At Your Best ( You Are Love ) " . By 2001 , Aaliyah had enjoyed her now seven @-@ year career and felt a sense of accomplishment . " This is what I always wanted , " she said of her career in Vibe magazine . " I breathe to perform , to entertain , I can 't imagine myself doing anything else . I 'm just a really happy girl right now . I honestly love every aspect of this business . I really do . I feel very fulfilled and complete . " 
 = = Artistry = = 
 = = = Voice and style = = = 
 Aaliyah had the vocal range of a soprano . With the release of her debut single " Back & Forth " , Dimitri Ehrlich of Entertainment Weekly expressed that Aaliyah 's " silky vocals are more agile than those of self @-@ proclaimed queen of hip @-@ hop soul Mary J. Blige . " In her review for Aaliyah 's second studio album One in a Million Vibe magazine , music critic Dream Hampton said that Aaliyah 's " deliciously feline " voice has the same " pop appeal " as Janet Jackson 's . Aaliyah described her sound as " street but sweet " , which featured her " gentle " vocals over a " hard " beat . Though Aaliyah did not write any of her own material , her lyrics were described as in @-@ depth . She incorporated R & B , pop and hip hop into her music . Her songs were often uptempo and at the same time often dark , revolving around " matters of the heart " . After her R. Kelly @-@ produced debut album , Aaliyah worked with Timbaland and Missy Elliott , whose productions were more electronic . Sasha Frere @-@ Jones of The Wire finds Aaliyah 's " Are You That Somebody ? " to be Timbaland 's " masterpiece " and exemplary of his production 's start @-@ stop rhythms , with " big half @-@ second pauses between beats and voices " . Keith Harris of Rolling Stone cites " Are You That Somebody ? " as " one of ' 90s R & B 's most astounding moments " . 
 Aaliyah 's songs have been said to have " crisp production " and " staccato arrangements " that " extend genre boundaries " while containing " old @-@ school " soul music . Kelefah Sanneh of The New York Times called Aaliyah " a digital diva who wove a spell with ones and zeroes " , and writes that her songs comprised " simple vocal riffs , repeated and refracted to echo the manipulated loops that create digital rhythm " , as Timbaland 's " computer @-@ programmed beats fitted perfectly with her cool , breathy voice to create a new kind of electronic music . " When she experimented with other genres on Aaliyah , such as Latin pop and heavy metal , Entertainment Weekly 's Craig Seymour panned the attempt . While Analyzing her eponymous album British publication NME ( New Musical Express ) felt that Aaliyah 's radical third album was intended to consolidate her position as <unk> & B 's most experimental artist . As her albums progressed , writers felt that Aaliyah matured , calling her progress a " declaration of strength and independence " . ABC News noted that Aaliyah 's music was evolving from the punchy pop influenced Hip hop and R & B to a more mature , introspective sound on her third album . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic described her eponymous album , Aaliyah , as " a statement of maturity and a stunning artistic leap forward " and called it one of the strongest urban soul records of its time . She portrayed " unfamiliar sounds , styles and emotions " , but managed to please critics with the contemporary sound it contained . Ernest Hardy of Rolling Stone felt that Aaliyah reflected a stronger technique , where she gave her best vocal performance . Prior to her death , Aaliyah expressed a desire to learn about the burgeoning UK garage scene she had heard about at the time . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 As an artist , Aaliyah often voiced that she was inspired by a number of performers . These include Michael Jackson , Stevie Wonder , Sade , En Vogue , Nine Inch Nails , Korn , Prince , Naughty by Nature , Johnny Mathis , Janet Jackson and Barbra Streisand . Aaliyah expressed that Michael Jackson 's Thriller was her " favorite album " and that " nothing will ever top Thriller . " She stated that she admired Sade because " she stays true to her style no matter what ... she 's an amazing artist , an amazing performer ... and I absolutely love her . " Aaliyah expressed she had always desired to work with Janet Jackson , whom she had drawn frequent comparison to over the course of her career , stating " I admire her a great deal . She 's a total performer ... I 'd love to do a duet with Janet Jackson . " Jackson reciprocated Aaliyah 's affections , commenting " I 've loved her from the beginning because she always comes out and does something different , musically . " Jackson also stated she would have enjoyed collaborating with Aaliyah . 
 = = = Image = = = 
 Aaliyah focused on her public image throughout her career . She often wore baggy clothes and sunglasses , stating that she wanted to be herself . She described her image as being " important ... to differentiate yourself from the rest of the pack " . She often wore black clothing , starting a trend for similar fashion among women in United States and Japan . Aaliyah 's fashionable style has been credited for being an influence on new fashion trend 's called Health Goth and " Ghetto Goth " also known as <unk> <unk> Aaliyah participated in fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger 's All America Tour and was featured in Tommy Jean ads , which depicted her in boxer shorts , baggy jeans and a tube top . Hilfiger 's brother , Andy , called it " a whole new look " that was " classy but sexy " . Carson Daly A former VJ on MTV 's Total Request Live commented on Aaliyah 's style by saying that she was " cutting edge " , " always one step ahead of the curve " and that " the TRL audience looks to her to figure out what 's hot and what 's new " . 
 When she changed her hairstyle , Aaliyah took her mother 's advice to cover her left eye , much like Veronica Lake . The look has become known as her signature and been referred to as fusion of " unnerving emotional honesty " and " a sense of mystique " . In 1998 , she hired a personal trainer to keep in shape , and exercised five days a week and ate diet foods . Aaliyah was praised for her " clean @-@ cut image " and " moral values " . Robert Christgau of The Village Voice wrote of Aaliyah 's artistry and image , " she was lithe and <unk> in a way that signified neither jailbait nor hottie — an ingenue whose selling point was sincerity , not innocence and the obverse it implies . " 
 Aaliyah was viewed by others as a role model . Emil <unk> , described by CNN as " a friend of Aaliyah 's " and follower of her career , explained : " Aaliyah is an excellent role model , because she started her career in the public eye at age 15 with a gold album entitled Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number . And then her second album , One in a Million went double platinum . She had the leading role in Romeo Must Die , which was a box office success . She 's won numerous awards , several MTV music video awards , and aside from her professional successes , many of her lyrics are very inspirational and uplifting . She also carried herself in a very professional manner . She was well spoken . She was beautiful , but she didn 't use her beauty to sell her music . She used her talent . Many young hip @-@ hop fans greatly admire her . " 
 She also was seen by others as a sex symbol . Aaliyah did not have a problem with being considered one . " I know that people think I 'm sexy and I am looked at as that , and it is cool with me , " she stated . " It 's wonderful to have sex appeal . If you embrace it , it can be a very beautiful thing . I am totally cool with that . Definitely . I see myself as sexy . If you are comfortable with it , it can be very classy and it can be very appealing . " The single " We Need a Resolution " was argued to have transformed " the once tomboy into a sexy grown woman " . Aaliyah mentioned that her mother , during her childhood , would take pictures of her and notice a sex appeal . She reinforced her mother 's belief by saying that she did feel " sexy for sure " and that she embraced it and was comfortable with this view of her . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In her spare time , she was mostly a home person , which dated back to her younger years , but on occasion went out and played laser tag . She reasoned this was due to her liking " the simple things in life " . Despite making a profit from her career that allowed her to purchase the vehicle she wanted , Aaliyah revealed during her final interview on August 21 , 2001 on 106 & Park that she had never owned a car due to living in New York City and hiring a car or driver on a regular basis . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Aaliyah 's family played a major role in the course of her career . Aaliyah 's father Michael Haughton , who died in 2012 , served as her personal manager . Her mother assisted her in her career while brother Rashad Haughton and cousin Jomo Hankerson worked with her consistently . Her father 's illness ended his co @-@ management of Aaliyah with her mother Diane Haughton . She ran all of her decisions by Rashad . 
 Aaliyah was known to have usually been accompanied by members of her immediate family and the " Rock the Boat " filming was credited by Rashad Haughton as being the first and only time her family was not present . In October 2001 , Rashad stated : " It really boggles everyone [ that ] from Day One , every single video she ever shot there 's always been myself or my mother or my father there . The circumstances surrounding this last video were really strange because my mother had eye surgery and couldn 't fly . That really bothered her because she always traveled . My dad had to take care of my mom at that time . And I went to Australia to visit some friends . We really couldn 't understand why we weren 't there . You ask yourself maybe we could have stopped it . But you can 't really answer the question . There 's always gonna be that question of why . " Her friend Kidada Jones said in the last year of her life her parents had given her more freedom and she had talked about wanting a family . " She wanted to have a family , and we talked about how we couldn 't wait to kick back with our babies . " 
 Gladys Knight , who had been married to Aaliyah 's uncle Barry Hankerson , was essential to the start of Aaliyah 's career as she gave her many of her earlier performances . One of their last conversations concerned Aaliyah having difficulty with " another young artist " that she was trying to work with . Knight felt the argument was " petty " and insisted that she remain being who she was in spite of the conflict . 
 = = = Illegal marriage = = = 
 With the release of Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number , rumors circulated of a relationship between Aaliyah and R. Kelly . Shortly after , there was speculation about a secret marriage with the release of " Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number " and the adult content that Kelly had written for Aaliyah . Vibe magazine later revealed a marriage certificate that listed the couple married on August 31 , 1994 , in Sheraton Gateway Suites in Rosemont , Illinois . Aaliyah , who was 15 at the time , was listed as 18 on the certificate ; the illegal marriage was annulled in February 1995 by her parents . The pair continued to deny marriage allegations , stating that neither was married . One particular allegation among the rumor was that Aaliyah wedded R. Kelly without her parents ' knowledge . 
 Aaliyah reportedly developed a friendship with R. Kelly during the recording of her debut album . As she recalled to Vibe magazine in 1994 , she and R. Kelly would " go watch a movie " and " go eat " when she got tired and would then " come back and work " . She described the relationship between her and R. Kelly as being " rather close . " In 2016 , Kelly said that he was in love with Aaliyah as he was with " anybody else . " In December 1994 , Aaliyah told the Sun @-@ Times that whenever she was asked about being married to R. Kelly , she urged them not to believe " all that mess " and that she and R. Kelly were " close " and " people took it the wrong way . " In his 2011 book The Man Behind the Man : Looking From the Inside Out , Demetrius Smith Sr. , a former member of R. Kelly 's entourage , wrote that R. Kelly told him " in a voice that sounded as if he wanted to burst into tears " that he thought Aaliyah was pregnant . 
 Jamie Foster Brown in the 1994 issue of Sister 2 Sister wrote that " R. Kelly told me that he and Aaliyah got together and it was just magic . " Brown also reported hearing about a relationship between them . " I 've been hearing about Robert and Aaliyah for a while — that she was pregnant . Or that she was coming and going in and out of his house . People would see her walking his dog , 12 Play , with her basketball cap and sunglasses on . Every time I asked the label , they said it was platonic . But I kept hearing complaints from people about her being in the studio with all those men . At 15 , " Brown said . " you have all those hormones and no brains attached to them . " 
 Aaliyah admitted in court documents that she had lied about her age . In May 1997 , she filed suit in Cook County seeking to have all records of the marriage expunged because she was not old enough under state law to get married without her parents ' consent . It was reported that she cut off all professional and personal ties with R. Kelly after the marriage was annulled and ceased having contact with him . In 2014 , Jomo Hankerson stated that Aaliyah " got <unk> " over her relationship with R. Kelly and the scandal over the marriage made it difficult to find producers for her second album . " We were coming off of a multi @-@ platinum debut album and except for a couple of relationships with Jermaine Dupri and Puffy , it was hard for us to get producers on the album . " Hankerson also expressed confusion over why " they were upset " with Aaliyah given her age at the time . 
 Aaliyah was known to avoid answering questions regarding R. Kelly following the professional split . During an interview with Christopher John Farley , she was asked if she was still in contact with him and if she would ever work with him again . Farley said Aaliyah responded with a " firm , frosty " ' No ' to both of the questions . Vibe magazine said Aaliyah changed the subject anytime " you bring up the marriage with her " . A spokeswoman for Aaliyah told the Chicago Sun @-@ Times in 2000 that when " R. Kelly comes up , she doesn 't even speak his name , and nobody 's allowed to ask about it at all " . Kelly later commented that Aaliyah had opportunities to address the pair 's relationship after they separated professionally but chose not to . 
 R. Kelly would have other allegations made about him regarding underage girls in the years following her death and his marriage to Aaliyah was used to evidence his involvement with them . He refused to discuss his relationship with her , citing that she was dead . " Out of respect for her , and her mom and her dad , I will not discuss Aaliyah . That was a whole other situation , a whole other time , it was a whole other thing , and I 'm sure that people also know that . " Aaliyah 's mother Diane Haughton reflected that everything " that went wrong in her life " began with her relationship with R. Kelly . The allegations have been said to have done " little to taint Aaliyah 's image or prevent her from becoming a reliable ' 90s hitmaker with viable sidelines in movies and modeling . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Quincy Jones said she was " like one of my daughters " and Aaliyah vacationed with him and his family in Fiji . She was close friends with his daughter Kidada Jones . By 2001 , they had been best friends for five years and Jones described her as having a great sense of humor . Aaliyah and Jones would make prank phone calls to what Aaliyah referred to as " public establishments " . At the time of her death , she and Jones were planning on starting a clothing line , benefited by Aaliyah 's popularity as a " style @-@ setter " and she sought to capitalize on her good taste . Her brother Rashad called her his best friend and stated that she " was my everything " . 
 Beyoncé stated after Aaliyah 's death that she was " the very first person to embrace Destiny 's Child . " Aaliyah met Beyoncé as well as the other members of Destiny 's Child in 1998 in Los Angeles . They were intimidated about meeting her , since she had already established herself and they were just making their names at the time . Beyoncé observed Aaliyah as having " handled herself like a lady " and commented on the " aura " she had , which she believed was an indication of Aaliyah having " a great family . " 
 In addition to working with them , Aaliyah had friendships with Missy Elliott and Timbaland . Aaliyah recalled her first time meeting Missy Elliott . " When we met , there was a bond that was established real quickly . A friendship formed and we built our studio relationship from that . " Missy Elliott said in 2010 that " there 's not a day that goes by that I don 't think " of Aaliyah and that she misses her every day . Missy Elliott said of Aaliyah during an appearance on RapFix Live in November 2012 , " Aaliyah , she was like a comedian . She always wanted to laugh . " 
 Timbaland admitted in 2011 that he was in love with her , but did not act out on his feelings due to their age difference and determined he would just " be her brother " . Despite this declaration , he still struggled with keeping his feelings to himself . Timbaland said the pair had an argument , and he learned of her death when attempting to reconcile . Immediately following her death , Timbaland told MTV he considered her as his " little sister " and that he and Aaliyah had a " chemistry " and that he had lost half of his creativity with her death . He also said that fans needed to know that beyond music " she was a brilliant person . " Aaliyah 's death had a large impact on both of them as they had been her closest collaborators in the last five years of her career and they owed their initial success to her . 
 In 2015 , Damon Dash claimed that Jay Z tried to date Aaliyah , but she placed him in the " friend zone " . In a New York City interview , Jay Z said her death was a precursor to the September 11 attacks , which took place the month after Aaliyah 's death . 
 = = = Engagement = = = 
 Aaliyah was dating co @-@ founder of Roc @-@ A @-@ Fella Records Damon Dash at the time of her death and , though they were not formally engaged , in interviews given after Aaliyah 's death Dash claimed the couple had planned to marry . Aaliyah and Dash met through his accountant and formed a friendship . Dash has said he is unsure of how he and Aaliyah started dating and that the two just understood each other . " I don 't know [ how we got involved ] , just spending time , you know , we just saw things the same and it was new , you know what I mean ? Meeting someone that is trying to do the same thing you are doing in the urban market , in the same urban market place but not really being so urban . It was just ; her mind was where my mind was . She understood me and she got my jokes . She thought my jokes were funny . " 
 Dash expressed his belief that Aaliyah was the " one " and claimed the pair were not officially engaged , but had spoken about getting married prior to her death . Aaliyah publicly never addressed the relationship between her and Dash as being anything but platonic . In May 2001 , she hosted a party for Dash 's 30th birthday at a New York City club , where they were spotted together and Dash was seen escorting her to a bathroom . Addressing this , Aaliyah stated that she and Dash were just " very good friends " and chose to " keep it at that " for the time being . Just two weeks before her death , Aaliyah traveled from New Jersey to East Hampton , New York to visit Dash at the summer house he shared with Jay Z. 
 The couple were separated for long periods at a time , as Dash recalled that Aaliyah continuously shot films and would be gone for months often to come back shortly and continue her schedule . Dash was also committed to " his own thing " , which did not make matters any better . Despite this , they were understanding that the time they had together was special . Dash remembered they would " be in a room full of people talking to each other and it felt like everyone was listening but it would be just us . It would be like we were the only ones in the room " . Dash always felt their time together was essential and Aaliyah was the person he was interested in being with , which is why , as he claimed , they had begun speaking about engagement . The relationship was mentioned in the lyrics of Jay @-@ Z 's remix to her song " Miss You " , released after her death . 
 = = Death = = 
 On August 25 , 2001 , at 6 : 50 p.m. ( EDT ) , Aaliyah and the members of the record company boarded a twin @-@ engine Cessna <unk> ( registration <unk> ) at the Marsh Harbour Airport in Abaco Islands , The Bahamas , to travel to the Opa @-@ locka Airport in Florida , after they completed filming the music video for " Rock the Boat " . They had a flight scheduled the following day , but with filming finishing early , Aaliyah and her entourage were eager to return to the United States and made the decision to leave immediately . The designated airplane was smaller than the Cessna 404 on which they had originally arrived , but the whole party and all of the equipment were accommodated on board . The plane crashed shortly after takeoff , about 200 feet ( 60 m ) from the end of the runway and exploded . 
 Aaliyah and the eight others on board — pilot Luis Morales III , hair stylist Eric Forman , Anthony Dodd , security guard Scott Gallin , family friend Keith Wallace , make @-@ up stylist Christopher Maldonado , and Blackground Records employees Douglas Kratz and Gina Smith — were all killed . Gallin survived the initial impact and spent his last moments worrying about Aaliyah 's condition , according to ambulance drivers . The plane was identified as being owned by Florida @-@ based company <unk> by Kathleen Bergen , spokeswoman for the US Federal Aviation Administration ( FAA ) in Atlanta . Initial reports of the crash identified Luis Morales as " L <unk> " . 
 According to findings from an inquest conducted by the coroner 's office in The Bahamas , Aaliyah suffered from " severe burns and a blow to the head " , in addition to severe shock and a weak heart . The coroner theorized that she went into such a state of shock that even if she had survived the crash , her recovery would have been nearly impossible given the severity of her injuries . The bodies were taken to the morgue at Princess Margaret Hospital in Nassau , where they were kept for relatives to help identify them . Some of the bodies were badly burned in the crash . 
 As the subsequent investigation determined , when the aircraft attempted to depart , it was over its maximum take @-@ off weight by 700 pounds ( 320 kg ) and was carrying one excess passenger , according to its certification . The National Transportation Safety Board report stated that " the airplane was seen lifting off the runway , and then nose down , impacting in a marsh on the south side of the departure end of runway 27 and then exploding in flames . " It indicated that the pilot was not approved to fly the plane . Morales falsely obtained his FAA license by showing hundreds of hours never flown , and he may also have falsified how many hours he had flown in order to get a job with his employer , Blackhawk International Airways . Additionally , an autopsy performed on Morales revealed traces of cocaine and alcohol in his system . 
 Aaliyah 's funeral was held on August 31 , 2001 , at the St. Ignatius Loyola Church in Manhattan . Her body was set in a silver @-@ plated copper @-@ deposit casket , which was carried in a glass horse @-@ drawn hearse . An estimated 800 mourners were in attendance at the procession . Among those in attendance at the private ceremony were Missy Elliott , Timbaland , Gladys Knight , Lil ' Kim and Sean Combs . After the service , 22 white doves were released to symbolize each year of Aaliyah 's life . Aaliyah was interred in a private room at the left end of a corridor in the Rosewood Mausoleum at the Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York . The inscription at the bottom of Aaliyah 's portrait at the funeral read : " We Were Given a Queen , We Were Given an Angel . " 
 After Aaliyah 's death , the German newspaper Die Zeit published excerpts from an interview done shortly before her death , in which she described a recurring dream : " It is dark in my favorite dream . Someone is following me . I don 't know why . I 'm scared . Then suddenly I lift off . Far away . How do I feel ? As if I am swimming in the air . Free . Weightless . Nobody can reach me . Nobody can touch me . It 's a wonderful feeling . " 
 = = Posthumous career = = 
 Immediately after Aaliyah 's death , there was uncertainty over whether the music video for " Rock the Boat " would ever air . It made its world premiere on BET 's Access Granted on October 9 , 2001 . She won two posthumous awards at the American Music Awards of 2002 ; Favorite Female R & B Artist and Favorite R & B / Soul Album for Aaliyah . Her second and final film , Queen of the Damned , was released in February 2002 . Before its release , Aaliyah 's brother , Rashad , re @-@ dubbed some of her lines during post @-@ production . It grossed US $ 15 @.@ 2 million in its first weekend , ranking number one at the box office . On the first anniversary of Aaliyah 's death , a candlelight vigil was held in Times Square ; millions of fans observed a moment of silence ; and throughout the United States , radio stations played her music in remembrance . In December 2002 , a collection of previously unreleased material was released as Aaliyah 's first posthumous album , I Care 4 U. A portion of the proceeds was donated to the Aaliyah Memorial Fund , a program that benefits the Revlon UCLA Women 's Cancer Research Program and Harlem 's Sloan Kettering Cancer Center . It debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , selling 280 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album 's lead single , " Miss You " , peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and topped the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . In August of the following year , clothing retailer Christian Dior donated profits from sales in honor of Aaliyah . 
 In 2005 , Aaliyah 's second compilation album , Ultimate Aaliyah was released in the UK by Blackground Records . Ultimate Aaliyah is a three disc set , which included a greatest hits audio CD and a DVD . Andy Kellman of AllMusic remarked " Ultimate Aaliyah adequately represents the shortened career of a tremendous talent who benefited from some of the best songwriting and production work by Timbaland , Missy Elliott , and R. Kelly . " A documentary movie Aaliyah Live in Amsterdam was released in 2011 , shortly before the tenth anniversary of Aaliyah 's death . The documentary , by <unk> Caesar , contained previously unseen footage shot of her career beginnings in 1995 when she was appearing in the Netherlands . 
 In March 2012 , music producer Jeffrey " J @-@ Dub " Walker announced on his Twitter account that a song " Steady Ground " , which he produced for Aaliyah 's third album , would be included in the forthcoming posthumous Aaliyah album . This second proposed posthumous album would feature this song using demo vocals , as Walker claims the originals were somehow lost by his sound engineer . Aaliyah 's brother Rashad later refuted Walker 's claim , claiming that " no official album [ is ] being released and supported by the Haughton family . " On August 5 , 2012 , a song entitled " Enough Said " was released online . The song was produced by Noah " 40 " Shebib and features Canadian rapper Drake . Four days later , Jomo Hankerson confirmed a posthumous album is being produced and that it is scheduled to be released by the end of 2012 by Blackground Records . The album was reported to include 16 unreleased songs and have contributions from Aaliyah 's longtime collaborators Timbaland and Missy Elliott , among others . On August 13 , Timbaland and Missy Elliott dismissed rumors about being contacted or participating for the project . Elliott 's manager Mona Scott @-@ Young said in a statement to XXL , " Although Missy and Timbaland always strive to keep the memory of their close friend alive , we have not been contacted about the project nor are there any plans at this time to participate . We 've seen the reports surfacing that they have been confirmed to participate but that is not the case . Both Missy and Timbaland are very sensitive to the loss still being felt by the family so we wanted to clear up any misinformation being circulated . " Elliott herself said , " Tim and I carry Aaliyah with us everyday , like so many of the people who love her . She will always live in our hearts . We have nothing but love and respect for her memory and for her loved ones left behind still grieving her loss . They are always in our prayers . " 
 In June 2013 , Aaliyah was featured on a new track by Chris Brown , titled " Don 't Think They Know " ; with Aaliyah singing the song 's hook . The video features dancing holographic versions of Aaliyah . The song appears on Brown 's sixth studio album , X. Timbaland voiced his disapproval for " Enough Said " and " Don 't Think They Know " in July 2013 . He exclaimed , " Aaliyah music only work with its soulmate , which is me " . Soon after , Timbaland apologized to Chris Brown over his remarks , which he explained were made due to Aaliyah and her death being a " very sensitive subject " . In January 2014 , producer Noah " 40 " Shebib confirmed that the posthumous album was shelved due to the negative reception surrounding Drake 's involvement . Shebib added , " Aaliyah 's mother saying , ' I don 't want this out ' was enough for me ... I walked away very quickly . " 
 Aaliyah 's vocals were reported to be featured on the T @-@ Pain mixtape , The Iron Way , on the track " Girlfriend " , but were pulled after being met with criticism by fans and many in attendance at a New York listening session that he hosted for the project . In response to the criticism , T @-@ Pain questioned if Aaliyah 's legacy was driven by her death and claimed that were she still alive , she would be seen as trying to emulate Beyoncé . According to T @-@ Pain , he was given her vocals from a session she had done prior to her death after being approached to work on a track for a posthumous Aaliyah album and completing the song , calling the exchange " just like a swap . " 
 She was featured on the Tink track " Million " , which was released in May 2015 and contained samples from her song " One in a Million " . Collaborator Timbaland was involved in the song 's creation , having previously claimed that Aaliyah appeared to him in a dream and stressed that Tink was " the one " . 
 In August 2015 , Timbaland confirmed that he had unreleased vocals from Aaliyah and stated a " sneak peek " would be coming soon . 
 In September 2015 , Aaliyah by <unk> , an official tribute fragrance was announced . 
 On December 19 , 2015 , Timbaland uploaded a snippet of a new Aaliyah song title " He Keeps Me Shakin " on his Instagram account and said it would be released December 25 , 2015 , on the Timbaland mixtape King Stays King . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Aaliyah has been credited for helping redefine R & B , pop and hip hop in the 1990s , " leaving an indelible imprint on the music industry as a whole . " According to Billboard Aaliyah revolutionized R & B with her sultry mix of pop , soul and hip hop . In a 2001 review of her eponymous album Rolling Stone magazine professed that Aaliyah 's impact on R & B and pop has been enormous . Steve Huey of AllMusic wrote Aaliyah ranks among the " elite " artists of the R & B genre , as she " played a major role in popularizing the stuttering , futuristic production style that consumed hip @-@ hop and urban soul in the late 1990s . " Bruce Britt of " music world " on Broadcast Music , Inc <unk> website stated that by combining " schoolgirl charm with urban grit " , Aaliyah helped define the teen @-@ oriented sound that has resulted in contemporary pop phenom 's like Brandy , Christina Aguilera and Destiny 's Child . 
 Described as one of " R & B 's most important artists " during the 1990s , her second studio album , One in a Million , became one of the most influential R & B albums of the decade . Music critic Simon Reynolds cited " Are You That Somebody ? " as " the most radical pop single " of 1998 . Kelefah Sanneh of The New York Times wrote that rather than being the song 's focal point , Aaliyah " knew how to disappear into the music , how to match her voice to the bass line " , and consequently " helped change the way popular music sounds ; the twitchy , beat @-@ driven songs of Destiny 's Child owe a clear debt to ' Are You That Somebody ' . " Sanneh asserted that by the time of her death in 2001 , Aaliyah " had recorded some of the most innovative and influential pop songs of the last five years . " Music publication pop dust called Aaliyah an unlikely queen of the underground mainly due to her influence on the underground alternative music scene which consist of heavy sampling of her music and many references that are made to her discography by underground artist , pop dust also mentioned that Aaliyah 's forward thinking music that she did with <unk> and the experimental music being made by many underground alternative artist are some what cut from the same cloth . While compiling a list of artist that take cues from Aaliyah MTV Hive mentioned that it ’ s easy to spot her influence on underground movements like dubstep , strains of indie pop , and in the lo @-@ fi R & B movements . With sales of 8 @.@ 1 million albums in the United States and an estimated 24 to 32 million albums worldwide , Aaliyah earned the nicknames " Princess of R & B " and " Queen of Urban Pop " , as she " proved she was a muse in her own right " . Ernest Hardy of Rolling Stone dubbed her as the " undisputed queen of the midtempo come @-@ on " . Aaliyah has been referred to as a pop icon and a R & B icon for her impact and contributions to those respective genres . Japanese pop singer Hikaru Utada has said several times that " It was when I heard Aaliyah 's Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number that I got hooked on R & B. " , after which Utada released her debut album First Love with heavy R & B influences . Another Japanese pop singer Crystal Kay has expressed how she admired Aaliyah when she was growing up and how she would practice dancing while watching her music videos . 
 Aaliyah was honored at the 2001 MTV Video Music Awards by Janet Jackson , Missy Elliott , Timbaland , Ginuwine and her brother , Rashad , who all paid tribute to her . In the same year , the United States Social Security Administration ranked the name Aaliyah one of the 100 most popular names for newborn girls . Aaliyah was ranked as one of " The Top 40 Women of the Video Era " in VH1 's 2003 The Greatest series . She was also ranked at number 18 on BET 's " Top 25 Dancers of All Time " . Aaliyah appeared on both 2000 and 2001 list of Maxim Hot 100 in position 41 and the latter at 14 . In 2002 VH1 created the 100 sexiest artist list and Aaliyah was ranked at number 36 . In memory of Aaliyah , the Entertainment Industry Foundation created the Aaliyah Memorial Fund to donate money raised to charities she supported . In December 2009 , Billboard magazine ranked Aaliyah at number 70 on its Top Artists of the Decade , while her eponymous album was ranked at number 181 on the magazine 's Top 200 Albums of the Decade . She is listed by Billboard as the tenth most successful female R & B artist of the past 25 years , and 27th most successful R & B artist overall . In 2012 , VH1 ranked her number 48 in " VH1 's Greatest Women in Music " . Also in 2012 , Aaliyah was ranked at number 10 on Complex magazine 's 100 hottest female singers of all @-@ time list and number 22 on their 90 hottest women of the 90 's list . In 2014 , NME ( New Musical Express ) ranked Aaliyah at number 18 on NME 's 100 most influential artist list . Aaliyah 's dress that she wore at the 2000 MTV Video Music Award 's was featured in the most memorable fashion moments at the VMA 's list by the fashion publication Harper 's Bazaar In October 2015 Aaliyah was featured in the 10 women who became Denim Style icons list created by the fashion publication Vogue . 
 Aaliyah 's music has influenced numerous artists including Adele , Ciara , Beyoncé , Monica , Chris Brown , Rihanna , Azealia Banks , Sevyn Streeter , Keyshia Cole , J. Cole , Kelly Rowland , Zendaya , Rita Ora , The xx , Arctic Monkeys , Speedy Ortiz , Chelsea Wolfe , Haim , Angel Haze , <unk> , Naya Rivera , Cassie , Hayley Williams , Jessie Ware , Yeasayer , Bebe <unk> and Omarion . Canadian R & B singer Keshia Chanté who was said to play as her in her pending biopic back in 2008 , complimented the singer 's futuristic style in music and fashion . Chanté backed out of the biopic after speaking to Diane Haughton , but has expressed a willingness to do the project if " the right production comes along and the family 's behind it " . Keisha also mentioned that Aaliyah had been part of her life " since I was 6 . " R & B singer and friend Brandy said about the late singer " She came out before Monica and I did , she was our inspiration . At the time , record companies did not believe in kid acts and it was just inspiring to see someone that was winning and winning being themselves . When I met her I embraced her , I was so happy to meet her . " Rapper Drake said that the singer has had the biggest influence on his career . He also has a tattoo of the singer behind his back . Solange Knowles remarked on the tenth anniversary of her death that she idolized Aaliyah and proclaimed that she would never be forgotten . Adam Levine , the lead vocalist of the pop rock group Maroon 5 , remembers that listening to " Are You That Somebody ? " convinced him to pursue a more soulful sound than that of his then @-@ band Kara 's Flowers . Erika Ramirez , associate editor of Billboard.com , said at the time of Aaliyah 's career " there weren 't many artists using the kind of soft vocals the ways she was using it , and now you see a lot of artists doing that and finding success , " her reasoning for Aaliyah 's continued influence on current artists . She argued that Aaliyah 's second album One in a Million was " very much ahead of its time , with the bass and electro kind of R & B sounds that they produced " , referring to collaborators Timbaland and Missy Elliott and that the sound , which " really stood out " at its time , was being replicated . 
 In 2012 , British singer @-@ songwriter Katy B released the song Aaliyah as a tribute to Aaliyah 's legacy and lasting impression on R & B music . The song first appeared on Katy B 's Danger EP and featured Jessie Ware on guest vocals . In 2016 , Swedish singer @-@ songwriter Erik Hassle released a song titled " If Your Man Only Knew " which serves as a tribute to Aaliyah 's 1996 single " If Your Girl Only Knew " 
 There has been continuing belief that Aaliyah would have achieved greater career success had it not been for her death . Emil <unk> mentioned the deaths of The Notorious B.I.G. and Tupac Shakur in conjunction with hers and added : " Her just @-@ released third album and scheduled role in a sequel to The Matrix could have made her another Janet Jackson or Whitney Houston " . Director of Queen of the Damned Michael Rymer said of Aaliyah , " God , that girl could have gone so far " and spoke of her having " such a clarity about what she wanted . Nothing was gonna step in her way . No ego , no nervousness , no manipulation . There was nothing to stop her . " 
 On July 18 , 2014 , it was announced that Alexandra Shipp replaced Zendaya for the role of Aaliyah for the Lifetime TV biopic movie Aaliyah : The Princess of R & B , which premiered on November 15 , 2014 . Zendaya drew criticism because people felt that she was too light skinned and did not greatly resemble Aaliyah . She voiced her strong respect for Aaliyah before dropping out of the project . She explained her choice to withdraw from the film in videos on Instagram . Aaliyah 's family has been vocal in their disapproving of the film . Her cousin Jomo Hankerson stated the family would prefer a " major studio release along the lines " of What 's Love Got to Do with It , the biopic based on the life of Tina Turner . Aaliyah 's family has consulted a lawyer to stop Lifetime from using " any of the music , or any of the photographs and videos " they own and Jomo Hankerson claimed the TV network " didn 't reach out . " On August 9 , 2014 , it was announced that <unk> <unk> and Izaak Smith had been cast as Aaliyah 's collaborators Missy Elliott and Timbaland . <unk> received criticism for her appearance in comparison with that of Missy Elliot . Despite negative reviews , the film 's premiere drew 3 @.@ 2 million viewers , becoming the second highest rated television movie of 2014 . In February 2015 a tribute dinner was held for Aaliyah by The Sugar Club in Dublin , Ireland . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Age Ain 't Nothing but a Number ( 1994 ) 
 One in a Million ( 1996 ) 
 Aaliyah ( 2001 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Operation Overlord = 
 Operation Overlord was the code name for the Battle of Normandy , the Allied operation that launched the successful invasion of German @-@ occupied Western Europe during World War II . The operation commenced on 6 June 1944 with the Normandy landings ( Operation Neptune , commonly known as D @-@ Day ) . A 1 @,@ 200 @-@ plane airborne assault preceded an amphibious assault involving more than 5 @,@ 000 vessels . Nearly 160 @,@ 000 troops crossed the English Channel on 6 June , and more than two million Allied troops were in France by the end of August . 
 The decision to undertake a cross @-@ channel invasion in 1944 was taken at the Trident Conference in Washington in May 1943 . General Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed commander of Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force ( SHAEF ) , and General Bernard Montgomery was named as commander of the 21st Army Group , which comprised all the land forces involved in the invasion . The Normandy coast was chosen as the site of the invasion , with the Americans assigned to land at sectors codenamed Utah and Omaha , the British at Sword and Gold , and the Canadians at Juno . To meet the conditions expected on the Normandy beachhead , special technology was developed , including two artificial ports called Mulberry harbours and an array of specialised tanks nicknamed Hobart 's Funnies . In the months leading up to the invasion , the Allies conducted a substantial military deception , Operation Bodyguard , using both electronic and visual misinformation . This misled the Germans as to the date and location of the main Allied landings . Adolf Hitler placed German Field Marshal Erwin Rommel in charge of developing fortifications all along the Atlantic Wall in anticipation of an invasion . 
 The Allies failed to reach their goals for the first day , but gained a tenuous foothold that they gradually expanded as they captured the port at Cherbourg on 26 June and the city of Caen on 21 July . A failed counterattack by German forces on 8 August led to 50 @,@ 000 soldiers of the German 7th Army being trapped in the Falaise pocket . The Allies launched an invasion of southern France ( code @-@ named Operation Dragoon ) on 15 August , and the Liberation of Paris followed on 25 August . German forces retreated across the Seine on 30 August 1944 , marking the close of Operation Overlord . 
 = = Preparations for D @-@ Day = = 
 In June 1940 , Germany 's leader Adolf Hitler had triumphed in what he called " the most famous victory in history " — the fall of France . The defending British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) , trapped along the northern coast of France , was able to evacuate over 338 @,@ 000 troops to England in the Dunkirk evacuation ( 27 May to 4 June ) . British planners reported to Prime Minister Winston Churchill on 4 October that even with the help of other Commonwealth countries and the United States , it would not be possible to regain a foothold in continental Europe in the near future . After the Germans invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941 , Soviet leader Joseph Stalin began pressing for the creation of a second front in Western Europe . Churchill declined because , even with American help , he felt the British did not have adequate forces for such a strike , and he wished to avoid costly frontal assaults such as those that had occurred at the Somme and Passchendaele in World War I. Two tentative plans code @-@ named Operation Roundup and Operation Sledgehammer were put forward for 1942 – 43 , but neither was deemed by the British to be practical or likely to succeed . Instead the Allies launched the invasion of French North Africa in November 1942 , the invasion of Sicily in July 1943 , and invaded Italy in September . These invasions provided the troops with valuable experience in amphibious warfare . 
 The decision to undertake a cross @-@ channel invasion within the next year was taken at the Trident Conference in Washington in May 1943 . Churchill favoured making the main Allied thrust into Germany from the Mediterranean theatre , but was over @-@ ruled by his American allies , who were providing the bulk of the men and equipment . British Lieutenant @-@ General Frederick E. Morgan was appointed Chief of Staff , Supreme Allied Commander ( COSSAC ) , to begin detailed planning . The initial plans were constrained by the number of available landing craft , most of which were already committed in the Mediterranean and Pacific . In part because of lessons learned in the Dieppe Raid of 19 August 1942 , the Allies decided not to directly assault a heavily defended French seaport in their first landings . The failure at Dieppe also highlighted the need for adequate artillery and air support , particularly close air support , and specialised ships able to travel extremely close to shore . The short operating range of British aircraft such as the Spitfire and Typhoon greatly limited the number of potential landing sites , as comprehensive air support depended upon having planes overhead for as long as possible . Morgan considered four sites for the landings : Brittany , the Cotentin Peninsula , Normandy , and the Pas de Calais . As Brittany and Cotentin are peninsulas , it would have been possible for the Germans to cut off the Allied advance at a relatively narrow isthmus , so these sites were rejected . 
 The Pas de Calais is the closest point in continental Europe to Britain and was the location of launch sites for V @-@ 1 and V @-@ 2 rockets , which were still under development . The Germans considered it to be the most likely initial landing zone , so it was the most heavily fortified region . It offered few opportunities for expansion , however , as the area is bounded by numerous rivers and canals , whereas landings on a broad front in Normandy would permit simultaneous threats against the port of Cherbourg , coastal ports further west in Brittany , and an overland attack towards Paris and eventually into Germany . Normandy was hence chosen as the landing site . The most serious drawback of the Normandy coast — the lack of port facilities — would be overcome through the development of artificial harbours . 
 The COSSAC staff planned to launch the invasion on 1 May 1944 . The initial draft of the plan was accepted at the Quebec Conference in August 1943 . General Dwight D. Eisenhower was appointed commander of SHAEF . General Bernard Montgomery was named commander of the 21st Army Group , which comprised all of the land forces involved in the invasion . On 31 December 1943 , Eisenhower and Montgomery first saw the COSSAC plan , which proposed amphibious landings by three divisions , with two more divisions in support . The two generals immediately insisted that the scale of the initial invasion be expanded to five divisions , with airborne descents by three additional divisions , to allow operations on a wider front and speed up the capture of the port at Cherbourg . The need to acquire or produce extra landing craft for the expanded operation meant that the invasion had to be delayed to June . Eventually , 39 Allied divisions would be committed to the Battle of Normandy : 22 American , 12 British , three Canadian , one Polish , and one French , totalling over a million troops all under overall British command . 
 = = = Allied invasion plan = = = 
 " Overlord " was the name assigned to the establishment of a large @-@ scale lodgement on the Continent . The first phase , the amphibious invasion and establishment of a secure foothold , was codenamed Operation Neptune . To gain the required air superiority needed to ensure a successful invasion , the Allies launched a bombing campaign ( codenamed Operation <unk> ) to target German aircraft production , fuel supplies , and airfields . Under the Transport Plan , communications infrastructure and road and rail links were bombed to cut off the north of France and make it more difficult to bring up reinforcements . These attacks were widespread so as to avoid revealing the exact location of the invasion . Elaborate deceptions were planned to prevent the Germans from determining the timing and location of the invasion . 
 The coastline of Normandy was divided into seventeen sectors , with codenames using a spelling alphabet — from Able , west of Omaha , to Roger on the east flank of Sword . Eight further sectors were added when the invasion was extended to include Utah on the Cotentin Peninsula . Sectors were further subdivided into beaches identified by the colours Green , Red , and White . 
 The landings were to be preceded by airborne drops near Caen on the eastern flank to secure the Orne River bridges , and north of Carentan on the western flank . The initial goal was to capture Carentan , Isigny , Bayeux , and Caen . The Americans , assigned to land at Utah and Omaha , were to cut off the Cotentin Peninsula and capture the port facilities at Cherbourg . The British at Sword and Gold , and the Canadians at Juno , were to capture Caen and form a front line from Caumont @-@ l 'Éventé to the south @-@ east of Caen in order to protect the American flank , while establishing airfields near Caen . Possession of Caen and its surroundings would give the Anglo @-@ Canadians a suitable staging area for a push south to capture the town of Falaise . A secure lodgement would be established and an attempt made to hold all territory captured north of the Avranches @-@ Falaise line during the first three weeks . The Allied armies would then swing left to advance towards the River Seine . 
 The invasion fleet , led by Admiral Sir Bertram Ramsay , was split into the Western Naval Task Force ( under Admiral Alan G Kirk ) supporting the American sectors and the Eastern Naval Task Force ( under Admiral Sir Philip Vian ) in the British and Canadian sectors . The American forces of the First Army , led by Lieutenant General Omar Bradley , comprised VII Corps ( Utah ) and V Corps ( Omaha ) . On the British side , Lieutenant @-@ General Miles Dempsey was in command of the Second Army , under which XXX Corps was assigned to Gold and I Corps to Juno and Sword . Land forces were under the overall command of Montgomery , and air command was assigned to Air Chief Marshal Sir Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory . The First Canadian Army included personnel and units from Poland , Belgium , and the Netherlands . Other Allied nations also participated . 
 = = = Reconnaissance = = = 
 The Allied Expeditionary Air Force undertook over 3 @,@ 200 photo reconnaissance sorties from April 1944 until the start of the invasion . Photos of the coastline were taken at extremely low altitude to show the invaders the terrain , obstacles on the beach , and defensive structures such as bunkers and gun emplacements . To avoid alerting the Germans as to the location of the invasion , this work had to be undertaken over the entire European coastline . Inland terrain , bridges , troop emplacements , and buildings were also photographed , in many cases from several angles , to give the Allies as much information as possible . Members of Combined Operations Pilotage Parties clandestinely prepared detailed harbour maps , including depth soundings . 
 An appeal for holiday pictures and postcards of Europe announced on the BBC received over ten million items , some of which proved to be useful . Information collected by the French resistance helped provide details on troop movements and construction techniques used by the Germans for bunkers and other defensive installations . 
 Many German radio messages were encoded using the Enigma machine and other <unk> techniques , and the codes were changed frequently . A team of code breakers stationed at Bletchley Park was responsible for breaking each new code as quickly as possible to provide advance information on German plans and troop movements . Information obtained in this way was called Ultra intelligence , as it could only be provided to the top level of commanders . The Enigma code used by Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt , Oberbefehlshaber West ( Supreme Commander West ; OB West ) , overall commander on the Western Front , was broken by the end of March . The Enigma codes were changed right after the Allied landings of 6 June , but by 17 June the Allies were again consistently able to interpret the intercepted signals . 
 = = = Technology = = = 
 In response to the lessons learned at the disastrous Dieppe raid , the Allies developed new technologies to help ensure the success of Overlord . To supplement the preliminary offshore bombardment and aerial assaults , some of the landing craft were equipped with artillery and anti @-@ tank guns to provide close supporting fire . The Allies had decided not to immediately attack any of the heavily protected French ports , so two artificial ports , called Mulberry harbours , were designed . Each assembly consisted of a floating outer breakwater , inner concrete caissons ( called Phoenix breakwaters ) , and several floating piers . The Mulberry harbours were supplemented by blockship shelters ( codenamed <unk> ) . With the expectation that fuel would be difficult or impossible to obtain on the continent , the Allies created a Pipe @-@ Line Under The Ocean ( <unk> ) . Specially developed pipes 3 inches ( 7 @.@ 6 cm ) in diameter were to be laid under the Channel from the Isle of Wight to Cherbourg by D @-@ Day plus 18 . Technical problems and the delay in capturing Cherbourg meant the pipeline was not operational until 22 September . A second line was laid from Dungeness to Boulogne in late October . 
 A series of specialised tanks , nicknamed Hobart 's Funnies , were created to deal with conditions expected during the Normandy campaign . Developed under the supervision of Major @-@ General Percy Hobart , these were specially modified M4 Sherman and Churchill tanks . Examples include the Sherman Crab tank ( equipped with a mine flail ) , the Churchill Crocodile ( a flame @-@ throwing tank ) , and the Armoured Ramp Carrier , which other tanks could use as a bridge to scale sea @-@ walls or overcome other obstacles . In some areas , the beaches consisted of a soft clay that could not support the weight of tanks . The " bobbin " tank would overcome this problem by deploying a roll of matting over the soft surface . The material was then left in place to create a route for more conventional tanks . The Armoured Vehicle Royal Engineers ( AVREs ) were modified for many tasks , including laying bridges and firing large charges into pillboxes . The Duplex @-@ Drive tank ( DD tank ) , another design developed by Hobart 's group , was a self @-@ propelled amphibious tank kept afloat using a waterproof canvas screen inflated with compressed air . These tanks were easily swamped , and on D @-@ Day many sank before reaching the shore , especially at Omaha . 
 = = = Deception = = = 
 In the months leading up to the invasion , the Allies conducted Operation Bodyguard , the overall strategy designed to mislead the Germans as to the date and location of the main Allied landings . Operation Fortitude included Fortitude North , a misinformation campaign using fake radio traffic to lead the Germans into expecting an attack on Norway , and Fortitude South , a major deception designed to fool the Germans into believing that the landings would take place at Pas de Calais in July . A fictitious First U.S. Army Group was created , supposedly located in Kent and Sussex under the command of Lieutenant General George S. Patton . The Allies constructed dummy tanks , trucks , and landing craft , and positioned them near the coast . Several military units , including II Canadian Corps and 2nd Canadian Division , were moved into the area to bolster the illusion that a large force was gathering in the area . As well as the broadcast of fake radio traffic , genuine radio messages from 21st Army Group were first routed to Kent via landline and then broadcast , to give the Germans the impression that most of the Allied troops were stationed there . Patton was stationed in England until 6 July , thus continuing to deceive the Germans into believing a second attack would take place at Calais . Soldiers and civilians alike were aware of the need for secrecy , and the invasion troops were as much as possible kept isolated , especially in the period immediately before the invasion . One American general was sent back to the United States in disgrace after revealing the invasion date at a party . 
 The Germans thought they had an extensive network of spies operating in the UK , but in fact all their agents had been captured , and some had become double agents working for the Allies as part of the Double @-@ Cross System . The double agent Juan Pujol García , a Spanish opponent of the Nazis known by the code name " Garbo " , developed over the two years leading up to D @-@ Day a fake network of informants that the Germans believed were collecting intelligence on their behalf . In the months preceding D @-@ Day , Pujol sent hundreds of messages to his superiors in Madrid , messages specially prepared by the British intelligence service to convince the Germans that the attack would come in July at Calais . 
 Many of the German radar stations on the French coast were destroyed in preparation for the landings . On the night before the invasion , in Operation Taxable , No. 617 Squadron RAF dropped strips of " window " , metal foil that caused a radar return mistakenly interpreted by German radar operators as a naval convoy . The illusion was bolstered by a group of small craft towing barrage balloons . " Window " was also dropped by No. 218 Squadron RAF near Boulogne @-@ sur @-@ Mer in Operation Glimmer . On the same night , a small group of Special Air Service ( SAS ) operators deployed dummy paratroopers over Le Havre and Isigny . These dummies led the Germans to believe an additional airborne assault had occurred . 
 = = = Rehearsals and security = = = 
 Training exercises for the Overlord landings took place as early as July 1943 . As the nearby beach resembled the planned Normandy landing site , the town of Slapton , Devon , was evacuated in December 1943 and taken over by the armed forces as a site for training exercises that included the use of landing craft and management of beach obstacles . It was near here on 28 April 1944 that 749 American soldiers and sailors were killed when German torpedo boats surprised members of Assault Force " U " conducting Exercise Tiger . Exercises with landing craft and live ammunition also took place at the Combined Training Centre in Inveraray , Scotland . Naval exercises took place in Northern Ireland , and medical teams in London and elsewhere rehearsed how they would handle the expected waves of casualties . Paratroopers conducted exercises , including a huge demonstration drop on 23 March 1944 observed by Churchill , Eisenhower , and other top officials . 
 Tactical surprise was considered a necessary element of the plan for the landings . Information on the exact date and location of the landings was provided only to the topmost levels of the armed forces . Men were sealed into their marshalling areas at the end of May , with no further communication with the outside . Troops were briefed using maps that were correct in every detail except for the place names , and most were not told their actual destination until they were already at sea . The effectiveness of the deception operations was increased by a news blackout in Britain . Travel to and from the Republic of Ireland was banned , and movement within several kilometres of the coast of England restricted . 
 = = = Weather forecast = = = 
 The invasion planners created a set of conditions regarding the timing of the invasion that meant only a few days in each month were deemed suitable . A full moon was desirable , as it would provide illumination for aircraft pilots and have the highest tides . The Allies wanted to schedule the landings for shortly before dawn , midway between low and high tide , with the tide coming in . This would improve the visibility of obstacles the enemy had placed on the beach while minimising the amount of time the men had to spend exposed in the open . Specific criteria were also set for wind speed , visibility , and cloud cover . Eisenhower had tentatively selected 5 June as the date for the assault . However , on 4 June , conditions were clearly unsuitable for a landing ; high winds and heavy seas made it impossible to launch landing craft , and low clouds would prevent aircraft from finding their targets . 
 By the evening of 4 June , the Allied meteorological team , headed by Group Captain James Stagg of the Royal Air Force , predicted that the weather would improve sufficiently so that the invasion could go ahead on 6 June . He met with Eisenhower and other senior commanders at their headquarters at Southwick House to discuss the situation . General Montgomery and Major General Walter Bedell Smith , Eisenhower 's chief of staff , were eager to launch the invasion . Admiral Bertram Ramsay was prepared to commit his ships , while Air Chief Marshal Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory was concerned that the conditions would be unfavourable for Allied aircraft to operate . After much discussion , Eisenhower decided that the invasion should go ahead . Allied control of the Atlantic meant that German meteorologists did not have access to as much information as the Allies on incoming weather patterns . As the Luftwaffe meteorological centre in Paris was predicting two weeks of stormy weather , many Wehrmacht commanders left their posts to attend war games in Rennes , and men in many units were given leave . Field Marshal Erwin Rommel returned to Germany for his wife 's birthday and to meet with Hitler to try to get more Panzers . 
 Had Eisenhower postponed the invasion , the next available date with the correct combination of tides ( but without the desirable full moon ) was two weeks later , from 18 to 20 June . As it happened , during this period they would have encountered a major storm lasting four days , between 19 and 22 June , that would have made the initial landings impossible . 
 = = = German preparations and defences = = = 
 Nazi Germany had at its disposal 50 divisions in France and the Low Countries , and another 18 were stationed in Denmark and Norway . Fifteen divisions were in the process of formation in Germany , but there was no strategic reserve . The Calais region was defended by the 15th Army , and Normandy by the 7th Army , commanded by Generaloberst ( colonel general ) Friedrich Dollmann . Combat losses throughout the war , particularly on the Eastern Front , meant the Germans no longer had a pool of able young men from which to draw . German soldiers were now on average six years older than their Allied counterparts . Many in the Normandy area were Ostlegionen ( eastern legions ) — conscripts and " volunteers " from Turkestan , Russia , Mongolia , and elsewhere . They were provided mainly with unreliable captured equipment and lacked motorised transport . Units that arrived later , such as the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend , were for the most part younger and far better equipped and trained than the static troops stationed along the coast . 
 = = = = Atlantic Wall = = = = 
 Alarmed by the raids on St Nazaire and Dieppe in 1942 , Hitler ordered the construction of fortifications all along the Atlantic coast , from Spain to Norway , to protect against an expected Allied invasion . He envisioned 15 @,@ 000 emplacements manned by 300 @,@ 000 troops , but due to shortages , particularly of concrete and manpower , most of the strongpoints were never built . As it was expected to be the site of the invasion , Pas de Calais was heavily defended . In the Normandy area , the best fortifications were concentrated at the port facilities at Cherbourg and Saint @-@ Malo . 
 A report by Rundstedt to Hitler in October 1943 regarding the weak defences in France led to the appointment of Rommel to oversee the construction of further fortifications along the expected invasion front , which stretched from the Netherlands to Cherbourg . Rommel was given command of the newly re @-@ formed Army Group B , which included the 7th Army , the 15th Army , and the forces guarding the Netherlands . Nazi Germany 's tangled command structure made it difficult for Rommel to achieve his task . He was not allowed to give orders to the Organisation Todt , which was commanded by armaments minister Albert Speer , so in some places he had to assign soldiers to do construction work . 
 Rommel believed that the Normandy coast could be a possible landing point for the invasion , so he ordered the construction of extensive defensive works along that shore . In addition to concrete gun emplacements at strategic points along the coast , he ordered wooden stakes , metal tripods , mines , and large anti @-@ tank obstacles to be placed on the beach to delay the approach of landing craft and impede the movement of tanks . Expecting the Allies to land at high tide so that the infantry would spend less time exposed on the beach , he ordered many of these obstacles to be placed at the high @-@ tide mark . Tangles of barbed wire , booby traps , and the removal of ground cover made the approach hazardous for infantry . On Rommel 's order , the number of mines along the coast was tripled . Given the Allied air supremacy ( 4 @,@ 029 Allied aircraft assigned to operations in Normandy plus 5 @,@ 514 aircraft assigned to bombing and defence , versus 570 Luftwaffe planes stationed in France and the Low Countries ) , booby @-@ trapped stakes known as Rommelspargel ( Rommel 's asparagus ) were set up in meadows and fields to deter airborne landings . 
 = = = = Mobile reserves = = = = 
 Rommel , believing that the Germans ' best chance was to stop the invasion at the shore , requested that mobile reserves — especially tanks — be stationed as close to the coast as possible . Rundstedt , General Leo Geyr von Schweppenburg ( commander of Panzer Group West ) , and other senior commanders believed that the invasion could not be stopped on the beaches . Geyr argued for a conventional doctrine : keeping the Panzer formations concentrated in a central position around Paris and Rouen and deploying them only when the main Allied beachhead had been identified . Geyr also noted that in the Italian Campaign the armour stationed near the coast had been damaged by naval bombardment . Rommel 's opinion was that because of the overwhelming Allied air superiority , large @-@ scale movement of tanks would not be possible once the invasion was underway . Hitler made the final decision , which was to leave three divisions under Geyr 's command and give Rommel operational control of three tank divisions as reserves . Hitler took personal control of four divisions as strategic reserves , not to be used without his direct orders . 
 = = Invasion = = 
 You are about to embark upon the Great Crusade , toward which we have striven these many months . The eyes of the world are upon you . The hopes and prayers of liberty @-@ loving people everywhere march with you . In company with our brave Allies and brothers @-@ in @-@ arms on other Fronts , you will bring about the destruction of the German war machine , the elimination of Nazi tyranny over the oppressed peoples of Europe , and security for ourselves in a free world . 
 By May 1944 , 1 @.@ 5 million American troops had arrived in the United Kingdom . Most were housed in temporary camps in the south @-@ west of England , ready to move across the Channel to the western section of the landing zone . British and Canadian troops were billeted in accommodations further east , spread from Southampton to Newhaven , and even on the east coast for men who would be coming across in later waves . A complex system called Movement Control assured that the men and vehicles left on schedule from twenty departure points . Some men had to board their craft nearly a week before departure . The ships met at a rendezvous point ( nicknamed " Piccadilly Circus " ) south @-@ east of the Isle of Wight to assemble into convoys to cross the Channel . Minesweepers began clearing lanes on the evening of 5 June , and a thousand bombers left before dawn to attack the coastal defences . Some 1 @,@ 200 aircraft departed England just before midnight to transport three airborne divisions to their drop zones behind enemy lines several hours before the beach landings . The US 82nd and 101st Airborne Divisions were assigned objectives on the Cotentin Peninsula west of Utah . The British 6th Airborne Division was assigned to capture intact the bridges over the Caen Canal and River Orne . The Free French 4th SAS battalion of 538 men was assigned objectives in Brittany ( Operation <unk> , Operation <unk> ) . Some 132 @,@ 000 men were transported by sea on D @-@ Day , and a further 24 @,@ 000 came by air . Preliminary naval bombardment commenced at 05 : 45 and continued until 06 : 25 from five battleships , twenty cruisers , sixty @-@ five destroyers , and two monitors . Infantry began arriving on the beaches at around 06 : 30 . 
 = = = Beaches = = = 
 The craft bearing the U.S. 4th Infantry Division assaulting Utah were pushed by the current to a spot about 1 @,@ 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 yd ) south of their intended landing zone . The troops met light resistance , suffering fewer than 200 casualties . Their efforts to push inland fell far short of their targets for the first day , but they were able to advance about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) , making contact with the 101st Airborne Division . The airborne landings west of Utah were not very successful , as only ten per cent of the paratroopers landed in their drop zones . Gathering the men together into fighting units was made difficult by a shortage of radios and by the terrain , with its hedgerows , stone walls , and marshes . The 82nd Airborne captured its primary objective at Sainte @-@ Mère @-@ Église and worked to protect the western flank . Its failure to capture the river crossings at the River Merderet resulted in a delay in sealing off the Cotentin Peninsula . The 101st Airborne helped protect the southern flank and captured the lock on the River Douve at La <unk> , but did not capture the assigned nearby bridges on the first day . 
 At Pointe du Hoc , the task for the two hundred men of 2nd Ranger Battalion , commanded by Lt. Colonel James Rudder , was to scale the 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) cliffs with ropes and ladders to destroy the gun battery located there . While under fire from above , the men scaled the cliff , only to discover that the guns had already been withdrawn . The Rangers located the weapons , unguarded but ready to use , in an orchard some 550 metres ( 600 yd ) south of the point , and disabled them . Under attack , the men at the point became isolated , and some were captured . By dawn on D + 1 , Rudder had only 90 men able to fight . Relief did not come until D + 2 , when members of the 743rd Tank Battalion arrived . 
 Omaha , the most heavily defended sector , was assigned to the U.S. 1st Infantry Division , supplemented by troops from the U.S. 29th Infantry Division . They faced the 352nd Infantry Division , rather than the expected single regiment . Strong currents forced many landing craft east of their intended position or delayed them . Casualties were heavier than all the other landings combined , as the men were subjected to fire from the cliffs above . Problems clearing the beach of obstructions led to the beachmaster calling a halt to further landings of vehicles at 08 : 30 . A group of destroyers arrived around this time to offer supporting artillery fire . Exit from Omaha was possible only via five gullies , and by late morning barely six hundred men had reached the higher ground . By noon , as the artillery fire took its toll and the Germans started to run out of ammunition , the Americans were able to clear some lanes on the beaches . They also started clearing the draws of enemy defences so that vehicles could move off the beach . The tenuous beachhead was expanded over the following days , and the D @-@ Day objectives were accomplished by D + 3 . 
 At Gold , high winds made conditions difficult for the landing craft , and the amphibious DD tanks were landed close to shore or directly on the beach instead of further out as planned . Aerial attacks had failed to hit the Le Hamel strong point , and its 75 mm gun continued to do damage until 16 : 00 . On the western flank , the 1st Battalion , Hampshire Regiment captured Arromanches ( future site of Mulberry " B " ) , and contact was made on the eastern flank with the Canadian forces at Juno . 
 Landings of infantry at Juno were delayed because of rough seas , and the men arrived ahead of their supporting armour , suffering many casualties while disembarking . Most of the offshore bombardment had missed the German defences . In spite of these difficulties , the Canadians quickly cleared the beach and created two exits to the villages above . Delays in taking Bény @-@ sur @-@ Mer led to congestion on the beach , but by nightfall the contiguous Juno and Gold beachheads covered an area 12 miles ( 19 km ) wide and 7 miles ( 10 km ) deep . Casualties at Juno were 961 men . 
 On Sword , 21 of 25 DD tanks made it safely ashore to provide cover for the infantry , who began disembarking at 07 : 30 . They quickly cleared the beach and created several exits for the tanks . In the windy conditions , the tide came in more quickly than expected , making manoeuvring the armour difficult . The 2nd Battalion , King 's Shropshire Light Infantry advanced on foot to within a few kilometres of Caen , but had to withdraw due to lack of armour support . At 16 : 00 , the German 21st Panzer Division mounted a counterattack between Sword and Juno and nearly succeeded in reaching the channel . They met stiff resistance from the British 3rd Infantry Division and were soon recalled to assist in the area between Caen and Bayeux . 
 The first components of the Mulberry harbours were brought across on D + 1 and the structures were in use for unloading by mid @-@ June . One was constructed at Arromanches by British forces , the other at Omaha by American forces . Severe storms on 19 June interrupted the landing of supplies and destroyed the Omaha harbour . The repaired Arromanches harbour was able to receive around 6 @,@ 000 tons of materiel daily and was in continuous use for the next ten months , but most shipments were brought in over the beaches until the port of Cherbourg was cleared of mines and obstructions on 16 July . 
 Allied casualties on the first day were at least 10 @,@ 000 , with 4 @,@ 414 confirmed dead . The Germans lost 1 @,@ 000 men . The Allied invasion plans had called for the capture of Carentan , St. Lô , Caen , and Bayeux on the first day , with all the beaches ( other than Utah ) linked with a front line 10 to 16 kilometres ( 6 to 10 mi ) from the beaches ; none of these objectives were achieved . The five bridgeheads were not connected until 12 June , by which time the Allies held a front around 97 kilometres ( 60 mi ) long and 24 kilometres ( 15 mi ) deep . Caen , a major objective , was still in German hands at the end of D @-@ Day and would not be completely captured until 21 July . Nearly 160 @,@ 000 troops crossed the English Channel on 6 June , and more than two million Allied troops were in France by the end of August . 
 = = = Cherbourg = = = 
 In the western part of the lodgement , US troops were to occupy the Cotentin Peninsula , especially Cherbourg , which would provide the Allies with a deep water harbour . The terrain behind Utah and Omaha is characterised by bocage , with thorny hedgerows on embankments 3 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 to 1 @.@ 2 m ) high with a ditch on either side . Many areas were additionally protected by rifle pits and machine @-@ gun placements . Most of the roads were too narrow for tanks , and Germans had flooded the fields behind Utah with sea water for up to 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the coast . German forces on the peninsula included the 91st Infantry Division and the 243rd and 709th Static Infantry Divisions . By D + 3 the Allied commanders realised that Cherbourg would not quickly be taken , and decided to cut off the peninsula to prevent any further reinforcements from being brought in . After failed attempts by the inexperienced 90th Infantry Division , General J. Lawton Collins assigned the 9th Infantry Division to the task . They reached the west coast of the Cotentin on 17 June , cutting off Cherbourg . The 9th Division , joined by the 4th and 79th Infantry Divisions , took control of the peninsula in fierce fighting from 19 June , and Cherbourg was captured on 26 June . By this time the Germans had destroyed the port facilities , which were not brought back into full operation until September . 
 = = = Caen = = = 
 Fighting in the Caen area versus the 21st Panzer , the 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend , and other units soon reached a stalemate . During Operation Perch , XXX Corps attempted to advance south towards Mont Pinçon . They soon abandoned the direct approach in favour of a pincer attack to encircle Caen . XXX Corps attempted a flanking move from Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles towards Villers @-@ Bocage , while I Corps tried to flank Caen from the east . I Corps ' attack was quickly halted . While XXX Corps briefly captured Villers @-@ Bocage , their lead armoured elements were ambushed , initiating a day @-@ long battle ( the Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage ) . The British were forced to withdraw to Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles . After a delay because of storms during 17 – 23 June , Operation Epsom was launched on 26 June , an attempt by VIII Corps to swing around and attack Caen from the south @-@ west and establish a bridgehead south of the Odon . Although the operation failed to take Caen , the Germans suffered heavy tank losses and had committed every available Panzer unit to the operation . Rundstedt was dismissed on 1 July and replaced as OB West by Field Marshal Günther von Kluge after remarking that the war was now lost . Caen was severely bombed on the night of 7 July and then occupied north of the River Orne in Operation Charnwood on 8 – 9 July . Two offensives , Operation Atlantic and Operation Goodwood during 18 – 21 July , captured the rest of Caen and the high ground to the south , but by then the city was nearly destroyed . Hitler survived an assassination attempt on 20 July . 
 = = = Breakout from the beachhead = = = 
 After securing territory in the Cotentin Peninsula as far south as Saint @-@ Lô , the Allies launched Operation Cobra on 25 July , and advanced further south to Avranches . This goal was reached on 1 August . Patton 's U.S. Third Army , activated on 1 August , quickly controlled Brittany and territory as far south as the Loire , while the First Army maintained pressure eastward toward Le Mans to protect their flank . By 3 August , Patton and the Third Army were able to leave a small force in Brittany and drive eastward towards the main concentration of German forces south of Caen . Meanwhile , the British launched Operation Bluecoat on 30 July to secure Vire and the high ground of Mont Pinçon . Over Kluge 's objections , on 4 August Hitler ordered a counter @-@ offensive ( Operation Lüttich ) from Vire towards Avranches . 
 While II Canadian Corps pushed south from Caen toward Falaise in Operation Totalize on 8 August , Bradley and Montgomery realised that there was an opportunity for the bulk of the German forces to be trapped at Falaise . Patton 's Third Army continued to encircle around from the south , reaching Alençon on the 11th . Though Hitler continued to insist until the 14th that his forces should counter @-@ attack , Kluge and his officers began planning a retreat eastward . The German forces were severely hampered by Hitler 's insistence on making all major decisions himself , which left his forces without orders for periods as long as 24 hours while information was sent back and forth to Hitler 's residence at Obersalzberg in Bavaria . On the evening of 12 August , Patton asked Bradley if his forces should continue northward to close the gap and encircle the German forces . Bradley refused , because Montgomery had already assigned the First Canadian Army to take the territory from the north . The Canadians met heavy resistance and captured Falaise on 16 August . The gap was closed on 21 August , trapping 50 @,@ 000 German troops , but more than a third of the German 7th Army and nine of the eleven Panzer divisions had escaped to the east . Montgomery 's decision @-@ making regarding the Falaise Gap was criticised at the time by American commanders , especially Patton , although Bradley was more sympathetic and believed Patton would not have been able to close the gap . The issue has been the subject of much discussion among historians , criticism being levelled at American , British , and Canadian forces . Hitler relieved Kluge of his command of OB West on 15 August and replaced him with Field Marshal Walter Model ; Kluge committed suicide on 19 August after Hitler became aware of his involvement in the 20 July plot . An invasion in southern France ( Operation Dragoon ) was launched on 15 August . 
 The French Resistance in Paris rose against the Germans on 19 August . Eisenhower initially wanted to bypass the city to pursue other targets , but amid reports that the citizens were going hungry and Hitler 's stated intention to destroy the city , de Gaulle insisted that it should be taken immediately . French forces of the 2nd Armoured Division under General Philippe Leclerc arrived from the west on 24 August , while the U.S. 4th Infantry Division pressed up from the south . Scattered fighting continued throughout the night , and by the morning of 25 August Paris was liberated . 
 Operations continued in the British and Canadian sectors until the end of the month . On 25 August , the U.S. 2nd Armored Division fought its way into Elbeuf , making contact with British and Canadian armoured divisions . The 2nd Canadian Infantry Division advanced into the Forêt de la <unk> on the morning of 27 August . The area was strongly held , and the 4th and 6th Canadian brigades sustained heavy casualties over the course of three days as the Germans fought a delaying action in terrain well suited to defence . The Germans pulled back on the 29th , withdrawing over the Seine on the 30th . On the afternoon of the 30th , the 3rd Canadian Infantry Division crossed the Seine near Elbeuf and entered Rouen to a jubilant welcome . 
 = = Campaign close = = 
 Eisenhower took direct command of all Allied ground forces on 1 September . Concerned about German counter @-@ attacks and the limited materiel arriving in France , he decided to continue operations on a broad front rather than attempting narrow thrusts . The linkup of the Normandy forces with the Allied forces in southern France occurred on 12 September as part of the drive to the Siegfried Line . On 17 September , Montgomery launched Operation Market Garden , a failed attempt by Anglo @-@ American airborne troops to capture bridges throughout the Netherlands to allow ground forces to cross the Rhine into Germany . The Allied advance slowed due to German resistance and the lack of supplies ( especially fuel ) . On 16 December the Germans launched the Ardennes Offensive , also known as the Battle of the Bulge , their last major offensive of the war in the Western Front . A series of successful Soviet actions began with the Vistula – Oder Offensive on 12 January . Hitler committed suicide on 30 April as Soviet troops neared his Führerbunker in Berlin , and Germany surrendered on 7 May 1945 . 
 The Normandy landings were the largest seaborne invasion in history , with nearly 5 @,@ 000 landing and assault craft , 289 escort vessels , and 277 minesweepers . They hastened the end of the war in Europe , drawing large forces away from the Eastern Front that might otherwise have slowed the Soviet advance . The opening of another front in western Europe was a tremendous psychological blow for Germany 's military , who feared a repetition of the two @-@ front war of World War I. The Normandy landings also heralded the start of the " race for Europe " between the Soviet forces and the Western powers , which some historians consider to be the start of the Cold War . 
 Victory in Normandy stemmed from several factors . German preparations along the Atlantic Wall were only partially finished ; shortly before D @-@ Day Rommel reported that construction was only 18 per cent complete in some areas as resources were diverted elsewhere . The deceptions undertaken in Operation Fortitude were successful , leaving the Germans obligated to defend a huge stretch of coastline . The Allies achieved and maintained air superiority , which meant that the Germans were unable to make observations of the preparations underway in Britain and were unable to interfere via bomber attacks . Transportation infrastructure in France was severely disrupted by Allied bombers and the French Resistance , making it difficult for the Germans to bring up reinforcements and supplies . Much of the opening artillery barrage was off @-@ target or not concentrated enough to have any impact , but the specialised armour worked well except on Omaha , providing close artillery support for the troops as they disembarked onto the beaches . The indecisiveness and overly complicated command structure of the German high command was also a factor in the Allied success . 
 = = Casualties = = 
 = = = Allies = = = 
 From D @-@ Day to 21 August , the Allies landed 2 @,@ 052 @,@ 299 men in northern France . The cost of the Normandy campaign was high for both sides . Between 6 June and the end of August , the American armies suffered 124 @,@ 394 casualties , of which 20 @,@ 668 were killed . Casualties within the First Canadian and Second British Army are placed at 83 @,@ 045 : 15 @,@ 995 killed , 57 @,@ 996 wounded , and 9 @,@ 054 missing . Of these , Canadian losses amounted to 18 @,@ 444 , with 5 @,@ 021 killed in action . The Allied air forces , having flown 480 @,@ 317 sorties in support of the invasion , lost 4 @,@ 101 aircraft and 16 @,@ 714 airmen ( 8 @,@ 536 members of the USAAF , and 8 @,@ 178 flying under the command of the RAF ) . The Free French SAS paratroopers suffered 77 killed , with 197 wounded and missing . Allied tank losses have been estimated at around 4 @,@ 000 , with losses split evenly between the American and British / Canadian armies . Historians slightly differ on overall casualties during the campaign , with the lowest losses totaling 225 @,@ 606 and the highest at 226 @,@ 386 . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 German forces in France reported losses of 158 @,@ 930 men between D @-@ Day and 14 August , just before the start of Operation Dragoon in Southern France . In action at the Falaise pocket , 50 @,@ 000 men were lost , of which 10 @,@ 000 were killed and 40 @,@ 000 captured . Estimates of German losses for the Normandy campaign range from 400 @,@ 000 ( 200 @,@ 000 killed or wounded ; 200 @,@ 000 captured ) to 500 @,@ 000 ( 290 @,@ 000 killed or wounded , 210 @,@ 000 captured ) to 530 @,@ 000 . 
 There are no exact figures regarding German tank losses in Normandy . Approximately 2 @,@ 300 tanks and assault guns were committed to the battle , of which only 100 to 120 crossed the Seine at the end of the campaign . While German forces reported only 481 tanks destroyed between D @-@ day and 31 July , research conducted by No. 2 Operational Research Section of 21st Army Group indicates that the Allies destroyed around 550 tanks in June and July and another 500 in August , for a total of 1 @,@ 050 tanks destroyed by enemy action , including 100 destroyed by aircraft . Luftwaffe losses amounted to 2 @,@ 127 aircraft . By the end of the Normandy campaign , 55 German divisions ( 42 infantry and 13 panzer ) had been rendered combat ineffective ; seven of these were disbanded . By September , OB West had only 13 infantry divisions , 3 panzer divisions , and 2 panzer brigades rated as combat effective . 
 = = = Civilians and French heritage buildings = = = 
 During the liberation of Normandy , between 13 @,@ 632 and 19 @,@ 890 French civilians were killed , and more were seriously wounded . In addition to those who died during the campaign , 11 @,@ 000 to 19 @,@ 000 Normans are estimated to have been killed during pre @-@ invasion bombing . A total of 70 @,@ 000 French civilians were killed throughout the course of the war . Land mines and unexploded ordnance continued to inflict casualties upon the Norman population following the end of the campaign . 
 Prior to the invasion , SHAEF issued instructions ( later the basis for the 1954 Hague Convention Protocol I ) emphasising the need to limit the destruction to French heritage sites . These sites , named in the Official Civil Affairs Lists of Monuments , were not to be used by troops unless permission was received from the upper echelons of the chain of command . Nevertheless , church spires and other stone buildings throughout the area were damaged or destroyed to prevent them being used by the Germans . Efforts were made to prevent reconstruction workers from using rubble from important ruins to repair roads , and to search for artefacts . The Bayeux tapestry and other important cultural treasures had been stored at the Château de <unk> near Le Mans from the start of the war , and survived intact . The occupying German forces also kept a list of protected buildings , but their intent was to keep the facilities in good condition for use as accommodation by German troops . 
 Many cities and towns in Normandy were totally devastated by the fighting and bombings . By the end of the Battle of Caen there remained only 8 @,@ 000 liveable quarters for a population of over 60 @,@ 000 . Of the 18 listed churches in Caen , four were seriously damaged and five were destroyed , along with 66 other listed monuments . In the Calvados department ( location of the Normandy beachhead ) , 76 @,@ 000 citizens were rendered homeless . Of Caen 's 210 pre @-@ war Jewish population , only one survived the war . 
 Looting was a concern , with all sides taking part — the retreating Germans , the invading Allies ( for example British forces looting the Musée des <unk> in Caen and Château d <unk> near Bayeux ) , and the local French population . Looting was never condoned by Allied forces , and perpetrators were punished . 
 = = War memorials and tourism = = 
 The beaches of Normandy are still known by their invasion code names . Significant places have plaques , memorials , or small museums , and guide books and maps are available . Some of the German strong points remain preserved ; Pointe du Hoc in particular is little changed from 1944 . The remains of Mulberry harbour B still sits in the sea at Arromanches . Several large cemeteries in the area serve as the final resting place for many of the Allied and German soldiers killed in the Normandy campaign . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Roguelike = 
 Roguelike is a subgenre of role @-@ playing video games characterized by a dungeon crawl through procedurally generated game levels , turn @-@ based gameplay , tile @-@ based graphics , and permanent death of the player @-@ character . Most roguelikes are based on a high fantasy narrative , reflecting their influence from tabletop role playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons . Though the roguelikes Beneath Apple Manor and Sword of Fargoal predate it , the 1980 game Rogue is considered the forerunner and the namesake of the genre , with derivative games mirroring Rogue 's <unk> or sprite @-@ based graphics . These games were popularized among college students and computer programmers of the 1980s and 1990s , leading to a large number of variants but adhering to these common gameplay elements , often titled the " Berlin Interpretation " . Some of the better @-@ known variants include Hack , NetHack , Ancient Domains of Mystery , Moria , Angband , and Tales of Maj <unk> . The Japanese series of Mystery Dungeon games by Chunsoft , inspired by Rogue , also fall within the concept of roguelike games . 
 More recently , with more powerful home computers and gaming systems , new variations of roguelikes incorporating other gameplay genres , thematic elements and graphical styles have become popular , typically retaining the notion of procedural generation and permanent death of the player @-@ character . Indie games like Weird Worlds : Return to Infinite Space , Spelunky , The Binding of Isaac , FTL : Faster Than Light , and Rogue Legacy helped to establish the use of roguelike elements in other genres . These titles are sometimes labeled as " roguelike @-@ like " , " rogue @-@ lite " , or " procedural death labyrinths " to reflect the variation from titles which mimic the gameplay of traditional roguelikes more faithfully . Other games , like Diablo and UnReal World , key titles in the action role @-@ playing and the survival game genres respectively , took inspiration from roguelikes . 
 = = Gameplay and design = = 
 = = = General gameplay = = = 
 Deriving from the concepts of tabletop role @-@ playing games such as Dungeons & Dragons , nearly all roguelikes give the player control of a character , which they may customize by selecting a class , race , and gender , and adjusting attributes points and skills . At the start of the game , the character is placed at the top @-@ most level of a dungeon , with basic equipment such as a simple weapon , armor , torches , and food . Following along the role @-@ playing concept of a dungeon crawl , the player moves the character through the dungeon , collecting treasure which can include new weapons , armors , magical devices , potions , scrolls , food , and in @-@ game money , while having to fight monsters that roam the dungeon . Most combat is performed simply by attempting to move the character into the same space as the monster , which the game then calculates the damage that the character and monster deal . Other types of attacks , such as firing an arrow or performing an offensive magic spell , can often be performed as well . 
 Defeating monsters earns the character experience points , and after earning enough points , the character will gain an experience level , improving their hit points , magic capability , and other attributes . Monsters may drop treasure to be looted . On the other hand , the character dies if they lose all their hit points . As most roguelikes feature the concept of permadeath , this represents the end of the game , and the player will need to restart the game with a newly made character . Roguelikes are nearly always turn @-@ based , with the game only reacting when the player makes an action with the character . This allows players to evaluate a difficult situation , such as being cornered by several monsters , at their own pace and determine the best strategy . 
 The player generally has to explore the dungeon to reveal its contents similar to a fog of war . Many roguelikes include factors related to light sources such as a torch to provide illumination to see monsters in nearby squares , and line of sight can also limit what monsters are visible . Dungeons tend to be connected by stairs ; lower dungeon levels generally are more difficult than higher ones , so that a character that is underdeveloped may have difficulty by progressing too fast . Dungeon levels and the population of monsters and treasure within them are generated randomly using procedural generation , so that no game is the same on subsequent playthroughs . Most roguelikes have an ultimate goal of either claiming an item located at the deepest level of the dungeon , or to defeat a specific monster that lives on that level . Typical roguelikes include a scoreboard , ranking the player 's performance once their game is over ( be it through permadeath or completing the objective ) based on the amount of treasure , money , and experience earned , and how fast the player completed the game in such cases . 
 = = = Key features = = = 
 The genre of roguelike broadly encompasses the gameplay that was popularized by the text @-@ based game Rogue ( 1980 ) , which bore out many variations due to its success ; As of 2015 , several hundred games claiming to be roguelikes were available through the Steam game catalog , and the user @-@ run wiki <unk> tracks hundreds of roguelikes and their development . Because of the expansion of numerous variations on the roguelike theme , the gameplay elements characterizing the roguelike genre were explicitly defined at the International Roguelike Development Conference 2008 held in Berlin , Germany ; these factors encompass what is known as the " Berlin Interpretation " . Some of the factors used in this definition include : 
 Roguelike games create random tile @-@ based levels , monster encounters , and treasure through procedural generation on each new game . Preferably roguelikes adhering to the Berlin Interpretation use ASCII @-@ based graphics . They may include pre @-@ determined levels as well , such as a town level common to the Moria family where the player can buy and sell equipment . Generated layouts typically incorporate rooms connected by corridors , some of which may be preset to some degree ( e.g. , monster lairs or treasuries ) . Open areas or natural features , such as rivers , may occur , though these are considered against the Berlin Interpretation . While early roguelikes would have levels confided to the bounds of the terminal screen , other roguelikes enabled a much larger level size , only a portion shown to the player as they moved around it . 
 Roguelikes traditionally implement permadeath . Once a character dies , the player must begin a new game , which will regenerate the game 's levels anew due to procedural generation . A " save game " feature will only provide suspension of gameplay and not a <unk> recoverable state ; the stored session is deleted upon resumption or character death . Players can circumvent this by backing up stored game data ( " save <unk> " ) , an act that is usually considered cheating ; the developers of Rogue introduced the permadeath feature after introducing a save function , finding that players were repeatedly loading saved games to achieve the best results . 
 The combat system is turn @-@ based instead of real @-@ time . Gameplay is usually step @-@ based , where player actions are performed serially and take a variable measure of in @-@ game time to complete . Game processes ( e.g. , monster movement and interaction , progressive effects such as poisoning or starvation ) advance based on the passage of time dictated by these actions . This requires the player to learn and apply tactics as they progress in the dungeon . 
 Roguelikes generally have complex interacting systems that allow the player to complete certain goals in multiple ways , creating emergent gameplay . For example , to get through a locked door , the player may attempt to pick the lock , kick it down , burn down the door , or even tunnel around it , depending on their current situation and inventory . A common phrase associated with NetHack is " The Dev Team Thinks of Everything " in that the developers seem to have anticipated every possible combination of actions that a player may attempt to try in their gameplay strategy . 
 Roguelike games are focused on hack and slash @-@ based gameplay , where the goal is to kill lots of monsters , and where other peaceful options do not exist . 
 The identity of magical items , including magically enchanted items , varies across games . Newly discovered objects only offer a vague physical description that is randomized between games , with purposes and capabilities left unstated . For example , a " bubbly " potion might heal wounds one game , then poison the player character in the next . Items are often subject to alteration , acquiring specific traits , such as a curse , or direct player modification . Exploration and discovery to learn the identity and function of items is of high value . 
 The player must use resource management to survive . Items that help sustain the player , such as food and healing items , are in limited supply , and the player must figure out how to use these most advantageously in order to survive in the dungeon . USGamer further considers " stamina decay " as another feature related to resource management . The player 's character constantly needs to find food to survive or will die from hunger , which prevents the player from exploiting health regeneration by simply either passing turns for a long period of time or fighting very weak monsters at low level dungeons . Rich Carlson , one of the creators of an early roguelike @-@ like Strange Adventures in Infinite Space , called this aspect a sort of " clock " , imposing some type of deadline or limitation on how much the player can explore and creating tension in the game . 
 Most are single @-@ player games . On multi @-@ user systems , leaderboards are often shared between players . Some roguelikes allow traces of former player characters to appear in later game sessions in the form of ghosts or grave markings . Some games such as NetHack even have the player 's former characters reappear as enemies within the dungeon . Multi @-@ player turn @-@ based derivatives such as <unk> , <unk> , and Crossfire do exist and are playable online . 
 = = = Early roguelikes = = = 
 Early roguelikes were developed to be played on text @-@ based user interfaces , commonly UNIX @-@ based computer mainframes and terminals used at colleges and universities before transitioning to personal computers . Games used a mix of ASCII or ANSI characters to represent elements of the dungeon levels , creatures , and items on the level . These games typically included one or two text lines presenting the player 's current status at the bottom of the screen , and text @-@ based menu screens to manage inventory , statistics , and other details . The player 's character was nearly always represented by the @ across text @-@ based roguelikes , which had been chosen by the developers of Rogue to stand for " where you 're at " . Other examples would include $ for monetary treasure and D for a dragon . Later games would take advantage of color @-@ based text graphics to increase the variation of creature types , such as a red D for a red dragon that would shoot fire , while a green D could indicate a green dragon that would shoot acid . Players would use the keyboard , using one <unk> to enter a command . With modern computer systems , users developed alternate means of displaying the game , such as graphical tilesets and <unk> @-@ based graphical front ends , as well as interfaces that took advantage of keyboard and mouse UI controls . 
 As computers offered more advanced user interfaces , such as windows and point @-@ and @-@ click menus , many traditional roguelikes were modified to include support for having multiple windows . This was useful to not only show the character @-@ based dungeon , but details on the character 's inventory , the monster they were in battle with , and other status messages , in separate windows . Having access to multiple windows also allowed having menus to complete more complex commands . 
 = = = Roguelike @-@ likes and procedural death labyrinths = = = 
 With computers and video game consoles capable of more advanced graphics and gameplay , numerous games have emerged that are loosely based on the classic roguelike design but diverge in one or more features . Many of these games use the concepts of procedurally generated maps and permadeath , while moving away from tile @-@ based movement and turn @-@ based gameplay , often using another gameplay genre such as action games or platformers . As such , the term " roguelike @-@ like " or " rogue @-@ lite " has been used to distinguish these games that possess some , but not all , of the Berlin Interpretation features from those that exactly meet the Berlin roguelike definition . The phrase " procedural death labyrinth " has also been applied to such games , as they retain the notion of permadeath and random level generation but lack the other high @-@ value factors normally associated with roguelike games . 
 Roguelike @-@ likes are generally much shorter games intended to be winnable within a single gaming session , in contrast to traditional roguelikes that are designed for multiple sessions of gameplay . Associated with their short length , many roguelike @-@ likes feature a metagame , whereby achieving certain goals will unlock features such as the ability to select a new character at the start of the game or the addition of new items and monsters in the procedural generation of the game 's levels . Several roguelike @-@ likes feature daily challenges , in which a preset random seed is used to generate the game 's levels in a deterministic fashion so that each player will have the same encounters ; players attempt to complete the game through those levels or otherwise get the highest score through online leaderboards . Roguelike @-@ likes may also allow the player to enter the random seed directly as to be able to <unk> the same set of levels or share a difficult set of levels with other players . 
 US Gamer further identified games they consider edge cases of being roguelikes or roguelike @-@ likes , as they are inspired by Rogue , and " that stray a bit further from the genre but still manage to scratch the same itch as a great roguelike " . These include games such as the Diablo series , ToeJam & Earl , and Dwarf Fortress . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history ( 1975 – 1980 ) = = = 
 The creation of roguelike games came from hobbyist programmers and computer hackers , attempting to create games for the nascent computer field in the early 1980s , particularly influenced by the 1975 text adventure game Colossal Cave Adventure ( often simply titled Adventure ) . Some elements of the roguelike genre were present in dungeon crawlers written for the PLATO system , like the multi @-@ user games dnd ( 1975 ) and Moria ( 1975 ) , although there is no evidence that the early roguelike creators had access to these games . The core roguelike games were developed independently of each other , many of the developers not learning about their respective projects until several years after the genre took off . 
 Roguelike games were initially developed for computing environments with limited memory , including shared mainframe systems and early home computers ; this limitation prevented developers from retaining all but a few dungeon levels in memory while the game was running , leading to procedural generation to avoid the memory storage issue . Roguelikes were also often written in languages like BASIC , which are not as efficient in memory and data management compared to modern languages , further limiting the scope the game could cover . 
 = = = = Concurrent variants = = = = 
 Though the term " roguelike " derives from the 1980 game Rogue , the first known game with the core roguelike gameplay elements was Beneath Apple Manor ( 1978 ) , written by Don Worth for the Apple II ; Beneath Apple Manor is also recognized as the first commercial roguelike game . The game , inspired by Worth 's enjoyment of Dungeons & Dragons roleplaying , included procedural generation using a modification of the random maze generator from the game Dragon Maze , role @-@ playing elements for the characters , tile @-@ based movement and turn @-@ based combat . Though Beneath Apple Manor predated Rogue , it was not as popular as Rogue : Rogue had advantage of being distributed over ARPANET which many college students had easy access to , while Beneath Apple Manor was packaged and sold by hand by Worth either at local stores or through mail fulfillment . 
 Another early roguelike whose development pre @-@ dated Rogue was Sword of Fargoal ( 1982 ) , developed by Jeff McCord starting in 1979 . The game was based on <unk> , an earlier title McCord had created on the Commodore PET which he shared locally with friends while a student at Henry Clay High School in Kentucky ; the game itself was based on a Dungeons & Dragons campaign he had run himself in the prior years . Before graduating and attending the University of Tennessee in 1981 , he had started work on <unk> II , which required the player to navigate through randomly generated dungeon levels , acquire a sword , and make it back to the surface with that sword through more randomly generated levels . The more advanced computers available at the school , such as the Commodore VIC @-@ 20 , enabled him to expand out the game further from the highly limited memory on the PET . On seeing the prospects of selling computer software , he eventually got a publication deal with Epyx , where they helped him to refine the marketing of the game , renaming it Sword of Fargoal , and giving him access to the more powerful Commodore 64 , enabling him to use graphics and sound as part of the game . The game was considered a success , and when it was ported to the PC in 1983 , it out @-@ shone Rogue 's PC release the same year due to Sword of Fargoal 's superior graphics and sound . 
 = = = = Rogue = = = = 
 Rogue was written by Glenn Wichman and Michael Toy in 1980 while students at the University of California , Santa Cruz . The game was inspired by Toy 's prior experience in playing the 1971 Star Trek game and programming clones of it for various other computer systems . It was also inspired by interactive fiction Adventure . While looking for a way to randomize the experience of Adventure , they came across Ken Arnold 's curses library that enabled them to better manipulate characters on the terminal screen , prompting Toy and Wichman to create a graphical @-@ like randomized adventure game . They created the story of the game by having the player seek out the " Amulet of <unk> " , " <unk> " being " Rodney " spelled backwards , the name of the wizard they envisioned had created the dungeon . Rogue was originally executed on a VAX @-@ 11 / 780 computer ; its limited memory forced them to use a simple text @-@ based interface for the game . Toy eventually dropped out of school but got a job at the computing labs at University of California , Berkeley , where he met with Arnold . Arnold helped to optimize the curses code and implement more features into the game . 
 Rogue proved popular with college students and computer researchers at the time , including Ken Thompson ; Dennis Ritchie had joked at the time that Rogue was " the biggest waste of CPU cycles in history " . Its popularity led to the game 's inclusion on BSD UNIX <unk> in 1984 , though at that time , without its source code . Toy and Arnold had anticipated selling Rogue commercially and were hesitant about releasing it ; Toy would go on to meet Jon Lane at Olivetti , and together they would go on to create the company A.I. Design to port the games for various home systems , later bringing Wichman back to help . 
 = = = Following evolution ( 1980 – 1995 ) = = = 
 The popularity of Rogue led developers to create their own versions of the game , though their efforts were originally limited by the lack of access to Rogue 's source , which was not released until BSD <unk> in 1986 . These developers resorted to building games from scratch similar to Rogue but with features that they wanted to see . These versions would be distributed with source code , and along with the original Rogue source , other developers were able to create software forks of the games , adding in new monsters , items , and gameplay features , creating several dozen variants . This process was aided by switching code to languages with better data typing , including object @-@ oriented and scripting languages , and cleaning up and <unk> the code so that contributors can better follow where changes can be made . 
 While there are some direct variants of Rogue , such as Brogue , most variants of Rogue could be classified into two branches based on two key games , Moria and Hack , that were developed in the spirit of Rogue . 
 = = = = Moria @-@ based = = = = 
 Moria ( 1983 ) was developed by Robert Alan <unk> while a student at University of Oklahoma , inspired by both Adventure and Rogue . Having access to a VAX @-@ 11 / 780 , but without the source to Rogue due to computer administrator restrictions , he began trying to recreate Rogue but specifically flavored with the complex underground cave maze of the same name in J.R.R. Tolkien 's Middle Earth stories . Following Tolkien 's fiction , the player 's goal was to descend to the depths of Moria to defeat the Balrog , akin to a boss battle . As with Rogue , levels were not persistent : when the player left the level and then tried to return , a new level would be procedurally generated . Among other improvement to Rogue , <unk> included a persistent town at the highest level where players could buy and sell equipment , and the use of data structures within the Pascal language allowed him to create a more diverse bestiary within the game . He got help from several playtesters as well as another student , <unk> Wayne Todd , who helped to program a deeper character generation system . UMoria ( short for UNIX Moria ) is a close variation on Moria by Jim E. Wilson , making the game more portable to a larger variety of computers while fixing various bugs . 
 Angband ( 1990 ) was developed by Alex Cutler and Andy <unk> while attending the University of Warwick . Having played UMoria , they wanted to expand the game even further . Working from UMoria 's code , they increased the number of levels and monsters , flavored the game based on Angband , the massive fortress controlled by Morgoth from Tolkien 's fiction , and incorporated more of the deadlier creatures described within the Middle Earth mythology . They kept the Balrog as a difficult creature that must be overcome at a mid @-@ game level , while Morgoth became the final boss the player must defeat to win the game . Following Cutler and <unk> 's graduation , Sean March and Geoff Hill took over the development to see the game through to a public release outside of the university , adding in elements such as giving the player a sense of the rewards and dangers of a level when they entered it the first time . 
 Once Angband was released to the public via USENET , there were efforts to have code maintainers ( the " devteam " ) to fix bugs , clean up the code and implement suggestions into the code . Due to numerous shifts in those maintaining the code ( due to other obligations ) , and the number of potential user suggestions to include , Angband would become highly forked , leading to a number of Angband variants ; at least sixty known variants exist with about a half dozen still under active development . One significant fork was <unk> ( 1994 ) ( short for Zelazny Angband ) , which expanded on Angband and altered the theme towards Roger Zelazny 's The Chronicles of Amber . The <unk> codebase would be used to create Tales of Middle Earth ( <unk> ) in 2002 , which later swapped out the Tolkien and Zelazny fiction setting for a new original one to become Tales of Maj <unk> ( 2009 ) . The vanilla Angband remains in development today by the devteam . 
 = = = = Hack @-@ based = = = = 
 Hack ( 1982 ) was developed by Jay Fenlason with help from Kenny Woodland , Mike Thome , and Jonathan Payne , students at Lincoln @-@ Sudbury Regional High School at the time , while participating in the school 's computer lab overseen by Brian Harvey . Harvey had been able to acquire a PDP @-@ 11 / 7 mainframe for the school and instituted a course curriculum that allowed students to do whatever they wanted on the computers , including playing games , as long as they had completed assignments by the end of each semester . Fenlason , Woodland , Thome , and Payne met through these courses and became a close @-@ group of friends and competent programmers . Harvey had invited the group to the computer labs at UC Berkeley where they had the opportunity to use the mainframe systems there , and were introduced to Rogue , inspiring them to create their own version as their class project . Fenlason had created a list of features they wanted to improve upon in Rogue such as having a level 's layout saved once the player moved off that level . They approached Toy and Arnold at a local USENIX conference for the source code to Rogue , but were refused , forcing them to develop the routines from scratch . The resulting program , Hack , stayed true to the original Dungeons and Dragons influences , and derived its name from being both a " hack and slash " game as well as a programming hack to recreate Rogue without having access to its source code . Fenlason was not able to include all the desired features , and his involvement in Hack 's development concluded after the students had left the school . Fenlason had provided the source code to Hack to the USENIX conferences to be distributed on their digital tapes , from which it was later discovered and built upon through USENET newsgroups , porting it to various systems . Like Angband , the <unk> of the Hack code passed through several hands , and some variants were created by different forks . 
 Hack would eventually be dropped in favor of NetHack ( 1987 ) . When Mike Stephenson , an analyst at a computer hardware manufacture , took <unk> of Hack 's code , he took the opportunity to improve upon it along with suggestions for game improvements from <unk> Miller , a philosophy professor at University of Pennsylvania , and Janet Walz , another computer hacker . Calling themselves the DevTeam , they began to make major modifications to Hack 's code . They named their new version NetHack , in part for the collaboration of the game over USENET . NetHack 's major deviations from Hack were the introduction of a wider variety of monsters , borrowing from other mythologies and lores , including anachronistic and contemporary cultural elements ( such as a tourist class with a flash @-@ bulb camera inspired by Terry Pratchett 's Discworld series ) in the high fantasy setting , and the use of pre @-@ defined levels with some procedural elements that the player would encounter deeper in the dungeons . Further iterations of the game included branching pathways through the dungeon and optional character @-@ based quests that could grant the player an extremely useful item to complete the game . Though the DevTeam released the code publicly , they carefully maintained who could contribute to the code base to avoid excessive forking of the vanilla game , and remain relatively quiet about suggested improvements to each release , working in relatively secrecy from its player base . There are separate forks of NetHack , such as Slash <unk> . 
 Ancient Domains of Mystery ( 1994 ) , or ADOM for short , derived from concepts presented in NetHack . ADOM was originally developed by Thomas <unk> while a student at Technical University of Dortmund . After playing through Rogue and Hack , he came to NetHack and was inspired by the game but dismayed at the complexity and elements he found unnecessary or distracting . <unk> created ADOM from scratch with the aim of creating a more story @-@ driven game than NetHack that kept the depth of gameplay with a focused theme and setting . The resulting game featured several different dungeons , many generated procedurally , connected through an overworld map of the fictional realm of <unk> , and would have the player complete various quests in those dungeons to progress the game . A major feature was the influence of Chaos forces through unsealed portals , which the player would have to close . While in areas affected by Chaos , the player 's character would become tainted , causing mutations that could be either detrimental or beneficial . ADOM , like NetHack and Angband , would gain a devteam to maintain the code and implement updates and patches to avoid excessive forking . 
 = = = = Other variants = = = = 
 Not all early roguelikes were readily classified as Hack or Moria descendants . Larn ( 1986 ) , developed by Noah Morgan , borrowed concepts from both Hack ( in that there are persistent and fixed levels ) and Moria ( in the availability of a shop level and general difficulty increasing with dungeon level ) , but while these two games have spiraled in size to take multiple play sessions to complete , Larn was aimed to be completed in a single session . Larn also uses a fixed @-@ time feature , in that the player had only so many turns to complete a goal , though there were ways to jump back in time as to extend play . This was further limited by the stamina decay created by the need to feed the character , as failure to find food would result in the character 's death . Omega , developed by the Laurence Brothers in the late 1980s , is credited with introducing an overworld concept to the roguelike genre , prior to the feature 's appearance in ADOM . Omega was often remembered for its odd inventory approach in which the player would have to pick up an object , considering it being held , and then moving that object to a bag or an equipment slot . Linley 's Dungeon Crawl ( 1995 ) was created by Linley <unk> and featured a skill @-@ based character progression system , in which experience points could be used to improve specific skills , such as weapon proficiency or trap detection . One fork of this would form the basis for Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup ( 2006 ) . 
 = = = Mystery Dungeon games ( 1995 – onward ) = = = 
 A variation of the roguelike genre came from Japan , primarily through the Mystery Dungeon series by Chunsoft . The first game in this series was Torneko no Daibōken : Fushigi no Dungeon ( <unk> <unk> , Torneko 's Great Adventure : Mystery Dungeon ) based on the Dragon Quest series . Producer Koichi Nakamura stated the game was directly inspired by Rogue , looking to make a " more understandable , more easy @-@ to @-@ play version " of the title . The developers had developed ways to reduce the difficulty of the roguelike by using progressively more difficult dungeons that were randomly generated , and made permadeath an option by selection of difficulty level . To date , over 25 games in the Mystery Dungeon series have been made across various platforms , and spanning various franchises , including Chocobo series based on Final Fantasy and Pokémon Mystery Dungeon based on Pokémon . Several titles in the Mystery Dungeon series were popular , and would become a staple of the Japanese video game market . The games were not as successful in Western markets when published there , as the target players – younger players who likely had not experienced games like Rogue – found the lack of a traditional role @-@ playing game save system odd . 
 Other Japanese role @-@ playing games would incorporate random dungeon generation as part of their design , mimicking part of the nature of roguelikes , and were considered roguelike titles when published in Western markets . Such titles include Vagrant Story , Shining Soul , and Baroque . The massively multiplayer online role playing game Final Fantasy XIV added a randomly @-@ generated Deep Dungeon that was inspired by the procedural generation of roguelikes . 
 = = = Continued development in Western markets ( 2002 – onward ) = = = 
 Though new classical roguelike variants would continue to be developed within the Western market , the genre languished as more advanced personal computers capable of improved graphics capabilities and games that utilized these features became popular . However , some of these new graphical games drew influence for roguelike concepts , notably action role @-@ playing games like Blizzard Entertainment 's Diablo ( 1996 ) . Diablo 's creator , David Brevik , acknowledged that games like Rogue , Nethack , Telengard and other roguelikes influenced the design of Diablo , including the nature of randomly generated dungeons and loot . 
 Existing roguelikes continue to be developed : a sequel to ADOM successfully received crowd funding in 2012 , while NetHack 's first major release in ten years in 2015 is set to help the DevTeam expand the game further . New roguelikes that adhere to core Berlin Interpretation rules are still being created , including Dungeon Crawl Stone Soup ( 2006 ) , Dungeons of <unk> ( 2011 ) , and Dragon Fin Soup ( 2015 ) . A subclass of " <unk> roguelikes " that could be completed in a short period of time have developed , often derived from entries in the Seven Day Roguelike Challenge ; examples include such as <unk> ( 2013 ) and Desktop Dungeons ( 2013 ) Some games would also take advantage of the ease of developing in the tile @-@ based ASCII interfaces common to roguelikes . For example , the highly popular Dwarf Fortress ( 2006 ) uses the roguelike interface atop a construction and management simulation , and would serve as a major inspiration for Minecraft , while <unk> ( 2014 ) is a more traditional turn @-@ based role playing game featuring a scripted story that uses an ASCII interface and roguelike gameplay elements . UnReal World ( 1992 ) , the game that is considered to be the forerunner of the survival game genre , and which frequently uses procedural generation to create the worlds that players must survive in , was developed by Sami <unk> and was influenced by roguelikes , with its initial interface being similar to that of NetHack . 
 = = = Growth of the roguelike @-@ like ( 2005 @-@ onward ) = = = 
 The roguelike genre saw a resurgence in Western markets after 2000 through independent developers that created a new subgenre designated the roguelike @-@ like . Indie developers began to incorporate roguelike elements into genres not normally associated with roguelikes , creating games that would form the basis of this new subgenre . Two of the earliest cited examples of roguelike @-@ likes are Strange Adventures in Infinite Space ( 2002 ) and its sequel Weird Worlds : Return to Infinite Space ( 2005 ) by Digital Eel , both space exploration games that included randomly generated planets and encounters , and permadeath . Digital Eel based their work on the space exploration game Starflight along with roguelikes like Nethack but wanted to provide a shorter experience that would be easier to replay , akin to tabletop beer and pretzels games like <unk> and The Sorcerer 's Cave that has elements in common with roguelikes . 
 Spelunky ( 2008 ) , released shortly after the formation of the Berlin Interpretation , is considered to be a major contribution to the growth of indie @-@ developed roguelike @-@ likes . Spelunky was developed by Derek Yu , who wanted to take the deep gameplay that is offered by roguelikes and combine it with the ease and pick @-@ up @-@ and @-@ play of a platformer . The result was a platform game incorporating the notion of permadeath in which the player takes an explorer character through randomly @-@ generated underground caves . The intent was to create " deep " gameplay in which the game could be replayed over and over again , with the randomly generated situations driving the need for the player to develop novel , emergent strategies on the fly . Developer Jason Rohrer stated that Spelunky " totally revamped my thinking about single @-@ player videogame design " . 
 The formula and success of both Weird Worlds and Spelunky would influence other developers in creating new roguelike @-@ likes . Edmund McMillen , the developer of The Binding of Isaac ( 2011 ) , and Kenny and Teddy Lee , the co @-@ developers of Rogue Legacy ( 2012 ) , credit Yu 's approach with Spelunky as showing how to distill down the nature of a traditional roguelike to apply it to other gaming genres which they had done for their roguelike @-@ likes . Justin Ma and Matthew Davis , the co @-@ developers of FTL : Faster Than Light ( 2012 ) , credited both Weird Worlds : Return to Infinite Space and Spelunky as part of their influence for FTL . All of these games earned critical praise , and their success has led to a more modern resurgence in roguelike @-@ likes since their release . 
