 = = Release = = 
 According to Shaun Considine , release coordinator for Columbia Records in 1965 , " Like a Rolling Stone " was first relegated to the " graveyard of canceled releases " because of concerns from the sales and marketing departments over its unprecedented six @-@ minute length and " raucous " rock sound . In the days following the rejection , Considine took a discarded acetate of the song to the New York club Arthur — a newly opened disco popular with celebrities and the media — and asked a DJ to play it . At the crowd 's insistence , the demo was played repeatedly , until finally it wore out . The next morning , a disc jockey and a programming director from the city 's leading top 40 stations called Columbia and demanded copies . Shortly afterward , on July 20 , 1965 , " Like a Rolling Stone " was released as a single with " Gates of Eden " as its B @-@ side . 
 Despite its length , the song became Dylan 's most commercially successful release to date , remaining in the US charts for 12 weeks , where it reached number 2 behind The Beatles ' " Help ! " . The promotional copies released to disc jockeys on July 15 had the first two verses and two refrains on one side of the disk , and the remainder of the song on the other . DJs wishing to play the entire song would simply flip the vinyl over . While many radio stations were reluctant to play " Like a Rolling Stone " in its entirety , public demand eventually forced them to air it in full . This helped the single reach its number 2 peak , several weeks after its release . It was a Top 10 hit in other countries , including Canada , Ireland , the Netherlands , and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Bob Dylan – vocals , guitar , harmonica 
 Mike Bloomfield – electric guitar 
 Charlie McCoy – guitar 
 Al Kooper – organ 
 Frank Owens – piano 
 Harvey Brooks – bass guitar 
 Bobby Gregg – drums 
 = = Themes = = 
 Unlike conventional chart hits of the time , " Like a Rolling Stone " featured lyrics that were interpreted as expressions of resentment rather than love . Author Oliver Trager characterizes the lyrics as : " Dylan 's sneer at a woman who has fallen from grace and is reduced to fending for herself in a hostile , unfamiliar world . " The song 's subject , " Miss Lonely , " previously opted for easy options in life — she attended the finest schools and enjoyed high @-@ placed friends — but now that her situation has become difficult , it appears that she has no meaningful experiences to define her character . The opening lines of the song establish the character 's former condition : 
 Once upon a time you dressed so fine 
 Threw the bums a dime in your prime , didn 't you ? 
 And the first verse ends with lines that seemingly deride her current condition : 
 Now you don 't talk so loud 
 Now you don 't seem so proud 
 About having to be scrounging your next meal 
 Despite the apparent vitriol , the song 's narrator also seems to evince compassion for Miss Lonely and exclaims joy in regard to the freedom of losing everything . Jann Wenner commented : " Everything has been stripped away . You 're on your own , you 're free now ... You 're so helpless and now you 've got nothing left . And you 're invisible — you 've got no secrets — that 's so liberating . You 've nothing to fear anymore . " The final verse ends with the lines : 
 When you ain 't got nothing , you got nothing to lose 
 You 're invisible now , you got no secrets to conceal 
 The refrain seems to emphasize these themes : 
 How does it feel 
 How does it feel 
 To be on your own 
 With no direction home 
 Like a complete unknown 
 Like a rolling stone 
 Dylan biographer Robert Shelton gave this interpretation : " A song that seems to hail the dropout life for those who can take it segues into compassion for those who have dropped out of bourgeois surroundings . ' Rolling Stone ' is about the loss of innocence and the harshness of experience . Myths , props , and old beliefs fall away to reveal a very taxing reality . " 
 Dylan humorously commented on the song 's moral perspective at a press conference at KQED television studio on December 3 , 1965 . When a reporter , suggesting that the song adopted a harsh perspective on a girl , asked Dylan , " Are you hard on [ people in your songs ] because you want to torment them ? Or to change their lives and make them know themselves ? " , Dylan replied while laughing , " I want to needle them . " 
 Commentators attempted to tie the characters in the song to specific people in Dylan 's personal life in 1965 . In his book <unk> : The Warhol ' 60s , Andy Warhol recalled that some people in his circle believed that " Like a Rolling Stone " contained hostile references to him ; he was told , " Listen to ' Like a Rolling Stone ' — I think you 're the diplomat on the chrome horse , man . " The reason behind Dylan 's alleged hostility to Warhol was supposedly Warhol 's treatment of actress and model Edie Sedgwick . It has been suggested that Sedgwick is the basis of the Miss Lonely character . Sedgwick was briefly involved with Dylan in late 1965 and early 1966 , around which time there was some discussion of the two making a movie together . According to Warhol 's collaborator Paul Morrissey , Sedgwick may have been in love with Dylan , and was shocked when she found out that Dylan had secretly married Sara Lownds in November 1965 . However , in The Bob Dylan Encyclopedia , Michael Gray argues that Sedgwick had no connection with " Like a Rolling Stone " , but states " there 's no doubt that the ghost of Edie Sedgwick hangs around Blonde on Blonde " . 
 Greil Marcus alluded to a suggestion by art historian Thomas E. Crow that Dylan had written the song as a comment on Warhol 's scene : 
 I heard a lecture by Thomas Crow ... about " Like a Rolling Stone " being about Edie Sedgwick within Andy Warhol 's circle , as something that Dylan saw from the outside , not being personally involved with either of them , but as something he saw and was scared by and saw disaster looming and wrote a song as a warning , and it was compelling . 
 Joan Baez , Marianne Faithfull and Bob Neuwirth have also been mooted as possible targets of Dylan 's scorn . Dylan 's biographer Howard Sounes warned against reducing the song to the biography of one person , and suggested " it is more likely that the song was aimed generally at those [ Dylan ] perceived as being ' phony ' " . Sounes adds , " There is some irony in the fact that one of the most famous songs of the folk @-@ rock era — an era associated primarily with ideals of peace and harmony — is one of vengeance . " 
 Mike Marqusee has written at length on the conflicts in Dylan 's life during this time , with its deepening alienation from his old folk @-@ revival audience and clear @-@ cut leftist causes . He suggests that the song is probably self @-@ referential : " The song only attains full poignancy when one realises it is sung , at least in part , to the singer himself : he 's the one ' with no direction home . ' " Dylan himself has noted that , after his motorcycle accident in 1966 , he realized that " when I used words like ' he ' and ' it ' and ' they , ' and talking about other people , I was really talking about nobody but me . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 In November 2013 , 48 years after the release of the song , Dylan 's website released an official music video for " Like a Rolling Stone " . Created by digital agency Interlude , the video is interactive , allowing viewers to use their keyboards to flip through 16 channels that imitate TV formats , including game shows , shopping networks and reality series . People on each channel appear to lip @-@ sync the song 's lyrics . Video director Vania Heymann stated , " I 'm using the medium of television to look back right at us — you 're flipping yourself to death with switching channels [ in real life ] . " The video contains an hour and 15 minutes worth of content in all and features appearances from comedian Marc Maron , rapper Danny Brown , The Price Is Right host Drew Carey , SportsCenter anchor Steve Levy , Jonathan and Drew Scott of Property Brothers , and Pawn Stars cast members Rick Harrison and Austin " <unk> " Russell . The video was released to publicize the release of a 35 album box set , Bob Dylan : The Complete Album Collection Vol . One , containing Dylan 's 35 official studio albums and 11 live albums . The Guinness Book of World Records recorded it as the longest wait for an official music video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Dylan performed the song live for the first time within days of its release , when he appeared at the Newport Folk Festival on July 25 , 1965 in Newport , Rhode Island . Many of the audience 's folk enthusiasts objected to Dylan 's use of electric guitars , looking down on rock ' n roll , as Bloomfield put it , as popular amongst " greasers , heads , dancers , people who got drunk and <unk> . " According to Dylan 's friend , music critic Paul Nelson , " The audience [ was ] booing and yelling ' Get rid of the electric guitar ' " , while Dylan and his backing musicians gave an uncertain rendition of their new single . 
 Highway 61 Revisited was issued at the end of August 1965 . When Dylan went on tour that fall he asked the future members of The Band to accompany him in performing the electric half of the concerts . " Like a Rolling Stone " took the closing slot on his setlist and held it , with rare exceptions , through the end of his 1966 " world tour . " On May 17 , 1966 , during the last leg of the tour , Dylan and his band performed at Free Trade Hall in Manchester , England . Just before they started to play the track , an audience member yelled " Judas ! " , apparently referring to Dylan 's supposed " betrayal " of folk music . Dylan responded , " I don 't believe you . You 're a liar ! " With that , he turned to the band , ordering them to " play it fucking loud . " 
 Since then , " Like a Rolling Stone " has remained a staple in Dylan 's concerts , often with revised arrangements . It was included in his 1969 Isle of Wight show and in both his reunion tour with The Band in 1974 and the Rolling Thunder Revue tour in 1975 – 76 . The song continued to be featured in other tours throughout the 1970s and 1980s . On the Never Ending Tour , which began in 1988 , " Like a Rolling Stone " has been the second most performed song , with 1901 performances registered through November 2014 . 
 Live performances of the song are included on Self Portrait ( recorded August 31 , 1969 ) , Before the Flood ( recorded February 13 , 1974 ) , Bob Dylan at Budokan ( recorded March 1 , 1978 ) , MTV Unplugged ( recorded November 18 , 1994 ) , The Bootleg Series Vol . 4 : Bob Dylan Live 1966 , The " Royal Albert Hall " Concert ( recorded May 17 , 1966 ; same recording also available on The Bootleg Series Vol . 7 : No Direction Home : The Soundtrack ) , and The Band 's 2001 reissue of Rock of Ages ( recorded 1 January 1972 ) . The July 1965 Newport performance of the song is included in Murray Lerner 's film The Other Side of the Mirror , while a May 21 , 1966 performance in Newcastle , England is featured in Martin Scorsese 's documentary No Direction Home , along with footage of the above @-@ mentioned May 17 heckling incident . 
 Besides appearing on Highway 61 Revisited , the song 's standard release can be found on the compilations Bob Dylan 's Greatest Hits , Biograph , The Best of Bob Dylan ( 1997 ) , The Essential Bob Dylan , The Best of Bob Dylan ( 2005 ) , and Dylan . The mono version appears on The Original Mono Recordings . In addition , the early , incomplete studio recording in 3 / 4 time appears on The Bootleg Series Vol . 2 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The song 's sound has been described as revolutionary in its combination of electric guitar licks , organ chords , and Dylan 's voice , at once young and jeeringly cynical . Critic Michael Gray described the track as " a chaotic amalgam of blues , impressionism , allegory , and an intense directness in the central chorus : ' How does it feel ' " . The song had an enormous impact on popular culture and rock music . Its success made Dylan a pop icon , as Paul Williams notes : 
 Dylan had been famous , had been the center of attention , for a long time . But now the ante was being upped again . He 'd become a pop star as well as a folk star ... and was , even more than the Beatles , a public symbol of the vast cultural , political , generational changes taking place in the United States and Europe . He was perceived as , and in many ways functioned as , a leader . 
 Record producer Paul Rothchild , producer of The Doors ' first five albums , recalled the elation that an American musician had made a record that successfully challenged the primacy of the British Invasion groups . He said , " What I realized when I was sitting there is that one of US — one of the so @-@ called Village hipsters — was making music that could compete with THEM — the Beatles , and the Stones , and the Dave Clark Five — without sacrificing any of the integrity of folk music or the power of rock 'n'roll . " 
 The song had a huge impact on Bruce Springsteen , who was 15 years old when he first heard it . Springsteen described the moment during his speech inducting Dylan into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1988 and also assessed the long @-@ term significance of " Like a Rolling Stone " : 
 The first time I heard Bob Dylan , I was in the car with my mother listening to WMCA , and on came that snare shot that sounded like somebody 'd kicked open the door to your mind ... The way that Elvis freed your body , Dylan freed your mind , and showed us that because the music was physical did not mean it was anti @-@ intellect . He had the vision and talent to make a pop song so that it contained the whole world . He invented a new way a pop singer could sound , broke through the limitations of what a recording could achieve , and he changed the face of rock 'n'roll for ever and ever " 
 Dylan 's contemporaries in 1965 were both startled and challenged by the single . Paul McCartney remembered going around to John Lennon 's house in Weybridge to hear the song . According to McCartney , " It seemed to go on and on forever . It was just beautiful ... He showed all of us that it was possible to go a little further . " Frank Zappa had a more extreme reaction : " When I heard ' Like a Rolling Stone ' , I wanted to quit the music business , because I felt : ' If this wins and it does what it 's supposed to do , I don 't need to do anything else ... ' But it didn 't do anything . It sold but nobody responded to it in the way that they should have . " Nearly forty years later , in 2003 , Elvis Costello commented on the innovative quality of the single . " What a shocking thing to live in a world where there was Manfred Mann and the Supremes and Engelbert Humperdinck and here comes ' Like a Rolling Stone ' " . 
 Although CBS tried to make the record more " radio friendly " by cutting it in half and spreading it over both sides of the vinyl , both Dylan and fans demanded that the full duration of the recording should be placed on one side and that radio stations play the song in its entirety . The success of " Like a Rolling Stone " was influential in changing the music business convention regarding the length of singles , whereby they were restricted to durations of less than three minutes . In the words of Rolling Stone magazine , " No other pop song has so thoroughly challenged and transformed the commercial laws and artistic conventions of its time , for all time . " Richard Austin , of Sotheby 's auction house , said : " Before the release of Like a Rolling Stone , music charts were overrun with short and sweet love songs , many clocking in at three minutes or less . By defying convention with six and a half minutes of dark , brooding poetry , Dylan rewrote the rules for pop music . " 
 In 1966 , Dylan told Ralph Gleason : " ' Rolling Stone 's the best song I wrote . " In 2004 , speaking to Robert Hilburn , Dylan still felt that the song had a special place in his work : " It 's like a ghost is writing a song like that , it gives you the song and it goes away . You don 't know what it means . Except that the ghost picked me to write the song . " 
 More than 50 years since its release , " Like a Rolling Stone " remains highly regarded , as measured by polls of reviewers and fellow songwriters . A 2002 ranking by Uncut and a 2005 poll in Mojo both rated it as Dylan 's number one song . As for his personal views on such polls , Dylan told Ed Bradley in a 2004 interview on 60 Minutes that he never pays attention to them , because they change frequently . Dylan 's point was illustrated in the " 100 Greatest Songs of All Time poll " by Mojo in 2000 , which included two Dylan singles , but not " Like a Rolling Stone " . Five years later , the magazine named it his number one song . Rolling Stone picked " Like a Rolling Stone " as the number two single of the past 25 years in 1989 , and then in 2004 placed the song at number one on its list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . In 2010 , Rolling Stone again placed " Like a Rolling Stone " at the top of their list of " 500 Greatest Songs Of All Time " . In 2006 , Pitchfork Media placed it at number 4 on their list of " The 200 Greatest Songs of the 1960s " . 
 On June 24 , 2014 , Sotheby 's sold Dylan 's original hand @-@ written lyrics of " Like a Rolling Stone " at a New York auction devoted to rock memorabilia . The lyrics were sold for $ 2 million , a record price for a popular music manuscript . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Many artists have covered " Like a Rolling Stone " , including Nancy Sinatra , Patricia O 'Callaghan , Drive @-@ By Truckers , Johnny Thunders , David Bowie ( with Mick Ronson ) , the Four Seasons , Sixto Rodriguez , The Rascals , Judy Collins , Johnny Winter , Cher , <unk> , Spirit , Michael Bolton , The Creation , David Gilmour , The Surfaris , Al Stewart , John Mellencamp , The Wailers , Green Day , DIIV , Sebastian Cabot , and the Rolling Stones . John Lennon sings the lyric " Like a rolling stone " twice in the intro to his song " Dig It " on the 1970 version of The Beatles ' Let It Be album . 
 One of the most famous covers of the song was made by guitarist Jimi Hendrix , performing with The Jimi Hendrix Experience , who recorded a live version at the Monterey Pop Festival . Hendrix was an avid fan of Bob Dylan , and especially liked " Like a Rolling Stone " . " It made me feel that I wasn 't the only one who 'd ever felt so low ... " Hendrix said . After the second verse , Hendrix skipped to the fourth . Hendrix played the electric guitar , and music critic Greil Marcus described the atmosphere of the Hendrix recording thus : 
 Huge chords ride over the beginning of each verse like rain clouds ; the tune is taken very slowly , with Hendrix 's thick , street @-@ talk drawl sounding nothing at all like Dylan 's Midwestern dust storm . " 
 The song has also been covered in various languages . Hugues <unk> covered the song in French as " Comme des <unk> qui <unk> " ( " Like Rolling Stones " ) ( <unk> Trans Dylan , 1995 ) , Austrian Wolfgang Ambros included an Austrian @-@ German dialect version " Allan <unk> a Stan " on his 1978 LP Wie Im Schlaf which reached position 8 in the Austrian charts for 8 weeks , German band BAP created a dialect of Cologne version " Wie ' ne Stein " on its LP <unk> <unk> noh <unk> and Lars <unk> did a performance of the song in Swedish titled " Som en <unk> <unk> " , literally " Like a Homeless Soul " . Articolo 31 recorded an Italian version titled " Come una <unk> <unk> " ( literally , " Like a Kicked @-@ off Stone " ) for their 1998 album Nessuno . Articolo 31 's version is a hip @-@ hop song which contains overdubs of a confused girl 's voice , rapped parts and DJing . This version contains only three verses and is four and a half minutes long . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 1992 South Africa vs New Zealand rugby union match = 
 In 1992 , South Africa played a rugby union test match against New Zealand , which later became known as the Return Test . It was a rugby union test match between the South African national rugby union team ( colloquially known as the Springboks ) and New Zealand national rugby union team ( colloquially known as the All Blacks ) at Ellis Park Stadium in Johannesburg on 15 August 1992 . It was named as the Return Test as it was South Africa 's first test match since the International Rugby Board ( IRB ) had banned them due to apartheid . 
 = = History = = 
 Between 1984 and 1992 , South Africa were isolated from playing test rugby due to pressures on the IRB from groups such as " Halt All Racist Tours " against South Africa 's apartheid policies . They had played a number of unofficial tests against rebel teams such as the New Zealand Cavaliers but these were condemned by rugby 's organising bodies and players that took part in them often received bans from national selection . 
 In 1990 , President F.W. de Klerk started negotiations to end apartheid in South Africa with Nelson Mandela 's African National Congress ( ANC ) . During negotiation , the white South African Rugby Board and the non @-@ racial South African Rugby Union merged to create the South African Rugby Football Union . Rugby at the time was seen by black South Africans as a symbol of white supremacy . The ANC demanded that the new SARFU improve development of black players . This was because the Springboks team consisted solely of white players at the time , though black players were eligible for selection for the Springboks following the merger of the two governing bodies . Following the yes vote in the South African apartheid referendum in March 1992 , the IRB lifted restrictions on tours of South Africa . It was announced that the return test would be against New Zealand . This was criticised in South Africa as the Springboks had not played full international rugby for 11 years and it was felt it would not be competitive however New Zealand were invited because it was felt appropriate after the events around the 1981 South Africa rugby union tour . 
 = = Pre match = = 
 The ANC had agreed to support the match under three conditions : that the South African national flag not be flown officially , that the national anthem " Die Stem van Suid @-@ Afrika " not be played and that there would be a minute 's silence to remember victims of the township violence in South Africa . The SARFU agreed to these requests , but a request for visiting teams to visit <unk> was not agreed to . 
 Before the match , however , the Conservative Party passed out leaflets endorsing singing of " Die Stem van Suid @-@ Afrika " as a protest against Black nationalism . It was noticed that a large number of the predominantly white <unk> crowd waved South African flags that the Conservative Party had also given out . The minutes silence was also disrupted by the crowd jeering " Fuck die ANC " and singing " Die Stem van Suid @-@ Afrika " . After the performance of " God Defend New Zealand " ; SARFU President Louis Luyt broke the agreement with the ANC and played an instrumental version of " Die Stem van Suid @-@ Afrika " over the PA system with the crowd and several South African players joining in . This was followed by the traditional haka of the All Blacks . 
 = = The match = = 
 = = = First half = = = 
 The first points of the match were scored by New Zealand 's Grant Fox from a penalty kick , during which the South African supporters counted Fox 's steps in a divergence from rugby etiquette where normally silence is kept during kicks . South Africa also had a penalty kick at goal , but this was missed by Naas Botha . The first try of the match came from New Zealand 's <unk> Brooke following a quick tap penalty which was converted by Fox . South Africa then pressured the All Blacks but failed to score , with the score at the end of first half 10 – 0 to New Zealand . 
 = = = Second half = = = 
 The second half started with Botha kicking a penalty to make the score 10 – 3 . However Botha missed two further penalty kicks which proved crucial in the result of the match . Following a clearance kick from Robert du Preez , John Kirwan scored a try for New Zealand with Fox converting , making the score 17 – 3 , before Fox scored another penalty to make it 20 – 3 . Later in the match Danie Gerber scored a try for the Springboks which Botha converted . Following some poor tackling , John Timu scored for the All Blacks , with the try again being converted by Fox . In the last 5 minutes of the match , South Africa scored two tries from Pieter Muller and Gerber with both being converted by Botha with the last kick of the game to make the final score 27 – 24 . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Though the match was intended to be a celebration of unity , the pre @-@ match actions caused a political row . The fact that " Die Stem van Suid @-@ Afrika " was played before the match and the reaction of the predominantly white crowd were perceived to be an act of white defiance . Luyt defended his decision to play the South African anthem , stating " I will not be threatened by anybody , and I don 't care if certain people , not having rugby at heart , feel upset about my decision . " In its match report the following day , The Star wrote , " For that moment inside the concrete bowl , it seemed like a besieged tribe had gathered to take strength in their numbers and to send , from the protected citadel , a message of defiance to their perceived persecutors . " 
 The ANC threatened to withdraw support for South Africa 's next test match against Australia , which could have led to the cancellation the match due to safety concerns and Australia stated they would not play if the match didn 't have ANC support . However , the future South African sports minister Steve <unk> asked for the ANC to give the supporters another chance and the ANC did not withdraw their support . Instead they issued a warning that if it happened again they would oppose all future tours and the 1995 Rugby World Cup . 
 The return test was seen as the first step towards the 1995 Rugby World Cup , which South Africa hosted and won by defeating New Zealand 15 – 12 in the final . Before that match , both anthems of South Africa – " Nkosi Sikelel ' iAfrika " and " Die Stem van Suid @-@ Afrika " – were played and sung by both players and fans . The 1992 test was seen as the first step towards the notion of South Africa as a " rainbow nation " after apartheid as rugby started to gain support from all races . 
 = Great Expectations ( Grey 's Anatomy ) = 
 " Great Expectations " is the thirteenth episode of the third season of the American television medical drama Grey 's Anatomy , and the show 's 49th episode overall . It was written by Eric Buchman and directed by Michael Grossman . The episode aired on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) in the United States on January 25 , 2007 . In the episode , Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) , and Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) struggle to be considered for the position of chief of surgery after Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) announces his plans for retirement . Further storylines include Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) mourning his father , Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) trying to get financial support for a free clinic , and Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) dealing with her troubled relationship with Burke . 
 Although the episode was fictionally set in Seattle , filming occurred in Los Angeles , California . Loretta Devine ( Adele Webber ) reprised her role as a guest star , in addition to Rachel Boston ( Rachel Meyer ) and Jessica Stroup ( Jillian Miller ) . The title of the episode refers to the song , " Great Expectations " , by American hard rock band Kiss . The episode received mixed to favorable reviews , with the storyline involving O 'Malley 's grieving being particularly highlighted . Running for 47 minutes and seven seconds , the episode was viewed by 21 @.@ 50 million Americans in the United States upon its original airing , ranked first its time @-@ slot and garnered a 7 @.@ 6 Nielsen rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 " Great Expectations " opens to a voice @-@ over narration from Dr. Meredith Grey ( Ellen Pompeo ) about the expectations on becoming a surgeon . Following the death of Harold O 'Malley ( George Dzundza ) , his son Dr. George O 'Malley ( T.R. Knight ) , is seen using sex as way to cope with the devastating news , much to the displeasure of his girlfriend , Dr. Callie Torres ( Sara Ramirez ) , who seeks help from Dr. Izzie Stevens ( Katherine Heigl ) , O 'Malley 's best friend . Dr. Richard Webber ( James Pickens , Jr . ) unexpectedly announces his plans of retirement , which lead to Dr. Derek Shepherd ( Patrick Dempsey ) , Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , Dr. Addison Montgomery ( Kate Walsh ) and Dr. Mark Sloan ( Eric Dane ) , four of the hospital 's attending surgeons , to compete for the position of chief of surgery . Dr. Cristina Yang ( Sandra Oh ) is facing difficulties her relationship with Dr. Preston Burke ( Isaiah Washington ) , whose betrayal is seen to have resulted in reciprocated silent treatment . Resident Dr. Miranda Bailey ( Chandra Wilson ) expresses her desire to open a free clinic , adjacent to the hospital , but deals with rejection from both the chief and the attending physicians , who find no practical reason for funding . 
 A patient , Jillian Miller ( Jessica Stroup ) , is admitted in obstetrics and gynaecology , and is revealed to suffer from advanced cervical cancer , which leads to her contacting her parents , from whom she ran away from years ago , along with her best friend Rachel Meyer ( Rachel Boston ) . Stevens quickly becomes emotionally involved in the patient 's <unk> and encourages her to return home , after learning that the two girls were Amish , shunned from their natal village . Torres and Yang operate on a runner who is admitted in orthopedics , coping with the news that he will never be able to compete in races after the extensive surgical procedure . Sloan announces his plans of returning to New York City , but abruptly decides to stay in Seattle , following Grey accidentally revealing Webber 's retirement plans . Shepherd is displeased with Sloan 's decision , which results in an argument between him and Grey , which threatens putting damage on their relationship . Webber returns to his wife , Adele ( Loretta Devine ) , seeking forgiveness , but is left devastated at the realization that she has been spending the night with another man . Bailey ultimately finds support in Stevens , who proves enthusiastic to spend her entire US $ 8 million inheritance , for the opening of the free clinic . At the conclusion of the episode , Yang confides in Burke , who unexpectedly proposes to her , whereas O 'Malley , who finally admits how affected he was by the death of his father , proposes to Torres . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by producer Eric Buchman , while filmmaker Michael Grossman directed it . Buchman explained how his main concept for the episode was to describe O 'Malley 's grieving in a different way than depicted for Stevens , but in a manner that would be both bothering to her and painful for his partner , Torres . However , he stated that Torres ' emotional state during the mourning was also significant to the episode : " We wanted Callie to feel some remorse . She finally got George , but not in the way she wanted . She 's gotten his body , but the underlying relationship isn 't there anymore . " Buchman disclosed that one of the story lines he had originally intended to include in the scrip was Yang and Burke 's cold relationship being " kept alive " by having silent sex , which ultimately did not occur , due to being looked upon as " boring , neither dramatic , nor comedic " , and also as not being descriptive of the character 's feelings . The story line involving the four attending physicians fighting for the title of chief of surgery , was described by Buchman as a comic relief , used to emphasize a childish side of the characters ' personalities which had not been previously developed . In addition , Buchman described Webber 's retirement as an attempt to reconcile with his estranged wife , but leads to emotional devastation at the realization that she had moved on with a different man . 
 The concept of Grey and Shepherd 's fight was described by Buchman as having " no more taboos " , compared to the other story lines developed in the episode : " Even though it was a minor fight , it 's very revealing for Meredith . This is probably the longest relationship she 's every been in , and the first with someone she feels a genuine connection with . We might know Derek will come back , but she doesn 't . " The last scene of them in the episode has been deemed " a milestone of sorts for Meredith " , with the goal to determine her to admit how new to this romantic development in her personal life she actually is , after years of being known as the woman with habitual excessive drinking and sexual relationships with inappropriate men . Also noted was the aftermath of Alex and Addison 's kiss in the previous episode : " What 's most painful about that scene ? Not that Alex effectively shut Addison down in such a cold and direct manner . But that it seems like such a waste of chemistry . When they went into that closet , the last thing we wanted to see them do is pour water on their fire " , stated Buchman , noting how the scene was written to be " frustrating , shocking , and therefore unexpected " for the audience . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode was originally broadcast on January 25 , 2007 at 9 : 00 ET , and averaged 21 @.@ 50 million viewers , ranking third in weekly viewership with a 7 @.@ 6 rating , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode was the sixteenth most @-@ watched episode of the season , airing in the third week after the winter hiatus . Showing a significant decrease in ratings , the episode attracted approximately half a million less viewers than " Six Days ( Part 2 ) " , which received a 7 @.@ 7 rating . " Great Expectations " was also the lead in the time slot , with approximately one @-@ fourth more viewers than CBS 's juggernaut CSI , which ranked fourth in weekly viewership with a 7 @.@ 5 rating . 
 Staci Krause of IGN had mixed perspectives on the episode 's story arcs , comparing the advanced development in the personal story lines to the introduction of disappointing medical cases . She described the story line involving Yang and Burke 's silent relationship as " finally showing resolution , taking pleasure to the next level " , adding : " It was shocking to see Cristina be the one to break , but even more shocking was Burke 's two @-@ word response : marry me . I 'm really not sure why Cristina didn 't just say yes , since two minutes before had said she was in it for the long haul . It seems like they are dragging this out for the sake of dragging it out . " Bailey 's evolution in the episode , mainly her interactions with four competing attending physicians , <unk> described as " a reminder of why they called her the Nazi , something that was easy to forget with recent events . " 
 Krause deemed the revelation of Adele 's moving on " an interesting twist , with unexpected repercussions " , whereas Stevens ' offering Bailey the money to open the free clinic , was negatively reviewed ; looked upon as the most predictable event of the episode . Krause noted that both medical cases were confusing , assessing that " it would have been nice to learn more about the severe dehydration that caused the runner 's legs to swell . " In addition , Krause explained how the Amish angle was unexpected , but significantly helpful to the entertainment level , while a lack of realism in the medical case was highlighted : " No one bothered to really mention that it would have been nice , had it been caught earlier . It was , but she allowed herself to deteriorate . " The fight between Grey and Shepherd was deemed " a tiff that Derek was entirely responsible for " , but also a proof of " how damaged Meredith really is " . Krause expressed disappointment in the storyline involving O 'Malley proposing to Torres : " Callie certainly didn 't look thrilled . If she believes George is proposing as a means to get over his grief , she 's probably right and should likely run in the opposite direction . " Considering each of the attending <unk> ' chances of becoming the chief of surgery , Krause noted the possibility of Sloan being chosen as " hilarious , but a tad unbelievable " , whereas assessing that Montgomery 's " great traits " might suffer , due to her relationship with Karev , which was described as " certainly bringing into question her ability to stay on the straight and narrow " . Krause characterized the whole as " one of those guilty pleasures that many may not admit to " . 
 Kelly West of Cinema Blend also expressed mixed point of views on the episode , having different opinions on each storyline . She noted how the scene which sees Torres " desperately trying to escape George 's room after three rolls in the hay with the grief @-@ stricken intern " helped the episode reach a high level of entertainment : " The look , or should I say , looks on Izzie 's face as Callie <unk> on about legs being bent the wrong way and needing to heal after too much sex were priceless and could only matched by the look she gave to George when he opened the door , clearly ready for Callie once more . " She highly praised the scene that concludes Stevens ' storyline in the episode , seeing " a heart to heart in which she agrees to back off " . Shepherd 's characterization was negatively responded to , whose enraged attitude was described as " unhealthy " for the evolution of his " fresh relationship " with Grey . West positively received the storyline involving the race for the title of chief , noting that " it was kind of funny to see like the attendings were the kids in the episode " . 
 In response to Bailey 's storyline , which she deemed " not surprising " , West stated : " He tells Bailey that it 's her that will eventually be Chief when she ’ s ready . Miranda 's reaction could only be described as shock . While the other residents were running around trying to get information , she was so busy working on the free clinic project that she hadn ’ t even heard he was retiring . " The story of the two Amish girls was deemed " a little side story , which was actually quite touching and well written " , being praised for the realistic portrayals and the effects the storyline had on Stevens . " I don 't think I 've ever realized that Callie and Cristina never really interacted before . When they did speak to one another the episode , their personalities clash right away . At first they were snippy to one another but the two bonded after slicing open a runner 's legs and then operating on him . " , assessed West , in response to Torres and Yang 's arc , which was described as " an obvious parallel to the rest of the episode " . West compared the reaction of Yang and Torres following the proposals , by noting that the former was " surprised and maybe a little bit touched " , whereas Torres expressed fear and concern : " She 's worried that he 's only proposing because he 's still getting over the loss of his dad and just needs someone to cling to . I adore George , but he 's a mess right now and needs to get stuff straightened out before he makes any lifelong commitments . " 
 = San Esteban ( 1554 shipwreck ) = 
 San Esteban was a Spanish cargo ship that was wrecked in a storm in the Gulf of Mexico on what is now the Padre Island National Seashore in southern Texas on 29 April 1554 . 
 San Esteban was one of a flotilla of four ships carrying treasure from New Spain ( Mexico ) to Cuba . Three were wrecked in the storm , including San Esteban . Many of the three hundred sailors and passengers drowned while trying to reach shore . About thirty took a boat to seek help . Almost all the others died of thirst or starvation , or were killed by hostile local Karankawa Indians during their attempt to walk back to safety . The Spanish sent a salvage expedition , but recovered less than half of the cargo and treasure . 
 One of the wrecks was rediscovered in 1964 . A private company , Platoro , Ltd . , began to excavate the Espíritu Santo wreck in late 1967 , which caused public outrage and the passage of new laws to protect wrecks on the Texan coast . The remains of San Esteban were found in 1970 and excavated in 1972 @-@ 73 . Many artifacts have been recovered and are held in the Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History . They include the world 's oldest mariner 's astrolabe with a confirmed date . 
 = = 16th century = = 
 = = = Outbound journey = = = 
 San Esteban left Sanlúcar de Barrameda , Spain , on 4 November 1552 . It was part of a fleet of 54 ships under the command of Captain @-@ General Bartolomé Carreño that included an escort of six well @-@ armed ships with 360 soldiers . The escorting ships and 18 vessels were destined for the mainland of South America . Ten ships were heading to Santo Domingo and four to other parts of the West Indies . Sixteen were bound for San Juan de Ulúa ( Veracruz ) in New Spain ( Mexico ) . 
 The fleet had a difficult outbound voyage , suffering from bad weather , accidents and skirmishes with pirates . Eight vessels were lost and the rest scattered . All the New Spain flotilla arrived safely at Vera Cruz during February and March 1553 . The plan was to scrap eleven of the vessels and keep only five to make the return journey . This was typical . Ships from the Americas to Spain carried a much smaller volume of cargo than ships traveling in the other direction , although the shipments to Spain included valuable gold and silver . 
 In September 1552 Vera Cruz had been battered by a hurricane . The harbor facilities had not yet been repaired . The ships were unloaded and refitted slowly , and only one was prepared to sail for Havana to join the fleet for the return journey to Spain that year . The other four waited for over a year at Vera Cruz for the next fleet . These were the San Esteban , with Francisco del Huerto as master , Espíritu Santo , Santa María de Yciar and San Andrés with Antonio Corzo as master . Eventually the four decided not to wait longer and sailed for Havana without an escort . Antonio Corzo was named captain @-@ general of the flotilla . 
 = = = Shipwreck = = = 
 Oral tradition holds that a priest in Mexico predicted that there would be a disaster before the ships set sail , but that his warning was ignored . The four ships left Vera Cruz on 9 April 1554 , carrying over 400 people and valuable treasure and cargo . The passengers included wealthy citizens , merchants and former soldiers , but there were also a few prisoners and five Dominican missionaries who had decided to return to Spain . The ships carried barrels holding over 85 @,@ 000 pounds ( 39 @,@ 000 kg ) of silver coins and disks that had been minted in Mexico City . The total cargo was worth more than two million pesos , the equivalent of almost US $ 10 million in 1975 . 
 Due to prevailing winds and currents , the best route from Veracruz to Havana ran along the shore of what became Texas and Louisiana . The four vessels took this route . On 29 April 1554 the ships were nearing Havana when they ran into a severe storm . Three of the ships were blown back to the west and wrecked on the Padre Island sandbars . Only San Andrés escaped . Santa Maria de Yciar sank about 42 miles ( 68 km ) north of the Rio Grande 's mouth , where the Mansfield Channel is today . Espiritu Santo sank about 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the north of this point and San Esteban was wrecked 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) further north again . 
 = = = Survivors = = = 
 There were about three hundred people on the wrecked vessels , of whom perhaps 100 @-@ 150 escaped drowning . Many women and children were among those who reached shore . Francisco del Huerto , the master of San Esteban , was able to salvage a boat . He made his way back to Vera Cruz with 30 men to get help . The other survivors tried to walk south along the shore , not realizing that the nearest Spanish outpost was Tampico , 300 miles ( 480 km ) away . They met local people who seemed friendly and offered food , but later a fight broke out . The Spanish escaped but the Karankawa Indians followed them , picking off stragglers with arrows . The Spanish made driftwood rafts to cross the Rio Grande . They lost their crossbows when the unstable rafts tipped . 
 The Indians seized two men , took their clothes and then released them . The other Spaniards thought that perhaps the Indians only wanted their clothes , and stripped naked before going on . The women and children walked ahead to protect their modesty , and were ambushed and killed . Almost all of the men died of thirst or starvation , or were killed . There are records of only two who reached safety . One , Brother Marcos de Mena , was left for dead after receiving multiple arrow wounds . He recovered and managed to reach Pánuco with the aid of friendly Indians . The other , Francisco Vazquez , left the group early on and went back to the dunes facing the wrecks . He hid there until help arrived . The event came to be called the " Wreck of the Three Hundred " . 
 = = = Salvage = = = 
 Francisco del Huerto managed to reach Vera Cruz and tell of the tragic event . A rescue mission was dispatched by sea under Ángel de <unk> . His small body of troops arrived in June . He guarded the site against looters from the Spanish settlements of Tampico and Pánuco until the salvage expedition arrived , and remained during the salvage operation from 23 July to 12 September . 
 The main salvage crew dispatched from Vera Cruz to try to recover the treasure was under García de Escalante Alvarado ( a nephew of Pedro de Alvarado ) . Alvarado bought six vessels to recover the Emperor Charles V 's coin and bullion , and the other cargo . There were 102 sailors , including eleven Spanish divers . The masts of San Esteban could still be seen . Salvage of San Esteban began at once . She had sunk in just 12 to 18 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 to 5 @.@ 5 m ) of water , so could be thoroughly explored . The salvage team dragged a chain along the bottom to find the two other ships . Santa Maria de Yciar was located on 20 August . Her hull had split and the cargo was scattered around the wreck . 
 Alvarado recovered over 29 @,@ 000 pounds ( 13 @,@ 000 kg ) of silver as well as 22 @,@ 000 pesos . The salvage crew also recovered personal items and cargo . This included resin , cochineal , sugar , wood and hides . The salvage crew found about 41 % of the total value of the cargo . 51 @,@ 600 pounds ( 23 @,@ 400 kg ) of precious metals , coins , jewelry and religious artifacts were lost . After that the island was rarely visited by Europeans for the next 200 years . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = Rediscovery and Espíritu Santo excavations = = = 
 The 1554 wrecks were well documented and were shown on maps from 1646 . Treasure hunters who knew of them and <unk> searching at random found traces of Spanish coins and fragments of ships on the Padre Island beaches throughout the 20th century . The search intensified after dredgers accidentally destroyed Santa Maria de Yciar late in the 1950s . In the summer of 1964 Vida Lee Connor found Espíritu Santo while scuba diving . She spent two years exploring her discovery before marking it with buoys and announcing the find . When she went back to the site later she found a private diving party taking items from the wreck . This was the start of a major debate about antiquities found in Texas . 
 Platoro , Ltd . , a private company , began to excavate Espíritu Santo wreck in late 1967 . They found about 500 objects , including a gold bar , jewelry , and equipment used for navigation . Platoro 's exploration and retrieval of objects from the site started a long @-@ running argument with the state of Texas about ownership of the artifacts . It also triggered the Texas legislature to pass the Antiquities Code in 1969 to prevent unauthorized excavation of future finds . 
 In 1960 the U.S. Supreme Court had ruled that all territory up to 10 @.@ 35 miles ( 16 @.@ 66 km ) from the Texas coastline was the property of the state of Texas . On this basis , due to a concern that the excavation should be conducted using scientific archaeological methods , and since this was the oldest shipwreck site to be examined in the Western Hemisphere , the state launched a suit against Platoro . The Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory ( TARL ) at the University of Texas at Austin received the objects for study in the interim . There was a lengthy argument in the courts over state versus federal jurisdiction and compensation to Platoro . The outcome was that Platoro was offered a cash settlement of $ 313 @,@ 000 . The state of Texas was acknowledged to be the custodian of the artifacts that had been recovered . 
 The Antiquities Conservation Facility ( ACF ) was set up at TARL to study the material found by Platoro . The ACF extended principles and approaches developed by TARL to cover shipwreck conservation and analysis . This created the basis for future marine archaeology in Texas . After the ACF was closed these principles were carried forward in the Conservation Research Laboratory at Texas A & M University . 
 = = = San Esteban excavation = = = 
 In 1970 the Texas Antiquities Committee commissioned the Institute of Underwater Research to survey about 20 miles ( 32 km ) of the coast over a one @-@ month period . The institute found San Esteban during the survey . Where the magnetometer indicated that iron was present , they used a " blower " to make a vertical jet of water that blew a 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) layer of sand and shell away from the Pleistocene clay bottom and exposed the artifacts of the wreck . The Antiquities Committee arranged for the site of the San Esteban to be excavated in the summer of 1972 , with follow @-@ up work in the summers of 1973 and 1975 . They focused on this wreck , since it had not been disturbed . 
 Most of the ship 's wooden hull was lost , but the layout of the ship could be seen from the placement of the anchors , guns and fasteners . Corrosion and chemical interactions had melded many of the metal artifacts into conglomerates . One of these weighed more than two tons and was more than 4 metres ( 13 ft ) in length . It held two anchors , a hooped barrel gun of wrought @-@ iron , and various other objects . The divers made careful maps of the material they recovered , but had no way of determining on the spot what was inside the metal conglomerates encrusted by marine growth . The divers recovered some of the conglomerates and some individual artifacts in 1972 . The next year they recovered the rest of the large conglomerates , many smaller conglomerates and individual artifacts . In all they brought up 12 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 26 @,@ 000 lb ) of artifacts in 1972 @-@ 73 . The Texas Archaeological Research Laboratory received all the artifacts for analysis . 
 Each <unk> conglomerate of concreted material was carefully documented with photographs , radiographs where practical , and detailed conservation records . The researchers used hammers , chisels and small pneumatic chisels to break open the conglomerates . They then subjected the metal and wood objects to complex and time @-@ consuming processes to remove the products of corrosion and preserve them from future degradation . There had been a suspicion that Platoro had excavated from the San Esteban as well as the Espíritu Santo , but the analysis of the San Esteban artifacts made it clear that the Platoro collection all came from Espíritu Santo . 
 The San Esteban findings included three broken anchors and a wrought iron swivel gun that was also broken and unusable . The broken objects may have been kept so they could later be repaired , or may have just been used for ballast . There were four anchors in working condition . The anchors were made of wrought iron . Other finds included ship 's fittings , tools and a cannon made by welding together iron bars . This gun and the wrought iron guns were by now obsolete in Europe , but presumably considered sufficient for the New World . The divers recovered the stern end of the keel and a portion of the sternpost . The stern / keel section of the San Esteban is similar to other wrecks of the period , and contributes to a view of ship construction at the time . Experts have estimated that the ship was 21 to 30 metres ( 69 to 98 ft ) long and displaced 164 to 286 long tons ( 167 to 291 t ) . The planks were 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick . 
 Miscellaneous finds included a brass buckle , shards of glass and olive pits . Several conglomerates held the exoskeletons of cockroaches , providing the first evidence of shipment of these insects between Europe and the Americas . Personal possessions included a gold crucifix , pins , silver thimbles and silver <unk> coins . The salvage team also found silver and gold bullion . Some locally @-@ made items included prismatic obsidian blades and a polished nodule of iron pyrite for use as a mirror . Other items included weapons and instruments for navigation . A mariner 's astrolabe is the oldest such instrument with a confirmed date . <unk> objects from England were found and stoneware from Cologne , Germany . In the end about 1 @,@ 500 artifacts were retrieved from the San Esteban , 85 % of them from the conglomerates . 
 = = = Preservation and display = = = 
 On 21 January 1974 the National Park Service listed the three wrecks as the " Mansfield Cut Underwater Archeological District " in the National Register of Historic Places . The Texas Antiquities Committee of the State of Texas owns the San Esteban wreck . It is managed by the National Park Service . The National Register lists the site as part of an archaeological district of national significance . 
 The Texas Antiquities Committee sponsored a travelling exhibition of the finds from the 1554 wreck from 1977 to 1981 , which visited 20 museums across Texas . The exhibition showed an anchor , cannons and the remaining parts of the keel and stern post . Display cases held explanatory text , illustrations and artifacts . The recovered objects found a permanent home at the Corpus Christi Museum of Science and History . An extension to the museum opened in May 1990 to house the Shipwreck ! exhibition . 
 = SMS König = 
 SMS König was the first of four König @-@ class dreadnought battleships of the Imperial German Navy ( Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. König ( Eng : " King " ) was named in honor of King William II of Württemberg . Laid down in October 1911 , the ship was launched on 1 March 1913 . Final construction on König was completed shortly after the outbreak of World War I ; she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 9 August 1914 . 
 Along with her three sister ships , Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and Kronprinz , König took part in most of the fleet actions during the war . As the leading ship in the German line on 31 May 1916 in the Battle of Jutland , König was heavily engaged by several British battleships and suffered ten large @-@ caliber shell hits . In October 1917 , she forced the Russian pre @-@ dreadnought battleship Slava to scuttle herself in the Battle of Moon Sound , which followed Germany 's successful Operation Albion . 
 König was interned , along with the majority of the High Seas Fleet , in Scapa Flow in November 1918 following the Armistice . On 21 June 1919 , Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter gave the order to scuttle the fleet , including König , while the British guard ships were out of the harbor on exercises . Unlike most of the scuttled ships , König was never raised for scrapping ; the wreck is still on the bottom of the bay . 
 = = Construction and design = = 
 König was ordered under the provisional name " S " and built at the Kaiserliche Werft dockyards in Wilhelmshaven , under construction number 33 . Her keel was laid in October 1911 and she was launched on 1 March 1913 by the King 's cousin , Albrecht , Duke of Württemberg . Fitting @-@ out work was completed by 9 August 1914 , the day she was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet . She had cost the Imperial German Government 45 million Goldmarks . The first of what were eventually four ships in her class , König would later be joined in service by Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and Kronprinz . 
 König displaced 25 @,@ 796 t ( 25 @,@ 389 long tons ) as built and 28 @,@ 600 t ( 28 @,@ 100 long tons ) fully loaded , with a length of 175 @.@ 4 m ( 575 ft 6 in ) , a beam of 29 @.@ 5 m ( 96 ft 9 in ) and a draft of 9 @.@ 19 m ( 30 ft 2 in ) . She was powered by three Parsons steam turbines , which developed a total of 42 @,@ 708 shaft horsepower ( 31 @,@ 847 kW ) and yielded a maximum speed of 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . 
 She was armed with ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns arranged in five twin gun turrets : two superfiring turrets each fore and aft and one turret amidships between the two funnels . König was the first German battleship to mount all of her main battery artillery on the centerline . Like the earlier Kaiser @-@ class battleships , König could bring all of her main guns to bear on either side , but the newer vessel enjoyed a wider arc of fire due to the all @-@ centerline arrangement . Her secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , six 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns and five 50 cm ( 20 in ) underwater torpedo tubes , one in the bow and two on each beam . 
 = = Service = = 
 Directly after commissioning , König conducted sea trials , which were completed by 23 November 1914 . Her crew consisted of 41 officers and 1 @,@ 095 enlisted men . Afterward , the ship was attached to the V Division of the III Battle Squadron of the German High Seas Fleet , where she would later be joined by her sister ships . On 9 December , König ran aground in the Wilhelmshaven roadstead . Her sister ship Grosser Kurfürst , following right behind , rammed her stern and caused some minor damage . König was then freed from the bottom and taken back to Wilhelmshaven ; repair work lasted until 2 January 1915 . 
 = = = Operations in the North Sea = = = 
 König took part in several fleet sorties in support of Rear Admiral Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group ; however , due to her grounding outside Wilhelmshaven , the ship missed the first operation of these battlecruisers on the night of 15 – 16 December 1914 , when they were tasked with bombarding the English coast to lure out a portion of the British Grand Fleet to the waiting German fleet . On 22 January 1915 , König and the rest of III Squadron were detached from the fleet to conduct maneuver , gunnery , and torpedo training in the Baltic . They returned to the North Sea on 11 February , too late to assist the I Scouting Group at the Battle of Dogger Bank . 
 König then took part in several sorties into the North Sea . On 29 March , the ship led the fleet out to Terschelling . Three weeks later , on 17 – 18 April , she supported an operation in which the light cruisers of the II Scouting Group laid mines off the Swarte Bank . Another fleet advance occurred on 22 April , again with König in the lead . On 23 April , III Squadron returned to the Baltic for another round of exercises lasting until 10 May . Another minelaying operation was conducted by the II Scouting Group on 17 May , with the battleship again in support . 
 König participated in a fleet advance into the North Sea which ended without combat from 29 until 31 May . She was then briefly assigned to picket duty in the German defensive belt . The ship again ran aground on 6 July , though damage was minimal . The ship supported a minelaying operation on 11 – 12 September off Texel . Another fleet advance followed on 23 – 24 October ; after returning , König went into drydock for maintenance , rejoining the fleet by 4 November . The ship was then sent back to the Baltic for more training on 5 – 20 December . On the return voyage , she was slightly damaged after grounding in the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal during a snow storm . König was in the Baltic on 17 January 1916 for further training , then on 24 January returned to the North Sea . Two fleet advances followed on 5 – 6 March and 21 – 22 April . 
 König was available on 24 April 1916 to support a raid on the English coast , again as support for the German battlecruiser force in the I Scouting Group . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 , and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft unopposed , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short artillery duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . König then went to the Baltic for another round of exercises , including torpedo drills off Mecklenburg . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 König was present during the fleet operation that resulted in the battle of Jutland which took place on 31 May and 1 June 1916 . The German fleet again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . König , followed by her sisters Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and Kronprinz , made up the V Division of the III Battle Squadron , and they were the vanguard of the fleet . The III Battle Squadron was the first of three battleship units ; directly astern were the Kaiser @-@ class battleships of the VI Division , III Battle Squadron . Directly astern of the Kaiser @-@ class ships were the Helgoland and Nassau classes of the II Battle Squadron ; in the rear guard were the obsolescent Deutschland @-@ class pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the I Battle Squadron . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 CET , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south to draw the British ships toward the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König 's crew spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later at 17 : 46 , the order to open fire was given . 
 König , Grosser Kurfürst , and Markgraf were the first to reach effective gunnery range ; they engaged the battlecruisers Lion , Princess Royal , and Tiger , respectively , at a range of 21 @,@ 000 yards . König 's first salvos fell short of her target , and so she shifted her fire to the nearer Tiger . Simultaneously , König and her sisters began firing on the destroyers Nestor and Nicator with their secondary battery . The two destroyers closed in on the German line , and after having endured a hail of gunfire , maneuvered into a good firing position . Each ship launched two torpedoes apiece at König and Grosser Kurfürst , although all four weapons missed . In return , a secondary battery shell from one of the battleships hit Nestor and wrecked her engine room . The ship , along with the destroyer Nomad , was crippled and lying directly in the path of the advancing German line . Both of the destroyers were sunk , and German torpedo boats stopped to pick up survivors . At around 18 : 00 , König and her three sister ships shifted their fire to the approaching Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the V Battle Squadron . König initially engaged Barham until that ship was out of range , then shifted to Valiant . However , the faster British battleships were able to move out of effective gunnery range quickly . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from the British battlecruiser Invincible ; Rear Admiral Paul Behncke in König attempted to maneuver his four ships to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British III and IV Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . König and her sisters fired heavily on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the battleships ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . In the ensuing melee , the British armored cruiser Defence was struck by several heavy caliber shells from the German dreadnoughts . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and , in a massive explosion , destroyed the cruiser . 
 Shortly after 19 : 20 , König again entered gunnery range of the battleship Warspite and opened fire on her target . She was joined by the dreadnoughts Friedrich der Grosse , Ostfriesland , Helgoland , and Thüringen . However , König rapidly lost sight of Warspite , as she had been in the process of turning east @-@ northeast . Nearly simultaneously , British light cruisers and destroyers attempted to make a torpedo attack against the leading ships of the German line , including König . Shortly thereafter , the main British line came into range of the German fleet ; at 19 : 30 the British battleships opened fire on both the German battlecruiser force and the König @-@ class ships . König came under especially heavy fire during this period . In the span of 5 minutes , Iron Duke fired 9 salvos at König from a range of 12 @,@ 000 yards ; only one shell hit the ship . The 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shell struck the forward conning tower but instead of penetrating , the shell ricocheted off and detonated some 50 yards past the ship . Rear Admiral Behncke was injured , though he remained in command of the ship . The ship was then obscured by smoke that granted a temporary reprieve . 
 By 20 : 00 , the German line was ordered to turn westward to disengage from the British fleet . König , at the head , completed her turn and then reduced speed to allow the vessels behind her to return to formation . Shortly thereafter , four British light cruisers resumed the attacks on the crippled Wiesbaden ; the leading German battleships , including König , opened fire on the cruisers in an attempt to drive them off . The pursuing British battleships had by this time turned further south and nearly managed to " cross the T " of the German line . To rectify this situation , Admiral Scheer ordered a 16 @-@ point turn south and sent Hipper 's battlecruisers on a charge toward the British fleet . During the turn , König was struck by a 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch shell from Iron Duke ; the shell hit the ship just aft of the rearmost gun turret . König suffered significant structural damage , and several rooms were filled with smoke . During the turn to starboard , Vice Admiral Schmidt , the commander of the I Battle Squadron , decided to turn his ships immediately , instead of following the leading ships in succession . This caused a great deal of confusion , and nearly resulted in several collisions . As a result , many of the German battleships were forced to drastically reduce speed , which put the entire fleet in great danger . In an attempt to mitigate the predicament , König turned to port and laid a smokescreen between the German and British lines . 
 During the battle , König suffered significant damage . A heavy shell penetrated the main armored deck toward the bow . Another shell hit the armored bulkhead at the corner and shoved it back five feet , breaking off a large piece from the armor plate in the process . Shell splinters from another hit penetrated several of the casemates that held the 15 cm secondary guns , two of which were disabled . The ammunition stores for these two guns were set on fire and the magazines had to be flooded to prevent an explosion . The ship nevertheless remained combat effective , as her primary battery remained in operation , as did most of her secondary guns ; König could also steam at close to her maximum speed . Other areas of the ship had to be counter @-@ flooded to maintain stability ; 1 @,@ 600 tons of water entered the ship , either as a result of battle damage or counter @-@ flooding efforts . The flooding rendered the battleship sufficiently low in the water to prevent the ship from being able to cross the <unk> Bank until 09 : 30 on 1 June . König was taken to Kiel for initial repairs , as that was the only location that had a floating dry dock large enough to fit the ship . Repairs were conducted there from 4 to 18 June , at which point the ship was transferred to the Howaldtswerke shipyard . König was again ready to join the fleet by 21 July . In the course of the battle , she suffered 45 men killed and 27 wounded , the highest tally for any surviving battleship in the German fleet . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 Following completion of repairs , König was again detached to the Baltic for training , from the end of July until early August . König was back in the North Sea on 5 August . A major fleet sortie occurred on 18 – 20 August , with König again in the lead . The I Scouting Group was to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland , in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . However , as Von der Tann and Moltke were the only battlecruisers in fighting condition , the new battleship Bayern and two of König 's sisters , Markgraf and Grosser Kurfürst , were temporarily assigned to the I Scouting Group . Admiral Scheer and the rest of the High Seas Fleet would trail behind providing cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 König remained in port until 21 October , when the ship was again sent to the Baltic for training . The ship returned to the fleet on 3 November . König and the rest of III Squadron then steamed out to Horns Reef on 5 – 6 November . König was then assigned various tasks , including guard duty in the German Bight and convoy escort in the Baltic . 1917 saw several training missions in the Baltic during 22 February – 4 March ; 14 – 22 March and 17 May – 9 June . König then went into Wilhelmshaven for maintenance on 16 June . The installation of a new heavy foremast and other work lasted until 21 July . On 10 September , König again went into the Baltic for training maneuvers . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to eliminate the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . The Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic island of Ösel , and specifically the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe Peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint operation with the army to capture Ösel and Moon Islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The V Division included the four König @-@ class ships , and was by this time augmented with the new battleship Bayern . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with 9 light cruisers , 3 torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , supported by over 100 aircraft and 6 zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 König departed Kiel on 23 September for Putziger Wiek , where the ship remained until 10 October . The operation began on 12 October ; at 03 : 00 König anchored off Ösel in Tagga Bay and disembarked soldiers . By 05 : 50 , König opened fire on Russian coastal artillery emplacements , joined by Moltke , Bayern , and the other three König @-@ class ships . Simultaneously , the Kaiser @-@ class ships engaged the batteries on the Sworbe peninsula ; the objective was to secure the channel between Moon and Dagö islands , which would block the only escape route of the Russian ships in the Gulf . Both Grosser Kurfürst and Bayern struck mines while maneuvering into their bombardment positions , with minimal damage to the former . Bayern was severely wounded , and had to be withdrawn to Kiel for repairs . At 17 : 30 , König departed the area to refuel ; she returned to the Irben Strait on 15 October . 
 On 16 October , it was decided to detach a portion of the invasion flotilla to clear the Russian naval forces in Moon Sound ; these included the two Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts . To this end , König and Kronprinz , along with the cruisers Strassburg and Kolberg and a number of smaller vessels , were sent to engage the Russian battleships . They arrived by the morning of 17 October , but a deep Russian minefield thwarted their progress . The Germans were surprised to discover that the 30 @.@ 5 cm guns of the Russian battleships out @-@ ranged their own 30 @.@ 5 cm guns . The Russian ships managed to keep the distance wide enough to prevent the German battleships from being able to return fire , while still firing effectively on the German ships , and the Germans had to take several evasive maneuvers to avoid the Russian shells . However , by 10 : 00 , the minesweepers had cleared a path through the minefield , and König and Kronprinz dashed into the bay . By 10 : 13 , König was in range of Slava and quickly opened fire . Meanwhile , Kronprinz fired on both Slava and the cruiser Bayan . The Russian vessels were hit dozens of times , until at 10 : 30 the Russian naval commander , Admiral Bakhirev , ordered their withdrawal . König had hit Slava seven times ; the damage inflicted prevented her from escaping to the north . Instead , she was scuttled and her crew was evacuated on a destroyer . In the course of the engagement , König struck the cruiser Bayan once . Following the engagement , König fired on shore batteries on Woi and Werder . 
 On 20 October , König was towed by mine sweepers into the <unk> roadstead . König transferred soldiers to the island of <unk> which was then occupied . By that time , the fighting on the islands was winding down ; Moon , Ösel , and Dagö were in German possession . The previous day , the Admiralstab had ordered the cessation of naval actions and the return of the dreadnoughts to the High Seas Fleet as soon as possible . On the return voyage , König struck bottom in a heavy swell . The ship was repaired in Kiel ; the work lasted until 17 November . 
 = = = Final operations = = = 
 Following König 's return from the Baltic , the ship was tasked with guard duties in the North Sea and with providing support for minesweepers . König returned to the Baltic on 22 December for further training , which lasted until 8 January 1918 . Another round of exercises was conducted from 23 February to 11 March . On 20 April König steamed out to assist a German patrol that was engaged with British forces . The ship was part of the force that steamed to Norway to intercept a heavily escorted British convoy on 23 – 25 April , though the operation was canceled when the battlecruiser Moltke suffered mechanical damage . König was briefly grounded in the northern harbor of the island of Helgoland on 30 May . Two months later , on 31 July , König and the rest of III Squadron covered a minesweeping unit in the North Sea . The ship then went to the Baltic for training on 7 – 18 August , after which König returned to the North Sea . König conducted her last exercise in the Baltic starting on 28 September ; the maneuvers lasted until 1 October . 
 König was to have taken part in a final fleet action days before the Armistice , an operation which envisioned the bulk of the High Seas Fleet sortieing from their base in Wilhelmshaven to engage the British Grand Fleet . To retain a better bargaining position for Germany , Admirals Hipper and Scheer intended to inflict as much damage as possible on the British navy , whatever the cost to the fleet . On 29 October 1918 , the order was given to depart from Wilhelmshaven to consolidate the fleet in the Jade roadstead , with the intention of departing the following morning . However , starting on the night of 29 October , sailors on Thüringen mutinied . The unrest spread to other battleships , including König . The operation was ultimately canceled ; in an attempt to suppress the mutiny , Admiral Scheer ordered the fleet be dispersed . König and the rest of III Squadron were sent to Kiel . During the subsequent mutiny , König 's captain was wounded three times , and both her first officer and adjutant were killed . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , most of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , were interned in the British naval base in Scapa Flow . Prior to the departure of the German fleet , Admiral Adolf von Trotha made clear to von Reuter that he could not allow the Allies to seize the ships , under any conditions . The fleet rendezvoused with the British light cruiser Cardiff , which led the ships to the Allied fleet that was to escort the Germans to Scapa Flow . The massive flotilla consisted of some 370 British , American , and French warships . Once the ships were interned , their guns were disabled through the removal of their breech blocks . 
 The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . Von Reuter believed that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered the ships to be sunk . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers , and at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . König sank at 14 : 00 ; the ship was never raised for scrapping , unlike most of the other capital ships that were scuttled . The rights to future salvage operations on the wreck were sold to Britain in 1962 . 
 The ship is now a popular dive site in Scapa Flow , lying at a depth of 40 m ( 130 ft ) on a sandy floor to the east of Cava . She turned over as she sank and the hull faces upwards at about 20 m ( 66 ft ) down . There are several dynamited holes in her superstructure where salvagers have gained access to obtain non @-@ ferrous metals . 
 = HD 40307 c = 
 HD 40307 c is an extrasolar planet orbiting the star HD 40307 , located 42 light @-@ years away in the direction of the southern constellation Pictor . The planet was discovered by the radial velocity method , using the HARPS apparatus , in June 2008 . Of the six proposed planets in the HD 40307 star system , it is the third largest , and has the second closest orbit from the star . The planet is of interest as this star has relatively low metallicity , supporting a hypothesis that different metallicities in protostars determine what kind of planets they will form . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Like the other two exoplanets , HD 40307 b and HD 40307 d , orbiting the star HD 40307 , HD 40307 c was discovered by measuring variations in the radial velocity of HD 40307 caused by the star 's orbit around the center of mass of the planetary system . These measurements were made by the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher spectrograph apparatus ( HARPS ) at the La Silla Observatory in Chile 's Atacama Desert . The discovery of planets in the HD 40307 system was announced in an astrophysics convention that took place in Nantes , France in mid @-@ June 2008 . 
 = = Orbit and mass = = 
 HD 40307 c is the third most massive planet in the system , with a lower mass bound 6 @.@ 8 times the mass of the Earth . The planet orbits HD 40307 at about 0 @.@ 08 astronomical units ( AU ) , as compared to the Earth 's distance from the Sun at 1 AU ; as a result , one year on the planet constitutes approximately 9 @.@ 6 Earth days . Analysis of the radial velocity data used to detect the planet does not yield a statistically significant deviation from a circular orbit . 
 The star around which the planet HD 40307 orbits has a low metallicity , unusual when compared to other planet @-@ bearing stars . This supports a hypothesis concerning the possibility that the metallicity of stars during their births may determine whether a protostar 's accretion disk forms gas giants or terrestrial planets . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 HD 40307 c has not been observed directly and likely does not transit . More specific characteristics ( such as surface temperature , composition and radius ) cannot be determined . 
 HD 40307 c has a small mass of at least 6 @.@ 9 times Earth 's , so it was first assumed terrestrial . Later in 2009 a study stated that if HD 40307 c is terrestrial , tidal heating would destabilise it , in a manner greater than this process crushes the Jovian moon Io . Such restrictions as bind terrestrial planets would not restrict ice giant planets like Neptune or Uranus . HD 40307 c might be a sub @-@ Neptune . 
 Since the same tides are predicted to result in the destruction of larger natural satellites of planets located close to their parent star , it is unlikely that HD 40307 c hosts any satellites . 
 = Angel tube station = 
 Angel is a London Underground station in the Angel area of the London Borough of Islington . It is on the Bank branch ( eastern corollary ) of the Northern line , between Old Street and King 's Cross St. Pancras stations , in Travelcard Zone 1 . The station was originally built by the City & South London Railway ( C & SLR ) and opened on 17 November 1901 . The station served as a terminus until the line was extended to Euston on 12 May 1907 . 
 The station was rebuilt in the early 1990s to accommodate the large number of passengers using the station . As a result , the station has an extra @-@ wide southbound platform , the longest escalators on the Underground network and the fourth @-@ longest escalators in Western Europe . It is also a proposed station on the Crossrail 2 proposed line ( N. Surrey and S.W. London @-@ S.E. Hertfordshire ) . 
 = = Location = = 
 On Islington High Street , the station provides access to several nearby Off West End , or Fringe theatre venues including the Old Red Lion Theatre , Sadler 's Wells Theatre , the King 's Head Theatre and the Almeida Theatre . It is also the nearest station to the main campus of City University and Chapel Market , a London street market , and the antiques market and dealers of Camden Passage . Between Angel and Old Street is the disused City Road station . 
 = = History = = 
 Angel station was originally built by the City & South London Railway ( C & SLR ) , and opened on 17 November 1901 as the northern terminus of a new extension from Moorgate . The station building was designed by Sydney Smith and was on the corner of City Road and Torrens Street . On 12 May 1907 , the C & SLR opened a further extension from Angel to Euston and Angel became a through station . 
 As with many of the C & SLR 's stations , it was originally built with a single central island platform serving two tracks in a single tunnel – an arrangement still seen at Clapham North and Clapham Common ( as of 2015 ) . Access to the platforms from street level was via three Euston Anderson electric lifts before the rebuilding of the station . When the C & SLR line was closed for tunnel reconstruction in the early 1920s to accommodate larger trains , the station façade was reclad with tiling and the lifts were replaced by new ones from Otis . 
 = = = Station rebuilding = = = 
 For years since its opening , the station regularly suffered from overcrowding and had a very narrow island platform ( barely 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) in width ) , which constituted a major safety issue and caused justified fear among passengers . Consequently , the station was comprehensively rebuilt in the early 1990s . A new section of tunnel was excavated for a new northbound platform , and the southbound platform was rebuilt to completely occupy the original 30 @-@ foot tunnel , leaving it wider than most deep @-@ level platforms on the system . The lifts and the ground @-@ level building were closed and a new station entrance was opened on 10 August 1992 around the corner in Islington High Street together with the northbound platform while the southbound platform opened on 17 September 1992 . Because of the distance between the new entrance and the platforms , and their depth , two flights of escalators were required , aligned approximately at a right angle . 
 = = The station today = = 
 The station 's ticket hall has a sculpture of an Angel by Kevin Boys . Angel is also one of the number of stations to have only escalator access to the platforms . 
 = = = Escalators = = = 
 With a vertical rise of 27 metres ( 89 ft ) and a length of 60 metres ( 200 ft ) , Angel station has the longest escalators on the Underground , and the fourth @-@ longest set of escalators in Western Europe ( after <unk> <unk> in the Prague Metro at 87 metres ( 285 ft ) , Västra <unk> in the Stockholm Metro at 67 metres ( 220 ft ) and <unk> station in the Helsinki Metro at 64 metres ( 210 ft ) ) . The escalators at Angel were also the longest in the United Kingdom until they were surpassed in 2008 by the those at Heathrow Terminal 5A , to connect the main building with the people moving system to the satellite terminals . 
 = = = Station improvements = = = 
 The station was refurbished ( as of 2015 ) and work began on 2 January 2007 . Additional CCTV cameras and Help Points were installed , bringing the total to 77 cameras in the station and 9 Help Points ( which were upgraded with new induction loops ) to better aid hearing @-@ impaired passengers . In addition , new communications equipment was introduced and damaged signs were replaced with new ones . 
 = = Former siding = = 
 When Angel was opened , a long dead @-@ end siding was provided for train stabling , converging from the left onto the northbound line just south of the station . This was retained over the years but eventually it was closed on 23 January 1959 ( along with the signal box at the south end of the platform ) to simplify through running . The siding lay derelict and unused until the rebuilding scheme . Part of the siding was used as the northbound diversion tunnel , which branched off the existing northbound line , cut through into the end of the siding and continued along it until it branched off left to the new northbound platform . 
 = = Services and connections = = 
 Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally operate every 3 – 6 minutes between 06 : 03 and 00 : 25 in both directions . 
 London Bus routes 4 , 19 , 30 , 38 , 43 , 56 , 73 , 153 , 205 , 214 , 274 , 341 , 394 and 476 , and night routes N19 , N38 , <unk> , N73 and <unk> serve the station . 
 = = Future proposals = = 
 Angel is a proposed station on the Crossrail 2 ( Chelsea @-@ Hackney line ) project . Depending on the route constructed , it would be between King 's Cross St. Pancras and Dalston Junction or Hackney Central . It was officially safeguarded as part of the route in 2007 , although there had been proposals for a route for some time previously and safeguarding had been in place since 1991 . This would provide an interchange between a London Underground line and a Crossrail line . 
 = = In media = = 
 The station 's escalators and the southbound platform were featured in the Bollywood hit film Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge . 
 = 2014 Philadelphia Phillies season = 
 The Philadelphia Phillies ' 2014 season was the 132nd in the history of the franchise . After a disappointing 2013 , the Phillies entered the offseason with a strategy to reload rather than rebuild ; they did not want to relinquish the opportunity to do well in 2014 in hopes of being competitive down the road . Commensurate with this strategy , among their key acquisitions were right fielder Marlon Byrd and starting pitcher A. J. Burnett . The Phillies began the season with new coaches ( as Ryne Sandberg entered his first season as manager after taking over on an interim basis in August 2013 ) and new broadcasters ; Jamie Moyer and Matt Stairs , two members of the 2008 World Series squad , replaced Chris Wheeler and Gary Matthews as analysts on Comcast SportsNet Philadelphia . 
 After offseason headlines indicated a tenuous relationship between Sandberg and shortstop Jimmy Rollins and controversy about draft picks who did not sign with the team , the season began auspiciously with an opening @-@ day win ; however , the Phillies then lost their next two games . April continued in that fashion ; the team played .500 ball in their first 26 games , exceeding expectations . One commentator called them " pleasantly mediocre " , despite a horrific performance from the bullpen . May was a frustrating month for the Phillies ; failing to win games they were in a position to win , they posted an 11 – 16 record and a .230 team batting average ( the worst in the National League ) . June was almost as bad ; although the team had 12 wins and 17 losses , the bullpen improved to one of the best in the NL . In the 2014 Major League Baseball draft that month the Phillies selected Aaron Nola as their first @-@ round pick , encouraging optimism from fans and the media . Although the Phillies began July at the bottom of the National League East Division , they amassed a five @-@ game winning streak shortly before the All @-@ Star break . This moved them to within nine games of .500 , but they lost the last two games and had a 42 – 53 record at the break . 
 As the trade deadline approached , it was speculated that the Phillies would surrender older players to obtain younger ones . They made two deals , neither involving key components of the team . In August they had their best month of the season : a 14 – 13 record , thanks to strong pitching and adequate hitting . Although the Phillies began September with four pitchers combining for a no @-@ hitter , their month deteriorated from there . The squad had an 11 – 15 record , finishing the season with 73 wins and 89 losses . Significant personnel changes on the field and in the front office were expected during the offseason . 
 = = Preceding offseason = = 
 = = = Player transactions = = = 
 The Phillies entered the offseason with a strategy of " reloading , not rebuilding " . According to Matt Gelb of The Philadelphia Inquirer , " Bold best describes what Rubén Amaro Jr. has done so far in putting together the 2014 Phillies and it sure is appropriate that the word ends with the letters O @-@ L @-@ D. " The team wanted to re @-@ sign Carlos Ruiz ( or find another catcher ) and sign a right @-@ handed @-@ hitting corner outfielder and a middle @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rotation starter to supplement Cole Hamels and Cliff Lee after the departure of Roy Halladay and the discovery of medical problems in Cuban Miguel Alfredo González , signed by the Phillies the previous summer . 
 = = = = Players becoming free agents = = = = 
 Outfielder Roger <unk> – Signed minor @-@ league contract with the Cincinnati Reds on January 31 , 2014 . 
 Right @-@ hand pitcher Roy Halladay – Announced his retirement from baseball as a member of the Toronto Blue Jays on December 9 , 2013 . 
 Left @-@ hand pitcher César Jiménez – Re @-@ signed with the Phillies on November 15 , 2013 . 
 Left @-@ hand pitcher John Lannan – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the New York Mets on January 18 , 2014 . 
 Catcher Steven <unk> – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the Atlanta Braves on January 13 , 2014 . 
 Infielder Michael Martínez – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the Pittsburgh Pirates on December 13 , 2013 . 
 Right @-@ hand pitcher Zach Miner – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the Seattle Mariners on February 11 , 2014 . 
 Infielder Pete Orr – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the Milwaukee Brewers on January 27 , 2014 . 
 Right @-@ hand pitcher J. C. Ramírez – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the Cleveland Indians on November 1 , 2013 . 
 Catcher Carlos Ruiz – Re @-@ signed with the Phillies on November 18 , 2013 . 
 Outfielder Casper Wells – Signed a minor @-@ league contract with the Chicago Cubs on November 23 , 2013 . 
 = = = = Acquisitions = = = = 
 The Phillies ' first offseason acquisition was Shawn Camp , a right @-@ handed middle reliever coming off an " awful " season with the Chicago Cubs who was signed on November 11 , 2013 to a minor @-@ league contract with an invitation to spring training . The next day , they signed the right @-@ handed @-@ hitting corner outfielder for whom they were looking : Marlon Byrd , a member of the team from his debut in 2002 to 2005 , signed a two @-@ year contract for $ 16 million . Soon after the agreement was announced , Phillies general manager Rubén Amaro , Jr. was criticized by analyst Keith Law for overpaying Byrd ; according to Law , Byrd 's 2013 season was a " fluke " and an " outlier " . Near the end of that week , the Phillies signed two players to minor @-@ league contracts with invitations to spring training : outfielder Clete Thomas , who led Minnesota Twins outfielders in games played in their 2013 season ( with a .214 batting average ) , and Cesar Jimenez , a left @-@ handed specialist who pitched 17 innings with the Phillies in 2013 . The following week the team signed infielder Reid Brignac , a well @-@ regarded prospect for the Tampa Bay Rays who had struggled in the major leagues , to a minor @-@ league contract with a spring @-@ training invitation . Shortly afterwards the Phillies addressed their catching needs , re @-@ signing Carlos Ruiz to a three @-@ year contract ( with an option for a fourth year ) worth $ 26 million . Similar to the Byrd deal , Amaro was criticized for signing a 35 @-@ year @-@ old catcher to a three @-@ year contract . Cliff Corcoran wrote for Sports Illustrated , " While Ruiz may have been an underrated player in the past , heading into his age @-@ 35 season , he doesn ’ t have far to fall before he 's little more than a replacement @-@ level catcher . " 
 The Phillies made no more acquisitions until December ; on December 2 they signed Jeff Manship , a right @-@ handed pitcher who was mediocre as a starter and reliever ( since 2011 , he had an 0 – 5 record and a 7 @.@ 44 earned run average ) , to a minor @-@ league contract with a spring @-@ training invitation . The next day they made their only trade of the offseason , sending 2013 backup catcher Erik Kratz and minor @-@ league relief pitcher Rob Rasmussen to the Toronto Blue Jays in exchange for Brad Lincoln , a veteran right @-@ handed relief pitcher who the Phillies hoped would improve their bullpen 's depth and leadership . Uncertain if minor @-@ league catching prospects Cameron Rupp , Tommy Joseph and Sebastian Valle were ready for the major leagues , the Phillies signed " strong defensive catcher " Wil Nieves to a one @-@ year contract for $ 1 @.@ 125 million as a backup . On December 12 they selected Kevin Munson , a right @-@ handed pitcher from the Arizona Diamondbacks organization , in the Rule 5 draft ; if Munson did not remain on their 40 @-@ man roster , they had to offer him back to Arizona . On December 18 they brought back Lou Marson , a top catching prospect for the Phillies " languish [ ing ] " on the Cleveland Indians as part of a package of players traded for Cliff Lee , on a minor @-@ league contract with an invitation to spring training . That day , the Phillies signed four other players to minor @-@ league contracts with invitations to spring training : right @-@ handed relief pitchers Sean O 'Sullivan and Chris <unk> and outfielders Dave <unk> and Tony Gwynn , Jr .. Right @-@ handed starting pitcher Roberto Hernández , formerly known as Fausto Carmona , was signed to a one @-@ year contract worth $ 4 @.@ 5 million . 
 It was nearly a month before the Phillies signed another player ; on January 13 , 2014 , journeyman infielder Ronny Cedeño was signed to a minor @-@ league contract with a spring @-@ training invitation . Just over a week later they signed Chad Gaudin , a right @-@ handed pitcher with starting and relief experience , a 5 – 2 record and a 3 @.@ 06 ERA with the San Diego Padres in 2013 ( before an August season @-@ ending carpal tunnel injury ) , to a minor @-@ league contract with an invitation to spring training ; he was released on February 13 , 2014 , after failing a physical . On January 21 they signed Bobby Abreu , a member of the Phillies from 1998 to 2006 who had not played in MLB since 2012 but had performed well in the Venezuelan Winter League , to a minor @-@ league contract with a spring @-@ training invitation . On February 12 , when Cole Hamels announced he would not be ready for opening day due to tendinitis in his throwing shoulder , A. J. Burnett was reportedly signed to a one @-@ year , $ 16 million contract despite Amaro 's previous assertion that the Phillies would make no more major acquisitions . Burnett 's salary was later clarified as $ 15 million , with a $ 1 million buyout clause and a partial no @-@ trade clause . To make room for Burnett on the roster , the Phillies designated former first @-@ round draft pick Joe Savery for assignment ; Savery was later claimed from waivers by the Oakland Athletics . Shortly before opening day , the team acquired infielder Jayson Nix ( younger brother of <unk> Nix , whom the Phillies acquired for their bench several years earlier ) from the Tampa Bay Rays . 
 = = = Coaching changes = = = 
 In Ryne Sandberg 's first full season as manager ( after replacing Charlie Manuel near the end of the 2013 season ) , he reconfigured the Phillies ' staff . Among his first acquisitions were long @-@ time friend Larry Bowa ( who managed the Phillies from 2001 to 2004 ) as bench coach and former bench coach Pete Mackanin as third @-@ base coach . At the same time , the team announced the retention of Steve Henderson as hitting coach . Shortly thereafter , the Phillies announced that Juan Samuel would switch from third- to first @-@ base coach and Wally Joyner would return for a second season as assistant hitting coach . About a month later , the team reported that the Detroit Tigers had lured Joyner away as their hitting coach . Although the most difficult position to fill was pitching coach ( vacated by Rich Dubee at the end of the 2013 season ) , on November 21 the Phillies announced that they had hired Bob McClure and retained pitching @-@ coach candidate Rod Nichols as bullpen coach and Jesús <unk> as bullpen catcher . Sandberg finished his staffing a week before Christmas by promoting minor @-@ league assistant John <unk> to assistant hitting coach . 
 = = = TV and broadcast changes = = = 
 On January 2 , 2014 , the Phillies and Comcast Sportsnet announced a 25 @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 5 billion TV contract ; although it averaged $ 100 million a year , it was structured to begin below the average and end above it . Soon after the agreement was reached , Comcast ( who would hire announcers under the deal ) removed 37 @-@ year announcer Chris Wheeler and seven @-@ year announcer Gary Matthews . Although the remaining Phillies announcers were disappointed with the decision , they all returned for the season . One replacement analyst was planned , and early candidates included Ricky <unk> , Mitch Williams , John Kruk , Chris Coste , Jamie Moyer , Brad Lidge and Matt Stairs . Lidge and Kruk were among the first to be contacted , but both declined . Mickey Morandini was a possibility , but Stairs and Moyer reportedly interviewed well and were favored . On February 11 , Comcast announced that Moyer and Stairs would join Tom McCarthy and Gregg Murphy on the Phillies ' TV broadcast team . The company later announced that Moyer and Stairs would each call over 100 games , including 30 games together with McCarthy . After the first spring @-@ training game , it was announced that Mike Schmidt would join the broadcast team for Sunday afternoon games . 
 Early in the season , the new broadcast team " struggled " ; Josh <unk> called Moyer boring and monotonous and Stairs inarticulate , with a tendency to mumble . McCarthy was forced to " carry the broadcast and talk as much as possible " to minimize ( but not eliminate ) dead air . By the season 's second half it was agreed that the broadcast team had improved , but Chuck Darrow criticized Moyer 's " esoteric " commentary and Stairs ' poor enunciation ; fans may have judged the new announcers based on standards set by Hall of Fame announcer Harry Kalas and partner Richie Ashburn . According to Awful Announcing , the broadcast team was one of the most improved in the major leagues ; when Moyer announced that he would not return in 2015 , the website called it " a damn shame " . 
 = = = Unsigned draft picks controversy = = = 
 On February 20 , 2014 , Baseball America revealed that the Phillies reported Ben Wetzler and Jason Monda ( two 2013 draft selections who did not sign with the club ) to the National Collegiate Athletic Association for violating the NCAA 's no @-@ agent rule : student athletes may not use agents to negotiate professional contracts . Although players observe the " patently ridiculous " rule by routinely hiring " advisors " ( usually agents ) , the NCAA suspended Wetzler for 11 games . The Phillies were criticized for reporting the players : 
 The question remains : What 's the upside for the Phillies here ? The practice of using agents in something less than a sanctioned manner will continue , and if anything they 've made a number of advisors and college programs less likely to cooperate with them in the future . This is a pretty pitiful organization top to bottom these days , and now that indictment absolutely extends to the amateur scouting department . Bad show , Phillies . 
 David Murphy of the Philadelphia Daily News asked if the Phillies wanted to punish Wetzler for not signing with them . According to ESPN 's Buster Olney , the Phillies ' reporting of Wetzler and Monda would hurt the team in the long run : " As time passes and the Phillies ’ silence continues , the impression hardens within the industry — particularly among agents and college coaches — that the team acted out of vindictiveness , because neither Wetzler nor Monda accepted their offer . " He called the Phillies ' decision " breathtakingly abhorrent " , saying that the debacle would " tarnish the reputation of a respected organization " . Amaro dismissed the likelihood of retribution by agents or players , replying , " No , I 'm not " , when asked if he was concerned that the organization 's reporting of Wetzler would hinder its ability to " glean accurate and detailed information about a player 's willingness to go pro , or even gain access to said players " . 
 = = = Jimmy Rollins and Ryne Sandberg = = = 
 A lack of rapport between veteran shortstop Jimmy Rollins and manager Ryne Sandberg attracted attention during the offseason ; ESPN 's Buster Olney described sentiment in the Phillies ' organization that Rollins should be traded . Amaro and Rollins dispelled the rumors , with Amaro calling them " absolute silliness " . Sandberg praised backup shortstop Freddy Galvis ' attitude ( which many in the media saw as the manager sending a message to the team that no one – including Rollins – was above team rules ) , and one column examined the point at which Rollins ceased being the team 's unquestioned leader . Rollins ( who had a good relationship with former manager Charlie Manuel ) said , " He 's [ Sandberg 's ] completely different from Charlie from the very onset , their personalities . He 's pretty much a real quiet guy , he really is . Charlie was a get @-@ in @-@ your face with jokes type of guy . We 're still learning him , he 's still learning us from this side of it . Being a coach and being a manager are completely different things – you deal with so much more being a manager . " 
 = = Season notes = = 
 = = = Spring training = = = 
 After three spring @-@ training games the Phillies ' starting rotation already had significant health concerns , predominantly with throwing shoulders ; Cole Hamels had discomfort in his left shoulder , and Jon Pettibone and Ethan Martin in their right shoulders . Although the club hoped to avoid a " patchwork " starting rotation like 2013 's , it already lacked pitching depth ; two top prospects , Adam Morgan and Shane Watson , were lost for most of the season due to shoulder surgery . Mike Adams , acquired by the Phillies as their setup man but who missed most of the 2013 season before offseason surgery , threw a bullpen session in late February and said he felt " real good " and hoped to join the bullpen by April . David Buchanan started the Phillies ' fourth spring @-@ training game , pitching two good innings ; after the game , MLB.com Phillies beat reporter called him a dark @-@ horse candidate for the Phillies ' starting rotation . Miguel Alfredo González was less effective in that game . Early in March the Phillies announced that Hamels had a " setback " in his recovery ( arm fatigue ) , and the likelihood of his pitching in April was " remote " ; this necessitated a new fifth starter . The top candidates were Buchanan , who pitched well in his next few outings , and Jeff Manship ; both had ERAs at or below 1 @.@ 50 through March 11 . 
 On March 8 the Phillies made their first minor @-@ league demotions : seven players , including two ( Michael <unk> and Luis García ) with major @-@ league experience , and top pitching prospect Jesse Biddle . On March 17 Sandberg confirmed speculation that Cliff Lee would be the Phillies ' opening @-@ day starting pitcher against his former team , the Texas Rangers and Yu Darvish , and Rule 5 draft selection Kevin Munson was returned to the Arizona Diamondbacks . 
 Concerns arose about methicillin @-@ resistant Staphylococcus aureus ( MRSA ) in the Phillies ' spring @-@ training clubhouse at Bright House Field when , on March 21 , Freddy Galvis was placed on the disabled list with a staph infection ; Galvis was hospitalized , missing opening day , and the clubhouse was disinfected after the next game . Darin Ruf was also placed on the DL with an oblique strain , incurred during batting practice that day . On March 22 the Phillies demoted Maikel Franco to minor @-@ league camp , making Cody Asche their opening @-@ day starter at third base . Although he had been expected to make the team , Kevin Frandsen was cut from their 40 @-@ man roster ; this increased the possibility that " <unk> candidate " César Hernández would make the team . Frandsen rejected his minor @-@ league assignment , electing to pursue free agency . The Phillies also released Ronny Cedeño , once a top candidate to replace Galvis during his injury . The club 's bench narrowed when the Phillies announced that Bobby Abreu would not make the team ( primarily due to lackluster defense ) , leaving Tony Gwynn , Jr . , John Mayberry , Jr . , Reid Brignac , Wil Nieves and Hernández likely to remain . The team acquired Jayson Nix from the Tampa Bay Rays , assigning Brignac to Triple @-@ A Lehigh Valley . The Phillies began the season with six players on the DL : Galvis , Ruf , Mike Adams , Miguel Alfredo González , Cole Hamels and Ethan Martin . 
 = = = Opening @-@ day roster = = = 
 The Phillies announced their opening @-@ day roster on March 29 , near the deadline . Since they did not need a fifth starter for two weeks , four starters , eight relievers , two catchers , six infielders and five outfielders made up the roster . Two players who did not expect to make the team when they began spring training were left @-@ handed reliever Mario Hollands ( who said he was in " shock " when he heard the news ) and outfielder Tony Gwynn , Jr . , ending a " long road back to the majors " . 
 = = = March / April = = = 
 The Phillies opened their season with a three @-@ game series in Arlington , Texas against the Rangers . On opening day , although they took a 6 – 0 lead ( thanks in part to a grand slam by Jimmy Rollins , his 200th career home run ) , but Cliff Lee gave up seven runs in the next two innings . The Phillies tied the game in the fourth inning , and over the next several innings Marlon Byrd and Cody Asche homered . Texas scored two more runs , but the Phillies won 14 – 10 . Despite the 14 opening @-@ day runs , Ryne Sandberg changed the lineup for the Phillies ' second game ( against left @-@ handed Martin Perez ) by replacing three left @-@ handed hitters with right @-@ handed hitters ( perhaps to maximize the Phillies ' platoon advantage ) . A. J. Burnett started , pitching six innings and giving up one run . The game was scoreless until the sixth inning before the Rangers won , 3 – 2 , on a walk @-@ off single by Adrián Beltré in the bottom of the ninth . Although Kyle Kendrick allowed one run in seven innings in the series ' final game , Jonathan Papelbon gave up three runs in the ninth inning ( including a walk @-@ off walk to Shin @-@ Soo Choo ) to blow the save . The Phillies lost two of their first three games , despite strong starting pitching in the last two . 
 The club then traveled to Chicago to play the Cubs . They won the first game of the series , 7 – 2 , thanks to home runs by Utley and Mayberry and strong pitching from starter Roberto Hernández ( who got credit for the win ) and five relief pitchers who combined for 4 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings . The next day Lee threw seven scoreless innings and Papelbon recorded his first save of the season as the Phillies defeated the Cubs , 2 – 0 ; Utley was three @-@ for @-@ three , including a home run , to lead the team offensively . The Phillies lost the final game of the series , 8 – 3 , as Burnett gave up eight runs ( four earned ) in 5 2 ⁄ 3 innings and the offense was 1 @-@ for @-@ 15 with runners in scoring position . 
 In the home opener against the Brewers , starter Kyle Kendrick gave up two of Ryan Braun 's three home runs and allowed six runs ( four earned ) in five innings for a 10 – 4 loss . The next day the Phillies again lost , 9 – 4 , after the bullpen gave up five runs in the last three innings ; three of the Brewers ' nine runs were unearned , after two infield errors . They were swept in the series , losing the final game 6 – 2 ( the first time since 2007 the Phillies were swept in their first home series ) . In the series the Brewers scored 25 runs on 38 hits , 17 of which were extra base hits . Sandberg said , " The good news is they are leaving town . Now we have to concentrate on gaining some momentum ... " 
 The home stand continued with a three @-@ game series against the Miami Marlins . In the opener , Marlins starter José Fernández gave up a career @-@ high six runs . A. J. Burnett , the Phillies ' starter , left the game after five innings with an apparent groin injury ( although he did not miss a start ) and the Phillies won 6 – 3 . Jonathan Pettibone made his season debut the next day , pitching five innings and allowing one run . The game went into extra innings , and in the bottom of the 10th Rollins hit a walk @-@ off home run for a 5 – 4 win . The Phillies had their first series sweep of the season and returned to a .500 winning percentage ( seven wins and seven losses ) the next day , defeating the Marlins 4 – 3 with two RBIs from backup catcher Wil Nieves and a home run by Utley to break a late tie . 
 The Atlanta Braves then visited Philadelphia for a four @-@ game series . In game one , Hernandez started for the Phillies and Ervin Santana for the Braves . After a pitchers ' duel through seven innings , the Braves hit back @-@ to @-@ back @-@ to @-@ back home runs in the top of the eighth before the Phillies rallied with five runs in the bottom of the inning ( a two @-@ RBI single by Byrd and a three @-@ run home run by Domonic Brown ) for a 6 – 5 lead entering the ninth . Since Papelbon had pitched in the previous three games , he was unavailable as a closer . Jake Diekman pitched the ninth inning , allowing a grand slam by Dan Uggla for a final score of 9 – 6 . Jackie Robinson Day , scheduled to be celebrated by the Phillies and Braves on April 15 , was postponed to the following day when the game was rained out . On April 16 Lee pitched nine innings , striking out 13 batters and giving up one run for a 1 – 0 loss . In the series ' last game , Burnett pitched seven shutout innings in a scoreless game before Ben Revere hit an RBI single in the eighth ; Papelbon pitched a scoreless ninth inning for the save in the 1 – 0 win . The Phillies finished the home stand with a 4 – 5 record . 
 The Phillies began a road trip with a three @-@ game series against the Colorado Rockies . In game one , Pettibone gave up eight runs in four innings ; with two hits , the Phillies lost 12 – 1 . After the game , Pettibone was sent to the Triple @-@ A ( AAA ) Lehigh Valley IronPigs . Although Kendrick had a quality start in the second game , the Phillies scored one run in a 3 – 1 loss . They salvaged the final game of the series , winning 10 – 9 despite Hernandez giving up six runs in four innings ; Ryan Howard was four @-@ for @-@ five at the plate , including a home run , a triple and three RBIs . The Phillies lost the lead three times before winning the game . The team then opened a four @-@ game series against the Los Angeles Dodgers . Lee pitched a " gem " of a game , striking out 10 batters in eight shutout innings ; Carlos Ruiz , in the cleanup spot , hit two doubles and a home run for four RBIs ( his first of the season ) for the Phillies ' 7 – 0 win . They won the second game in 10 innings ; Brown doubled , scoring Ruiz in the top of the 10th for a 3 – 2 lead held by Papelbon for his sixth save . Burnett had a good outing , and several relievers provided " stress @-@ free performances " for the victory ( which brought the team 's winning percentage to .500 ) . The Phillies lost game three , Cole Hamels ' season debut after an injury , 5 – 2 ; although Hamels had a quality start , the bullpen gave up three runs and the offense had five hits and struck out 13 times . Kendrick pitched the final game of the series for a 7 – 3 win , behind strong offense from Ruiz ( who reached base in all five plate appearances , scoring twice and driving in two runs ) and Byrd ( who had four RBIs ) . In game two the Phillies rallied from a 5 – 0 deficit to win , 6 – 5 . Ruiz was three @-@ for @-@ four , with two runs and an RBI ; Gwynn had a pinch @-@ hit RBI double , and Asche had a pinch @-@ hit two @-@ RBI double for the Phillies ( who scored all their runs in the seventh and eighth innings ) . Papelbon recorded his seventh save . The Phillies finished the road trip with a 2 – 0 victory behind a " brilliant " Burnett , for a 6 – 4 record on the trip . For his .500 batting average on the road trip , Ruiz was named the NL Player of the Week . 
 To end April , the Phillies headed home for a two @-@ game series against the New York Mets . The first game was delayed due to rain ; it rained throughout the game , which the Mets won 6 – 1 after the " truly embarrassed " Hamels struggled on the mound . The Phillies announced that the game scheduled for April 30 would be rescheduled for June 2 due to rain , and ended the month with a 13 – 13 record . 
 Although Miguel Alfredo González had progressed in his rehab and Darin Ruf and Ethan Martin were closer to joining the team , the Phillies had no projected return date for any of them . Another problem during the first month of the season was the lack of third @-@ base production ; in the season 's first 25 games the combined third @-@ base batting average was .165 , and the combined pitchers ' batting average was .196 . Asche , Jayson Nix and Freddy Galvis had not asserted themselves , leading to speculation about the early arrival of prospect Maikel Franco despite his struggle at the AAA level . At the end of the season 's first month , the team 's offensive leaders were Utley ( .355 batting average ) , Howard ( five home runs ) , Byrd ( 17 RBIs ) and Revere ( 10 stolen bases ) . Pitching leaders were Lee and Antonio Bastardo ( three wins ) , Burnett ( 2 @.@ 15 ERA ) , Lee ( 41 innings pitched ) and Mario Hollands ( 1 @.@ 000 walks plus hits per inning pitched ) . The bullpen struggled in April , with the worst ERA in the National League and three opening @-@ day relievers relegated to AAA . Philly.com columnist Justin Klugh called the team " pleasantly mediocre " , noting their .500 record despite a tough early @-@ season schedule . 
 = = = May = = = 
 The Phillies ' first May game opened a series with the Washington Nationals on May 2 . The Nationals won , 5 – 3 , despite a quality start by Lee . Philadelphia won game two 7 – 2 , thanks to a strong start from A. J. Burnett ( the first Phillies starter of the season to win a home game ) , a Cody Asche home run and four – for @-@ five hitting by Jimmy Rollins . The Phillies took the series ' rubber match , 1 – 0 , with a strong start from Roberto Hernandez and a first @-@ inning RBI triple by Jimmy Rollins . The team then hosted the Toronto Blue Jays , with Kyle Kendrick starting against former Phillie J. A. Happ in the series ' first game . The Phillies lost , 3 – 0 ; Kendrick had no run support , losing his eighth consecutive decision ( dating back to 2013 ) despite a " decent " ERA . The club lost the next night as well , with Cole Hamels giving up five runs in six innings ; despite a sixth @-@ inning grand slam by Asche to tie the game , the Blue Jays came back in extra innings for a 6 – 5 win . The home @-@ and @-@ home series then moved to Toronto for two games , where the Phillies gave up nine runs in the seventh inning of the first game to lose 10 – 0 . After the game , Shawn Camp was outrighted from the roster and Luis García recalled . The series concluded the next night , with five Blue Jays home runs giving them a 12 – 6 win . The Phillies then began a three @-@ game series at Citi Field with the New York Mets . Hernandez started game one , pitching five innings and allowing one run ; in his first hit of the day , Marlon Byrd batted in Chase Utley ( the go @-@ ahead run ) in the top of the 11th inning . Papelbon saved the game in the bottom of the 11th and the Phillies won 3 – 2 , snapping a four @-@ game losing streak . They won another one @-@ run game ( 5 – 4 ) the next night ; Ryan Howard 's RBI single in the top of the ninth gave the Phillies the lead , and Papelbon recorded his 11th save of the season . In the final game of the series Hamels consistently had " an answer " to the Mets ' offense , throwing a career @-@ high 133 pitches in seven innings , allowing one run and striking out 10 hitters . Entering the ninth inning , the Phillies led 4 – 1 ; with Papelbon unavailable , Antonio Bastardo and Hernandez squandered the lead and the Phillies lost 5 – 4 in 11 innings . The teams finished a series which was " ... ugly , between two deeply flawed teams : more than 12 hours of game time , nearly 80 runners left on base combined . " 
 Days after he was optioned to AAA , Freddy Galvis broke his clavicle and the Phillies outrighted Jayson Nix from the 40 @-@ man roster , leaving the team with an infield hole despite the recall of Reid Brignac . The Los Angeles Angels came to Citizens Bank Park for a two @-@ game series on May 13 – 14 . On the 13th the Angels won , 4 – 3 ; the four Angel runs ( all unearned ) were scored in the sixth inning , when Asche committed two of his three errors , and Lee received the loss despite having no earned runs . The Phillies dropped four games below .500 ( 17 – 21 ) the next night , losing the series ' second game 3 – 0 after Burnett " struggled through five innings " . The team then began a three @-@ game series against the Cincinnati Reds . In game one , Devin <unk> hit a three @-@ run home run and the Reds ' pitching shut out the Phillies ; despite a quality start , Kendrick had another loss . After two straight shutouts the Phillies scored 12 runs in the next game , defeating Cincinnati 12 – 1 for Hamels ' 100th career win ; Domonic Brown had a home run and five RBIs , Asche had three RBIs and César Hernández hit his first major @-@ league home run . The Phillies took the rubber match of the series , winning 8 – 3 with four home runs ( by Rollins , Asche , Byrd and Wil Nieves ) and a solid start from Lee ( his last before joining the 15 @-@ day disabled list May 21 with to a left @-@ elbow strain ; the team recalled Ruf , who returned from injury ) . After a day off the Phillies played the Marlins in Miami , their second meeting of the season . The Phillies won the series ' first game 6 – 5 , with Burnett settling in after disagreements over the strike zone with home @-@ plate umpire Will Little early in the game ; Marlins manager Mike Redmond was later ejected from the game for arguing balls and strikes . Burnett pitched five innings , Rollins homered and Papelbon held on in the ninth for his 12th save . The Phillies lost the next two games : 14 – 5 on May 21 , with a Marcell Ozuna grand slam , and 4 – 3 on May 22 with a walk @-@ off single by Christian Yelich . 
 Next , the Dodgers came to Citizens Bank Park for a three @-@ game series . After the Phillies lost game one ( 2 – 0 ) in a pitchers ' duel between Hernandez and Clayton Kershaw , when they were zero @-@ for @-@ nine with runners in scoring position , David Buchanan made his major @-@ league debut on May 24 . The Phillies won 5 – 3 , with Buchanan getting the win after a five @-@ inning start and Papelbon earning his 13th save . The next day , Josh Beckett pitched a no @-@ hitter for a 6 – 0 Dodger victory . The next day ( Memorial Day ) , Kendrick had his first win since August 6 , 2013 ; Howard 's five RBIs gave the Phillies a 9 – 0 win over the Colorado Rockies . The team lost game two of the series , 6 – 2 , despite Ben Revere 's first major @-@ league home run ; Hamels allowed four runs in seven innings , and Jeff Manship gave up two more in the eighth . 
 The Phillies ended the month with a five @-@ game series , continuing into June , against the New York Mets . Although Buchanan 's second major @-@ league start in the series opener was a quality start , the Phillies offense managed one run for a 4 – 1 loss . The last two games of May went 14 innings apiece , with the Phillies winning the first and losing the second . In the first game A. J. Burnett threw seven innings and allowed five runs , after which six relievers threw a combined seven scoreless innings . Ruiz had four hits and Brown had four RBIs ; Reid Brignac hit a walk @-@ off RBI single to left field in the 14th inning , scoring Byrd for a 6 – 5 win . The next night , after the Phillies fell behind 4 – 0 , Howard hit a seventh @-@ inning three @-@ run home run ; in the bottom of the ninth , Brown hit an RBI single to tie the game and send it into extra innings . In the 14th inning David Wright hit an RBI single to take the lead , which the Mets ' bullpen held to win 5 – 4 . 
 In May the Phillies ' team batting average ( .230 ) was the lowest in the National League , and they were near the bottom in runs scored , home runs and slugging percentage . For the season to date they were 10th in the NL in batting average ( .243 ) , 12th in home runs ( 43 ) , fourth in walks and 10th in strikeouts . Despite offensive mediocrity the pitching staff improved since April , with the starting rotation 's May ERA ( 3 @.@ 96 ) sixth in the NL and the bullpen 's ERA ( 3 @.@ 35 ) eighth in the league . The bullpen remained near the bottom of the NL , with a 4 @.@ 05 ERA for the season to date . Asche had a strong May ( unlike April ) before his injury , with a .317 batting average , three home runs and 12 RBIs . Although Utley regressed from April , he had a .291 batting average and 13 RBIs . Brown struggled , batting <unk> despite 17 RBIs ( second on the team ) . Kendrick led the pitching staff in May innings pitched , with 37 2 ⁄ 3 ; Burnett led with two wins , and Hernandez had a 1 @.@ 73 ERA in four starts and two relief appearances ( among the best on the staff ) . At the end of May , the Phillies were 24 – 29 for the season and 11 – 16 for the month . 
 = = = June = = = 
 After two consecutive extra @-@ inning games , the Phillies recalled Philippe Aumont from Triple @-@ A and Cesar Jimenez from the 15 @-@ day disabled list ( for a strained right quadriceps ) to replace Darin Ruf and Jeff Manship before game four of their five @-@ game series with the Mets ; it was the first major @-@ league roster appearance for both . The team 's first June game went into extra innings . With the score tied 2 – 2 after nine , Aumont gave up two runs in the top of the 11th inning ; the Phillies scored once in the bottom of the inning , losing 4 – 3 . They lost the fifth game of the series , 11 – 2 . " After five games and 57 innings of torturous baseball , the Phillies @-@ Mets Citizens Bank Park horror show is finally over . And it did not go well , " wrote John <unk> of The Good <unk> , the Phillies blog on <unk> Before their next series the Phillies demoted Aumont ( who had a 21 @.@ 60 ERA in two appearances ) to the minor leagues and recalled Ethan Martin , who pitched well in Triple @-@ A after an early @-@ season shoulder injury . For additional pitching depth they signed Jason Marquis , who was returning from Tommy John surgery . Although before the series with the Nationals Sandberg had a " serious meeting " with the players to explain the need for greater urgency on the field , the Phillies were swept . In game one they were shut out for the seventh time in their last 27 games , losing 7 – 0 as Buchanan struggled in his first road start . Burnett started the next night , also struggling through six innings and allowing eight runs in a rain @-@ delayed 8 – 4 loss . When Kendrick started the series ' final game , the Phillies jumped into the lead with a first @-@ inning run before losing 4 – 2 ( their sixth consecutive loss ) . After the series , the team called up Ronny Cedeño for his Phillies debut . 
 The Phillies then began a road trip , with their first stop Cincinnati . Before the trip they placed Mike Adams ( with an inflamed right rotator cuff ) on the disabled list and promoted Ken Giles , a top prospect with a 100 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 160 km / h ) fastball . The Phillies snapped a six @-@ game losing streak when they scored eight runs and Cole Hamels pitched 7 2 ⁄ 3 shutout innings for an 8 – 0 win . They lost the next game 6 – 5 , as two innings ended with runners thrown out at home plate by relays from the outfield . The first play was reviewed because of the new MLB rule limiting a catcher 's ability to block home plate , and Sandberg was ejected from the game for arguing the result ( the first time he was thrown out since he began managing the Phillies ) . The Reds won the series ' final game , 4 – 1 , before the Phillies returned home to sweep the San Diego Padres . In game one , Burnett earned his first win in six starts and Papelbon his 300th career save in a 5 – 2 final . The next night was a scoreless , 8 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inning pitchers ' duel between Hamels and Tyson Ross before Reid Brignac 's three @-@ run walk @-@ off home run . Brignac had another " key hit " the next day , when the Phillies won 7 – 3 with strong pitching from Kendrick . The home stand continued with a series against the Cubs . The first game was a 1960s " turn back the clock " night , with both teams in 1964 uniforms . The Cubs won , 2 – 1 ; in a move called " horrible " by Phillies announcer Jamie Moyer , home @-@ plate umpire Mark <unk> ejected Roberto Hernandez from the game in the sixth inning for hitting Starlin Castro without first warning Hernandez . Sandberg was ejected for arguing Hernandez ' ejection . In game two Jimmy Rollins hit a single to right field , passing Mike Schmidt to become the Phillies ' all @-@ time hitting leader with 2 @,@ 235 . They won 7 – 4 , with Buchanan earning his second win of the season and Papelbon his 15th save . The Cubs won the Father 's Day rubber match of the series 3 – 0 , with Travis Wood holding the Phillies to three hits . 
 After their 4 – 2 home stand , the Phillies traveled to Atlanta to play the Braves . The series ' first game lasted 13 innings , with the Phillies scoring five runs in the top of the 13th for a 6 – 1 win . Aaron <unk> , called up to replace Tony Gwynn , Jr . ( on the bereavement list after the death of his father , Hall of Famer Tony Gwynn ) , pinch @-@ hit in the bottom of the 12th inning for his major @-@ league debut . Kendrick started for the Phillies in game two of the series , " assertive [ ly ] " overcoming his previous first @-@ inning struggles and allowing two runs in seven innings for a 5 – 2 win . The team swept the Braves , winning the final game of the series 10 – 5 ; Marlon Byrd had three RBIs and a home run , but backup catcher Wil Nieves ( who had three hits in the game ) hurt his leg rounding first base after hitting a ground rule double . The Phillies called up Cameron Rupp as backup catcher , demoting <unk> while Nieves recovered . They then traveled to St. Louis for a four @-@ game series with the Cardinals . Buchanan started for the Phillies in the " best performance of his young career " , pitching 72 ⁄ 3 innings and allowing one run in a 4 – 1 victory . Ryan Howard hit a home run , his 14th of the season , in his hometown . Brignac injured his ankle in a slide ; he went on the DL , and Asche returned from the list . The next day , Burnett pitched the Phillies to their ninth win ( 5 – 1 ) in 11 games . They split the series , losing the last two games : a June 21 pitchers ' duel between Hamels and Adam Wainwright ( the 4 – 1 loss ended the Phillies ' five @-@ game winning streak ) and a 5 – 3 loss the following day , with Kendrick giving up four runs in one inning . 
 The Phillies ended the month with two four @-@ game home series , against the Marlins and Braves . In their first game against the Marlins , a 4 – 0 loss , they had six hits . The next night the Phillies won , 7 – 4 ; Asche and Byrd had two RBIs each and the bullpen was solid . In the third game , Domonic Brown failed to catch a fly ball to left field ; three runs scored in a 3 – 2 loss . The Phillies won the series ' final game , 5 – 3 , with a 14th @-@ inning walk @-@ off home run by Chase Utley . After the game , Carlos Ruiz was placed on the disabled list with to a concussion sustained in the 11th inning . After the Phillies swept the Braves earlier in the month , the Braves returned the favor in the month 's final series for both teams . In game one Kendrick returned to his old ways , allowing three runs in the first inning of a 4 – 2 loss . The next day , June 28 , featured a day @-@ night doubleheader . Hernandez started the afternoon game ; two errors and six runs allowed by the bullpen led to a 10 – 3 loss . In the night game , the Phillies called up Sean O 'Sullivan for his season debut and lost 5 – 1 . After this game ( the 81st of the 162 @-@ game season ) , the Phillies had a 36 – 45 record before losing the series ' final game 3 – 2 . 
 In June César Hernández was the team 's leading hitter , with a .348 batting average ; Byrd led the team with eight home runs and 17 RBIs , and Ben Revere led the team with eight stolen bases . Ruiz and Mayberry struggled , with respective batting averages of .200 and .206 and combining for four home runs and 15 RBIs . Mario Hollands and Justin De Fratus did not allow an earned run all month ( 222 ⁄ 3 combined innings pitched ) , with Papelbon allowing one earned run and accumulating five saves . Hamels was the team 's best starting pitcher ; in six starts , he posted a 1 @.@ 23 ERA and his opposing hitters batted .214 . David Buchanan and Roberto Hernandez had ERAs of over 5 @.@ 00 for the month , with a combined eight losses . The bullpen was fourth in the NL with a 2 @.@ 63 ERA , and the starting rotation ranked 12th in the league with a 3 @.@ 89 ERA . The Phillies ' offense ranked 10th , with a .240 batting average ; eighth in homes runs ( 22 ) , and 10th in runs scored ( 104 ) . 
 = = = = MLB draft = = = = 
 Due to their lackluster 2013 performance , the Phillies had the seventh first @-@ round pick in the June 5 – 7 MLB draft . They selected Aaron Nola , a starting pitcher from Louisiana State University predicted by many to be one of the first draft picks to reach the major leagues , for fast @-@ tracking through the Phillies ' minor @-@ league system . In the second round , they selected another pitcher – <unk> Matt <unk> , who played college ball with the Cal Poly Mustangs – and selected Aaron Brown , a pitcher @-@ outfielder from Pepperdine , in the third round . The Phillies changed their organizational draft philosophy from drafting unpolished players with potential to selecting players ready to contribute to the big @-@ league club , picking only one high @-@ school player in the first 28 rounds . Michael Baumann wrote on the Crashburn Alley blog , " Given how high the Phillies drafted and how bad their farm system is at the top , I wanted them to get back into the game with one swing . This draft won ’ t do that , but generally you want to get at least one good major league player out of every draft class , plus some odds and ends . " 
 = = = July = = = 
 The Phillies entered July with a 36 – 46 record ( last in the NL East ) , and began a 10 @-@ game road trip . In the first series , they played the Miami Marlins ; the first game was an 11 @-@ inning 5 – 4 loss , despite 10 strikeouts in six innings from A. J. Burnett and back @-@ to @-@ back home runs in the eighth by Marlon Byrd and Cody Asche . The next night the Phillies were shut out 5 – 0 , their 11th shutout in 84 games ( which Ryne Sandberg called " hard to believe " ) . During the game , Mario Hollands ' 18 @-@ inning scoreless streak ended when he gave up a two @-@ run homer to Jarrod Saltalamacchia . The Phillies salvaged the final game of the series , scoring two runs in the ninth inning to defeat the Marlins 5 – 4 . 
 After Miami , the Phillies ' next stop was PNC Park to play the Pittsburgh Pirates . The first game , on the Fourth of July in " picture @-@ postcard holiday weather " , was an 8 – 2 loss for the Phillies and their 11th in 14 games ; the team never recovered from Roberto Hernandez ' allowing four runs in the first inning . They lost 3 – 2 the next night , with the Pirates again scoring in the first inning to lead the entire game despite a late Phillies comeback attempt . The Phillies were swept the next day , losing 6 – 2 behind A. J. Burnett to Jeff Locke ( whom Burnett mentored the previous season ) and Russell Martin ( Burnett 's former catcher ) . Locke allowed one earned run in eight innings , and Martin drove in two runs . The Phillies began a four @-@ game series against the Milwaukee Brewers , who had the best record in the NL , with the third @-@ worst record in the league . The Phillies won the first game 3 – 2 , with a first @-@ inning home run by Chase Utley and good pitching from Cole Hamels , Ken Giles and Jonathan Papelbon . The next night they overcame a 5 – 1 first @-@ inning deficit to beat the Brewers 9 – 7 , thanks to three RBIs apiece from Utley and Domonic Brown . Hernandez had his best start of the season in the series ' third game , allowing one run in eight innings on 84 pitches ( unusual , since his pitch count was among the highest in the major leagues ) . The Phillies swept the Brewers the next afternoon ; hitless in the first six innings , they scored seven runs in the eighth inning and two more in the ninth to win 9 – 1 . David Buchanan , allowing one solo home run in seven innings , was the winning pitcher . It was the first Phillies sweep of a four @-@ game series since 2011 , when they defeated the Cincinnati Reds in late August and early September . After the game the team called up former all @-@ star outfielder Grady Sizemore , whom they had signed to a minor @-@ league contract in June , as an extra bat in their final series before the All @-@ Star break . 
 The Phillies returned home to play the Washington Nationals before the break . With Sizemore leading their lineup for the first time , they won 6 – 2 ; Burnett allowed two runs in 72 ⁄ 3 innings and Jimmy Rollins hit two home runs . The team 's five @-@ game winning streak ended on July 12 , when they lost to the Nationals 5 – 3 in 10 innings with 15 strikeouts . The Phillies ended the unofficial first half of their season with another loss , bowing to the Nationals 10 – 3 in the series ' rubber match . 
 The second half of the season began on a sour note as the Phillies lost to the Braves 6 – 4 , with Burnett giving up six runs in five innings . The next night ( July 19 ) they edged the Braves 2 – 1 behind a " masterful " performance from Hamels , who struck out nine batters in seven innings and allowed one run in a pitchers ' duel with Aaron Harang . The Phillies lost the rubber match 8 – 2 , with the Braves scoring six runs in the first three innings , before returning home to face the San Francisco Giants in a four @-@ game series . The team made a number of roster changes , recalling Cliff Lee , Wil Nieves and Reid Brignac from the disabled list , designating Tony Gwynn , Jr. for assignment , optioning César Hernández to Triple @-@ A and <unk> <unk> Hill from the roster . Lee started the first game of the series ( a 7 – 4 loss despite 14 Phillies hits ) , allowing six runs and 12 hits in 52 ⁄ 3 innings . Although the next evening 's 14 @-@ inning game showcased Phillies trade candidates ( including Byrd and Antonio Bastardo ) to the team scouts in attendance , they lost 9 – 6 when the Giants scored four runs on Jeff Manship in the 14th . Before the second half of the series the Phillies activated Carlos Ruiz from the DL , recalled Philippe Aumont to replace Cameron Rupp and Manship , placed John Mayberry , Jr. on the DL and recalled Darin Ruf . In the series ' third game , after Burnett 's eight scoreless innings Papelbon gave up three runs in the ninth to lose 3 – 1 . The Phillies salvaged the final game of the series ( 2 – 1 ) when Hamels struck out 10 , allowed one run in eight innings , and Byrd and Utley drove in a run apiece . The home stand continued with three games against the Arizona Diamondbacks . Phillies outfielders Sizemore , Ruf and Brown powered the team to a 9 – 5 victory in the first game ; Kendrick earned the win by pitching 52 ⁄ 3 innings , allowing three runs , and Sizemore recorded his 1,000th career hit . The next night was Lee 's final opportunity to pitch before interested scouts before the trade deadline . He allowed three runs in five innings and the Phillies squandered a four @-@ run lead , losing 10 – 6 in 10 innings . They won the rubber match the next day , when Roberto Hernandez pitched seven strong innings and Ryan Howard hit a two @-@ run homer and scored the go @-@ ahead run ( ending a week in which he had been benched ) . 
 The team began a road trip against two division rivals : the Mets and the Nationals . In the first game of the Mets series , the Phillies lost 7 – 1 against Bartolo Colón ; although Colón and A. J. Burnett ( the Phillies ' starter ) were trade candidates , neither was traded . The next day Utley hit a grand slam and Hamels continued his dominance as the Phillies shut out the Mets 6 – 0 , but the Mets routed the Phillies 11 – 2 in the series finale . The last game of the month opened a four @-@ game series with the Nationals ; the Phillies won 10 – 4 but Lee re @-@ injured his elbow , probably ending his season . 
 The Phillies batted .248 in July ( 11th in the National League ) , hit 24 home runs ( fourth in the NL ) and scored 111 runs ( third in the league ) . For the season to date they had a .243 batting average ( 10th in NL ) , 89 home runs ( eighth in the league ) and 426 runs ( also eighth ) . Of those who played the entire month , Ben Revere led the team with a .359 batting average and seven stolen bases and his July success raised his season batting average to .301 . Rollins ' seven home runs in July led the team , as did Utley 's 19 RBIs . Sizemore was a team leader at the plate , batting .328 with one home run and five RBIs in 16 games . Ryan Howard ( .165 , with two home runs ) and Tony Gwynn , Jr . ( <unk> before his July 31 release ) struggled at the plate that month . Phillies pitchers ranked 13th in the NL in ERA ( 4 @.@ 62 ) and 11th in WHIP ( 1 @.@ 33 ) and BAA ( .266 ) . Their season ERA of 4 @.@ 05 was 13th in the league . The team 's best starting pitchers in July were Cole Hamels ( 4 – 1 , with a 1 @.@ 94 ERA in six starts ) and Roberto Hernandez ( 2 – 1 , with a 3 @.@ 76 ERA in four starts ) . Ken Giles led the team in July ERA ( 0 @.@ 66 ) , Justin De Fratus in appearances ( 14 ) , Hamels in innings pitched ( 412 ⁄ 3 ) and Jonathan Papelbon in BAA ( .159 ) and WHIP ( 0 @.@ 69 ) . Mario Hollands struggled on the mound that month , with a 15 @.@ 26 ERA in eight appearances , and Kyle Kendrick was 2 – 3 with a 6 @.@ 94 ERA in six starts . 
 = = = = Trades and speculation = = = = 
 At of the end of June the Phillies , with a 36 – 46 record , were at the bottom of the NL East and most observers agreed that they should be " sellers " rather than " buyers " ( trade better players for future prospects , rather than trading future prospects for established players ) by the July 31 trade deadline . However , the Phillies management ( including general manager Ruben Amaro , Jr. and president Dave Montgomery ) did not think a fire sale would benefit the organization . According to Amaro : 
 " I can ’ t blow this team up for five years and expect us to be ( bad ) for the next five or six years . I don ’ t think that 's the right way to go about our franchise . Our fans , our organization , I think we owe it to a lot of people , if we do have to go into a transition , it 's going to be a shorter one than that . There 's ways to do it . You have to make shrewd moves , make intelligent moves and try to continue to do that so that they drop off isn ’ t long term . So if we have to go a step backward for a year or two to move forward then that 's what we ’ ll try to do . " 
 Marlon Byrd and closer Jonathan Papelbon were top trade candidates because of other teams ' needs and the fact that neither had no @-@ trade clauses . Papelbon expressed a willingness to be traded , saying that it was " mind @-@ boggling " to him that some players would prefer to remain on a losing team . According to a USA Today article : 
 " Amaro has been reluctant to break up a team that won five straight NL East titles from 2007 @-@ 11 , captured two pennants and won a World Series . But it 's clear this overpriced group isn 't going anywhere . The Phillies need prospects and don 't have immediate help in the minor leagues . Trading some of the veterans now could help the team start fresh . " 
 Although Amaro announced Cole Hamels ' availability , his high asking price hindered the possibility of a deal . Cliff Lee had been available , but after re @-@ injuring his elbow ( and probably missing the rest of the season ) the possibility of a deal evaporated . The non @-@ waiver trade deadline passed with no trades by the Phillies . Amaro was harshly criticized for holding onto Papelbon , Byrd , Hamels , Lee , A. J. Burnett and Antonio Bastardo . Although they did not make a deal before the non @-@ waiver trading deadline , the team could still move a player on waivers ; they did so , trading Roberto Hernandez to the Dodgers on August 7 for two players to be named later . The first named player was <unk> Valentin , son of former major leaguer José Valentín and a switch @-@ hitting second baseman called a " breakout candidate " by a Baseball Prospectus writer . Observers generally considered Valentin a good fit for the Phillies , since the team did not give up much in return . Several weeks later the Phillies acquired their second named player , right @-@ handed pitcher Victor Arano , to complete the trade . Arano , rated the Dodgers ' 14th @-@ best prospect by MLB.com , had a 94 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour ( 151 km / h ) fastball and a slider in his repertoire . According to a Dodgers source , he had potential as a back @-@ of @-@ the @-@ rotation starter . Shortly before the September 1 waiver deadline , the Phillies traded " perennial fourth outfielder " John Mayberry , Jr. to the Toronto Blue Jays for third @-@ base prospect Gustavo Pierre ] 
 = = = August = = = 
 The Phillies began August by placing Cliff Lee on the disabled list , replacing him on the roster with Cesar Jimenez ; however , David Buchanan was eventually expected to take Lee 's place in the starting rotation . They continued their series with the Washington Nationals , winning 2 – 1 with another strong outing from Roberto Hernandez and a home run by Marlon Byrd . After wins in the series ' first two games , starting pitcher A. J. Burnett was ejected in the second inning of the third game for arguing with home plate umpire Chris Guccione about the strike zone . Burnett 's first ejection in his 16 @-@ season career sparked 11 runs by the Nationals , who shut out the Phillies . The team also lost the rubber match 4 – 0 the following day , when Cole Hamels had no run support in a pitchers ' duel with Stephen Strasburg . 
 After a day off the Phillies hosted the Houston Astros , whose 47 – 65 record was two games worse than theirs . The series opener was another pitchers ' duel , with Kyle Kendrick and Dallas <unk> allowing one run apiece in seven innings . Seven Phillies relievers then combined for eight shutout innings before they won , 2 – 1 , in the bottom of the 15th with a Ryan Howard walk @-@ off RBI single to score Grady Sizemore . Howard also hit a home run in the game 's second inning . The Phillies ' success continued in their next game , when Buchanan ( starting for Lee ) had a quality start and his first career RBI at the plate in a 10 – 3 victory over the Astros . In the Phillies ' organization , first @-@ round draft pick Aaron Nola was promoted to the Reading Fightin ' Phils ( the team 's Double @-@ A affiliate ) and had a " solid " first outing . Sean O 'Sullivan was called up in place of the recently traded Roberto Hernandez . Although O 'Sullivan gave up five runs ( including three home runs ) in six innings , the Phillies scored five runs in the eighth inning – including a grand slam by Howard – to win 6 – 5 and sweep the Astros . The team then opened a four @-@ game series with the Mets ; in game one , the Phillies lost 5 – 4 after scoring three runs in the ninth inning . Hamels ' lack of run support continued in game two ; although he allowed only one run in seven innings , Antonio Bastardo gave up an RBI single to Lucas Duda for a 2 – 1 loss . That night ( August 9 ) , the Phillies placed former manager Charlie Manuel on their Wall of Fame . The next afternoon Howard hit a walk @-@ off single , capping a rally from a five @-@ run deficit and giving Ken Giles his first career win . 
 Shortly after the Phillies claimed Jerome Williams off waivers and designated O 'Sullivan for assignment , Williams started in the opener of a two @-@ game series with the Angels in Los Angeles . Williams threw five shutout innings before giving up two runs in the sixth ; Bastardo then gave up five more , and the Angels won 7 – 2 . The Phillies also lost the second game , 4 – 3 , as A. J. Burnett 's inconsistency continued . The second ( and final ) series of the road trip pitted the Phillies against the San Francisco Giants . Hamels started game one , allowing a three @-@ run homer in the fourth inning to give the Giants a 3 – 0 lead . The Phillies rallied , with a Marlon Byrd home run in the fifth inning and a two @-@ run homer by Cody Asche to tie the game in the eighth . In the tenth , Chase Utley was hit by a pitch with the bases loaded ( scoring one run ) and Howard added a sacrifice fly to give the Phillies a 5 – 3 victory and Papelbon a save . In the second game , the Phillies jumped to a 5 – 1 lead before a sixth @-@ inning infield error fueled a Giants rally . When Sandberg came out to remove Kendrick from the game , the pitcher stormed off the field in disgust ; the Giants won , 6 – 5 . The Phillies also lost the series ' rubber match , 5 – 2 ; despite a quality start from Buchanan and Asche 's three hits , the Giants had strong hitting by Michael Morse and Brandon Crawford . 
 The Phillies returned home to face the Seattle Mariners in a three @-@ game series , and two unlikely players were key contributors in the team 's win in the series opener : Jerome Williams allowed one run in seven innings and Andrés Blanco hit a three @-@ run homer ( his first home run in three years ) to defeat the Mariners , 4 – 1 . The next night , Burnett 's struggles during the second half of the season continued as he gave up five runs in 72 ⁄ 3 innings for a 5 – 2 loss . The Phillies then edged the Mariners 4 – 3 , with help from Wil Nieves ( three hits ) and the bullpen ( Jake Diekman , Giles and Papelbon pitched four scoreless innings , striking out nine ) . The Phillies ' home stand continued with a three @-@ game series against the St. Louis Cardinals . Kendrick started game one ; despite his continued first @-@ inning struggles ( he allowed three runs in the first , raising his season first @-@ inning ERA to 9 @.@ 69 ) , the Phillies batted around in the third to take a 5 – 4 lead and strong pitching from both teams enabled them to hang on for the win . The next night , mental errors by the Phillies cost them the game 6 – 5 in 12 innings . Williams started the series ' rubber match , continuing his effectiveness in a 7 – 1 win with eight strong innings and driving in a run with a suicide squeeze . The series win was the Phillies ' first consecutive @-@ series victory since April , a 33 @-@ series drought and their longest since 1996 – 1997 . 
 The final series of the home stand featured the Washington Nationals . After Burnett 's poor pitching led some to suggest that he would retire after the season , he dominated game one by striking out 12 batters and allowing one run in seven innings for a 3 – 2 win . The Phillies ' success continued the next day , when Sandberg started Freddy Galvis and Darin Ruf in place of Chase Utley and Ryan Howard . Ruf and Galvis combined for four hits , two runs and three RBIs in a 4 – 3 victory . The team swept the series when Sizemore entered the game as a pinch hitter in the sixth inning , and his two @-@ run homer helped the Phillies to an 8 – 4 final score . 
 After three series victories , the Phillies went to Citi Field for a three @-@ game series with the Mets . Although a game @-@ one win would have lifted them out of last place in their division for the first time since June , they lost 4 – 1 on a fielding error by Sizemore ( who said he " let the team down " ) . The Phillies evened the series with Williams ' quality start in the second game , winning 7 – 2 , but their series @-@ victory streak ended when they lost the final game 6 – 5 ( A. J. Burnett 's 15th loss of the season ) . 
 Although the Phillies won 14 games and lost 13 in August , their first winning month since March ( when they were 1 – 0 ) , Ruben Amaro said that the team needed " significant " changes to contend in the near future . They were in the middle of the NL in August , ranking eighth in batting average ( .251 ) , seventh in runs scored ( 107 ) and tied for fifth place in home runs ( 23 ) . Among the team 's offensive leaders that month were Ruf and Revere , who batted .370 and .311 ; Byrd , who led the team with five home runs ; Howard , who led with 23 RBIs and Rollins , who led with 13 walks . Ruiz struggled at the plate in August , batting .217 with two home runs and seven RBIs . The difference in quality between starting and relief pitching persisted ; in August , starting pitchers had a 3 @.@ 76 ERA ( 10th in the NL ) and the bullpen ERA was 2 @.@ 60 ( third in the league ) . The team 's 3 @.@ 26 August ERA was fifth in the NL . <unk> Papelbon , Diekman and Giles had a strong month , with each below a 2 @.@ 00 ERA in at least 12 appearances , and Antonio Bastardo was the only Phillies reliever pitching at least 10 games with an ERA above 3 @.@ 00 . Jerome Williams led the starting staff with three wins and a 2 @.@ 03 ERA in 262 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , but A. J. Burnett 's struggles continued : a 1 – 5 record , with a 5 @.@ 50 ERA in six starts . 
 = = = September = = = 
 The Phillies began September in Atlanta with a three @-@ game series against the Braves on a high note : Cole Hamels , Jake Diekman , Ken Giles and Jonathan Papelbon combined to pitch a no @-@ hitter , the 11th combined no @-@ hitter in major @-@ league history , for a 7 – 0 victory . The next day " Atlanta 's offense remained in desultory mode " and Kyle Kendrick was helped by double plays to a Phillies 4 – 0 win , extending the Braves ' scoreless streak to 24 innings . In the series ' final game , Phillies reliever Mario Hollands left the game with a season @-@ ending injury and Miguel Alfredo González made his major @-@ league debut in a 7 – 4 loss . After a day off , the road trip continued with a three @-@ game series against the Washington Nationals . In game one the Phillies came back twice from five @-@ run deficits to beat the Nationals 9 – 8 in 11 innings , with Ben Revere hitting his second career home run . The next day was another pitchers ' duel ; A. J. Burnett had his second consecutive solid start , allowing one run in seven innings for a 3 – 1 win . According to Ryne Sandberg , Burnett had the " best movement he 's had on the ball this year " . For the second straight series , the Phillies won the first two games but failed to sweep . Starter Cole Hamels committed a balk , allowing a runner to advance to third base and score on a sacrifice fly for a 3 – 2 loss . 
 The Phillies then returned home for seven games against the Pirates and Marlins . In the first Pirates game , Jimmy Rollins tripled and scored in the fourth inning before leaving the game with a hamstring injury and the Phillies lost 6 – 4 . The Phillies won the second game , 4 – 3 ( their lone victory of the four @-@ game series ) , with the help of Freddy Galvis ; Galvis , batting eighth in the order , hit a home run and scored three runs . In his first start against the Phillies since he was traded , Pittsburgh starter Vance Worley then earned a 6 – 3 win for the Pirates . The Phillies scored one run in the series ' conclusion , a 4 – 1 loss . 
 Their home stand continued with a three @-@ game series against the Marlins . Batting second ( a career first ) in the first game , Cody Asche hit his first career walk @-@ off hit : a home run in the tenth inning for a 3 – 1 victory . In the next game , possibly Kyle Kendrick 's final start with the Phillies at Citizens Bank Park ( since his contract expired at the end of the season ) , he pitched 61 ⁄ 3 innings and allowed one run in the Phillies ' 2 – 1 win . They failed to sweep , however , when Papelbon 's blown save gave the Marlins a 5 – 4 win in the series ' final game . 
 The Phillies then headed to San Diego to face the Padres in a four @-@ game series , managing two hits in the opener to spoil Jerome Williams ' solid start with a 1 – 0 loss . Although the next night a 5 – 4 loss ( their 82nd ) clinched a losing season , they won game three 5 – 2 behind a " stellar outing " by Hamels . The Phillies then lost the fourth game of the series , 7 – 3 , before continuing their West Coast trip with a series against the Oakland Athletics . Despite a good start from David Buchanan in the series ' opener , the Phillies scored once in a 3 – 1 loss . They won the second 3 – 0 , a game " peppered " with bright spots , before losing the 10 @-@ inning rubber match of the series 8 – 6 . 
 The team flew to Miami for the season 's penultimate series . Despite Hamels ' quality start in game one , the Phillies were shut out 2 – 0 . In the second game Kendrick made possibly his final start in a Phillies uniform a fine overall effort , allowing one run in seven innings of a 2 – 1 win and going three @-@ for @-@ three at the plate ( doubling and driving in a run ) . The Phillies lost the series , with the bullpen failing to hold the lead in a third @-@ game 6 – 4 loss . 
 Their final series of the season , at home , was three games with the Braves . The Phillies won the opener with a strong start by Williams , who ended his Phillies season with a 2 @.@ 83 ERA . Although Burnett pitched decently in game two , the Braves won 4 – 2 . The Phillies ' season ended when Hamels , despite a quality start , was on the losing end of a 2 – 1 final score . 
 September 's offense sputtered , with a .228 batting average , 3 @.@ 31 runs per game and a <unk> on @-@ base plus slugging percentage ( 13th , 14th and 14th , respectively , of the 15 NL teams ) . Pitching was better , with the starters ' 3 @.@ 27 cumulative ERA fourth in the NL and the relievers ' 3 @.@ 09 cumulative ERA fifth in the league . Cesar Hernandez led the team with a .333 batting average in 14 games , and Freddy Galvis and Ryan Howard hit three home runs apiece . Ben Revere 's 13 RBIs and nine stolen bases were the Phillies ' September best . Carlos Ruiz struggled , batting .193 despite two home runs and eight RBIs . Justin De Fratus and Ken Giles led the bullpen with ERAs of 0 @.@ 00 and 0 @.@ 82 in nine and eleven games , respectively . Cole Hamels was the Phillies ' best starting pitcher that month , with a 2 – 3 record despite a 1 @.@ 96 ERA . 
 = = Season standings = = 
 = = = National League East = = = 
 = = = National League Wild Card = = = 
 = = = Game Log = = = 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 All players who made an appearance for the Phillies during 2014 are included . 
 = = Player statistics = = 
 = = = Batting = = = 
 List does not include pitchers . Stats in bold indicate team leaders ( among players with at least 100 at @-@ bats for percentages ) . Only stats recorded with Phillies are included . 
 Note : G 
 = Games played ; AB = 
 At bats ; R 
 = Runs ; H = 
 Hits ; 2B 
 = Doubles ; 3B = 
 Triples ; HR 
 = Home runs ; RBI = 
 Runs batted in ; BB 
 = Walks ; SO = 
 Strikeouts ; SB 
 = Stolen bases ; <unk> . = 
 Batting average ; OBP 
 = On Base Percentage ; SLG = 
 Slugging ; OPS = On Base + Slugging 
 Source : MLB.com 
 = = = Pitching = = = 
 Stats in bold are the team leaders among those who pitched in at least nine games . Only stats with the Phillies are shown . 
 Note : W 
 = Wins ; L = 
 Losses ; ERA 
 = Earned run average ; G = 
 Games pitched ; GS 
 = Games started ; SV = 
 Saves ; IP 
 = Innings pitched ; R = 
 Runs allowed ; ER 
 = Earned runs allowed ; BB = 
 Walks allowed ; K 
 = Strikeouts ; BAA = 
 Batting average Against ; WHIP = Walks + Hits / Innings pitched 
 Source : MLB.com 
 = = Farm system = = 
 = Bill Schmeisser = 
 William Christian Schmeisser ( 1880 – 1941 ) , known widely as " Father Bill " , was an American lacrosse player , coach , and patron . He served as the head coach of the Johns Hopkins Blue Jays for ten non @-@ consecutive years , and won eight national championships . He was also an active patron of the sport and promoter of its development . He helped found the highly successful amateur Mount Washington Lacrosse Club . Schmeisser viewed his role in the sport as altruistic , and he never received monetary compensation for coaching . 
 = = Education = = 
 He was born on August 4 , 1880 in Baltimore , Maryland and attended high school at Baltimore City College , from which he graduated in 1899 . He received his undergraduate college education at Johns Hopkins University and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1902 . While at Hopkins , Schmeisser played as a defenseman on the lacrosse team from 1900 to 1902 . He was also a member of the Beta Mu chapter of Phi Gamma Delta . 
 Schmeisser returned to Johns Hopkins for graduate study in the field of political economy , and played an additional year of lacrosse , in 1905 . In 1907 , he graduated from the school of law at the University of Maryland , Baltimore . 
 = = Role in lacrosse = = 
 In 1902 , he served as team captain and as a co @-@ coach for Johns Hopkins alongside Ronald T. Abercrombie . That season , the team was awarded the Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( ILA ) national championship . The following year , Schmeisser became the sole head coach , and the team again garnered the ILA championship . He returned to Hopkins as its head lacrosse coach from 1905 to 1909 . Schmeisser took the position again from 1923 to 1925 , and Johns Hopkins secured the United States Intercollegiate Lacrosse Association ( USILA ) championships in 1923 and 1924 . 
 Schmeisser helped organize and played on the Mount Washington Lacrosse Club , a highly successful Baltimore @-@ based amateur team . Since there was no professional league , many former college lacrosse stars played for Mount Washington . The club regularly participated in exhibition games against the top intercollegiate programs and very rarely lost . In 1904 , Schmeisser and Abercrombie co @-@ authored Lacrosse : From Candidate to Team , a book which became the sport 's standard text for the next fifty years . He also helped promote lacrosse at the University of Maryland and the Naval Academy . 
 Schmeisser was known to often carry a furled umbrella on the sidelines , regardless of the weather , and he stated that his reason for doing so was , " This way I know it won 't rain . " In 1919 , he helped start the tradition in which flags bearing gold stars are attached to the goals prior to the season opener . This was first done to honor three former Hopkins players who were killed in action during the First World War . The tradition has continued to date and additional stars have been added for players killed in the Second World War and Viet Nam . 
 In 1928 , Johns Hopkins won a postseason tournament to represent the United States in a lacrosse exhibition event during the Summer Olympics in Amsterdam , and Schmeisser accompanied the team as an assistant coach . He also traveled to England in 1937 alongside the all @-@ star team . In 1941 , just two months before his death , Schmeisser convinced the undefeated Johns Hopkins team to accept a challenge from the likewise undefeated Mount Washington Club . The Blue Jays edged their opponents , 7 – 6 . 
 Schmeisser was a long @-@ time official of the USILA , and he held positions that included member of the rules committee , chief referee , and president . US Lacrosse , the American sport 's governing body , inducted him into the National Lacrosse Hall of Fame in 1957 . He was inducted into the Johns Hopkins University Athletic Hall of Fame in 1995 . He is also the namesake of the William C. Schmeisser Award , which is given annually to the most outstanding defenseman in NCAA Division I men 's lacrosse . 
 = = Professional life = = 
 Schmeisser was an attorney by trade and never accepted payment for his coaching . After earning his undergraduate degree , he worked first as a bank clerk and then as a law clerk . His next job was as an attorney for the Willis and Homer firm . Later in his career , he ran his own law firm and was a member of the American Bar Association , the Maryland State Bar Association , and the Bar Association of Baltimore City . Schmeisser also served sixteen years on the board of directors of the YMCA 's Baltimore Branch and as president from 1938 to 1941 . 
 He married Isabel <unk> , with whom he had two children , a son and a daughter . Schmeisser died on July 1 , 1941 at Union Memorial Hospital in Baltimore after a month @-@ long illness . 
 = Clare Castle = 
 Clare Castle is a medieval castle in the small town of Clare in Suffolk , England . Built shortly after the Norman conquest of England by Richard Fitz Gilbert , the motte and bailey castle was later improved in stone . In the 14th century the castle was the home of Elizabeth de Clare , one of the richest women in England , who maintained a substantial household there . The castle passed into the hands of the Crown , and by the 16th century was in ruins . Damaged by the construction of the Great Eastern Railway through the castle in 1867 , the remains of the castle are now part of a local park and a scheduled monument and a grade 2 * listed building . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 11th - 13th centuries = = = 
 Soon after the Norman conquest of England , Richard Fitz Gilbert was granted a barony by William the Conqueror , with two blocks of land , first in Kent and later across Suffolk and Essex . Richard built two castles to defend his new lands , Tonbridge in Kent , followed by Clare Castle in Suffolk . The exact date of the construction is unknown , but the first documentary records of the castle appear by 1090 . In the 11th century , Suffolk was one of the most prosperous parts of the country . 
 Clare Castle was built between the River Stour and the Chilton Stream and took the form of a motte and bailey design , with two baileys rather than the more common one . The motte is 850 feet ( 259 m ) wide at the base and 100 feet ( 30 m ) tall , with its flat summit 63 feet ( 19 m ) across . The two baileys , stretching alongside from the motte along the north and east , were protected by deep ditches and steep palisades , with either a causeway or a drawbridge linking the inner to the outer bailey ; the inner bailey was also sheltered by the curve of the Chilton . 
 The castle was built on the site of a former Anglo @-@ Saxon manor house , probably reflective of the wider Norman effort to demonstrate that their authority had replaced those of the previous lords . Castles such as this were termed a caput , and as historian Robert Liddiard describes , as well as having a defensive value it also " represented and reflected the rank and dignity of the lord " . The castle was surrounded by three parks , including the Great Park at <unk> , established by 1090 . Like many other major castles , Clare was twinned with a local religious house when Richard de Clare founded Clare Priory in 1249 , close to the castle , and grew to contain 29 friars . 
 A new keep was built , probably in the 13th century . This took the form of a polygonal shell keep , with fourteen triangular buttresses supporting six foot ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) thick walls . The inner bailey was strengthened with new stone walls , 20 to 30 feet ( 6 to 9 m ) tall on top of the earlier earth banks , the walls and keep being built of flint and rubble . The castle was manned during this period by a castle @-@ guard system , in which lands were given out to local lords in return for their providing knights and soldiers to serve at the castle . 
 = = = 14th century = = = 
 By the early 14th century , before the outbreak of the Black Death , the town of Clare had a population of around 600 . The de Clares continued to own estates across England , but in Suffolk their possessions were concentrated in estates clustered around Clare Castle . The castle was passed through the de Clare line until Gilbert de Clare died at the battle of Bannockburn in 1314 , when the estate passed onto his sisters . Elizabeth de Clare , whose husband John de Burgh had died the previous year , acquired the castle ; the combined estates made Elizabeth one of the wealthiest women in England . Elizabeth used the castle as her main residence between 1322 and 1360 . 
 The castle was well developed by this time , and was reached through three gates positioned across the wider estate , called <unk> , Redgate and <unk> . The castle itself had four stone towers protecting the entrance to the inner bailey and the keep , called <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Elizabeth built a chamber for her own use at the castle between 1346 @-@ 7 . A substantial water @-@ garden , forming part of the moat to the east , existed at the castle during this period ; it may have included a fountain and probably had a geometric form , possibly similar to the garden at nearby St Benet 's Abbey in Norfolk . Vineyards and orchards surrounded the property . The castle 's three parks continued in active use , and , as part of the local rearing programme , the local deer were moved between them as the animals grew older . 
 The castle and estates supported a luxurious , wealthy lifestyle by their owners - Elizabeth had an income of approximately £ 3 @,@ 500 a year , most of which was spent on supporting her household , centred on Clare . Over £ 1 @,@ 750 was spent on food and drink , including luxuries such as swans , salmon and German wines . Some goods could be bought locally , but others , such as furs , spices , cloth and wine , were imported for the castle through the international fairs held at Bury St Edmunds , Colchester , Ipswich , London , King 's Lynn and Stourbridge . The staff at Clare Castle included falconers , tailors , chaplains and goldsmiths , supported as necessary by 30 knights and squires . The castle 's bakers could produce up to 2 @,@ 360 loaves of bread a day , and on average around 900 gallons ( 4 , 091 litres ) of ale were brewed every five days . 
 = = = 15th - 21st centuries = = = 
 After Elizabeth de Clare 's death , Clare Castle passed by marriage into the Mortimers of Wigmore . When Sir Edmund Mortimer acquired the castle in 1405 , contemporaries reported it " in good repair and stocked " . The subsequent years saw the Mortimers heavily involved in the Wars of the Roses ; after Edmund 's death in 1425 , the castle passed to Richard of York and in turn , via his son Edward IV , to the Crown . 
 The castle deteriorated during this period . The masonry of the castle had probably been stripped for use as local building materials , as this part of England was traditionally very short of suitable stone . Edward VI gave the castle to Sir John <unk> , until it reverted to Mary I. After Mary , the castle was acquired by Sir Gervase Elwes , whose family retained it until the 19th century . At some point after 1720 , the surviving east and south sides of the inner bailey walls were destroyed . 
 In 1867 the Cambridge and Colchester branch line of the Great Eastern Railway was built through the castle , cutting across and largely destroying the inner bailey in order to make room for a new station . The railway line was later closed in 1967 as part of the Beeching Axe . 
 The castle now consists of a motte , on which a part of the keep still stands and the outer bailey earthworks ; fragments of the inner bailey stone wall can also still be seen . The disused station , goods yard and the castle grounds have been developed into a landscaped country park , interlaced with water in the old moats , called Clare Castle Country Park , which is crossed by the Stour Valley Path . The park was opened in June 1972 , after 15 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 ha ) were donated by Anthony de <unk> and 4 @.@ 5 acres ( 1 @.@ 8 ha ) of railway land bought for £ 10 @,@ 000 . In 2014 the keep and curtain wall were extensively consolidated with the assistance of English Heritage ( now Historic England ) . On the keep two of the surviving merlons have been refaced and capped ; a walkway has been reintroduced - all to protect the surviving original masonry . A flagpole was fixed to the outer wall . In March 2015 , the stewardship of the park transferred from Suffolk County Council to Clare Town Council . A trust manages Clare Castle Country Park on behalf of the town council , with the support of local volunteers . The castle is a scheduled monument and a grade 2 * listed building . The castle is a scheduled monument and a grade 2 * listed building . 
 = Aaron Peirsol = 
 Aaron Wells Peirsol ( born July 23 , 1983 ) is an American former competition swimmer and backstroke specialist who is a former world champion and world record @-@ holder . He is a three @-@ time Olympian and seven @-@ time Olympic medalist ( five gold , two silver ) . As a member of the U.S. national team , he holds the world record in the men 's 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay ( long course ) . Individually , he currently holds the world record in the 100 @-@ meter and 200 @-@ meter backstroke events ( long course ) . In February 2011 , Peirsol announced his retirement , saying , " I ended up doing everything I set out to do . " 
 Peirsol 's successes have earned him the American Swimmer of the Year Award once . He has won a total of thirty @-@ six medals in major international competition , twenty @-@ nine gold , six silver , and one bronze spanning the Olympics , the World , Pan American , and the Pan Pacific Championships . 
 In his Olympic debut at the 2000 Summer Olympics , at the age of 17 , Peirsol won a silver medal in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke . Four years later , at the 2004 Summer Olympics , Peirsol won gold in the 100 @-@ meter and 200 @-@ meter backstroke ( sweeping the backstroke events ) and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In his third Olympics ( 2008 Summer Olympics ) , Peirsol won gold in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . He came short of his success he had in Athens by winning silver in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , finishing behind Ryan Lochte . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Peirsol was born in Irvine , California , in 1983 , the son of Scott and <unk> Peirsol . His father is a captain and his mother is a retired dental hygienist . He has one younger sister , Hayley , who is also a swimmer . Peirsol and his sister are the only sibling duo to medal at the same FINA World Championships ( in 2003 ) . He is a 2002 graduate of Newport Harbor High School in Newport Beach , California . Peirsol attended the University of Texas at Austin and graduated in 2006 , majoring in government . He was the 2003 NCAA Swimmer of the Year . After finishing his second year of collegiate eligibility , Peirsol signed with Nike , Inc . , thus turning professional . Peirsol trained under the guidance of Eddie Reese and Kris <unk> . 
 Peirsol is also involved in a number of charities . He is an ambassador for the Global Water Foundation and the <unk> Foundation . He is also a spokesman for Oceana , which is the largest international ocean conservation and advocacy organization . 
 = = Swimming career = = 
 = = = 2000 – 2002 = = = 
 Peirsol qualified for his first Olympics at the age of seventeen after finishing second to Lenny Krayzelburg in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke at the 2000 U.S. Olympic Team Trials . Peirsol also competed in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , but did not qualify for the event , finishing 4th . At the 2000 Summer Olympics , Peirsol finished second to Krayzelburg in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke . Afterwards Peirsol said , " I think I 'm getting to a point where I 'm becoming more of a threat to ( Lenny ) and I think he knows that . " 
 At the 2001 National Championships , with Krayzelburg not competing , Peirsol qualified for the 2001 World Aquatics Championships in Fukuoka , Japan , in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . Peirsol 's time in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke was the second @-@ fastest ever , with only Krayzelburg 's world record faster . At the 2001 World Aquatics Championships , Peirsol won gold in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke with a time of 1 : 57 @.@ 13 , a championship record . 
 Peirsol started off 2002 with the first world record of his career in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , bettering Krayzelburg 's mark set in 1999 . In his first major competition of 2002 , Peirsol won five medals ( three gold , one silver , one bronze ) at the 2002 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) in Moscow . In Moscow , he was a part of the American team that broke the world record in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay and he broke the 200 @-@ meter backstroke world record . At the 2002 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Yokohama , Japan , Peirsol won gold in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . Combined with Brendan Hansen , Michael Phelps , and Jason Lezak , Peirsol set the world record in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay to break the previous record set in 2000 . 
 = = = 2003 World Championships = = = 
 At the 2003 World Aquatics Championships in Barcelona , Spain , Peirsol won gold in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . He also won a silver medal in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in a time of 53 @.@ 61 , a championship record . His time was just 0 @.@ 01 s off Lenny Krayzelburg 's world record . Peirsol participated in the 4 × 200 @-@ meter freestyle relay with Michael Phelps , Nate <unk> , and Klete Keller to win silver behind Australia . Peirsol then competed in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke and won gold in a time of 1 : 55 @.@ 92 , almost two seconds ahead of second @-@ place finisher Gordan <unk> of Croatia . Peirsol also competed in the 50 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In the 50 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol finished out of medal contention with an 8th @-@ place finish . In his last event , Peirsol competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Brendan Hansen , Ian Crocker , and Jason Lezak . The final time of 3 : 31 @.@ 54 was a new world record , bettering the old mark from 2002 . 
 = = = 2004 Summer Olympic Games = = = 
 At the 2004 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Peirsol won individual titles in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke . Four years after finishing in 4th place at the 2000 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Peirsol won the 100 @-@ meter backstroke title , beating Lenny Krayzelburg . Peirsol was the only individual in the field to break 54 seconds and was just off Krayzelburg 's world record . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won in a world record time of 1 : 54 @.@ 74 , bettering his previous record of 1 : 55 @.@ 15 set in 2002 . He beat his closest competitor , Michael Phelps , by more than a second . 
 At the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens , Greece , Peirsol won gold in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke , sweeping the backstroke events , and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in a time of 54 @.@ 06 , 0 @.@ 29 s ahead of second @-@ place finisher Markus Rogan of Austria . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in an Olympic record time of 1 : 54 @.@ 95 and completed a clean sweep of the backstroke events . Rogan again finished second to Peirsol , 2 @.@ 40 s back . An initial disqualification alleged that Peirsol had made an illegal turn during the 200 @-@ meter backstroke race . Having been improperly entered , the disqualification was eventually overturned . In his last event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Peirsol combined with Brendan Hansen , Ian Crocker , and Jason Lezak to win gold in a world record time of 3 : 30 @.@ 68 , 2 @.@ 94 s ahead of second @-@ place finisher Germany . While leading off the relay , Peirsol broke the world record in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke with a time of 53 @.@ 45 , bettering Krayzelburg 's time of 53 @.@ 60 set in 1999 . 
 Peirsol caused minor controversy when he accused Kosuke <unk> of Japan of using an illegal dolphin kick in the 100 @-@ meter breaststroke final when compatriot Brendan Hansen lost by 0 @.@ 17 s . 
 = = = 2004 FINA Short Course World Championships = = = 
 Shortly after the 2004 Summer Olympics , Peirsol competed at the 2004 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) in Indianapolis where he won three gold medals . His first gold medal came in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke in a time of 50 @.@ 72 , a new championship record . Three days later , Peirsol competed in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in a world record time of 1 : 50 @.@ 52 , bettering his old mark of 1 : 50 @.@ 64 ( set earlier in 2004 ) and finished 2 @.@ 02 s ahead of Matt Welsh of Australia . Peirsol then competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Brendan Hansen , Ian Crocker , and Jason Lezak to win gold in a world record time of 3 : 25 @.@ 09 , 4 @.@ 63 s ahead of Australia . Peirsol also competed in the 50 @-@ meter backstroke but finished out of medal contention . 
 = = = 2005 World Championships = = = 
 At the 2005 World Championship Trials , the selection meet for the 2005 World Aquatics Championships , Peirsol won individual titles in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke . In the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won and broke his own world record with a time of 53 @.@ 17 , bettering his time of 53 @.@ 45 set in Athens . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol easily won with a time of 1 : 55 @.@ 13 . 
 At the 2005 World Aquatics Championships in Montreal , Quebec , Peirsol won gold in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in a time of 53 @.@ 62 , just 0 @.@ 01 s off his championship record set two years earlier in Barcelona . For his second event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won in dominating fashion . His time of 1 : 54 @.@ 66 was a new world record and 1 @.@ 97 s ahead of second @-@ place finisher Markus Rogan . Peirsol then competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Brendan Hansen , Ian Crocker , and Jason Lezak to win gold in a time of 3 : 31 @.@ 85 , 3 @.@ 23 s ahead of second @-@ place finisher Russia . Peirsol also competed in the 50 @-@ meter backstroke but finished out of medal contention . 
 = = = 2006 Pan Pacific Championships = = = 
 At the 2006 National Championships , the selection meet for the 2006 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships and the 2007 World Aquatics Championships , Peirsol won individual titles in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke . At the 2006 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Victoria , British Columbia , Peirsol won gold in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in a championship record time of 53 @.@ 32 . Peirsol was the only individual in the field to break 54 seconds and beat his closest competitor , Ryan Lochte , by 0 @.@ 70 s . Peirsol earned his second gold in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke with a world record time of 1 : 54 @.@ 44 , bettering his previous mark of 1 : 54 @.@ 66 set last year in Montreal . At the time , Peirsol held nine of the fastest times posted in the event and defeated second @-@ place finisher Michael Phelps by 2 @.@ 37 s . Peirsol then competed in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay with Brendan Hansen , Ian Crocker , and Jason Lezak to win gold in a time of 3 : 31 @.@ 79 , a new championship record . 
 = = = 2007 World Championships = = = 
 At the 2007 World Aquatics Championships in Melbourne , Australia , Peirsol won one gold and one silver medal . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won gold in a world record time of 52 @.@ 98 , bettering his time of 53 @.@ 17 set in 2005 . Peirsol became the first man in the event to go under 53 seconds and beat Ryan Lochte by 0 @.@ 52 s . At the time , Peirsol held five of the fastest times posted in the event . At one point during the first 50 @-@ meters , Peirsol was a full meter behind Ryan Lochte , and at the turn , Peirsol was in third place behind Liam Tancock and Lochte . But Peirsol had a superior finish to over @-@ take both swimmers . After the race , Peirsol thanked Lochte for the fast start , which he attributed to the world record . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol placed second to Lochte and lost his world record he set in 2006 . Throughout the race , Peirsol was in first and at the 150 @-@ meter mark , Peirsol was ahead of Lochte 1 : 24 @.@ 56 to 1 : 25 @.@ 05 . But Lochte had a strong finish to over @-@ take Peirsol for the win . For Peirsol , it was his first international loss in the event since the 2000 Summer Olympics . Peirsol did not have a chance to swim in the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay final because the United States was disqualified in the heats . 
 = = = 2008 Summer Olympic Games = = = 
 At the 2008 U.S. Olympic Team Trials , Peirsol won individual titles in the 100 and 200 @-@ meter backstroke , repeating his results from the 2004 U.S. Olympic Team Trials . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won ahead of Matt Grevers with a world record time of 52 @.@ 89 , lowering his previous mark of 52 @.@ 98 set last year . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won in a time of 1 : 54 @.@ 32 , equalling Ryan Lochte 's world record set last year . Lochte finished a close second , just 0 @.@ 02 s behind Peirsol . 
 At the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China , Peirsol won gold in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . He also won silver in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol was the heavy favorite for gold , with him being the world @-@ record holder and the defending Olympic champion . For the final of the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol was swimming in lane two , having qualified fifth in the semi @-@ finals . At the first 50 @-@ meters in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke final , Peirsol was in second place behind Liam Tancock , who took it out in 25 @.@ 11 . Peirsol was 0 @.@ 54 s behind Tancock at the turn . However , after the turn , Peirsol overtook Tancock , who eventually placed sixth , and won the gold . Peirsol 's final time of 52 @.@ 54 was a new world record , bettering his previous mark of 52 @.@ 89 set last month . After the race , Peirsol said , " I 'm a little bit excited , a little bit relieved , absolutely elated . " In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol placed second to Ryan Loche 1 : 54 @.@ 33 to 1 : 53 @.@ 94 . In winning the gold , Lochte broke the world record tie he and Peirsol shared in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke . In his last event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Peirsol combined with Brendan Hansen , Michael Phelps , and Jason Lezak to win gold in a world record time of 3 : 29 @.@ 34 , lowering the old mark of 3 : 30 @.@ 68 set four years ago in Athens . 
 = = = 2009 World Championships = = = 
 At the 2009 National Championships , the selection meet for the 2009 World Aquatics Championships , Peirsol won individual titles in the 100- and 200 @-@ meter backstroke . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won in a time of 51 @.@ 94 , reclaiming the world record from Aschwin Wildeboer Faber . In winning the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol became the first person to swim the event in under 52 seconds and it was the sixth time he set the world record in the event . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol defeated Ryan Lochte and reclaimed the 200 @-@ meter backstroke world record he lost in Beijing . Peirsol also competed in the 100 @-@ meter butterfly but did not qualify for the event in Rome , finishing in third place . 
 At the 2009 World Aquatics Championships in Rome , Peirsol won two gold medals . In his first event , the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol surprised many after he failed to make the final , which he attributed to a miscalculation of his own position in the semi @-@ finals . Peirsol said , " I thought I was going faster . I am very disappointed . I completely misjudged my race . I have to go on , pick myself up and focus on my next events . " But Peirsol 's world record in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke would stay in place after the final . In his second event , the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol won the gold in a time of 1 : 51 @.@ 92 , breaking his own world record of 1 : 53 @.@ 08 by more than a second . Peirsol then competed in the 50 @-@ meter backstroke but did not advance past the heats . In his last event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Peirsol combined with Eric Shanteau , Michael Phelps , and David Walters to win gold in a world record time of 3 : 27 @.@ 28 , lowering the old mark of 3 : 29 @.@ 34 set a year ago in Beijing . While leading off the relay , Peirsol broke the championship record in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke with a time of 52 @.@ 19 , bettering the previous mark of 52 @.@ 26 set by Junya Koga . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 At the 2010 National Championships , Peirsol placed second in both the 100- and 200 @-@ meter backstroke . In the 100 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol placed second to David Plummer , who touched just 0 @.@ 03 s ahead . For Peirsol , it was his first loss in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke at a national championships since he placed 4th at the 2000 U.S. Olympic Team Trials . In the 200 @-@ meter backstroke , Peirsol placed second to Ryan Lochte , who finished 0 @.@ 70 s ahead . 
 At the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships in Irvine , California , Peirsol won gold in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke and the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay . Peirsol 's first gold came in the 100 @-@ meter backstroke . Initially , Peirsol did not qualify to swim in the medal @-@ awarding final because only a maximum of two swimmers from one country could enter in the finals and David Plummer and Ryan Lochte owned the top two American spots . However , Lochte withdrew from the 100 @-@ meter backstroke and as a result , Peirsol advanced to the finals . Peirsol won the gold in a time of 53 @.@ 31 , breaking his own championship record set in 2006 . Peirsol then competed in the 200 @-@ meter backstroke but did not qualify to swim in the medal @-@ awarding final , with Lochte and Tyler Clary taking the top two American spots . In his final event , the 4 × 100 @-@ meter medley relay , Peirsol won gold along with compatriots Mark Gangloff , Michael Phelps , and Nathan Adrian . This would be the last race of his international career . When the competition was over , Peirsol said he put his swimming equipment in a locker and walked away . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 On February 2 , 2011 , at the age of twenty @-@ seven , Peirsol announced that he was officially retiring from professional swimming . This ended months of speculation after Peirsol withdrew from his spots in both the 2010 FINA World Swimming Championships ( 25 m ) in Dubai and the 2011 World Aquatics Championships in Shanghai . Peirsol said he contemplated retirement after the 2008 Summer Olympics . In 2010 , he said he had no further goals and found it difficult to swim because he " ended up doing everything ( he ) set out to do . " He added , " Things outside of the sport started to interest me . " Peirsol said it was " poetic " that he ended his career at the same pool he trained in as a kid at the 2010 Pan Pacific Swimming Championships . Peirsol plans to go to graduate school at the University of Texas at Austin to study political science . 
 = Jo Stafford = 
 Jo Elizabeth Stafford ( November 12 , 1917 – July 16 , 2008 ) was an American traditional pop music singer and occasional actress , whose career spanned five decades from the late 1930s to the early 1980s . Admired for the purity of her voice , she originally underwent classical training to become an opera singer before following a career in popular music , and by 1955 had achieved more worldwide record sales than any other female artist . Her 1952 song " You Belong to Me " topped the charts in the United States and United Kingdom , the record becoming the first by a female artist to reach number one on the U.K. Singles Chart . 
 Born in Coalinga , California , Stafford made her first musical appearance at age twelve . While still at high school she joined her two older sisters to form a vocal trio named The Stafford Sisters , who found moderate success on radio and in film . In 1938 , while the sisters were part of the cast of Twentieth Century Fox 's production of Alexander 's Ragtime Band , Stafford met the future members of The Pied Pipers and became the group 's lead singer . Bandleader Tommy Dorsey hired them in 1939 to perform back @-@ up vocals for his orchestra . 
 In addition to her recordings with the Pied Pipers , Stafford featured in solo performances for Dorsey . After leaving the group in 1944 , she recorded a series of pop standards for Capitol Records and Columbia Records . Many of her recordings were backed by the orchestra of Paul Weston . She also performed duets with Gordon MacRae and Frankie Laine . Her work with the United Service Organizations ( USO ) giving concerts for soldiers during World War II earned her the nickname " G.I. Jo " . Starting in 1945 , Stafford was a regular host of the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) radio series The Chesterfield Supper Club and later appeared in television specials — including two series called The Jo Stafford Show , in 1954 in the U.S. and in 1961 in the U.K. 
 Stafford married twice : first in 1937 to musician John Huddleston ( the couple divorced in 1943 ) ; then in 1952 to Paul Weston , with whom she had two children . She and Weston developed a comedy routine in which they assumed the identity of an incompetent lounge act named Jonathan and Darlene Edwards , parodying well @-@ known songs . The act proved popular at parties and among the wider public when the couple released an album as the Edwardses in 1957 . In 1961 , the album Jonathan and Darlene Edwards in Paris won Stafford her only Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album , and was the first commercially successful parody album . Stafford largely retired as a performer in the mid @-@ 1960s , but continued in the music business . She had a brief resurgence in popularity in the late 1970s when she recorded a cover of the Bee Gees hit , " Stayin ' Alive " as Darlene Edwards . In the 1990s , she began re @-@ releasing some of her material through Corinthian Records , a label founded by Weston . She died in 2008 in Century City , Los Angeles , and is interred with Weston at Holy Cross Cemetery , Culver City . Her work in radio , television and music is recognized by three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Jo Elizabeth Stafford was born in Coalinga , California , in 1917 , to Grover Cleveland Stafford and Anna Stafford ( née York ) — a second cousin of World War I hero Sergeant Alvin York . She was the third of four children . Both her parents enjoyed singing and sharing music with their family . Stafford 's father hoped for success in the California oil fields when he moved his family from <unk> , Tennessee , but worked in a succession of unrelated jobs . Her mother was an accomplished banjo player , playing and singing many of the folk songs which influenced Stafford 's later career . Anna insisted that her children should take piano lessons , but Jo was the only one among her sisters who took a keen interest in it , and through this she learned to read music . 
 Stafford 's first public singing appearance was in Long Beach , where the family lived when she was twelve . She sang " Believe Me If All Those Endearing Young Charms " , a Stafford family sentimental favorite . Her second was far more dramatic . As a student at Long Beach Polytechnic High School with the lead in the school musical , she was rehearsing on stage when the 1933 Long Beach earthquake destroyed the school . With her mother 's encouragement , Stafford originally planned to become an opera singer and studied voice as a child , taking private lessons from Foster Rucker , an announcer on California radio station KNX . Because of the Great Depression , she abandoned that idea and joined her older sisters Christine and Pauline in a popular vocal group The Stafford Sisters . The two older Staffords were already part of a trio with an unrelated third member when the act got a big booking at Long Beach 's West Coast Theater . Pauline was too ill to perform , and Jo was drafted in to take her place so they could keep the engagement . She asked her glee club teacher for a week 's absence from school , saying her mother needed her at home , and this was granted . The performance was a success , and Jo became a permanent member of the group . 
 The Staffords ' first radio appearance was on Los Angeles station KHJ as part of The Happy Go Lucky Hour when Jo was 16 , a role they secured after hopefuls at the audition were asked if they had their own musical accompanist ( s ) . Christine Stafford said that Jo played piano , and the sisters were hired , even though she had not previously given a public piano performance . The Staffords were subsequently heard on KNX 's The Singing Crockett Family of Kentucky , and California Melodies , a network radio show aired on the Mutual Broadcasting System . While Stafford worked on The Jack <unk> Show she met John Huddleston — a backing singer on the programme — and they were married in October 1937 . The couple divorced in 1943 . 
 The sisters found work in the film industry as backup vocalists , and immediately after graduating from high school , Jo worked on film soundtracks . The Stafford Sisters made their first recording , " Let 's Get Together and Swing " with Louis Prima , in 1936 . In 1937 , Jo worked behind the scenes with Fred Astaire on the soundtrack of A Damsel in Distress , creating the arrangements for the film , and with her sisters she arranged the backing vocals for " Nice Work If You Can Get It " . Stafford said that her arrangement had to be adapted because Astaire had difficulty with some of the syncopation . In her words : " The man with the syncopated shoes couldn 't do the syncopated notes " . 
 = = The Pied Pipers = = 
 By 1938 , the Staffords were involved with Twentieth Century Fox 's production of Alexander 's Ragtime Band . The studio brought in many vocal groups to work on the film , including The Four <unk> , The Rhythm Kings and The King Sisters , who began to sing and socialized between takes . The Stafford Sisters , The Four <unk> and The Rhythm Kings became a new vocal group called The Pied Pipers . Stafford later said , " We started singing together just for fun , and these sessions led to the formation of an eight @-@ voice singing group that we christened ' The Pied Pipers ' " . The group consisted of eight members , including Stafford — John Huddleston , Hal Hooper , Chuck Lowry , Bud Hervey , George Tait , Woody Newbury , and Dick <unk> . 
 As The Pied Pipers , they worked on local radio and movie soundtracks . When Alyce and Yvonne King threw a party for their boyfriends ' visit to Los Angeles , the group was invited to perform . The King Sisters ' boyfriends were Tommy Dorsey 's arrangers Axel Stordahl and Paul Weston , who became interested in the group . Weston said the group 's vocals were unique for its time and that their vocal arrangements were much like those for orchestral instruments . 
 Weston persuaded Dorsey to audition the group in 1938 , and the eight drove together to New York City . Dorsey liked them and signed them for ten weeks . After their second broadcast , the sponsor — visiting from overseas — heard the group sing " Hold Tight ( Want Some Seafood Mama ) " . Until this point , the sponsor knew only that he was paying for Dorsey 's program and that its ratings were very good ; transcription discs mailed to him by his advertising agency always arrived broken . He thought that the performance was terrible , and pressured the advertising agency representing his brand to fire the group . They stayed in New York for several months , landing one job that paid them $ 3 @.@ 60 each , and they recorded some material for RCA Victor Records . Weston later said that he and Stordahl felt responsibility for the group , since Weston had arranged their audition with Dorsey . After six months in New York and with no work there for them , The Pied Pipers returned to Los Angeles , where four of their members left the group to seek regular employment . Shortly afterwards , Stafford received a telephone call from Dorsey , who told her he wished to hire the group , but wanted only four of them , including Stafford . After she agreed to the offer the remaining Pied Pipers — Stafford , Huddleston , Lowry and Wilson — traveled to Chicago in 1939 . The decision led to success for the group , especially Stafford , who featured in both collective and solo performances with Dorsey 's orchestra . 
 When Frank Sinatra joined the Dorsey band , The Pied Pipers provided backing vocals for his recordings . Their version of " I 'll Never Smile Again " topped the Billboard Chart for twelve weeks in 1940 and helped to establish Sinatra as a singer . Stafford , Sinatra , and The Pied Pipers toured extensively with Dorsey during their three years as part of his orchestra , giving concerts at venues across the United States . Stafford made her first solo recording — " Little Man with a Candy Cigar " — in 1941 , after Dorsey agreed to her request to record solo . Her public debut as a soloist with the band occurred at New York 's Hotel Astor in May 1942 . Bill Davidson of Collier 's magazine reported in 1951 that because Stafford weighed in excess of 180 lb , Dorsey was reluctant to give her a leading vocal role in his orchestra , believing she was not sufficiently glamorous for the part . However , Peter Levinson 's 2005 biography of Dorsey offers a different account . Stafford recalls that she was overweight , but Dorsey didn 't try hiding her because of it . 
 In November 1942 , The Pied Pipers had a disagreement with Dorsey when he fired Clark <unk> — a guitarist and vocalist who had replaced Billy Wilson in the line up — when he mistakenly gave the bandleader misdirections at a railroad station in Portland , Oregon . The remaining three members then quit in an act of solidarity . At the time the number one song in the United States was " There Are Such Things " by Frank Sinatra and The Pied Pipers . Sinatra also left Dorsey that year . Following their departure from the orchestra , The Pied Pipers played a series of vaudeville dates in the Eastern United States ; when they returned to California , they were signed to appear in the 1943 Universal Pictures movie Gals Incorporated . From there , they joined the NBC Radio show " Bob Crosby and Company " . As well as working with Bob Crosby , they also appeared on radio shows hosted by Sinatra and Johnny Mercer , and were one of the first groups signed to Mercer 's new label , Capitol Records , which was founded in 1942 . Weston — who left Dorsey 's band in 1940 to work with Dinah Shore — became music director at Capitol . 
 = = Solo career = = 
 = = = Capitol Records and United Service Organization = = = 
 While Stafford was still working for Dorsey , Johnny Mercer told her , " Some day I 'm going to have my own record company , and you 're going to record for me . " She subsequently became the first solo artist signed to Capitol after leaving the Pied Pipers in 1944 . A key figure in helping Stafford to develop her solo career was Mike <unk> , an agent who first heard her as a member of the Pied Pipers while he was serving as a Captain with the United States Army . Having previously discovered artists such as Glenn Miller , Artie Shaw , and Woody Herman , <unk> was impressed by Stafford 's voice , and contacted her when he was demobilized in 1944 . After she agreed to let him represent her , he encouraged her to reduce her weight and arranged a string of engagements that raised her profile , and confidence . 
 The success of Stafford 's solo career led to a demand for personal appearances , and from February 1945 she embarked on a six @-@ month residency at New York 's La Martinique nightclub . Her performance was well @-@ received — an article in the July 1945 edition of Band Leaders magazine described it as " sensational " — but Stafford did not enjoy singing before live audiences , and it was the only nightclub venue she ever played . Speaking about her discomfort with live performances , Stafford told a 1996 interview with The New Yorker 's Nancy Franklin , " I 'm basically a singer , period , and I think I 'm really lousy up in front of an audience — it 's just not me . " 
 Stafford 's tenure with the United Service Organizations ( USO ) during World War II — which often saw her perform for soldiers stationed in the U.S. — led to her acquiring the nickname " G.I. Jo " . On returning from the Pacific theater , a veteran told Stafford that the Japanese would play her records on loudspeakers in an attempt to make the U.S. troops homesick enough to surrender . She replied personally to all the letters she received from servicemen . Stafford was a favorite of many servicemen during both World War II and the Korean War ; her recordings received extensive airplay on the American Forces radio and in some military hospitals at lights @-@ out . Stafford 's involvement with servicemen led to an interest in military history and a sound knowledge of it . Years after World War II , Stafford was a guest at a dinner party with a retired naval officer . When the discussion turned to a wartime action off Mindanao , the officer tried to correct Stafford , who held to her point . He countered her by saying , " Madame , I was there " . A few days after the party , Stafford received a note of apology from him , saying he had re @-@ read his logs and that she was correct . 
 = = = Chesterfield Supper Club , duets , and Voice of America = = = 
 Beginning on December 11 , 1945 , Stafford hosted the Tuesday and Thursday broadcasts of NBC musical variety radio program The Chesterfield Supper Club . On April 5 , 1946 , the entire cast , including Stafford and Perry Como , participated in the first commercial radio broadcast from an airplane . The initial plan was to use the stand @-@ held microphones used in studios but when these proved to be problematic , the cast switched to hand @-@ held microphones , which because of the plane 's cabin pressure became difficult to hold . Three flights were made that day ; a rehearsal in the afternoon , then two in the evening — one for the initial 6 : 00 pm broadcast and another at 10 : 00 pm for the West Coast broadcast . 
 Stafford moved from New York to California in November 1946 , continuing to host Chesterfield Supper Club from Hollywood . In 1948 , she restricted her appearances on the show to Tuesdays , and Peggy Lee hosted the Thursday broadcasts . Stafford left the show when it was expanded to 30 minutes , making her final appearance on September 2 , 1949 . She returned to the program in 1954 ; it ended its run on NBC Radio the following year . During her time with Chesterfield Supper Club , Stafford revisited some of the folk music she had enjoyed as a child . Weston , her conductor on the programme , suggested using some of the folk music for the show . With her renewed interest in folk tunes came an interest in folklore ; Stafford established a contest to award a prize to the best collection of American folklore submitted by a college student . The annual Jo Stafford Prize for American Folklore was handled by the American Folklore Society , with the first prize of $ 250 awarded in 1949 . 
 Stafford continued to record . She duetted with Gordon MacRae on a number of songs . In 1948 , their version of " Say Something Sweet to Your Sweetheart " sold over a million copies . The following year , they repeated their success with " My Happiness " , and Stafford and MacRae recorded " Whispering Hope " together . Stafford began hosting a weekly program on Radio Luxembourg in 1950 ; working unpaid , she recorded the voice portions of the shows in Hollywood . At the time , she was hosting Club Fifteen with Bob Crosby for Columbia Broadcasting System ( CBS ) radio . 
 Weston moved from Capitol to Columbia Records and , in 1950 , Stafford followed suit . Content and very comfortable working with him , Stafford had had a clause inserted in her contract with Capitol stating that if Weston left that label , she would automatically be released from her obligations to them . When that happened , Capitol wanted Stafford to record eight more songs before December 15 , 1950 , and she found herself in the unusual situation of simultaneously working for two competing record companies , an instance that was very rare in an industry where musicians were seen as assets . In 1954 , Stafford became the second artist after Bing Crosby to sell 25 million records for Columbia . She was presented with a diamond @-@ studded disc to mark the occasion . 
 In 1950 , Stafford began working for Voice of America ( VOA ) , the U.S. government broadcaster transmitting programmes overseas to undermine the influence of communism . She presented a weekly show that aired in Eastern Europe , and Collier 's magazine published an article about the program in its April 21 , 1951 issue that discussed her worldwide popularity , including in countries behind the Iron Curtain . The article , titled " Jo Stafford : Her Songs Upset Joe Stalin " , earned her the wrath of the U.S. Communist Daily Worker newspaper , which published a column critical of Stafford and VOA . 
 = = = Marriage to Paul Weston and later career = = = 
 Although Weston and Stafford had known each other since their introduction at the King Sisters ' party , they did not become romantically involved until 1945 , when Weston traveled to New York to see Stafford perform at La Martinique . They were married in a Roman Catholic ceremony on February 26 , 1952 , before which Stafford converted to Catholicism . The wedding was conducted at St Gregory 's Catholic Church in Los Angeles by Father Joe Kearney , a former guitarist with the Bob Crosby band who left the music business , trained as a priest and served as head of the Catholic Labor Institute . The couple left for Europe for a combined honeymoon and business trip : Stafford had an engagement at the London Palladium . Stafford and Weston had two children : Tim was born in 1952 , and Amy in 1956 . Both children followed their parents into the music industry . Tim Weston became an arranger and producer who took charge of Corinthian Records , his father 's music label , and Amy Weston became a session singer , performing with a trio , Daddy 's Money , and singing in commercials . 
 In the 1950s , Stafford had a string of popular hits with Frankie Laine , six of which charted . Their duet of the Hank Williams song " Hey Good Lookin ' " made the top ten in 1951 . She had her best @-@ known hits — " Jambalaya " , " Shrimp Boats " , " Make Love to Me " , and " You Belong to Me " — around this time . " You Belong to Me " was Stafford 's biggest hit , topping the charts in the United States and the United Kingdom . In the U.K. , it was the first song by a female singer to top the chart . The record first appeared on U.S. charts on August 1 , 1952 , and remained there for 24 weeks . In the U.K. , it entered the charts on November 14 , 1952 , at number 12 , reached number one on January 16 , 1953 , and stayed on the charts for 19 weeks . In a July 1953 interview , Paul Weston said his wife 's big hit was really the " B " side of the single " Pretty Boy " , which both Weston and Columbia Records believed would be the big seller . 
 Stafford hosted the 15 @-@ minute The Jo Stafford Show on CBS @-@ TV from 1954 to 1955 , with Weston as her conductor and music arranger . She appeared on NBC 's Club Oasis in 1958 , and on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) series The Pat Boone Chevy Showroom in 1959 . In the early 1960s , Stafford hosted a series of television specials called The Jo Stafford Show , which were centered around music . The shows were produced in England and featured British and American guests including Claire Bloom , Stanley Holloway , Ella Fitzgerald , Mel Tormé , and Rosemary Clooney . 
 Both Stafford and Weston returned to Capitol in 1961 . During her second stint at Capitol , Stafford also recorded for Sinatra 's label Reprise Records . The albums issued by Reprise were released between 1961 and 1964 , and were mostly remakes of songs from her past . Sinatra sold Reprise to Warner Brothers in 1963 , and they retargeted the label at a teenage audience , letting go many of the original artists who had signed up with Sinatra . In late 1965 , both Stafford and Weston signed to Dot Records . 
 = = Comedy performances = = 
 During the 1940s , Stafford briefly performed comedy songs under the name " Cinderella G. Stump " with Red Ingle and the Natural Seven . In 1947 , she recorded a hillbilly @-@ style parody of " Temptation " , pronouncing its title " Tim @-@ <unk> " . Stafford created Stump after Weston suggested her for the role when Ingle said his female vocalist was unavailable for the recording session . After meeting Ingle at a recording studio she gave an impromptu performance . The speed of her voice was intentionally increased for the song , giving it the hillbilly sound , and the listening public did not initially know that her voice was on the record . Because it was a lighthearted , impromptu performance and she accepted the standard scale pay , Stafford waived all royalties from the record . Stafford , along with Ingle and Weston , made a personal appearance tour in 1949 , and she performed " Temptation " as Cinderella G. Stump . Stafford and Ingle performed the song on network television in 1960 for Startime . Stafford recorded a second song with Ingle in 1948 . " The Prisoner of Love 's Song " was a parody of " Prisoner of Love " , and featured in an advertisement for Capitol releases in the January 8 , 1949 edition of Billboard magazine . 
 Throughout the 1950s , Stafford and Weston entertained party guests by performing skits in which they impersonated a poor lounge act . Stafford sang off @-@ key in a high pitched voice and Weston played songs on the piano in unconventional rhythms . Weston began his impression of an unskilled pianist in or around 1955 , assuming the guise " when things got a little quiet , or when people began taking themselves too seriously at a Hollywood party . " He put on an impromptu performance of the act the following year at a Columbia Records sales convention in Key West , Florida , after hearing a particularly bad hotel pianist . The audience was very appreciative of his rendition of " Stardust " , particularly Columbia executives George Avakian and Irving Townsend , who encouraged Weston to make an album of such songs . Avakian named Weston 's character Jonathan Edwards , for the 18th century Calvinist preacher of the same name , and asked him to record under this alias . Weston worried that he might not be able to find enough material for an entire album , and he asked his wife to join the project . Stafford named her off @-@ key vocalist persona Darlene Edwards . 
 Stafford 's creation of Darlene Edwards had its roots in the novelty songs that Mitch Miller , the head of Columbia 's artists and repertoire department , had been selecting for her to sing . These included songs such as " Underneath the Overpass " , and because she did not agree with Miller 's music choices for her , Stafford and her studio musicians often recorded their own renditions of the music , performing the songs according to their feelings about them . Because she had some unused studio time at a 1957 recording session , as a joke Stafford recorded a track as Darlene Edwards . Those who heard bootlegs of the recording responded positively , and later that year , Stafford and Weston recorded an album of songs as Jonathan and Darlene , entitled The Piano Artistry of Jonathan Edwards . 
 As a publicity stunt , Weston and Stafford claimed that Jonathan and Darlene Edwards were a New Jersey lounge act which they had discovered , and denied any personal connection . This ruse led to much speculation about the Edwardses ' identities . In an article titled Two Right Hands in September 1957 , Time magazine reported that some people believed the performers were Harry and Margaret Truman , but the same piece identified Weston and Stafford as the Edwardses . In 1958 , Stafford and Weston appeared as the Edwardses on Jack Benny 's television program Shower of Stars , and in 1960 on The Garry Moore Show . The Piano Artistry of Jonathan Edwards was followed up with an album of popular music standards , Jonathan and Darlene Edwards in Paris , which was released in 1960 and won that year 's Grammy Award for Best Comedy Album . The Academy issued two awards for the category that year ; Bob Newhart also received an award for " Spoken Word Comedy " for his album The Button @-@ Down Mind Strikes Back ! The Grammy was Stafford 's only major award . 
 The couple continued to release comedy albums for several years , and in 1977 released a cover of the Bee Gees ' " Stayin ' Alive " as a single , with an Edwards interpretation of Helen Reddy 's " I Am Woman " as its " B " side . The same year also saw a brief resurgence in the popularity of Jonathan and Darlene albums when their cover of " Carioca " was featured as the opening and closing theme to The Kentucky Fried Movie . Their last release , Darlene Remembers Duke , Jonathan Plays Fats , was issued in 1982 . To mark the occasion , an interview with Stafford and Weston — in which they assumed the persona of the Edwardses — appeared in the December 1982 edition of Los Angeles Magazine . 
 = = Retirement and later life = = 
 In 1959 , Stafford was offered a contract to perform at Las Vegas , but declined it to concentrate on her family life . Because she disliked continuously traveling for television appearances that took her away from her children , and no longer found the music business fun , she went into semi @-@ retirement in the mid @-@ 1960s . She retired fully in 1975 . Except for the Jonathan and Darlene Edwards material , and re @-@ recording her favorite song " Whispering Hope " with her daughter Amy in 1978 , Stafford did not perform again until 1990 , at a ceremony honoring Frank Sinatra . The Westons devoted more time to Share Inc . — a charity aiding people with developmental disabilities — in which they had been active for many years . In or around 1983 , Concord Records tried to persuade Stafford to change her mind and come out of retirement , but although an album was planned , she did not feel she would be satisfied with the finished product , and the project was shelved . 
 Stafford won a breach @-@ of @-@ contract lawsuit against her former record label Columbia in the early 1990s . Because of a clause concerning the payment of royalties in her contract , she secured the rights to all of the recordings she made with the company , including those Weston and she made as Jonathan and Darlene Edwards . After the lawsuit was settled , Stafford and her son Tim reactivated Corinthian Records , which Weston — a devout Christian — had started as a label for religious music in the 1970s , and they began releasing some of her old material . 
 In 1996 , Paul Weston died of natural causes ; Stafford continued to operate Corinthian Records . In 2006 , she donated the couple 's library — including music arrangements , photographs , business correspondence and recordings — to the University of Arizona . Stafford began suffering from congestive heart failure in October 2007 , from which she died aged 90 on July 16 , 2008 . She was buried with her husband at the Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City , California . 
 = = Style , awards , and recognition = = 
 Stafford was admired by critics and the listening public for the purity of her voice , and was considered one of the most versatile vocalists of her era . Peter Levinson said that she was a coloratura soprano , whose operatic training allowed her to sing a natural falsetto . Her style encompassed a number of genres , including big band , ballads , jazz , folk and comedy . The music critic Terry Teachout described her as " rhythmically fluid without ever sounding self @-@ consciously ' jazzy ' " , while Rosemary Clooney said of her , " The voice says it all : beautiful , pure , straightforward , no artifice , matchless intonation , instantly recognizable . Those things describe the woman too . " Writing for the New York Sun , Will Friedwald described her 1947 interpretation of " Haunted Heart " as " effective because it 's so subtle , because Stafford holds something back and doesn 't shove her emotion in the listener 's face . " Nancy Franklin described Stafford 's version of the folk song " He 's Gone Away " as " wistful and tender , as if she had picked up a piece of clothing once worn by a loved one and begun singing . " Frank Sinatra said , " It was a joy to sit on the bandstand and listen to her " . The singer Judy Collins has cited Stafford 's folk recordings as an influence on her own musical career . The country singer Patsy Cline was also inspired by Stafford 's work . 
 In their guise of Jonathan and Darlene Edwards , Weston and Stafford earned admiration from their show business peers . The pianist George Shearing was a fan and would play " Autumn in New York " in the style of Edwards if he knew the couple were in the audience . Ray Charles also enjoyed their performance . Art Carney — who played Ed Norton in the comedy series The Honeymooners — once wrote the Edwardses a fan letter as Norton . However , not everybody appreciated the Edwards act . Mitch Miller blamed the couple 's 1962 album Sing Along With Jonathan and Darlene Edwards for ending his sing @-@ along albums and television show , while in 2003 , Stafford told Michael Feinstein that the Bee Gees had disliked the Edwards ' version of " Stayin ' Alive " . 
 In 1960 , Stafford said there were good and bad points to working closely with Weston . His knowledge of her made it easy for him to arrange her music , but sometimes it caused difficulties . Weston knew Stafford 's abilities and would write or arrange elaborate music because he knew she was capable of performing it . She also said she did not believe she could perform in Broadway musicals because she thought her voice was not powerful enough for stage work . In 2003 , she recalled that there was often limited rehearsal time before she recorded a song , and how Weston would sometimes slip musical arrangements under the bathroom door as she was in the bath getting ready to go to the studio . 
 Her work in radio , television and music is recognized by three stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame . In 1952 , listeners of Radio Luxembourg voted Stafford their favorite female singer . The New York Fashion Academy named her one of the Best Dressed Women of 1955 . Songbirds magazine has reported that , by 1955 , Stafford had amassed more worldwide record sales than any other female artist , and that she was ranked fifth overall . She was nominated in the Best Female Singer category at the 1955 Emmy Awards . She won a Grammy for Jonathan and Darlene Edwards in Paris , and The Pied Pipers ' recording of " I 'll Never Smile Again " was inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1982 , as was Stafford 's version of " You Belong to Me " in 1998 . She was inducted into the Big Band Academy of America 's Golden Bandstand in April 2007 . Stafford and Weston were founding members of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences . 
 Stafford 's music has been referenced in popular culture . Her recording of " Blues in the Night " features in a scene of James Michener 's novel The Drifters ( 1971 ) , while a Marine Corps Sergeant Major in Walter Murphy 's The Vicar of Christ ( 1979 ) hears a radio broadcast of her singing " On Top of Old Smoky " shortly before a battle in Korea . Commenting on the latter reference for his 1989 book Singers and the Song — which includes a chapter about Stafford — the author Gene Lees says it " somehow sets Stafford 's place in the American culture . You 're getting pretty famous when your name turns up in crossword puzzles ; you are woven into a nation 's history when you turn up in its fiction . " 
 = = Politics = = 
 Stafford was a Democrat , supporting John F. Kennedy for president in 1960 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = Film and television = = 
 Stafford appeared in films from the 1930s onwards , including Alexander 's Ragtime Band . Her final on @-@ screen appearance was in the Frank Sinatra tribute Sinatra 75 : The Best Is Yet to Come in 1990 . She declined several offers of television work because she was forced to memorize scripts ( as she was unable to read the cue cards without her glasses ) , and the bright studio lights caused her discomfort . 
 = = Publications = = 
 Stafford , Jo ( 1951 ) . Easy Lessons in Singing with Hints for Vocalists . Carl Fischer . 
 Weston , Paul ; Stafford , Jo ; <unk> , Keith ( 2012 ) . Song of the Open Road : an Autobiography and Other Writings . BearManor Media . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 287 @-@ 9 . 
 = = = Listen = = = 
 Interview by KUOW @-@ FM 's Amanda Wilde 
 Jo Stafford and Nelson Eddy 1951 mp3 recordings and information at <unk> / blog site 
 = For Those Who Have Heart = 
 For Those Who Have Heart is the second studio album by American rock band A Day to Remember , and their first for Victory . It was released on January 22 , 2007 by Victory . For the album , the band had a line @-@ up change swapping drummer Bobby Scruggs for Alex Shelnutt . It charted at number 17 on the Heatseekers Album Chart in the U.S. The music video for " The Plot to Bomb the Panhandle " was released a month later . Several of the album 's songs appeared on the band 's MySpace profile before the release . Recorded and mixed at Zing Studios by producer Eric Arena , the album was re @-@ released in February 2008 , with additional tracks and a bonus DVD . The DVD featured a performance of the band live at the Capitol , in the band 's hometown , Ocala , Florida . The music video for " The Danger in Starting a Fire " was released in the same month , and the music video for " Since U Been Gone " , which had been streamed on the band 's MySpace , was released in July . For Those Who Have Heart was generally well received by music critics . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 = = = Leaving Indianola and arrival of Alex Shelnutt = = = 
 After releasing their first album , And Their Name Was Treason ( 2005 ) , A Day to Remember went on a tour of the U.S. in summer 2005 . As rhythm guitarist Neil Westfall said , Indianola " didn 't have money to support a band growing [ ... ] so we wanted to find someone who could support us and willing to do video , like recording budget , working with a producer , studio we wanted to work with , whatever . Like Indianola couldn 't do that . " 
 Drummer Bobby Scruggs told the band he wasn 't going to continue with the band , and on January 27 , 2006 it was posted online that the band were looking for a new drummer , for the start of a tour in mid @-@ February . Eventually , bassist Joshua Woodard and Westfall recruited drummer Alex Shelnutt only three days before going on tour . Upon being asked , Shelnutt 's response was " Ask my mom " , as he was 15 at the time . Upon Shelnutt joining , Westfall said the group " started sounding like a real professional band . He gave us something we never had before . " 
 = = = Signing with Victory Records and recording = = = 
 Woodard was put in touch with a representative from record label Victory Records . Victory auditioned the band in June , and following a week @-@ long worth of phone calls , the group were told of Victory 's interest in signing them up . 
 The band was reported to have signed a deal with Victory in July . An announcement of Victory signing the band was released on August 11 , 2006 . Demos were recorded by Matt Finch at 318 Studios , with pre @-@ production at The Wade Studios in Ocala by Andrew Wade . Recording began in October at Zing Studios , Westfield with producer Eric Arena . Arena also mixed the tracks . Alan Douches mastered the record at West West Side Music , New Windsor . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Initial releases = = = 
 Prior to the release of the album , a few tracks surfaced on the band 's Myspace : " The Plot to Bomb the Panhandle " , " Fast Forward to 2012 " , " The Danger in Starting a Fire " , " A Shot in the Dark " and " Show ' Em the Ropes " . Cover art was unveiled on November 30 , 2006 . A commercial to promote the album was released on January 4 , 2007 . Pre @-@ orders were taken starting January 16 . The album was released in the US on January 22 , while the UK release occurred a week later , on January 29 . 
 On March 8 , the band released the music video for " The Plot to Bomb the Panhandle " , which featured Ron Jeremy . The video was filmed in Los Angeles . After being asked how they got Jeremy to appear , McKinnon said " It was pretty much some that we were kicking around . We were kicking around different people and I think , Tony threw that out there , out of nowhere and we were like ' That 'd be cool , that 'd be funny , people will be into that . ' " . A few days later , the band appeared at Victory 's showcase event at SXSW , on March 14 . In September , it was announced that the album had sold 20 @,@ 000 copies . A live video of " Monument " appeared exclusively on <unk> on December 5 . 
 = = = Re @-@ release of the album = = = 
 On February 4 , 2008 a re @-@ recording of " You Should 've Killed Me When You Had the Chance " was posted on the band 's Myspace . The album was reissued on February 19 . The reissue has different cover artwork , as well as four bonus tracks – the track listing of which was revealed on February 1 . The bonus tracks are : a new song recorded especially for the <unk> , titled " Why Walk on Water When We 've Got Boats " , two re @-@ recorded songs that were originally featured on their debut album , And Their Name Was Treason – " Heartless " and the aforementioned " You Should 've Killed Me When You Had the Chance " – and a cover of the Kelly Clarkson song , " Since U Been Gone " . The new tracks were recorded at The Wade Studio . In addition to these bonus tracks , is a bonus DVD with footage of A Day to Remember 's performance in Ocala , two music videos , as well as behind the scenes footage of recording and commentary on the re @-@ release . 
 The re @-@ release came about after Victory asked the band whether or not if they were going to do a new album . Commenting about Victory 's inquiry about a new album , Woodard " We weren 't ready to do it [ a new album ] , so they asked if , you know , we were interested in doing a re @-@ release with new artwork and adding some new songs . " About the re @-@ recording of the old songs , Westfall said " We 've made a lot of changes to these songs that we play live [ ... ] and now we 're getting a chance to record it , so the people that don 't get to see us live can hear it and appreciate it for what it is . " On the new tracks , producer Andrew Wade said " I think this new stuff that we 're recording is really gonna blow a lot of kids away . [ ... ] [ The re @-@ recordings ] just sound amazing , they all sound like completely different songs , and the new song is serious . " About the new song , " Why Walk on Water When We 've Got Boats " , the band wanted to do a fast @-@ paced song . McKinnon admitted the band " kinda just winged it . But we had some little ideas from being on tour and messing around . " 
 Woodard said about inspiration for the tempo of the song : " We 've all been listening to a lot of faster stuff like Comeback Kid and stuff like that and I don 't know and just sitting here one day ' let 's write a fast song ' . " " Since U Been Gone " had appeared on the band 's Myspace account , on September 21 , 2007 , as free for download . " Since U Been Gone " had overdubs added to it especially for the release on the For Those Who Have Heart reissue . The band chose the song , as McKinnon stated , " we thought would embody what we are as a band by taking like , the poppiest thing ever and still making it hard enough to where kids fight at our shows over it . " The performance included on the DVD was filmed at the Capitol , a building that used to be a bank , in Ocala , on January 5 , 2008 . The performance was filmed by Dan Dobi , with audio recorded by Wade . The music video for " The Danger in Starting a Fire " was posted online on February 29 , 2008 . On April 16 , 2008 , it was announced that the band would be filming a music video for " Since U Been Gone " on April 29 and 30 . Five days later , it was mentioned online that the video 's director was Don Tyler . The music video appeared on YouTube on July 23 . The re @-@ recorded " Heartless " appeared on the band 's MySpace profile in October 2008 . 
 = = = Further appearances = = = 
 " The Plot to Bomb the Panhandle " was included on Victory 's Victory Records Label Sampler , from 2009 . " The Plot to Bomb the Panhandle " was available as downloadable content in the video game Rock Band 3 via the Rock Band Network . The band played an acoustic version of " Monument " and two tracks from Homesick ( 2009 ) for KROQ on August 3 , 2010 . The album , along with Homesick and Attack of the Killer B @-@ Sides ( 2010 ) , had a reissue on vinyl , in 2011 . Another vinyl reissue was released , in 3 different colors , in 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The original edition peaked at number 17 on the Billboard Top Heatseekers chart , while the reissue charted at number 43 on the Top Independent Albums chart . Russ <unk> of AbsolutePunk said the album " improved on every level " from their previous album , And Their Name Was Treason . McKinnon 's vocals were noted by <unk> as " the greatest improvement " . Allmusic reviewer Corey Apar spoke of " Fast Forward to 2012 " as being an appropriate opening track that summarized a " display of the band 's volatile persona ; it launches forth in melodic hardcore mode before quickly dropping into death snarling and sludgy riffing " . Apar also said that the combination endures " in varying levels " throughout the rest of the album . For PopMatters , Andrew Blackie had written the album was a mix of " death metal grunts with the brash melodies of pop @-@ punk " . Speaking of " The Plot to Bomb the Panhandle " , Blackie said the song had " a Green Day sensibility to it " , with music that " fitted together with class and precision " helped by that of Shelnutt . 
 Punknews.org contributor <unk> said " Fast Forward to 2012 " was " incredibly promising " but within " mere seconds the melodic punk is replaced by vocals that sound like a post @-@ Taco Bell burrito belch " . About the band playing " The Price We Pay " , he also said the group had fallen " equally flat with their attempt at acoustic emo pop " with " horrifically banal lyrics " . Rolling Stone magazine said the album was " among the 40 most important new releases of the month " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics and music by A Day to Remember . 
 Other editions 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel per reissue edition booklet . 
 = Witches ' Sabbath ( The Great He @-@ Goat ) = 
 Witches ' Sabbath or The Great He @-@ Goat ( Spanish : <unk> or El gran <unk> ) are names given to an oil mural by the Spanish artist Francisco Goya ( 1746 – 1828 ) , probably completed between 1821 and 1823 . It explores themes of violence , intimidation , aging and death . Satan hulks , in the form of a goat , in moonlit silhouette over a coven of ugly and terrified witches . A withdrawn young girl in black sits to the far right , apart and withdrawn from the other women ; perhaps in defiance . Goya was then around 75 years old , living alone and suffering from acute mental and physical distress . 
 It is one of the fourteen Black Paintings that Goya applied in oil on the plaster walls of his house , the Quinta del Sordo . The paintings were completed in secret : he did not title any of the works or leave record of his intentions in creating them . Absent of fact , Witches ' Sabbath is generally seen by art historians as a satire on the credulity of the age , a condemnation of superstition and the witch trials of the Spanish Inquisition . As with the other works in the group , Witches ' Sabbath reflects its painter 's disillusionment and can be linked thematically to his earlier etching The Sleep of Reason <unk> Monsters as well as the Disasters of War print series , another bold political statement published only posthumously . 
 Around 1874 , some fifty years after his death , the plaster murals were taken down and transferred to canvas supports . Witches ' Sabbath was much wider before transfer – it was the broadest of the Black Paintings . During the transfer about 140 cm ( 55 in ) of the painting was cut from the right @-@ hand side . At its reduced dimensions of 141 × 436 cm ( 56 × 172 in ) , its framing is unusually tightly cropped , which some critics find adds to its haunted , spectral aura , although others believe it distorts Goya 's intentions by moving the centre of balance and reducing the painting 's impact . 
 = = Background = = 
 Goya did not title any of the fourteen Black Paintings ; their modern names came about after his death . They are not <unk> , mentioned in his letters , and there are no records of him speaking of them . The works today are known by a variety of titles , most of which date to around the 1860s : his children were largely responsible for the names , with close friend Bernardo de Iriarte contributing the rest . The title El Gran <unk> ( The Great He @-@ Goat ) was given by painter Antonio Brugada ( 1804 – 63 ) . The Basque term for a Witches ' Sabbath , <unk> , is the source of the Spanish title <unk> and a derivation of <unk> , the Basque word for a male goat , which may have been combined with the word <unk> ( " field " ) to arrive at <unk> . 
 The historical record of Goya 's later life is relatively scant ; no accounts of his thoughts from this time survive . He deliberately suppressed a number of his works from this period – most notably the Disasters of War series – which are today considered amongst his finest . He was tormented by a dread of old age and fear of madness , the latter possibly from anxiety caused by an undiagnosed illness that left him deaf from the early 1790s . Goya had been a successful and royally placed artist , but withdrew from public life during his final years . From the late 1810s he lived in near @-@ solitude outside Madrid in a farmhouse converted into a studio . The house had become known as " La Quinta del Sordo " ( The House of the Deaf Man ) , after the nearest farmhouse had coincidentally also belonged to a deaf man . Art historians assume Goya felt alienated from the social and political trends that followed the 1814 restoration of the Bourbon monarchy , and that he viewed these developments as reactionary means of social control . In his unpublished art he seems to have railed against what he saw as a tactical retreat into Medievalism . It is thought that he had hoped for political and religious reform , but like many liberals became disillusioned when the restored Bourbon monarchy and Catholic hierarchy rejected the Spanish Constitution of 1812 . 
 Goya went to exile in France in 1824 , and ownership of the house passed to his grandson Mariano . An 1830 inventory by Brugada indicates that the work took a full wall between two windows on the first floor , opposite A Pilgrimage to San Isidro . On the wall to the right were Saturn <unk> His Son and Judith and Holofernes . Leocadia , Two Old Men and Two Old Men Eating Soup were on the left wall . Art historian Lawrence Gowing observed that the lower floor was divided thematically , with a male side – Saturn and A Pilgrimage to San Isidro – and a female side – Judith and Holofernes , Witches ' Sabbath and Leocadia . The house changed owners a number of times before March 1873 , when it came into the possession of the Belgian Frédéric Émile d 'Erlanger , who speculated that the area would appreciate in value over the coming years . The murals had deteriorated badly after many years on the walls . To preserve them , the new owner of the house had them transferred to canvas under the direction of the art restorer of the Museo del Prado , Salvador Martinez Cubells . Following their exhibition at the Paris Exposition Universelle in 1878 , where they were met with little reaction , d 'Erlanger donated them to the Spanish state in 1881 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Satan preaches from a raised earth mound and is dressed in clerical clothing that may be a <unk> . He has a goat @-@ like beard and horns , and stands in silhouette , accentuating his heavy body and gaping mouth , which is depicted as if he is screaming . His form may be derived from a 1652 illustration of the Canaanite idol <unk> , as illustrated by Athanasius Kircher . 
 He holds court before a circle of crouched and mostly terrified women , accepted by art historians as a coven of witches . Some bow their heads in fear , others look towards him in open @-@ mouthed and rapt awe . Describing the women , art historian Brian McQuade writes that the " sub @-@ humanity of the gathered group is underlined by their bestial features and moronic stares " . Satan 's absolute power over the women has been compared to that of the king in Goya 's 1815 The Junta of the Philippines , where authority is gained not from respect or personal charisma , but through fear and domination . The women are a mixture of old and young , and have similar twisted features ; all but one are scowling , nervous and obsequious . Goya 's use of tone to create atmosphere is reminiscent of both Velázquez and Jusepe de Ribera . The latter was an admirer of Caravaggio and utilised tenebrism and chiaroscuro . Goya learned from these sources , and from Rembrandt , some of whose prints he owned . 
 An old woman sits to the right of the goat ; her back to the viewer . Her face is half hidden , and she wears a white @-@ hooded headdress resembling a nun 's habit . She sits alongside bottles and vials on the ground to her right . Art critic Robert Hughes wonders if they " contain the drugs and <unk> needed for the devilish ceremonies " . The eyes of some figures are lined with white paint . The faces of the two main figures – the goat and the woman to the far right – are hidden . The woman is separated from the group , she is perhaps a postulant about to be initiated into the coven . She may represent Goya 's maid and probable lover Leocadia Weiss , whose full @-@ length portrait appears in the same series . 
 As with the other Black Paintings , Goya began with a black background which he painted over with lighter pigments , then with broad , heavy brushstrokes of grey , blue and brown . The darker areas were achieved by leaving the black under @-@ paint exposed ; this is most obvious in the figure of the Devil . Like the other works in the series , Witches ' Sabbath is worked up through heavy , slashing brushstrokes . The plaster was underlaid with thick carbon black before the paint was applied in hues of white lead , Prussian blue , vermilion of mercury , and crystals of powdered glass , orpiment and iron oxides . He likely worked with mixed materials . Technical analysis indicates that most of the Black Paintings begun with preparatory drawings . Witches ' Sabbath is the exception ; the final composition seems to have been painted directly onto the wall . 
 Art historian Fred Licht notes that Goya 's brushwork appears " clumsy , ponderous , and rough " and lacking finish compared to his earlier work . Licht believes this was a deliberate ploy to physically convey dismay at human inadequacy and his own feelings of personal doubt . Unique in the series , Witches ' Sabbath was not significantly altered by Goya after his initial work . 
 = = Interpretation = = 
 There is no record of Goya 's thoughts during this period . He completed the series during a period recuperating from illness , possibly lead poisoning , when he was in considerable mental and physical pain , and withdrew from public life . Witches ' Sabbath is believed to be a rather bitter , but silent , protest against the royalists and clergy who had retaken control of Spain after the Peninsular War of 1807 – 14 . Advocates of the Enlightenment had sought to redistribute land to the peasants , to educate women , publish a vernacular Bible and , by replacing superstition with reason , put an end to the Inquisition . Witch hunting , which occurred during the <unk> Inquisition , was appalling to idealist liberals such as Goya . As court painter Goya was a part of the established order ; surviving evidence indicates he was acquiesced to the wishes of his patrons . Yet numerous paintings and etchings have emerged since , suggesting he had convictions favouring liberalism , enlightenment , and reason . He seems to have kept such beliefs private , only expressing them in his private art ; his more sensitive works were not published at the time , probably for fear of reprisal or persecution . In Witches ' Sabbath Goya mocks and ridicules the superstition , fear and irrationality of the ignorant placing their faith in ghouls , quack doctors and tyrants . 
 Goya had used witchcraft imagery in his 1797 – 98 Caprichos print series , and in his similarly titled 1789 painting Witches ' Sabbath . In both the 1789 and 1822 Sabbath pictures , the Devil is presented as a goat surrounded by a ring of terrified women . The earlier painting uses witchcraft imagery in a manner that inverts the order of traditional Christian iconography . The goat extends his left rather than right hoof towards the child , the quarter moon faces out at the left hand corner of the canvas . These inversions may be metaphor for the irrational undermining of the liberals who argued for scientific , religious and social progress . Many of the scientific bodies then active were condemned as subversive and their members accused as " agents of the devil " . 
 Describing the techniques employed in the Black Paintings , particularly the visible black ground paint , art historian Barbara Stafford said that " by brusquely inlaying spots of light with prevailing darkness , Goya 's <unk> and painted visions demonstrated the powerlessness of the unmoored intellect to unify a monstrously hybrid experience according to its own a priori transcendental laws . " 
 = = Restoration = = 
 Between 1874 and 1878 restorer Salvador Martinez Cubells was tasked with retouching the goat 's horns and a number of the witches ' faces . He removed more than 140 cm ( 55 in ) of landscape and sky to the right of the postulant witch , where the paint had been badly damaged . This alteration significantly shifted the work 's centre of balance ; the young woman was no longer near the middle of the composition , thus reducing both her prominence and the possibility that she is seen to be the focus of the work . 
 Some art historians have speculated that the area removed was beyond restoration since it is unlikely that such a large section of painting by an artist of Goya 's stature would be lightly discarded . Still , the removal may have been for aesthetic reasons , with the empty space on the right viewed as unnecessary ; its removal intended to bring balance to a canvas perceived as overlong . If this was Cubells ' reasoning , it was misguided ( he was not an accomplished painter and lacked insight into Goya 's intentions ) ; Goya had often used empty space to dramatic and evocative effect . 
 This can be seen in both The Dog from the same series , and his print Unfortunate events in the front seats of the ring of Madrid , and the death of the Mayor of Torrejón , where he left large empty areas . This seems to have been a reaction against contemporary conventions of balance and harmony , and was a precursor to works by modern artists such as Francis Bacon , who greatly admired Goya 's depiction of what Bacon described as " the void " . 
 = = Condition = = 
 The painting is in poor condition . Time and a complicated transfer – which involved mounting crumbling plaster onto canvas – have caused extensive damage and significant paint loss . The work seems to have been seriously damaged even before its removal from the walls of Goya 's home ; the base of dry plaster may have contributed to its early deterioration . <unk> completed on dry ( rather than wet ) plaster cannot survive for a long period on a roughened surface . Evan Connell believes that in applying oil to plaster Goya " made a technical mistake that all but guaranteed disintegration " . 
 Many of the Black Paintings were significantly altered during the restoration of the 1870s , and critic Arthur Lubow describes the works hanging in the Prado today as " at best a crude facsimile of what Goya painted " . We know the effect of many of Martinez Cubells ' changes from his accounts , but they inevitably lack objectivity . More reliable are two overlapping photographs taken in preparation for the restoration by Jean Laurent , now in the Courtauld Institute 's Witt Library . They show the painting in situ in the Quinta del Sordo and are the most reliable indicators of its appearance before restoration . But Laurent 's work presents difficulties , not least because some areas of the photographs lack resolution and contain indistinct passages . Photographs from this period tended to darken yellow and red areas while lightening blues and violets . 
 = HMS Duke of York ( 17 ) = 
 HMS Duke of York was a King George V @-@ class battleship of the Royal Navy . Laid down in May 1937 , the ship was constructed by John Brown and Company at Clydebank , Scotland , and commissioned into the Royal Navy on 4 November 1941 , subsequently seeing service during the Second World War . 
 In mid @-@ December 1941 , Duke of York transported Prime Minister Winston Churchill to the United States to meet President Franklin D. Roosevelt . Between March and September 1942 Duke of York was involved with convoy escort duties , but in October she was dispatched to Gibraltar where she became the flagship of Force H. 
 In October 1942 , Duke of York was involved in the Allied invasion of North Africa , but saw little action as her role only required her to protect the accompanying aircraft carriers . HMS Duke of York stopped the Gil <unk> on 1 November 1942 and a commando arrested Gastão de Freitas <unk> . The British had picked up radio traffic indicating naval espionage , possibly compromising the secrecy of " Operation Torch " . 
 After Torch , Duke of York was involved in Operations Camera and Governor , which were diversionary operations designed to draw the Germans ' attention away from Operation Husky . On 4 October , Duke of York operated with her sister @-@ ship Anson in covering a force of Allied cruisers and destroyers and the American carrier Ranger , which raided German shipping off Norway . The attack sank four merchant ships and badly damaged a further seven . 
 On 26 December 1943 Duke of York was part of a task force which encountered the German battleship Scharnhorst . During the engagement that followed , Scharnhorst hit Duke of York twice with little effect , but was herself hit by several of Duke of York 's 14 @-@ inch shells , silencing one of her turrets and hitting a boiler room . After temporarily escaping from Duke of York 's heavy fire , Scharnhorst was struck several times by torpedoes , allowing Duke of York to again open fire , contributing to the eventual sinking of Scharnhorst after a running action lasting ten @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours . 
 In 1945 Duke of York was assigned to the British Pacific Fleet as its flagship , but suffered mechanical problems in Malta which prevented her arriving in time to see any action before Japan surrendered . 
 After the war , Duke of York remained active until she was laid up in November 1951 . She was eventually scrapped in 1957 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 In the aftermath of the First World War , the Washington Naval Treaty was drawn up in 1922 in an effort to stop an arms race developing between Britain , Japan , France , Italy and the United States . This treaty limited the number of ships each nation was allowed to build and capped the tonnage of all capital ships at 35 @,@ 000 tons . These restrictions were extended in 1930 through the Treaty of London , however , by the mid @-@ 1930s Japan and Italy had withdrawn from both of these treaties and the British became concerned about a lack of modern battleships within their navy . As a result , the Admiralty ordered the construction of a new battleship class : the King George V class . Due to the provisions of both the Washington Naval Treaty and the Treaty of London , both of which were still in effect when the King George Vs were being designed , the main armament of the class was limited to the 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) guns prescribed under these instruments . They were the only battleships built at that time to adhere to the treaty and even though it soon became apparent to the British that the other signatories to the treaty were ignoring its requirements , it was too late to change the design of the class before they were laid down in 1937 . 
 Duke of York was the third ship in the King George V class , and was laid down at John Brown & Company 's shipyard in Clydebank , Scotland , on 5 May 1937 . Ironically , the title of Duke of York was in abeyance at that time , having been that held by King George VI prior to his succession to the throne in December 1936 . The battleship was launched on 28 February 1940 and was completed on 4 November 1941 . After this , the ship joined the Home Fleet at Scapa Flow . 
 = = Description = = 
 Duke of York displaced 36 @,@ 727 long tons ( 37 @,@ 300 t ) as built and 42 @,@ 076 long tons ( 42 @,@ 800 t ) fully loaded . The ship had an overall length of 700 feet ( 213 @.@ 4 m ) , a beam of 103 feet ( 31 @.@ 4 m ) and a draught of 29 feet ( 8 @.@ 8 m ) . Her designed metacentric height was 6 feet 1 inch ( 1 @.@ 85 m ) at normal load and 8 feet 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 46 m ) at deep load . 
 She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving four propeller shafts . Steam was provided by eight Admiralty 3 @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers which normally delivered 100 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 75 @,@ 000 kW ) , but could deliver 110 @,@ 000 shp ( 82 @,@ 000 kW ) at emergency overload . This gave Duke of York a top speed of 28 knots ( 52 km / h ; 32 mph ) . The ship carried 3 @,@ 700 long tons ( 3 @,@ 800 t ) of fuel oil , which was later increased to 4 @,@ 030 long tons ( 4 @,@ 100 t ) . She also carried 183 long tons ( 200 t ) of diesel oil , 256 long tons ( 300 t ) of reserve feed water and 430 long tons ( 400 t ) of freshwater . At full speed Duke of York had a range of 3 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 5 @,@ 700 km ; 3 @,@ 600 mi ) at 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Duke of York mounted 10 BL 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) Mk VII guns , which were mounted in one Mark II twin turret forward and two Mark III quadruple turrets , one forward and one aft . The guns could be elevated 40 degrees and depressed 3 degrees , while their training arcs varied . Turret " A " was able to traverse 286 degrees , while turrets " B " and " Y " could both move through 270 degrees . Hydraulic drives were used in the training and elevating process , achieving rates of two and eight degrees per second , respectively . A full gun broadside weighed 15 @,@ 950 pounds ( 7 @,@ 230 kg ) , and a salvo could be fired every 40 seconds . The secondary armament consisted of 16 QF 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 133 mm ) Mk I dual purpose guns which were mounted in eight twin turrets . The maximum range of the Mk I guns was 24 @,@ 070 yards ( 22 @,@ 009 @.@ 6 m ) at a 45 @-@ degree elevation , the anti @-@ aircraft ceiling was 49 @,@ 000 feet ( 14 @,@ 935 @.@ 2 m ) . The guns could be elevated to 70 degrees and depressed to 5 degrees . The normal rate of fire was ten to twelve rounds per minute , but in practice the guns could only fire seven to eight rounds per minute . 
 Along with her main and secondary batteries , Duke of York carried 48 QF 2 pdr ( 40 @-@ millimetre ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) ) Mk.VIII " pom @-@ pom " anti @-@ aircraft guns in six octuple , power @-@ driven , mountings . These were supplemented by six 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon light AA guns in single , hand @-@ worked , mounts . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 In mid @-@ December 1941 , Duke of York embarked Prime Minister Winston Churchill for a trip to the United States to confer with President Franklin D. Roosevelt . She arrived at Annapolis , Maryland , on 22 December 1941 , made a shakedown cruise to Bermuda in January 1942 , and departed for Scapa Flow on 17 January with Churchill returning home by air . 
 On 1 March 1942 she provided close escort for Convoy PQ 12 in company with the battlecruiser Renown , the cruiser Kenya , and six destroyers . On 6 March that force was reinforced with one of Duke of York 's sister ships , King George V , and the aircraft carrier Victorious , the heavy cruiser Berwick , and six destroyers as a result of Admiral John Tovey 's concerns that the German battleship Tirpitz might attempt to intercept the convoy . On 6 March the German battleship put to sea and was sighted by a British submarine around 19 : 40 ; no contact was made , however , except for an unsuccessful aerial torpedo attack by aircraft from Victorious . 
 Later that month , Convoy PQ 13 was constituted and Duke of York again formed part of the escort force . In early April , Duke of York , King George V , and the carrier Victorious formed the core of a support force that patrolled between Iceland and Norway to cover several convoys to the Soviet Union . In late April , when King George V accidentally rammed and sank the destroyer Punjabi in dense fog , sustaining significant bow damage , Duke of York was sent to relieve her . She continued in these operations through May , when she was joined by the American battleship USS Washington . In mid @-@ September , Duke of York escorted Convoy QP 14 . 
 In October 1942 , Duke of York was sent to Gibraltar as the new flagship of Force H , and supported the Allied landings in North Africa the following month . During this time Duke of York came under air attack by Italian aircraft on several occasions , but the raids were relatively small scale and were swiftly dealt with by the " umbrella " provided by the aircraft from the accompanying carriers Victorious , Formidable and Furious . After this action , Duke of York returned to Britain for a refit . 
 With her refit completed , Duke of York resumed her status as flagship from 14 May 1943 pending the departure of King George V and Howe for Operation Husky . Operation Gearbox in June 1943 involved a sweep by Duke of York and Anson , in company with the US battleships Alabama and South Dakota , to provide distant cover for minor operations in Spitsbergen and the Kola Inlet , while the following month diversionary operations , codenamed " Camera " and " Governor of Norway " , were carried out in order to draw the Germans ' attention away from Operation Husky . On 4 October , Duke of York and Anson covered a force of Allied cruisers and destroyers and the American carrier Ranger , which raided German shipping off Norway . The attack resulted in the sinking of four German merchant ships and damage to seven others , which forced many of them to be grounded . 
 = = = Action with Scharnhorst = = = 
 In 1943 the German battleship Scharnhorst moved to Norway , a position whence she could threaten the Arctic convoys to Russia . With Tirpitz and two armoured ships also in Norwegian fjords , it was necessary for the Royal Navy to provide heavy escorts for convoys between Britain and Russia . One of these was sighted by the Germans in early December 1943 , and Allied intelligence concluded that the following convoy , Convoy JW 55B , would be attacked by the German surface ships . Two surface forces were assigned to provide distant cover to JW 55B , which had left Loch Ewe on 22 December . On 25 December 1943 , Scharnhorst was reported at sea . Force 1 cruisers , Belfast , Norfolk and Sheffield , with four destroyers , made contact shortly after 09 : 00 on 26 December . A brief engagement occurred around 09 : 30 , but Scharnhorst outdistanced her pursuers , and again outran them after a brief skirmish around noon . 
 Meanwhile , Force 2 , including Duke of York , the cruiser Jamaica and four destroyers , was closing , and it was estimated that a night action with Scharnhorst would commence around 17 : 15 . But Scharnhorst altered course , and contact was made at 16 : 32 , at a distance of 29 @,@ 700 yards ( 27 @,@ 200 m ) . Force 2 manoeuvred for broadside fire . Belfast , with Force 1 , fired <unk> at 16 : 47 to illuminate Scharnhorst . This failed , so Duke of York fired a starshell from one of her 5 @.@ 25 @-@ inch ( 133 mm ) guns , taking Scharnhorst by surprise with her main battery trained fore and aft . By 16 : 50 Duke of York had closed to 12 @,@ 000 yards ( 11 @,@ 000 m ) and opened fire with a full ten @-@ gun broadside , scoring one hit . Although under heavy fire , Scharnhorst straddled Duke of York a number of times and hit her twice . A 28 @.@ 3 @-@ centimetre ( 11 @.@ 1 in ) shell passed through the mainmast and its port leg without detonating , but fragments from the hit destroyed the cable for the main search radar . A 15 @-@ centimetre ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) shell also pierced the port strut of the foremast without exploding . At 16 : 55 a 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) shell silenced turrets Anton and Bruno , but Scharnhorst maintained speed so that by 18 : 24 the range had opened to 21 @,@ 400 yards ( 19 @,@ 600 m ) , when Duke of York ceased fire after expending fifty @-@ two broadsides . One shell from the final salvos hit and exploded in Scharnhorst 's number one boiler room , slowing the ship and allowing the pursuing destroyers to overtake her . 
 Force 2 's destroyers then attacked with torpedoes , firing 28 and scoring hits with three . This slowed Scharnhorst , and at 19 : 01 Duke of York again opened fire , at a range of 10 @,@ 400 yards ( 9 @,@ 500 m ) . She ceased fire at 19 : 30 to allow the cruisers to close on Scharnhorst . Ten 14 @-@ inch shells had hit the German battleship , causing fires and explosions , and silencing almost all of the secondary battery . By 19 : 16 all of the main turrets aboard Scharnhorst had ceased fire and her speed had been cut to 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . Duke of York ceased fire at 19 : 30 . In the final stages of the battle the destroyers fired a total of 19 torpedoes at her , causing Scharnhorst to list badly to port , and at 19 : 45 she sank after a running action lasting ten @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours from the first , taking with her over 1 @,@ 700 men . Following her sinking , and the retreat of most of the other German heavy units from Norway , the need to maintain powerful forces in British home waters was diminished . 
 = = = Subsequent operations = = = 
 On 29 March 1944 , Duke of York and the rest of the Home Fleet left Scapa Flow to provide a support force for Convoy JW 58 . The ship operated in the Arctic and as cover for carriers conducting the Goodwood series of air strikes on Tirpitz in mid to late August . In September , when she was overhauled and partially modernized at Liverpool , radar equipment and additional anti @-@ aircraft guns were added . She was then ordered to join the British Pacific Fleet and sailed in company with her sister ship Anson on 25 April 1945 . A problem with the ship 's electrical circuitry delayed her while she was at Malta and , as a result , she did not reach Sydney until 29 July , by which time it too late for her to take any meaningful part in hostilities against the Japanese . 
 Nevertheless , in early August , Duke of York was assigned to Task Force 37 , along with four aircraft carriers and her sister King George V. From 9 August , TF 37 and three American carrier task forces conducted a series of air raids on Japan , which continued until 15 August when a surrender came into effect . After the conclusion of hostilities , Duke of York , alongside her sister , King George V , participated in the surrender ceremonies that took place in Tokyo Bay . The following month Duke of York sailed for Hong Kong , to join the fleet that assembled there to accept the surrender of the Japanese garrison there . She was the flagship of the British Pacific Fleet when the Japanese surrendered , and remained so until June 1946 , when she returned to Plymouth for an overhaul . 
 = = = Post war = = = 
 Duke of York was flagship of the Home Fleet following the end of the war and remained in service until April 1949 . She was laid up in November 1951 , and on 18 May 1957 she was ordered to be scrapped . She was broken up by Shipbreaking Industries , Ltd , in Faslane . 
 = = Refits = = 
 During her career , Duke of York was refitted on several occasions to bring her equipment up @-@ to @-@ date . The following are the dates and details of the refits undertaken . 
 = Kurt Hummel = 
 Kurt Elizabeth Hummel is a fictional character and one of the male leads in the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . Series creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan initially conceived of him as a fashionable gay countertenor who is routinely bullied at school . Kurt is portrayed by actor Chris Colfer , and has appeared as a character on the show since its pilot episode , first broadcast on May 19 , 2009 . Glee follows the trials of the New Directions glee club at the fictional William McKinley High School in the town of Lima , Ohio , of which Kurt is a member . His storylines in the first season focus on his struggle with his sexual identity as he discloses his homosexuality to his father and friends , and deals with his romantic feelings for Finn Hudson , the heterosexual co @-@ captain of the glee club . 
 In the show 's second season , Kurt is forced to transfer to a private school for his own safety after a closeted classmate bullies him relentlessly and then threatens to kill him . Kurt joins the Dalton Academy Warblers , the school 's glee club , which is a competition rival of New Directions , and is befriended by their openly gay lead singer Blaine Anderson . Later on , the two become romantically involved . Their relationship has been well received by critics , and they have been named " one of the most beloved TV couples of the millennium " by Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post . Kurt eventually transfers back to McKinley and rejoins New Directions , but continues his relationship with Blaine , who transfers to McKinley in the third season . In the fourth season , Kurt moves to New York City with his best friend and rival Rachel Berry , where he pursues his musical education while interning for <unk> For the remainder of the of the series , Glee charts Kurt 's life in Lima and New York as he grapples with young adulthood and realising his career ambitions . 
 Colfer describes Kurt as projecting a very confident " I 'm better than you " personality , despite being a typically scared and anxious teenager . Kurt 's solos for New Directions tend to be songs — usually show tunes — traditionally performed by women , which best suit his countertenor voice . His occasionally complex — but always loving — relationship with his father has been a focus for the show . Colfer 's portrayal of Kurt has received much critical praise , and he has been the recipient of several awards , including Best Supporting Actor in a Series , Miniseries or Television Film at the 2011 Golden Globe Awards . He has also garnered many award nominations , which include the 2010 and 2011 Emmy Awards for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series . In April 2011 , Colfer was named one of the 2011 Time 100 , Time 's list of the 100 most influential people . 
 = = Casting and creation = = 
 Prior to being cast in Glee , Colfer had no professional acting experience . He originally auditioned for the role of Artie Abrams , performing " Mr. Cellophane " from the musical Chicago . Murphy was so impressed by his performance that the role of Kurt was created for him . To keep the number of students in the glee club constant , a character named <unk> was cut from the show . Kurt 's name is inspired by the character Kurt von Trapp from The Sound of Music , a role that Colfer once played as a child . The Hummel surname comes from the popular German Hummel figurines ; Colfer explained in an interview that Murphy thought he had their rosy @-@ cheeked complexion . Murphy praised Colfer 's abilities despite his lack of formal training , saying , " I just thought he was so talented and gifted and unusual . I 've never seen anyone who looks like him or acts like him or sounds like him . You 'd think he ’ d been at Juilliard for six years but he hasn 't . " Murphy saw something of himself in the young actor , a fact that Colfer says is " completely mind @-@ blowing " . Colfer added , " For him to see me in him , I can 't even describe it . " 
 After being cast , Colfer said that he was happy " to be a part of something that is so new and different and so needed at this time " , and added , " It 's good to have something positive , especially for kids in small towns , like myself , who need a little pick @-@ me @-@ up . " Kurt has twice been portrayed as a child : in the episode " Grilled Cheesus " , a series of flashback scenes show Kurt at the age of eight , in which the character is played by Adam Kolkin . Although Kolkin was thirteen at the time of the audition , which called for an eight @-@ year @-@ old , he was chosen in part because his resemblance to Colfer was " so uncanny even the casting directors were taken aback " . Kurt has also been shown even younger — in the episode " The Substitute " , club director Will Schuester ( Matthew Morrison ) comes down with the flu and has a hallucination of the students as preschoolers ; all twelve glee club members , including Kurt , are played by very young children . 
 In December 2010 , Murphy announced that the cast of Glee would be replaced at the end of the third season to coincide with their graduation . He said , " Every year we 're going to populate a new group . There 's nothing more depressing than a high schooler with a bald spot . " He also revealed that some of the original cast would leave as early as 2012 : " I think you have to be true to the fact that here is a group of people who come and go in these teachers ' lives . " Murphy stated in July 2011 that Colfer would be one of the actors leaving at the end of the third season , and Colfer commented on the report , saying , " We had kind of known since the beginning , since we started the show , that these characters were going to grow up and they were going to graduate eventually . I don 't think I thought it was going to happen so soon , necessarily , but I think we knew something like this was coming . " However , Falchuk later said that while Colfer , along with Lea Michele and Cory Monteith , would graduate at the end of the third season , their graduation does not mean that they will leave the show . Falchuk insisted that " it was never our plan or our intention to let them go .... They are not done with the show after this season . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 In the show 's pilot episode , Kurt auditions for the New Directions glee club by performing " Mr. Cellophane " from Chicago . Although he initially hides his homosexuality , many of the other members assume he is gay . He confides that he is gay to fellow glee club member Mercedes ( Amber Riley ) in " Acafellas " , and the two develop a close friendship . In the following episode , " Preggers " , Kurt joins the school football team as a kicker in order to impress his widowed father , Burt Hummel ( Mike O 'Malley ) , and helps the failing team win its first game by kicking the tie @-@ breaking extra point . His heightened confidence leads him to disclose his homosexuality to his father , who not only responds with love and acceptance , but also surprises Kurt by telling him that he has long been aware that Kurt was gay . Kurt quits the football team in " Mash @-@ Up " , when Coach Ken Tanaka ( Patrick Gallagher ) forces the glee club members of the team to choose between the club and the team . 
 Kurt competes against the glee club 's star singer Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) for a solo on " Defying Gravity " from the musical Wicked . However , after Burt receives a homophobic phone call labeling his son " a fag " , Kurt intentionally misses the song 's high note in order to lose the competition and save his father from further harassment . In the episode " Ballad " , Kurt is teamed with club member and quarterback Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) , for whom he harbors romantic feelings . He is aware that Rachel is also attracted to Finn , and attempts to sabotage her chances with him by giving her a bad makeover . In " The Power of Madonna " , Kurt and Mercedes , dissatisfied with their limited solo opportunities within the glee club , become singers for the school 's cheerleading squad , the Cheerios . Although Mercedes soon resigns from the squad , Kurt stays through the National cheerleading competition , and performs a major solo in the routine that wins the Cheerios their sixth consecutive national championship . 
 Kurt introduces his father to Finn 's mother Carole ( Romy Rosemont ) in the hope that if the two began dating , it would bring Kurt closer to Finn . Finn is initially unhappy when he finds out his mother is in a serious relationship , but he soon bonds with Burt over sports and other traditionally masculine activities . Kurt , who becomes jealous over their growing relationship , briefly attempts to reclaim his father 's attention by acting more masculine : he imitates Burt 's style of dress , asks him for advice on performing songs by his favorite artist , John Mellencamp , and arranges to have Burt walk in on him kissing cheerleader and glee club member Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) . In the episode " Theatricality " , Burt invites Carole and Finn to move in with him and Kurt . Aware of Kurt 's attraction to him , Finn is uncomfortable with sharing a bedroom with Kurt . In the hopes of pleasing Finn , Kurt redecorates their bedroom , but Finn is appalled by its fancy appearance and lack of privacy . During the ensuing argument , when Kurt refuses to acknowledge his infatuation , Finn loses his temper and calls the new furnishings " faggy " . Burt overhears Finn 's homophobic words , delivers a stinging reprimand , and throws him out . However , at the end of the episode , when two bullies are about to attack Kurt , Finn redeems himself by defending him . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 Burt suffers a heart attack early in the second season . He is comatose for several days , and Kurt is terrified that he might lose him . When members of the glee club sing religious songs to comfort him , Kurt , who does not believe in God , feels alienated , and lashes out at them . Burt eventually regains consciousness , and Kurt takes charge of his recovery . In the episode " Duets " , Kurt suspects new glee club member and transfer student Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) is gay and recruits Sam to be his teammate in the club 's duets competition . Finn attempts to dissuade Kurt from partnering with Sam by predicting that Sam will be bullied to the point of quitting the club if he sings a duet with another male student . After Burt points out that Kurt may be taking advantage of Sam , Kurt terminates the partnership , and performs a " duet " with himself , singing " Le Jazz Hot ! " from Victor Victoria . With unusual empathy , Rachel notices how lonely and unhappy Kurt seems , and realizes how hard it is for him to be the only publicly gay student at school . She reminds Kurt that the club members value him highly and that he is not alone , and asks him to sing the Judy Garland / Barbra Streisand duet of " Get Happy " and " Happy Days Are Here Again " with her . 
 In " Never Been Kissed " , Kurt goes to spy on the Dalton Academy glee club , the Warblers — New Directions ' primary competition for Sectionals — and meets openly gay student Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) , who then flirts with him while singing lead in a Warblers performance of " Teenage Dream " . Kurt tells Blaine that he is being tormented by a homophobic bully at his high school , and Blaine convinces him to stand up for himself . When the bully , Dave Karofsky , throws Kurt against a locker , Kurt confronts him , and an increasingly agitated Karofsky abruptly grabs Kurt and kisses him . Before Karofsky can initiate a second kiss , Kurt shoves him away . Kurt and Blaine try to talk to Karofsky about being gay and closeted , but he denies the kiss . The bullying intensifies , and Karofsky threatens to kill Kurt if Kurt reveals their kiss to anyone . After Burt learns about Karofsky 's threat to his son , Karofsky is expelled . Burt and Carole get married , but when Karofsky 's expulsion is reversed by the school board , the newlyweds decide to spend the money they had saved for their honeymoon on tuition to transfer Kurt to Dalton Academy , which enforces a zero @-@ tolerance policy against bullying . 
 At Dalton , Kurt joins the Warblers . When the Warblers and New Directions meet at the show choir Sectionals competition , they tie for first place , making both groups eligible for Regionals . Kurt and Blaine become good friends , and Kurt soon falls in love with Blaine , though Blaine is initially oblivious to Kurt 's regard . However , in the episode " Original Song " , Blaine realizes his true feelings for Kurt , and they share a kiss . To Kurt 's disappointment , the Warblers lose to New Directions at the Regionals competition . He transfers back to McKinley in " Born This Way " after Karofsky starts an anti @-@ bullying club with glee club member Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) , and personally assures Kurt that he regrets his earlier threats . 
 Kurt invites Blaine to the McKinley junior prom in " Prom Queen " . The attendees greet Karofsky 's election as Prom King with great enthusiasm , but a stunned silence falls when Kurt is declared Prom Queen due to having received an overwhelming number of unwanted write @-@ in votes in the secret balloting . Humiliated , Kurt flees in tears , but is able to calm down and return for his coronation ; his comment — " Eat your heart out , Kate Middleton " — garners applause that swells into an ovation . The traditional dance between King and Queen is next , and Karofsky is faced with having to partner with a boy in front of his classmates . He rejects Kurt 's suggestion to come out at the prom , and abandons Kurt on the dance floor as the music begins ; Blaine dances with Kurt instead . At the end of the season , the glee club travels to the Nationals competition in New York City . Kurt and Rachel sneak into the Gershwin Theatre where Wicked is playing , and from the stage they sing " For Good " , a song from the musical . They both decide to come back to New York after graduation . New Directions finishes in twelfth place at Nationals , and upon Kurt 's return to Ohio , he and Blaine declare their love for one another . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 Blaine gives in to Kurt 's urgings and wishes and transfers to McKinley High so they can spend more time together during Kurt 's senior year . Kurt and Rachel decide they want to apply to a top school for the dramatic arts in New York City , NYADA , but are intimidated when they meet some of their competition and decide their applications need to include more accomplishments : Rachel proposes that McKinley do West Side Story as the school musical so she can star in it , and Kurt runs for class president . Brittany volunteers to be his campaign manager , and he accepts , but when he objects to her suggestions for posters and paraphernalia as overemphasizing his sexuality , she decides to run for the office herself . Kurt tries out for the musical , but the directors aren 't convinced that he 's masculine enough to portray Tony , the romantic male lead , and cast Blaine instead , even though he 's only a junior ; Kurt is given the minor role of Officer <unk> . When Rachel believes that she might not be cast as Maria , the female lead , she panics and decides to run for class president as well , infuriating Kurt . She eventually withdraws and throws her support behind Kurt , and secretly decides to help him further by stuffing the ballot box in his favor . He nevertheless loses to Brittany , and Rachel is suspended from school for cheating . The same day that Kurt loses , his father wins a special congressional election against Sue . 
 In " The First Time " , Kurt and Blaine discuss whether or not to have sex . When Blaine goes to Dalton to invite the Warblers to see him in West Side Story , he is pursued by a new warbler Sebastian Smythe ( Grant Gustin ) . Sebastian convinces Kurt and Blaine to go with him to a local gay bar — he supplies the fake IDs — and spends half the night dancing with Blaine . When they leave , a drunk and aroused Blaine urges Kurt to have sex with him in the back seat of the car . Kurt refuses , and Blaine walks home . He later tells Kurt that he was just nervous about the possibility of their first time , and that he cares nothing for Sebastian . They kiss onstage in the empty auditorium , and Kurt proposes that they go over to Blaine 's house for the night , where they have sex together for the first time . In the episode " Michael " , New Directions and the Warblers compete for the right to perform Michael Jackson 's music at Regionals by singing his song " Bad " . Sebastian , who has been unsuccessful in his attempts to steal Blaine from Kurt , throws a slushie laced with rock salt at Kurt , but Blaine jumps in front of Kurt and is badly injured by it ; the cornea in his right eye is deeply scratched and requires surgery . Neither group ultimately uses Jackson 's music at Regionals , and New Directions wins the competition . Later , Kurt succeeds in becoming a finalist for NYADA , as does Rachel . 
 In " Dance with Somebody " , Kurt feels that Blaine has been distant , and confides in a boy named Chandler he meets at the local music store . The two hit it off instantly with their common interest of moving to New York after high school . Kurt begins texting Chandler quite often soon after that . Rachel thinks he 's being in the wrong that Kurt is cheating on Blaine instead of talking to Blaine about the rut they are in . Blaine finds out about Chandler and is extremely hurt . Both Kurt and Blaine sing Whitney songs to express how they feel about their situation with Blaine singing It 's Not Right but It 's Okay and Kurt singing I Have Nothing as an apology . Eventually after having a talk in Emma 's office , the two make up and are stronger than ever . In " Goodbye " , Blaine is worried that he and Kurt will not make it as a couple after Kurt graduates and moves off to New York . Kurt reassures him that they will be okay as a couple . After graduation , Kurt , Rachel and Finn 's letters from the New York schools they applied to come in . Kurt does not get accepted to NYADA . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In Season 4 , Kurt joins Rachel in New York after she reveals that she is unhappy with her roommate and life at that point . After the encouragement of Blaine and his father , he decides to sell his car and fly to New York , where he finds a loft in Bushwick for him and Rachel to move into . Kurt applies for a job at Vogue.com and his editor , Isabelle Wright , who is also from Ohio , hires him partially based upon his portfolio of outfits and is impressed with his intuition and style . Early on , she leans on his support , and then quickly returns his support when he decides to give Rachel a makeover in the Vogue closet . Instead of being angry , she loves his idea to do a musical makeover for the website and joins in the makeover . Kurt becomes increasingly busy with his job at Vogue , and Blaine cheats on him in Lima . He comes to New York to tell Kurt what happened , and they break up . 
 Kurt continues working at Vogue throughout the season , and Isabelle encourages him to try to forgive Blaine , and at Thanksgiving , she brings her friends over to their loft and throws him a " <unk> . " When Kurt <unk> for NYADA , he is initially rejected , because Carmen Tibideaux sees his technical skill and tells him that he can sell a number , but doesn 't believe that he is emotional enough to be an artist . Later , when Kurt is at the Winter Showcase to support Rachel , she sees him moved by Rachel 's piece , and announces that he will be auditioning after the intermission . Though he initially panics , Rachel convinces him that he doesn 't need his bells and whistles to perform , and he chooses to sing " Being Alive " from Company , which impresses the NYADA audience , and he later gets a letter telling him that he has gotten in . 
 At Christmas , Kurt elects not to go back home , and so his father comes up to New York to set up his Christmas tree and spend some time with him . At this point , he tells Kurt that he has prostate cancer . He also has brought Blaine with him , who tries to win back Kurt 's trust , but the trip is uneasy . When Kurt begins at NYADA , he struggles initially to find his place , and meets a student named Adam Crawford , a senior who wants to recruit him for his own show choir , Adam 's Apples , and also seems interested in Kurt himself ; Kurt eventually asks him out for coffee . While at Will and Emma 's wedding , Kurt and Blaine hook up , leaving their relationship in a question , since Kurt is dating Adam , but not exclusive . When Kurt returns to New York , there is a snowstorm , leaving Kurt , Rachel , Santana , and Adam stuck together in the loft watching movies together . Santana strongly hints about Kurt 's hook up with Blaine , and after they are back at school , Adam asks Kurt about his feelings for Blaine . Kurt says that he is desperately trying to get over Blaine , and Adam invites him to find their own romantic movie . 
 When Santana moves in with him and Rachel , Kurt tries to keep Santana from telling Rachel about Brody prostituting himself . But Santana tells Rachel anyway , much to Kurt 's dismay . Later , Kurt and Rachel confront Santana for working at a club dancing and try to encourage her to take a dance class from the extension school of NYADA to keep her skills honed . Still working at Vogue , Kurt is put in charge of a ballet gala , and invites Rachel and Santana to help . He and Rachel reveal that they both had experiences with ballet as children , and Kurt started ballet at the age of three years when his mother decided to take him . He bribes Santana to go with a designer dress , and once they are at the gala , she admits she was in ballet as a child too and loved it . When Kurt returns to Lima , it is to be there for his father 's doctor 's visit , and his anxiety is apparent throughout his interactions with his friends . However , in the doctor 's office , Kurt , Burt , and Carole learn that Burt 's cancer has gone into remission , and Kurt takes his father to the Glee club to sing " Sunshine of My Life " to him , which Kurt says Burt used to sing to him when he was little . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 In the season premiere , " Love , Love , Love " , Kurt , who is still in Lima , agrees to get back together with Blaine . Emboldened , Blaine decides to ask Kurt to marry him , which he does in an extravagant proposal at Dalton Academy , in the spot where the two met . Kurt accepts . He is back in New York in " Tina in the Sky with Diamonds " , and gets a job at the diner where Rachel and Santana are working . He then returns to Lima in " The Quarterback " for his stepbrother Finn 's funeral and subsequent memorial , and he grieves with his parents and friends . 
 Kurt was still living in New York , but he was visiting his father in Lima 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 During the season , Kurt and Blaine have broken up but eventually reunite in time for Brittany and Santana 's wedding . At the two 's insistence , Kurt and Blaine get married alongside them . In 2020 , they are still married and are a celebrity couple . Rachel is pregnant with their child who is assumed to be a girl . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 According to Colfer , Glee 's creators initially " were leaning on [ Kurt ] being overly flamboyant " . However , the actor stated that he did not want to take that approach " because it 's so overdone " . Instead , he decided to portray the character as " more internal and superior . " Colfer has explained that Kurt " puts on a very confident , ' I 'm better than you ' persona , " but that " underneath it all he 's the same anxious and scared teen everyone is / was at some point . " Colfer also commented , " In later episodes , [ Kurt ] goes through an identity crisis , accepting and finding acceptance for who he is . He 's a tough guy in designer clothes . " In contrasting Kurt to his own personality , Colfer stated that Kurt is " very flamboyant and superior and uppity and into fashion " , while Colfer had never heard of fashion designer Marc Jacobs before Kurt referenced him in the pilot episode . The second season episode " Grilled Cheesus " centered around Kurt 's atheism , with Murphy explaining that Kurt is " saying to the world , ' Prove [ me ] wrong : If God is kindness and love , make me believe in God . ' " 
 Kurt reveals himself to be gay early in the show 's first season . The scene in which he tells his father was taken verbatim from Murphy 's own life . Murphy felt that the scene was " a great thing to put on television " , because , while gay characters are often isolated and attacked , audiences have rarely seen an openly gay character who " wins and triumphs " . He further explained , " The show is about making you feel good in the end . It 's about happy endings and optimism and the power of your personal journey and making you feel that the weird thing about me is the great thing about me . I 've done other shows with gay characters , and I will say that in many of those cases , the gay characters didn 't have a happy ending . And I thought you know what ? Enough . " Colfer has commented that his biggest challenge was in ensuring the scene felt " honest " and not comical or " used as a punchline " . He explained , " I think it 's probably the first time a character 's sexuality has been respected and almost dignified in a way , and I think that 's really important , and there needs to be more of that on TV . " 
 Kurt ’ s acute sense of fashion is exhibited in his on @-@ screen wardrobe . Glee 's costume designer Lou Eyrich said in an interview with the Seattle Times that Kurt is one of her favorite characters to dress : " He never , ever repeats and you get to push yourself creatively . He 's a perfect doll to dress because he 'll try on anything . " Eyrich sets out to dress Kurt with tailored pieces that " exude his quietly flashy dapper dandyism " , mindful that as the son of a car mechanic , " he doesn 't have a lot of money " . 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Kurt has a close relationship with his father Burt , who openly accepts his son after Kurt tells him that he is gay in the show 's fourth episode , " Preggers " . As the series progresses their relationship continues to grow stronger . Colfer has credited his off @-@ screen relationship with O 'Malley with improving the quality of their scenes together . Kurt has twice fallen in love . The first occurrence is initially alluded to in the episode " Acafellas " , in which Kurt tells his friend Mercedes that he does have feelings for someone . Mercedes mistakenly assumes that Rachel , the glee club 's lead singer , is the object of Kurt 's affections , and although he later tells Mercedes that he is gay , he does not reveal to her that he is actually in love with the club 's male lead , Finn . After Kurt hints to Finn of his attraction , their friendship becomes strained as Finn resists Kurt 's machinations to get them together . The episode in which Burt defends his son against Finn 's name @-@ calling prompted a response from Eric Goldman of IGN , who declared it " one of the heaviest scenes Glee has ever delved into " . 
 Before production on the second season began , Murphy confirmed that Kurt would be paired with a new romantic interest . According to Chord Overstreet , his character Sam Evans was originally intended to become Kurt 's love interest . However , Sam 's storyline was later adjusted to pair him with glee club member Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) after producers observed the chemistry between Overstreet and Agron . Kurt was subsequently paired with another new character , Blaine Anderson , a member of the rival show choir group the Dalton Academy Warblers , who is initially a mentor for Kurt . Murphy was unsure at first whether their relationship would become a romantic one , and stated that he wished to gauge public response to their friendship before planning future developments . He commented , " Part of me thinks he should be the boyfriend , part of me thinks he should just be the mentor . I didn 't want to decide that until we got into sort of the middle of the season . " Kurt transfers from McKinley High to Dalton Academy and falls in love with Blaine , though Blaine only considers him a close friend . However , when Kurt sings the Beatles song " Blackbird " in " Original Song " , Blaine finally realizes his true feelings and the two kiss , marking the start of the relationship . Criss noted , " We all want to see Kurt happy , and like all great love stories , if you have two people that can be together you 've got to hold it up . " When imagining Blaine and Kurt 's potential future together , Murphy expected to treat them the same as all other Glee relationships by making their pairing " as flawed and as exposed as everyone else 's . " This plan was confirmed by Falchuk after the characters kissed for the first time , though he later clarified : " They 're solid . They have problems — you have two stars dating each other , there 's going to be some competition there . " In the second season finale , they each tell the other , " I love you " , and early in the third season they decide to have sex for the first time . The Kurt – Blaine relationship has been well received by critics , and they were named " one of the most beloved TV couples of the millennium " late in the second season by Jarett Wieselman of the New York Post . 
 In a July 2012 interview with E ! News , Colfer elaborated in regard to the progression of the Kurt @-@ Blaine relationship in the show 's fourth season . Colfer said , " I would like to do something besides say ' I love you , ' and I think Darren [ Criss ] and I agree on that . We 're ready for the next step . They 've been together for a while . Let 's throw some spice and drama into that . " In September 2012 , Criss echoed Colfer 's sentiment , " We 're like an old married couple now . Let 's shake it up ! " 
 To begin the show 's fourth season , Kurt moves to New York while Blaine continues to go to high school in Ohio , though he and Blaine remain a couple . However , after Blaine cheats on him , Kurt breaks up with Blaine . The two later agree to remain friends , <unk> is unwilling to resume their relationship . That winter , Kurt begins to see Adam Crawford , a senior at his new school , NYADA . Despite this , Kurt has sex with Blaine when in Ohio to attend a wedding , putting into question whether Kurt still wants to be with Blaine . 
 Despite all this , Kurt and Blaine do get back together in a <unk> relationship in the first episode of the fifth season , Love Love Love , which is incidentally the same episode that Blaine proposes marriage . Kurt says yes immediately . 
 Kurt heads back to New York while Blaine finishes high school back in Lima . Eventually , midway through the fifth season , Blaine graduates and moves in with Kurt . They have difficulties and agree that it would be best for them to continue with their engagement but as Blaine lives somewhere else for now as they both need their space . They eventually do move back in with each other in the season five finale . 
 At the beginning for the sixth season , it seems as though Kurt and Blaine have broken off the engagement due to difficulties living together and Blaine has moved back to Lima . Kurt later regrets this and decides to continue his schooling in Lima , to try to win Blaine back . 
 When Kurt returns , he finds that Blaine is in a relationship with Karofsky . Despite everything that goes on in the beginning of the sixth season , Kurt and Blaine get back together in the beginning of the episode , A Wedding . Later in the same episode , Brittany and Sue Sylvester persuade the couple to get married at Brittany and Santana 's wedding to make a double gay wedding . 
 They continue through the rest of the sixth season as a wed couple and in the season six finale , Dreams Come True , it is revealed that five years in the future , Rachel is carrying their child , a daughter . 
 = = Musical performances = = 
 As Kurt , Colfer features in many songs that have been released as singles available for digital download and are also included in the show 's soundtrack albums . In the episode " Wheels " , Kurt performs " Defying Gravity " from the Broadway musical Wicked . Murphy selected " Defying Gravity " for the episode after Colfer related a story in which his own high school drama teacher had refused him the opportunity to perform the song because it was written to be sung by a female singer . Murphy explained , " I found a way to write it into the show because that 's in a nutshell what this show is about : someone being told that they can 't do something because of what the perception of them is as opposed to what their real ability is . " Colfer stated that the opportunity to sing the song " meant the world " to him , and that " it 's absolutely terrifying to watch yourself do something you 've dreamed about for such a long time . I know I 'm definitely not the best singer , but I think the message , the story behind the song about defying limits and borders placed by others , hopefully all that gets across with the performance . Although I do some very ' <unk> ' things in the song , it 's probably one of the most honest and close @-@ to @-@ heart scenes I 've ever filmed or performed for that matter . " Colfer 's recording of the performance was released as a single , as well as two additional versions — one sung by co @-@ star Michele , and another that was arranged as a duet for the two singers . The duet version charted at number thirty @-@ one on the Billboard Hot 100 , and was included on the show 's first soundtrack album , Glee : The Music , Volume 1 . 
 In " Grilled Cheesus " , when members of the glee club are singing songs about religion and spirituality , Kurt sings The Beatles ' " I Want to Hold Your Hand " , dedicating the song to his father , who is in a coma in the hospital . Murphy stated that it would have been easy to have Kurt , an atheist , sing an anti @-@ religion song , but instead chose to have him sing about love . Critics disagreed over the appropriateness of this song choice . Anthony Benigno of the Daily News said he " found it particularly jarring to hear Kurt singing ' I wanna be your man ' about his father " , but Jessica Derschowitz of CBS News and MTV 's Aly Semigran enjoyed that the performance of " I Want to Hold Your Hand " brought new meaning to the song , which Semigran named her favorite number of the episode . In " Special Education " , when given his first opportunity to audition for a Warblers solo , Kurt asks Rachel for advice on selecting a song and she recommends " Don 't Cry for Me Argentina " from Evita ; the episode cuts between the two as they each sing the song . Both Colfer 's and Michele 's versions were released as singles , available for digital download , although neither appears on an album . Kurt and Blaine perform the duet " Baby , It 's Cold Outside " during the Christmas @-@ oriented episode " A Very Glee Christmas " . The number was released on Glee : The Music , The Christmas Album , and although it was not also released as a single , it nevertheless reached number fifty @-@ seven on the Billboard Hot 100 . As a Dalton Academy Warbler , Kurt sings the harmony line to Blaine 's lead in " Animal " by Neon Trees in the episode " Sexy " , and in " Original Song " he sings " Blackbird " by The Beatles . He also sings primary lead in a duet version of " Candles " by Hey Monday , with Blaine as the other lead . All three songs were included on the soundtrack Glee : The Music Presents the Warblers , released on April 19 , 2011 . 
 Colfer 's performances have been well received by critics , particularly " As If We Never Said Goodbye " in the episode " Born This Way " . Meghan Brown of The Atlantic stated that the song was " absolutely stunning in every conceivable way " . She thought that he had the emotional connection , the musicality , and the storytelling ability " down pat " . Entertainment Weekly 's Sandra Gonzalez also praised the rendition : " Kurt apparently picked up a few helpful notes ... from his Warbler brothers and emerged an even better solo singer than I recall . ... Most enjoyable , however , was a tenderness Kurt added to the song that I don 't think could have been duplicated by any other member of this ensemble . " In his review , Michael Slezak of TVLine commended Kurt 's voice and gave the song an " A " : " I feel like we haven ’ t had too many strong musical moments from Kurt this season , but this number , which pushed Chris Colfer ’ s falsetto to impressive heights , went a long way to erase the deficit . " Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman wrote that it was " a sweeter moment than last season 's ' Rose 's Turn ' , but the high notes and big vocals are still there " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Kurt has received mainly positive reviews from television critics . James Poniewozik , writing for Time , deemed his coming out " beautifully handled " and praised the series for subverting expectations with Burt 's acceptance . Rick Bentley of McClatchy Newspapers praised Colfer 's performance in the episode " Home " and deemed him deserving of an Emmy nomination . IGN 's Robert Canning noted that " Grilled Cheesus " , which focuses on Kurt 's atheism and his father 's heart attack , showed again that the Hummels ' relationship was " the most affecting " of the show . Poniewozik appreciated the focus on Kurt and Burt in the episode and also named their relationship one of Glee 's " strongest and most nuanced relationships " . The primary criticism by CNN 's Lisa Respers France of that episode was that it appeared to be an Emmy submission showpiece for Colfer . She said that " Grilled Cheesus " felt forced and disliked Kurt 's angry " overwrought " reaction to his friends ' prayers . Christie Keith , writing for the lesbian and bisexual media website AfterEllen.com , praised Kurt 's storylines and suggested that Colfer should win an Emmy Award for his portrayal of Kurt dealing with his identity . 
 Critics were polarized by Kurt 's storyline in the episode " Never Been Kissed " . NPR 's Linda Holmes found it " absurd " that a teenager as deeply in denial as Karofsky would transition from bullying to kissing Kurt so quickly and described it as " emotionally and behaviorally unsound " . Leah Anthony Libresco of the Huffington Post called the episode " extraordinarily counterproductive " , and disapproved of Will treating Kurt 's upset as the key problem , rather than the unchecked bullying provoking it . She found Blaine 's advice to Kurt " misleading and dangerous " , especially the suggestion that targeted children should be held responsible for confronting their attackers and putting themselves at risk of further injury , rather than for protecting themselves . Poniewozik noted that the storyline was inherently flawed , as the show had previously treated bullying in a light @-@ hearted rather than serious manner , but said that its saving grace was the focus it placed on Colfer : " probably the strongest actor with the most interesting character among the Glee kids " . 
 The love story involving Kurt and Blaine was met with critical acclaim , especially the events in the " Original Song " episode where the characters first kissed . Katie Morgan of Billboard stated , " It sure took them long enough , but we 're so glad to finally see Kurt happy . " The Boston Herald 's Mark Perigard wrote , " It was utterly , sweetly romantic , and Criss sold the hell out of the moment . It ’ s long overdue and it will silence the growing legion of critics out there who were unhappy with the pace of this story and why Kurt always seemed to be stuck in pure misery . " Kevin Fallon of The Atlantic thought the kiss was " sweet " and said that he was pleased that it attracted no controversy whatsoever . Semigran praised the interaction between Kurt and Blaine , and characterized the kiss scene as a " sweet , real and , shockingly , un @-@ hyped moment " . She went on to commend the acting in the scene , and wrote that both actors " handled it with dignity and honesty " . 
 Critics were enthusiastic about Kurt and Blaine 's decision to have sex for the first time in the " The First Time " episode . Canning said that Kurt and Blaine 's " attempts to get a little wild " , and " trying to grow up faster than they should " , were " the better parts of the episode as they felt the most realistic " . Futterman praised their departure from the bar as a " very faithful and honest scene " . Crystal Bell of HuffPost TV was impressed by the way the characters ' relationship " inspires gay youth in a way that we haven 't seen on network television yet " and called them " amazing role models for all teens " , and The Atlantic writer Kevin Fallon said it was " remarkable " and a " milestone " that " the decision by gay teen characters to lose their virginities is given equal weight to that of a straight couple " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Colfer has won several awards for his portrayal of Kurt . He was named Best Supporting Actor in a Series , Miniseries or Television Film at the 68th Golden Globe Awards . His performance in the groundbreaking role earned him a spot on the 2011 Time 100 , Time 's 2011 list of the 100 most influential people in the world . He and the other series regulars won Favorite New Diverse Ensemble Cast at the 2009 Diversity Awards . In 2010 , Colfer was awarded Favorite Breakout Actor , Favorite TV Actor and Gay / Bi Man of the Year by gay entertainment website AfterElton.com , who also rated Kurt as the seventh best gay character of all time . AfterElton.com said , " Colfer 's portrayal of Kurt is that he 's taken a character that 's in many ways a gay stereotype ... and turned him into a well @-@ rounded person who can both make us laugh and break our hearts . " Colfer also won the 2010 Choice TV : Male Scene Stealer accolade at the Teen Choice Awards , and was part of the Glee cast ensemble given the Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series award at the 16th Screen Actors Guild Awards . At the 2011 Dorian Awards , Colfer tied with co @-@ star Jane Lynch for the TV Comedy Performance of the Year award . In addition to Colfer 's own 2010 Golden Globe Award , the show won for Best Television Series — Musical or Comedy . Glee also received the 2010 and 2011 GLAAD Media Awards for Outstanding Series Comedy . 
 The role has earned Colfer nominations for further awards . He was nominated in the Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Comedy Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards for his performance in the episode " Laryngitis " , and at the 63rd Primetime Emmy Awards for his performance in " Grilled Cheesus " . He received consecutive Best Supporting Actor in a Series , Miniseries or Television Film nominations at the 2009 and 2010 Satellite Awards . At the 17th Screen Actors Guild Awards , he was nominated for the Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series , and was included in the cast ensemble nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series , and was again included in the cast ensemble nomination for the 18th Screen Actors Guild Awards . 
 = The Causeway = 
 The Causeway is an arterial traffic crossing in Perth , Western Australia , linking the inner @-@ city suburbs of East Perth and Victoria Park . It is composed of two bridges either side of Heirisson Island that cross the Swan River at the eastern end of Perth Water . The current Causeway is the third structure to have been built across the river at this point . 
 Originally the site of mudflats which restricted river navigation , the Colony Government constructed a causeway and bridge across the site . The project was first planned in 1834 and opened in 1843 . When floods in 1862 almost destroyed it , the structure was rebuilt using convict labour , and raised to better withstand future floods . Governor John Hampton officially opened the new Causeway on 12 November 1867 . Over the following decades , the three bridges making up this second Causeway were widened several times , and they were eventually replaced in 1952 . 
 The current Causeway bridges were designed by E W C Godfrey , and built between 1947 and 1952 . They were the first in Western Australia to use steel composite construction . Large roundabouts were also constructed at each end of the structure , to improve the flow of traffic . The opening of the Graham Farmer Freeway in 2000 reduced the traffic volume on the Causeway , allowing the two central lanes to be turned into bus lanes . By the early 2000s , the concrete structures had suffered significant damage . Cracks were repaired using carbon fibre reinforcement and localised patching , extending the bridge 's life by decades . The Causeway bridges have been recognised for their heritage value by their entry on the Western Australian Register of Heritage Places . 
 = = History = = 
 Following the settlement of the Swan River Colony in 1829 , the Swan River was the main transportation link between Perth and the port of Fremantle . Land transportation was difficult as the only river crossing near Perth , a ford at the eastern end of the town , was often impassable for wagons and carts . The next crossing point was 20 miles ( 32 km ) upstream at Guildford , a major detour . The only alternative to these river crossings were ferries , which operated from North Fremantle , Preston Point , and The Narrows . 
 = = = First Causeway = = = 
 Soon after the colony was founded , settlers lobbied for the construction of a road across the mudflats in the Swan River at the eastern end of the town . A preliminary survey of the site was conducted in 1834 by the Commissioner for Roads and Bridges , George Fletcher Moore , together with Surveyor General John Septimus Roe . A public meeting on 17 February 1837 passed a resolution urging the colony 's government to construct the road at the site , and Roe showed the public plans for the proposed causeway . A year later , in January 1838 , the Perth Gazette noted that preliminary work had been carried out towards building the causeway , which is thought to have been the upgrading of Adelaide Terrace from the " bush track " it was previously . 
 A committee was set up in October 1838 to investigate the viability of a causeway at the site . On 16 February 1839 plans which had been prepared by Roe were submitted by the committee 's chairman to Henry Trigg , the Superintendent of Public Works . Trigg called for other plans and prepared estimates . At a meeting of the committee on 27 February 1839 , Trigg submitted a plan designed by Major Frederick Irwin , which was estimated to cost £ 2 @,@ 300 . The committee cut the estimated figure to £ 1 @,@ 800 , and waited for Governor Hutt to specify how much could be funded by the government . 
 This original " causeway " consisted of a central bridge ( for river navigation ) , with a raised rampart on either side . The first pile of the central bridge was driven home on 2 November 1840 . The bridge was completed in 1841 , costing £ <unk> , although the approaches to the bridge took longer to complete . The causeway was sufficiently completed in January 1842 to be used by horsemen , and the causeway was finally finished in May 1843 at a total cost of £ <unk> It was officially opened on 24 May 1843 by J. W. Hardey , the chairman of the Road Trust , in the presence of only one other person , one of his friends . 
 The causeway was originally a toll road , and costs for crossing ranged from one penny ( 1d ) for a person on foot to 6d for a horse @-@ drawn cart . The tolls were subject to an additional levy of 50 per cent during the night hours . The tolls were later removed , and it appears to have been Perth 's only toll road . 
 = = = Second Causeway = = = 
 In June 1862 major flooding was experienced in many towns in the region , resulting in losses over £ 30 @,@ 000 . In Perth , Mounts Bay Road was completely submerged , and the original causeway was almost destroyed after being under seven or eight feet ( 2 @.@ 1 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) of water . However , Governor John Hampton ordered that the causeway should be reconstructed and raised several feet . The new Causeway was designed by Richard Roach Jewell and built by convicts . 
 The opening of the newly refurbished Causeway was a more pompous affair than that of the first Causeway . The second causeway was to be opened by the Duke of Edinburgh , Prince Alfred ; however the Royal Navy ship HMS Galatea failed to call in to Western Australia on its way to Sydney . As a result , the Governor proceeded with the opening in the Duke 's absence . On 12 November 1867 the Governor drove " through an avenue of flags and bunting " from Government House to the Causeway . There were military corps , a band and a great crowd present for the opening . After speeches by dignitaries , the Governor declared the new Causeway open with the following words : 
 I , John Stephen Hampton , Governor in and over the Colony of Western Australia , do hereby declare this Perth Bridge and Causeway open for traffic . 
 The proceedings were then disrupted when a youngster " raced across the newly @-@ opened bridge before the Governor 's procession " on horseback after announcing the following to the astonished crowd : 
 And I , John Stephen Maley , do hereby declare that I will be the first to cross this Perth Bridge and Causeway ! 
 The parade , including the Governor 's carriage , then proceeded over the new Causeway after the boy . The Governor 's procession continued on steam boats upstream to Guildford where the Governor opened the new Guildford and Helena Bridges . 
 This second Causeway was made up of three bridges with a combined length of 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 490 m ) . Budget constraints encountered during construction meant that the bridges were structurally quite weak . A maximum of 4 @,@ 480 pounds ( 2 @.@ 03 t ) or six head of cattle was initially allowed across at a time . 
 This Causeway was modified several times during its life . In 1899 it was widened by the addition of a footpath , while by 1904 it had been strengthened and widened by an average of 9 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 85 m ) . In June 1905 the Causeway was placed under the control of the Minister for Works . From 1932 to 1933 the Causeway bridges were widened a further 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) on their downstream side , which increased the total width to 37 feet ( 11 m ) . 
 = = = Third Causeway = = = 
 Plans to build a new bridge at The Narrows downstream from the Causeway in the aftermath of World War II were put on hold while a new Causeway could be constructed . Vehicle traffic using the Causeway had almost doubled between 1930 and 1939 . 
 The current Causeway was built between 1947 and 1952 , and designed by E. W. C. Godfrey . It is made up of two bridges , meeting at Heirisson Island . Considerable work was carried out to dredge the river to provide much wider navigation channels . The Heirisson Islands were turned into a single island and a substantial portion of land beside Trinity College was reclaimed . 
 The bridges were the " first truly modern bridges " built in Perth after World War II , being the first bridges in Western Australia to use steel composite construction , and only the second ( and third ) in Australia . The bridges have a combined length of 1 @,@ 119 feet ( 341 m ) , with both featuring a 62 @-@ foot ( 19 m ) wide roadway supporting six traffic lanes , and a footway 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) wide on the western side of the bridges . In order to achieve a sufficiently high clearance above the river channels at high tide , the bridges have graded approaches that increase the roadway elevation . 
 The southeastern bridge is the longer of the two , at 737 feet ( 225 m ) long . It is made up of 11 spans , each made up of nine welded plate girders , with a 33 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) relieving span at each end . The north @-@ western bridge is shorter , at only 382 feet ( 116 m ) in length , and is made up of five spans with a 35 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) relieving span at each end . The bridge decks are of reinforced concrete supported by the plate girders , which are in turn freely supported by the concrete piers . 
 Supply problems in the aftermath of the war meant that the concrete piers were founded on jarrah timber piles , rather than concrete . Additionally , a steel plate shortage forced the bridge 's designers to avoid the use of steel to design the forms in the bridge 's superstructure . Also , the cement that was used on the bridges had to be sourced from seven different sources , which led to different durability for different parts of the bridges . 
 The previous Causeway had carried electric trams , and it was expected that the new Causeway would also carry trams , or perhaps trolleybuses instead . However , the proposed overhead wires were deemed too ugly for the new bridge , and between £ 30 @,@ 000 and £ 40 @,@ 000 could be saved by using buses instead . The routes using the Causeway were replaced with bus services , but the bridges as constructed were nonetheless designed to be able to carry trams . 
 The southeastern bridge was the first to be completed , and was opened to traffic on 19 September 1952 , with traffic continuing to use the other two bridges of the previous Causeway . Work then continued on the northwestern bridge and the further reclamation of land . 
 Roundabouts were constructed at each end of The Causeway , to improve the flow of traffic on the bridges and the distribution of traffic back into the road network . The eastern roundabout opened in 1952 , while the western one did not open until December 1954 . Guides on the usage of the roundabouts were published in newspapers . In 1973 construction began on a grade @-@ separated partial cloverleaf interchange at the eastern end of the Causeway . The $ 1 @.@ 3 million interchange opened on 8 March 1974 . 
 By 1954 , traffic entering the city by the Causeway had doubled , leading to renewed calls for a new bridge further west at The Narrows . That bridge was eventually built as the Narrows Bridge . Opened in 1959 , the Narrows Bridge alleviated the traffic problems at the Causeway ; the Narrows and the Causeway continued to be the only road crossings of the Swan River between Fremantle and Maylands until the <unk> Bridge of the Graham Farmer Freeway opened in 2000 . The opening of the latter eastern bypass coincided with the conversion of the Causeway 's two centre lanes to bus lanes . It also lowered traffic levels on the Causeway from 107 @,@ 000 cars per day to 70 @,@ 000 within six months . The western roundabout , the state 's worst black spot since 1989 , was also remodelled in 2000 into a traffic light controlled raindrop roundabout , in conjunction with the other works on the Causeway . 
 The variable @-@ quality cement which had been used in the construction of the Causeway bridges meant that by the early 2000s , they had suffered significant damage , leading to a repair contract being awarded to Kulin Group in 2004 . Localised patching of cracks in the piers was undertaken . At the ends of the piers , the cracking was more substantial and had to be tied back with carbon fibre reinforcement . Repairs were then coated with moisture @-@ resistant coating , and were expected to lengthen the life of the bridges by decades . 
 The Causeway bridges received an interim entry on the Western Australian Register of Heritage Places on 30 June 1998 , and this was made permanent on 30 October 1998 . They were also classified by the National Trust on 8 June 1998 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Causeway begins in East Perth , at the intersection of Riverside Drive , Adelaide Terrace , and Hay Street . This intersection is a traffic light controlled raindrop roundabout . The road reaches the Swan River 's northern foreshore after 350 metres ( 1 @,@ 150 ft ) , and crosses to Heirisson Island via the 114 @.@ 6 @-@ metre ( 376 ft ) long north @-@ western bridge . The road continues straight across the island for another 300 metres ( 980 ft ) . The road passes over the second , 224 @.@ 72 @-@ metre ( 737 ft ) long bridge , which links Heirisson Island to Victoria Park . The Causeway ends at a grade @-@ separated partial cloverleaf interchange , located 200 metres ( 660 ft ) south @-@ east of the second bridge . The interchange links The Causeway with four other roads : Canning Highway to the south @-@ west , Great Eastern Highway to the north @-@ east , and both Shepperton Road and Albany Highway to the south @-@ east . There is no access to Albany Highway from The Causeway , as Albany Highway is a one @-@ way road leading into the interchange . 
 = = Intersections = = 
