 The first non @-@ album outtake from the Highway 61 Revisited sessions to be released was the single " Positively 4th Street " , although on an early pressing of the single Columbia used another Highway 61 outtake , " Can You Please Crawl Out Your Window ? " , by mistake . " Crawl Out Your Window " was subsequently re @-@ recorded with the Hawks in October , and released as a single in November 1965 . Columbia accidentally released an alternate take of " From a Buick 6 " on an early pressing of Highway 61 Revisited , and this version continued to appear on the Japanese release for several years . Other outtakes officially released between 1991 and 2005 include alternate takes of " Like a Rolling Stone " and " It Takes a Lot to Laugh , It Takes a Train to Cry " , and a previously unreleased song , " Sitting on a Barbed Wire Fence " , on The Bootleg Series Volumes 1 – 3 ( Rare & Unreleased ) 1961 – 1991 , as well as alternate takes of " Desolation Row " , " Highway 61 Revisited " , " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " , " Tombstone Blues " , and " It Takes a Lot to Laugh , It Takes a Train to Cry " on The Bootleg Series Volume 7 . Excerpts from several different takes of " Like a Rolling Stone " appeared on the Highway 61 Interactive CD @-@ ROM , released in February 1995 . 
 In 2015 , Dylan released Volume 12 of his Bootleg Series , The Cutting Edge , in three different formats . The 18 @-@ disc Collector 's Edition was described as including " every note recorded during the 1965 – 1966 sessions , every alternate take and alternate lyric " . The 18 CDs contain every take of every song recorded in the studio during the Highway 61 Revisited sessions , from June 15 to August 4 , 1965 . 
 The Highway 61 Revisited out @-@ takes from the first recording session in New York , June 15 and 16 , 1965 comprise : ten takes of " It Takes A Lot To Laugh , It Takes A Train To Cry " , six takes of " Sitting On A Barbed @-@ Wire Fence " , and fifteen takes of " Like A Rolling Stone " . Additionally , The Cutting Edge contains four instrumental " stem " tracks , lifted from Take Four which was the released " Master take " of " Like A Rolling Stone " : Guitar ( Mike Bloomfield ) ; vocal , guitar ( Bob Dylan ) , piano and bass ; drums and organ . 
 The tracks from the second recording session in New York , July 29 to August 4 , 1965 , comprise seven takes of " It Takes A Lot To Laugh , It Takes A Train To Cry " , sixteen takes of " Tombstone Blues " , twelve takes of " Positively Fourth Street " , five takes of " From A Buick 6 " , seventeen takes of " Can You Please Crawl Out Your Window ? " , nine takes of " Highway 61 Revisited " , sixteen takes of " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " , seven takes of Queen Jane Approximately " , and eight takes of " Desolation Row " . 
 Describing the process of listening to these many alternative versions , Chris Gerard wrote in PopMatters : " The fact that these versions do not approach the greatness of the final recordings is exactly the point . These are works in progress . It ’ s a guided tour through the creative process that led to these landmark albums . " 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The cover artwork was photographed by Daniel Kramer several weeks before the recording sessions . Kramer captured Dylan sitting on the stoop of the apartment of his manager , Albert Grossman , located in Gramercy Park , New York , placing Dylan 's friend Bob Neuwirth behind Dylan " to give it extra color " . Dylan wears a Triumph motorcycle T @-@ shirt under a blue and purple silk shirt , holding his Ray @-@ Ban sunglasses in his right hand . Photographer Kramer commented in 2010 on the singer 's expression : " He 's hostile , or it 's a hostile moodiness . He 's almost challenging me or you or whoever 's looking at it : ' What are you gonna do about it , buster ? ' " 
 As he had on his previous three albums , Dylan contributed his own writing to the back cover of Highway 61 Revisited , in the shape of freeform , surrealist prose : " On the slow train time does not interfere & at the Arabian crossing waits White Heap , the man from the newspaper & behind him the hundred <unk> made of solid rock & stone . " One critic has pointed out the close similarity of these notes to the stream of consciousness , experimental novel Tarantula , which Dylan was writing during 1965 and 1966 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In the British music press , initial reviews of Highway 61 expressed both bafflement and admiration for the record . New Musical Express critic Allen Evans wrote : " Another set of message songs and story songs sung in that monotonous and tuneless way by Dylan which becomes quite arresting as you listen . " The Melody Maker LP review section , by an anonymous critic , commented : " Bob Dylan 's sixth LP , like all others , is fairly incomprehensible but nevertheless an absolute knock @-@ out . " The English poet Philip Larkin , reviewing the album for The Daily Telegraph , wrote that he found himself " well rewarded " by the record : " Dylan 's cawing , derisive voice is probably well suited to his material ... and his guitar adapts itself to rock ( ' Highway 61 ' ) and ballad ( ' Queen Jane ' ) . There is a marathon ' Desolation Row ' which has an enchanting tune and mysterious , possibly half @-@ baked words . " 
 In September 1965 , the US trade journal Billboard also praised the album , and predicted big sales for it : " Based upon his singles hit ' Like a Rolling Stone ' , Dylan has a top @-@ of @-@ the @-@ chart @-@ winner in this package of his off @-@ beat , commercial material . " The album peaked at number three on the US Billboard 200 chart of top albums , and number four on the UK albums charts . In the US , Highway 61 was certificated as a gold record in August 1967 , and platinum in August 1997 . 
 Highway 61 Revisited has remained among the most highly acclaimed of Dylan 's works . Biographer Anthony Scaduto praises its rich imagery , and describes it as " one of the most brilliant pop records ever made . As rock , it cuts through to the core of the music — a hard driving beat without frills , without self @-@ consciousness . " Michael Gray calls Highway 61 " revolutionary and stunning , not just for its energy and panache but in its vision : fusing radical , electrical music ... with lyrics that were light years ahead of anyone else 's ; Dylan here unites the force of blues @-@ based rock 'n'roll with the power of poetry . The whole rock culture , the whole post @-@ Beatle pop @-@ rock world , and so in an important sense the 1960s started here . " 
 Among Dylan 's contemporaries , Phil Ochs was impressed by Highway 61 , explaining : " It 's the kind of music that plants a seed in your mind and then you have to hear it several times . And as you go over it you start to hear more and more things . He 's done something that 's left the whole field ridiculously in the back of him . " In 2003 , Rolling Stone magazine described Highway 61 as " one of those albums that changed everything " , and placed it at number four in its list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . The Rolling Stone list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " ranked " Highway 61 Revisited " , " Desolation Row " and " Like a Rolling Stone " at number 373 , number 187 , and number one , respectively . In 2012 , The Best 100 Albums of All Time book ranked Highway 61 Revisited as the greatest album of all time . The album was also included in Robert Dimery 's 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 Most of the songs on Highway 61 Revisited have remained important , in varying degrees , to Dylan 's live performances since 1965 . According to his website , he has played " Like a Rolling Stone " over 2 @,@ 000 times , " Highway 61 Revisited " more than 1 @,@ 700 times , " Ballad of a Thin Man " over 1 @,@ 000 times , and most of the other songs between 150 and 500 times . 
 The influence of the songs on Highway 61 Revisited can be heard in many cover versions . " Like a Rolling Stone " has been recorded by artists including the Rolling Stones , on their live album Stripped , David Bowie and Mick Ronson on Heaven and Hull , Johnny Winter on Raisin ' Cain , and Jimi Hendrix at the Monterey Pop Festival . My Chemical Romance 's version of " Desolation Row " was featured in the film Watchmen in 2009 . The song has also been covered by the Grateful Dead on their album Postcards of the Hanging . " Just Like Tom Thumb 's Blues " has been recorded by Judy Collins , Linda Ronstadt , Nina Simone and Neil Young . The title track was covered by artists such as PJ Harvey , Karen O and Billy Joel . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 The track listing of Highway 61 Revisited is as follows : All songs written and composed by Bob Dylan . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The musical personnel on Highway 61 Revisited were as follows : 
 Bob Dylan – vocals , guitar , harmonica , piano , police car 
 Mike Bloomfield – electric guitar 
 Charlie McCoy – guitar 
 Paul Griffin , Al Kooper – piano , organ 
 Frank Owens – piano 
 Harvey Brooks , Russ <unk> , Joe Macho , Jr . – bass guitar 
 Bobby Gregg , Sam Lay – drums 
 Production personnel 
 Bob Johnston – producer 
 Tom Wilson – producer on " Like a Rolling Stone " 
 Daniel Kramer , Don Hunstein – photography 
 Steve Berkowitz – Hybrid SACD reissue production 
 Greg Calbi – Hybrid SACD reissue remastering 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Chart positions = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = The Wrath of the Gods ( 1914 film ) = 
 The Wrath of the Gods is a 1914 American silent drama film directed by Reginald Barker , and starring Sessue Hayakawa , Tsuru Aoki , Frank Borzage , Thomas Kurihara and Henry Kotani in the lead roles . This was the first feature film appearance of Hayakawa and the directorial debut of Barker . 
 The film is based on an American sailor who comes to the Yamaki family after his ship wrecks in the ocean . The sailor ( Borzage ) falls in love with the daughter ( Aoki ) of the family , unaware of the fact that she is cursed by God , such that if she marries , a nearby volcano will erupt and destroy the entire island on which the family lives . Writer and producer Thomas H. Ince got the idea for the film from the volcanic eruption on the island of Sakura @-@ Jima in 1914 . Hayakawa was paid $ 500 a week , the highest paid of all oriental stars at the time . 
 Filming started on January 27 , 1914 and was completed on February 13 . The film was released to a warm reception on June 7 after a large @-@ scale publicity campaign . The visual effects of the film were widely appreciated by critics . It premiered in Japan on 15 September 1918 , where it was later banned for " bringing dishonor to the country " . Hayakawa , who played Aoki 's father in the film , married her before the film 's premiere . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Baron Yamaki ( Sessue Hayakawa ) is a fisherman who lives along with his daughter Toya San ( Tsuru Aoki ) on an island . The island is inhabited by Buddhists and Yamaki had been cursed by Buddha for an affront by one of his ancestors who in a murderous rage , defiled an altar of Buddha in the nearby temple . The curse was that if his daughter married anyone , then the nearby volcano would erupt . Toya finds it difficult to form relationships with boys because the village prophet Takeo ( Thomas Kurihara ) has spread the rumour that she is cursed . She is therefore unwilling to continue her father 's acceptance of the curse . When Yamaki takes Toya @-@ san to the Buddha shrine in the garden of his house to pray and try to get the curse removed , she vents her feelings about the god 's unfairness . 
 An American sailor , Tom Wilson ( Frank Borzage ) , whose ship has been wrecked in a storm comes to them for help and shelter . Wilson falls in love with Toya and teaches her about Christianity . To the consternation of her father , Toya decides to convert and marry Tom at the local Japanese @-@ American mission . However , her father also converts . The locals , who have been stirred up by Takeo , go on a murderous rampage against the family . They first go to the chapel but the newlyweds evade them and so they go to the beach house instead . When the mob reaches his house , Yamaki throws out the Buddha statue he had set up in his house and puts a cross in its place . The villagers are infuriated by this ; they beat him to death beneath the cross and burn his house . Eventually , the volcano erupts and the village is destroyed , and Takeo dies in an avalanche . Only Tom Wilson and Toya San survive . They are taken away from the destroyed village by a United States merchant vessel . At the end of the film , Tom tells his bride , " Your gods may be powerful , Toya San , but mine has proved his omnipotence . You are saved to perpetuate your race . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Sessue Hayakawa as Lord Yamaki 
 Tsuru Aoki as Toya San 
 Frank Borzage as Tom Wilson 
 Thomas Kurihara as Takeo 
 Henry Kotani as Mr. <unk> 
 = = Production = = 
 On 12 January 1914 , a volcano erupted on the island of Sakura @-@ Jima in Kagoshima prefecture , in the southern part of Japan . It was one of the biggest disasters in the history of Japan . Producer Thomas H. Ince immediately decided to make a film based on the incident . The Toledo Blade reported on 24 January 1914 that " News of the eruption was hardly a day old before Mr. Ince had built in Santa Monica canyon a whole Japanese village " . Ince had constructed a very large village in his studio <unk> in Culver City , California , and decided , where possible , to use Japanese people instead of Americans as extras . He gathered workers from the Southern California who were to work as peasants in the film . Approximately 1 @,@ 000 , mostly Japanese , extras were used . The film 's shooting began on 27 January 1914 , just 15 days after the eruption ceased . Actress Enid Markey was " badly injured " during the production ; during her scene in which the lava flow destroys the village she was surrounded by smoke and fumes and nearly asphyxiated , but had recovered by May 1914 . Six reels were used to film it in total . 
 To help publicize the production , Ince reported to the newspapers that lead @-@ actress Tsuru Aoki was a native of the island of Sakura and she had lost all her relatives in the eruption — she was actually from <unk> Tsuru city , Kyushu , 180 miles north of Sakura @-@ Jima . Ince also embroidered her biography so that she would appeal to the middle @-@ class audiences as the heroine of a melodrama , claiming that she was the daughter of an illustrious Japanese artist . The biographical @-@ type publicity added emotional and psychological authenticity to the character that Aoki played in the film . 
 Sessue Hayakawa , Aoki 's soon @-@ to @-@ be husband , played her father in the film ; they married on May 1 just before the film 's release . Hayakawa was paid $ 500 a week and , seeing another chance to publicize his production , Ince stated that Hayakawa was " the highest paid of all oriental stars . " The film 's shipwreck scene was shot off the coast of Santa Monica , and an erupting volcano was also included among its lavish effects . This was the first feature film appearance of Hayakawa and the directorial debut of Barker . 
 = = Publicity and release = = 
 Targeted at the middle class , a large @-@ scale publicity campaign was organized by the New York Motion Picture Corporation . Four months prior to the release , New York Motion Picture Corporation put an advertisement in the 14 February 1914 edition of the New York Clipper , announcing : " Wait for The Wrath of the Gods . " Major journals carried full @-@ page advertisements of the film every week with pictures , various ad lines and photographs taken on the film set . An advertisement of the film featured an angry looking statue of Buddha and a young woman in a kimono praying in front of it . The marriage of the lead actors Tsuru Aoki and Sessue Hayakawa was also included in the publicity campaign . The film was released in a new theater called The Strand , on 7 June 1914 . 
 Variety noted that " special and incidental music was written by Joseph <unk> , pianist of the orchestra there . The stage [ at the Strand ] was given a <unk> air and atmosphere by the management . " The Wrath of the Gods was purported to have attracted 21 @,@ 000 spectators when Marcus Loew screened it along with a vaudeville bill at the opening of his summertime evening entertainment at Ebbets Field in Brooklyn . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The film was well received by critics , particularly for its visual effects , especially the volcano eruption scene . An advertisement for the film in the Williamsport Sun @-@ Gazette stated " Nothing like the " Wrath of God " has ever been seen . Pandemonium . Thrilling . Superb . " The Reading Times called the film a " genuine masterpiece " , stating that it contained " the greatest volcano scenes ever filmed " at the time . The New York Critics also hailed the film as a masterpiece , and the Brooklyn Daily Eagle considered it to be the best film of 1914 . The Washington Post wrote that the " scenic effects obtained are especially picturesque , a volcano in full action becoming the central sensation " . The Chicago Daily Tribune called the film " impressive " , and spoke of the " scenic splendor " and the " vigorous beauty of the outdoor settings " . True Republican wrote that " In the motion picture field [ the film ] was greater than The Darling of the Gods in drama , or Madame Butterfly in opera . " It also wrote that the volcanic eruption and typhoon scenes " can never be obliterated from the mind . " 
 The film was praised for its happy ending even though the Aoki 's character lost her village . Critic Gina Marchetti proposed in her book Tragic and Transcendent Love in the Forbidden City that the film was " simultaneously warning against miscegenation while celebrating romantic love . " The lead actress Tsuru Aoki 's acting was also highly appreciated for adding " the sense of naturalness to the archetypal narrative between Japan and the United States . " However , in Japan the lead actors Hayakawa and Aoki were considered insults to the country . The Japanese film critics labeled the film " Anti @-@ Japanese " for portraying the country and its people in a primitive manner . The film premiered in Asakusa 's <unk> Theater on September 15 , 1918 but was banned a few weeks later for bringing " dishonour to the country " . 
 The father Yamaki sacrifices himself in order to cut all ties between her daughter and Japan hoping that she would be protected by Tom and his Christian God . While referring to the film in particular , the film theorist <unk> <unk> said " Isn 't it a huge loss that Japanese producers don 't make any film for export and have all the greatly unique landscape of Japan by foreigners ? " Daisuke <unk> , in The Oxford Handbook of Japanese Cinema , states that the film and its narrative of a religion collision " emphasize the difficulty for a Japanese woman to become submissive to Christianity and the American family system " , stating that the film is first and foremost " an archetypal fable pitting the civilized West , embodied by an American sailor , against the primitive East , embodied by the Japanese woman , told as a religious battle between Buddhism and Christianity " . 
 The film was screened along with The Dragon Painter , which also stars Sessue Hayakawa , at the 30th Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival on May 4 , 2014 . The film 's DVD was released in the United States on 18 March 2008 . 
 = National Debt Clock = 
 The National Debt Clock is a billboard @-@ sized running total display which constantly updates to show the current United States gross national debt and each American family 's share of the debt . It is currently installed on Sixth Avenue in Manhattan , New York City . It was the first debt clock installed . 
 The idea for the clock came from New York real estate developer Seymour Durst , who wanted to highlight the rising national debt . In 1989 , he sponsored the installation of the first clock , which was originally placed on Sixth Avenue — between 42nd Street and 43rd Street — one block away from Times Square . At the time , the national debt remained under $ 3 trillion but was rising . The clock was temporarily switched off from 2000 to 2002 due to the debt actually falling during that period . 
 In 2004 , the original clock was dismantled and replaced by the current clock at the new location one block away . In 2008 , the U.S. national debt exceeded $ 10 trillion for the first time , leading to press reports that the clock had run out of digits . 
 The original clock outlived Seymour , who died in 1995 , with Seymour 's son Douglas taking over responsibility for the clock through the Durst Organization . As of September 2009 , Douglas Durst 's cousin Jonathan " Jody " Durst , with whom he currently shares a co @-@ presidency of the company , is in the process of taking over the day @-@ to @-@ day operations as president . In an interview with The New York Times , Jonathan Durst has said that maintenance of the clock is planned " for years to come . " 
 = = History = = 
 Invented and sponsored by New York real estate developer Seymour Durst , the National Debt Clock was installed in 1989 . After Seymour 's death in 1995 , his son Douglas Durst became president of the Durst Organization , which owns and maintains the clock . 
 Douglas Durst has stated that the clock represents a non @-@ partisan effort and explained the motivation behind the project in terms of intergenerational equity : " We 're a family business . We think generationally , and we don 't want to see the next generation crippled by this burden . " According to Douglas , his father had been toying with the basic idea of drawing attention to the growing national debt since at least 1980 , when during the holiday season he sent cards that said " Happy New Year . Your share of the national debt is $ 35 @,@ 000 " to senators and congressmen . In the early eighties , when Seymour first developed the idea of a constantly updated clock , the technology required to implement the project was not yet available . 
 = = = First clock = = = 
 With the national debt at US $ 2 @.@ 7 trillion dollars , the original 11 by 26 feet ( 3 @.@ 4 m × 7 @.@ 9 m ) clock was constructed in 1989 at a cost of US $ 100 @,@ 000 . It was mounted a block from Times Square , on a Durst building at Sixth Avenue near 42nd Street , facing the north side of 42nd Street and Bryant Park across the intersection . Built by the New York sign company Artkraft Strauss , the clock featured a dot @-@ based segment display emulating the then @-@ typical character resolution of <unk> . Similar to the second clock , the updating mechanism was such that the display was set to the estimated speed of debt growth ( odometer @-@ style ) and adjusted weekly according to the latest numbers published by the United States Treasury . Up until the week before his death , Seymour Durst himself adjusted the tally via modem . Since his passing , Artkraft Strauss has been keeping the figures current . 
 In 2000 , due to an improving debt situation , the clock started to run backward . With the original purpose of the clock being to highlight the rising debt and the reverse giving a mixed message , and with the display not being designed to properly run backward , the clock was unplugged and covered with a red , white and blue curtain in September 2000 , with the national debt standing at roughly 5 @.@ 7 trillion dollars . The clock was not dismantled , however , and in July 2002 the curtain was raised and the clock once again picked up tracking a rising debt , starting at 6 @.@ 1 trillion dollars . 
 = = = Second clock = = = 
 In 2004 , the original clock was moved from its location near 42nd Street ; the building has since made way for One Bryant Park . An updated model , which can run backward , was installed one block away on a Durst building at 1133 Avenue of the Americas ( more commonly known as 1133 Sixth Avenue ) . It is mounted on the side wall of the building which faces W. 44th Street . The new clock is outfitted with a brighter seven @-@ segment display with multiple LEDs per segment , allowing the numbers to be read more easily . 
 In the midst of extensive media attention during the financial crisis beginning in 2007 , some news reports mentioned the National Debt Clock , highlighting the fact that its display had run out of digits when the U.S. gross federal debt rose above US $ 10 trillion on September 30 , 2008 . 
 An overhaul or complete replacement adding two more digits to the clock 's display is currently being planned . 
 = = Similar projects = = 
 The idea of conveying a message through a periodically updated clock found an earlier expression in the Doomsday Clock . However , the innovation of the National Debt Clock was to feature a constantly running counter ; it has since inspired similar projects elsewhere , both in the United States and further afield . Various tracking counters of national debt are also kept online . 
 The National Debt Clock has also been credited as the inspiration behind other running <unk> , for example an AMD campaign employing an electronic billboard ; instead of a debt , it tracked the supposed additional cost of using a rival chip . 
 Two displays related to the national debt were shown during the 2012 Republican National Convention . One of the displays showed a ticking number similar to The National Debt Clock . The second display showed a number estimating the amount the national debt had increased since the start of the convention . 
 = The Boat Race 1922 = 
 The 74th Boat Race took place on 1 April 1922 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race , and had the significantly heavier crew . Four of the Oxford crew and three of the Cambridge crew had previous Boat Race experience . In this year 's race , umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Cambridge won by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 19 minutes 27 seconds . It was Cambridge 's fourth consecutive victory , the largest winning margin since 1914 and the fastest winning time since 1911 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2014 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1921 race by one length , while Oxford led overall with 39 victories to Cambridge 's 33 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Oxford 's coaches were George Drinkwater who had rowed for Oxford in the 1902 and 1903 races , E. D. Horsfall ( who had rowed in the three races prior to the First World War ) and R. P. P. Rowe who had rowed four times between 1889 and 1892 . Cambridge were coached by H. Peake ( who had participated in the Peace Regattas of 1919 ) , Sidney Swann ( who had rowed in the four races from 1911 to 1914 ) and G. L. Thomson . For the fourteenth year the umpire was old Etonian Frederick I. Pitman who rowed for Cambridge in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 11 lb ( 81 @.@ 0 kg ) , 7 pounds ( 3 @.@ 2 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Five of the Oxford crew had previous Boat Race experience , including cox W. H. Porritt who was making his third appearance in the event . Cambridge 's crew also included five individuals who had previously represented the university , including Humphrey Playford and P. H. G. H @-@ S. Hartley who were rowing for the Light Blues for the third consecutive year . Two of the participants were silver medallists in the men 's eight at the 1920 Summer Olympics : Oxford 's Sebastian Earl , and Guy Oliver Nickalls . All of the participants in the race were registered as British . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Cambridge . In a light wind and with a good tide , umpire Pitman commenced the race at 4 : 40 p.m. , which resulted in a false start , with Cambridge being released from their stakeboat too soon . After the restart , Cambridge were clear by the Mile Post and two lengths ahead of Oxford by the time the crews passed under Hammersmith Bridge . 
 According to Oxford 's bow , George Drinkwater , Cambridge were " rowing well within themselves " and passed the finishing post four and a half lengths ahead in a time of 19 minutes 27 seconds . It was their fourth consecutive victory , the largest winning margin since the 1914 race and the fastest winning time since the 1911 race . The win took the overall record in the event to 39 – 34 in Oxford 's favour . 
 = Grant Park Music Festival = 
 The Grant Park Music Festival ( formerly Grant Park Concerts ) is an annual ten @-@ week classical music concert series held in Chicago , Illinois , USA . It features the Grant Park Symphony Orchestra and Grant Park Chorus along with featured guest performers and conductors . The Festival has earned non @-@ profit organization status . It claims to be the nation 's only free , outdoor classical music series . The Grant Park Music Festival has been a Chicago tradition since 1931 when Chicago Mayor Anton Cermak suggested free concerts to lift spirits of Chicagoans during the Great Depression . The tradition of symphonic Grant Park Music Festival concerts began in 1935 . 
 The Festival is housed in the Jay Pritzker Pavilion in Millennium Park section of Grant Park in the Loop community area of Chicago . The 2004 season , during which the Festival moved to the Pritzker Pavilion , was the 70th season for the Festival . On occasion , the Festival has been held at the Harris Theater instead of the Pritzker Pavilion . Formerly , the Grant Park Music Festival was held at the Petrillo Music Shell in Grant Park . The Festival began when the music shell was located in its original location and moved when it was relocated . 
 Over time the Festival has had various financial supporters , three primary locations and one name change . The Festival has at times been nationally broadcast and has consistently enjoyed the efforts of many of the world 's leading classical musicians . Recently , the Festival organizers have agreed to release some of the concerts to the public via compact disk recordings . 
 = = Funding = = 
 Originally , the series was almost completely funded by the Park District . The Park District was responsible for performer payrolls , concert advertising and marketing , administered orchestra auditions , coordinated the scheduling for each season list of guest artists . Advertising costs for printed media designed by Park District graphic designers were funded through the Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) and the Federal Arts Program . The tradition of posters for Chicago Transit Authority buses , Chicago ' L ' trains and stations and field houses continued even after WPA relief funding ended . 
 In 1977 , the Grant Park Concerts Society evolved to coordinate all fund @-@ raising for the Festival . It coordinated both general marketing and the membership program . By hosting fund @-@ raising events and selling Festival memberships , it supplemented the Parks District funding , which was in the $ 1 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 0 million range . In 1996 , the Park District and Festival staff discontinued their relationship with the Concerts Society . The Park District resumed its responsibility as the sole marketing and fund @-@ raising department . 
 At the end of the 1990s the Festival was recognized as a non @-@ profit organization and developed ties with the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs . The relationship had the city department taking charge of some administrative duties . As of 2009 , The Festival featured the Grammy @-@ nominated Grant Park Symphony Orchestra and Chorus and is sponsored by the Chicago Park District , the Chicago Department of Cultural Affairs and the Grant Park Orchestral Association . The park district provides over half of the operating costs , while the Department of Cultural Affairs contributes logistical support . The remaining funding come from a variety of private sources including foundations , corporations and thousands of individual patrons . The park district pays the salaries of principal conductor Carlos Kalmar , chorus director Christopher Bell , and members of the orchestra and Grant Park Chorus . The Festival also receives grants and broadcast fees . In 2010 , the $ 2 million of the total Festival $ 4 million budget that was not covered by the Park District and was raised through memberships and private philanthropy . This money finances guest soloists and major collaborations . 
 = = History = = 
 The first concert occurred after the completion of the original Petrillo Music Shell on July 1 , 1935 with a march from Richard Wagner 's Tannhäuser . In the past , National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) and CBS Broadcasting Inc . ( CBS ) have broadcast the free concerts . The first summer boasted an attendance of approximately 1 @.@ 9 million for 65 concerts . In 1939 , the single @-@ concert attendance record was set with over 300 @,@ 000 for the Lily Pons concert . Pons shared the stage with her husband Andre Kostelanetz in what was described as the largest audience of her career . David Rubinoff was estimated to have drawn as many as 225 @,@ 000 . Current attendance at the approximately thirty annual concerts is estimated at three hundred thousand in total . The free Festival has always had a picnic @-@ like atmosphere . In the 1930s , the concerts were presented on national radio broadcasts to dozens of radio stations . 
 In addition to lifting spirits , the Grant Park Music Festival has been able to provide musicians a living wage . In 1938 , when the minimum wage was $ 0 @.@ 25 / hour , the musicians were paid $ 10 ( $ 168 @.@ 11 today ) for a 2 @-@ hour concert . In the early years , through the 1940s the Chicago Woman 's Symphony performed often at the Festival . In 1944 , the Festival developed its own professional Grant Park Symphony Orchestra . Also in 1944 , WGN ( AM ) began the nationally syndicated Theater of the Air live from Grant Park . In 1945 , Nikolai Malko became the Festival 's first resident conductor . He served in that role until 1954 . 
 Between the scheduling of Van Cliburn 's 1958 Grant Park Music Festival appearance and his actual July 16 appearance , he won the quadrennial International Tchaikovsky Competition in Moscow that April . He was catapulted to international fame for winning one of the world 's elite music competitions . As a result , he was greeted with a celebration that included a ticker tape parade down Michigan Avenue and his Grant Park Music Festival appearance was a major event . 
 In the 1960s , the Festival took a more adventurous direction featuring works by the likes of Arnold Schoenberg , Sergei Prokofiev , Gustav Mahler and Anton <unk> who highlighted the 1964 schedule under the new direction of Edward Gordon . In 1962 , Thomas Peck became the leader of the newly formed Grant Park Chorus , which he directed until his death in 1994 . In 1963 , the Festival introduced the interactive daytime Young People 's Concerts led by Irwin Hoffman and at times by youth audience members . Gordon also introduced opera in concert as part of the Festival in 1964 . 
 The 1970s saw declining attendance at the Festival . Mitch Miller , who derived popularity from the Sing Along with Mitch television show was a regular conductor and one of the largest draws . Steven <unk> , became concert manager in 1979 and served until 1990 . During the 1980s the Festival earned a reputation for performing works by American musical composers . <unk> focused on living American composers such as William <unk> , John Adams , Michael Torke and Paul Freeman . The 1980s also saw a host of elite principal conductors such as Zdeněk <unk> , Leonard Slatkin , Hugh Wolff , David Zinman and Robert Shaw . 
 The 1990s saw wide @-@ ranging performances such as the Russian opera Prince Igor , a narration of Casey at the Bat by Jack <unk> with orchestral accompaniment , six Chicago Bulls National Basketball Association championship celebrations and a celebrated return visit of Van Cliburn for the sixtieth season . The Van Cliburn visit rivaled the Pons attendance figures with estimates exceeding 300 @,@ 000 . In 1992 , the Grant Park Concerts officially became the Grant Park Music Festival . From 1994 to 1997 , Hugh Wolff served as principal conductor of the Festival and it took until 2000 for an elaborate search to yield Kalmar as his successor . 
 In 2000 , the Festival reached an agreement with <unk> Records to record the Grant Park Orchestra . It produced six CDs during the decade . In 2001 , Boston Landmarks Orchestra was founded for the purpose of providing a free summer concert series in Boston 's Hatch Memorial Shell and now claims to also provide an annual free summer music series . On July 16 , 2004 , the Festival moved to the state of the art Pritzker Pavilion , where it shares space with a regular world music series ( " Music Without Borders " ) , a jazz series ( " Made in Chicago " ) and a variety of annual performances by Steppenwolf Theatre , Lyric Opera of Chicago and Chicago Symphony Orchestra . Nonetheless , the Festival remains the core of the summer program with its Wednesday , Friday and Saturday evening performances for ten weeks during the heart of the summer . At the end of the 2005 Grant Park Music Festival season in August , the Festival 's Grant Park Orchestra and Carlos Kalmar presented Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning composer Adams ' On the Transmigration of Souls , which was written at the request of the New York Philharmonic to honor the victims of the September 11 attacks . In 2006 , the Joffrey Ballet celebrated its fiftieth anniversary in a collaboration with the Festival . During the decade , the Festival hosted an innovative array of talents such as Chinese <unk> player Betti Xiang , pipa player Yang Wei , Portuguese <unk> singer Mariza , Cuban classical and jazz clarinetist Paquito D 'Rivera , Hungarian @-@ Roma fiddler Roby Lakatos and Mediterranean singer Maria del Mar Bonet . 
 = = Performances = = 
 The performance schedule includes ten consecutive weeks of performances on Wednesday , Friday and Saturday from mid June to mid August . Currently , performances usually begin at 6 : 30 on Wednesday and Friday and 7 : 30 on Saturday with band shell seats reserved for subscribers . Unclaimed seats are released to the public 15 minutes before each performance . The lawn seating is free and commonly adorned with blankets and families . Harris Theater hosts occasional Grant Park Music Festival events . The orchestra and chorus have open rehearsals at the Pritzker Pavilion during performance season with sessions usually running from 11 : 00 am to 1 : 30 pm and approximately 2 : 30 or 3 : 00 pm until 5 : 00 pm . The Festival is represented by a staff of trained guides , called docents , that field questions and provide educational talks during the rehearsals . The rehearsals have programs available . 
 In the 1930s , the concerts lured some of the most prominent performers and conductors in the world : Pons , Jascha Heifetz , Bobby Breen , Rudy Vallee , Helen Morgan , conductor Andre Kostelanetz , violinists David Rubinoff , Mischa Elman , Efrem Zimbalist and Albert Spalding , pianist Moriz Rosenthal , sopranos Marion Claire , Edith Mason and Vivian Della Chiesa , tenors Tito <unk> , John Carter , Lawrence Tibbett and baritone John Charles Thomas . 
 The 1940s saw a broad spectrum of performers including Mario Lanza , clarinetist Benny Goodman , soprano Kirsten Flagstad and actor @-@ singer Paul Robeson . Other performers included sopranos Claire , Eileen Farrell , Grace Moore and Della Chiesa , tenors Giovanni Martinelli , Richard Tucker and Jan Peerce , baritone Robert Merrill , violinist Mischa <unk> and conductors Frederick Stock , Leo Kopp , Arthur Fiedler and Antal Doráti . 
 Beginning in the 1950s Chicago Mayor Richard J. Daley greeted the opening night crowds nearly every year during his 21 @-@ year tenure . Among the performers of the 1950s were sopranos Beverly Sills and Farrell , tenor Peerce , pianists , Van Cliburn , Jorge <unk> , Gary <unk> and Earl Wild , violinists Elman and Michael Rabin and cellist Janos Starker . 
 The 1960s upheld the tradition of diverse audiences and performers such as contralto Marian Anderson , pianists Alfred Brendel , Daniel Barenboim , Leon Fleisher , Lorin Hollander and Christoph Eschenbach , violinists Itzhak Perlman , Ruggiero Ricci , Charles Treger , Jaime Laredo , cellist Leonard Rose , conductor Leonard Bernstein , tenor Plácido Domingo , mezzo @-@ sopranos <unk> Horne and Tatiana <unk> , soprano Martina Arroyo and Roberta Peters , as well as a host of dance companies such as the American Ballet Theatre , Joffrey Ballet and Maria Alba Spanish Dance Company . The Joffrey Ballet performed Gerald Arpino and George Balanchine works . 
 In the 1970s , the Festival hosted soprano June Anderson , vocalist Gordon MacRae , pianists Dave Brubeck , Alicia de Larrocha , Jerome Lowenthal and Sheldon <unk> and violinists Elaine <unk> . Dancers from both the Chicago City Ballet and New York City Ballet were also featured . Conductors included Mitch Miller , Leonard Slatkin , Aaron Copland and David Zinman . Dancer Edward Villella and soprano Kathleen Battle also made appearances . 
 In the 1980s , featured performers included pianists Walter Klein , Hollander , André Watts and Garrick Ohlsson , clarinetist Richard Stoltzman , the Vermeer Quartet , baritone Merrill , bass Paul <unk> , soprano Arleen Auger and harmonica player Corky Siegel . Conductors included Macal , Slatkin , Wolff , Zinman and Shaw . 
 Performers in the 1990s included Van Cliburn , mezzo @-@ soprano Frederica von Stade , Rosemary Clooney , violinist Joshua Bell , conductor Maxim Shostakovich ( who led works by his father Dmitry Shostakovich ) , trumpeter Doc Severinsen and soprano Deborah Voigt . 
 In the new millennium 's first decade the Festival welcomed sopranos Battle , Dawn Upshaw , Karina Gauvin and Erin Wall , tenor Vittorio Grigolo , pianist Stephen Hough , violinists Rachel Barton Pine , James Ehnes , Roby Lakatos , Christian <unk> and Pinchas Zukerman , vocalists Otis Clay , Mariza and Maria del Mar Bonet and rock band The Decemberists . Other performers include pianist Valentina <unk> , soprano <unk> Lattimore , baritone Nathan Gunn and mezzo @-@ soprano Jennifer <unk> . The Joffrey Ballet also performed with the Festival . 
 The principal conductor is Carlos Kalmar . Guests in the 2007 season included Marc @-@ André Hamelin , Russell Braun , Erin Wall , Glen Ellyn Children 's Chorus and many more performing the works of composers such as Brahms , Beethoven , Mendelssohn , Leo Brouwer , Heitor Villa @-@ Lobos , Tan Dun and Ferruccio Busoni . 
 The 2010s included a scheduled Grant Park 's screening of the BBC 's nature documentary Planet Earth Live on July 21 , with live orchestral accompaniment featuring the score by five @-@ time Academy Award @-@ winning composer George Fenton , who served as conductor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Frommer 's describes the Festival as " One of the city 's greatest bargains " , and it notes that the series is popular . One of the special editions notes that the Festival is continuing to uphold its Depression era mission of lifting Chicagoans ' hearts and suggests that you arrive at the Festival an hour early to get good lawn seats . It also notes that the afternoon rehearsals are a good substitute for the evening performances . 
 = St Andrew 's Castle , Hamble = 
 St Andrew 's Castle was an artillery fort constructed by Henry VIII near Hamble @-@ le @-@ Rice , Hampshire , between 1542 and 1543 . It formed part of the King 's Device programme to protect against invasion from France and the Holy Roman Empire , and defended Southampton Water near the Solent . St Andrew 's comprised a keep and a gun platform , protected by a moat . The castle was decommissioned in 1642 during the English Civil War and has been largely destroyed through coastal erosion . 
 = = History = = 
 St Andrew 's Castle was built as a consequence of international tensions between England , France and the Holy Roman Empire in the final years of the reign of King Henry VIII . Traditionally the Crown had left coastal defences to the local lords and communities , only taking a modest role in building and maintaining fortifications , and while France and the Empire remained in conflict with one another , maritime raids were common but an actual invasion of England seemed unlikely . Basic defences , based around simple blockhouses and towers , existed in the south @-@ west and along the Sussex coast , with a few more impressive works in the north of England , but in general the fortifications were very limited in scale . 
 In 1533 , Henry then broke with Pope Paul III in order to annul the long @-@ standing marriage to his wife , Catherine of Aragon and remarry . Catherine was the aunt of Charles V , the Holy Roman Emperor , and he took the annulment as a personal insult . This resulted in France and the Empire declaring an alliance against Henry in 1538 , and the Pope encouraging the two countries to attack England . An invasion of England appeared certain . In response , Henry issued an order , called a " device " , in 1539 , giving instructions for the " defence of the realm in time of invasion " and the construction of forts along the English coastline . 
 St Andrew 's Castle was built to defend Southampton Water , a body of water which linked the Solent to the important port of Southampton . It was positioned by the shore , on what is now Hamble Common , to the south of the village of Hamble @-@ le @-@ Rice . It was located at one end of an old Iron Age ditch — the area had previously been occupied during this period , when a promontory hillfort , Hamble Common Camp , was built just along the coast . Construction took place between 1542 and 1543 , but the fortification may not have been fully completed until after Henry 's death in 1547 . 
 The castle comprised a tall , square keep made from stone , with a semi @-@ circular gun platform on the seaward side , protected by a 25 @-@ metre @-@ wide ( 82 ft ) moat and a wooden breakwater ; it would have been similar in design to the contemporary fortification of West Cowes Castle . A survey in 1559 reported that the castle was heavily armed , with its artillery comprising two iron culverins , an iron demi @-@ culverin , two iron sakers , two bases , an iron falcon , an iron falconet and a quarter sling . The lighter guns would probably have been placed on the roof of the keep , with two heavy weapons lower down and the remainder on the external gun platform . It also held handguns , bows and hand weapons for close defence . 
 William Paulet , later the Marquess of Winchester , was appointed as Keeper and Captain of the castle in 1547 , being paid £ 19 each year to perform the role ; his garrison included a master gunner , a porter and six soldiers . Paulet also controlled Netley Castle , just along the coast . By 1559 the garrison had decreased slightly , comprising a captain , two gunners and four soldiers . 
 The castle was still operational in 1623 , but it was decommissioned by Parliamentary forces in 1642 during the English Civil War . The site has been heavily affected by coastal erosion — the local shoreline was retreating by 0 @.@ 5 metres ( 1 ft 8 in ) a year during the 1990s — and only a few parts of the masonry and earthworks can still be seen in the 21st century . The remains of the castle and the surrounding common land are protected under UK law as a scheduled monument . 
 = Euston tube station = 
 Euston is a London Underground station served by the Victoria line and both branches of the Northern line . It directly connects with Euston main line station above it . The station is in Travelcard Zone 1 . 
 Euston was constructed as two separate underground stations . Three of the four Northern line platforms date from the station 's opening in 1907 . The fourth Northern line platform and the two Victoria line platforms were constructed in the 1960s when the station was significantly altered to accommodate the Victoria line . Plans for High Speed 2 and Crossrail 2 both include proposals to modify the station to provide interchanges with the new services . 
 On the Northern line 's Bank branch the station is between Camden Town and King 's Cross St Pancras . On the Charing Cross branch it is between Mornington Crescent and Warren Street . On the Victoria line it is between Warren Street and King 's Cross St. Pancras . The station is near Euston Square station allowing connections at street level to the Circle , Hammersmith and City and Metropolitan lines . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Northern line = = = 
 = = = = Planning = = = = 
 An underground station to serve Euston station was first proposed by the Hampstead , St Pancras & Charing Cross Railway in 1891 . The company planned a route to run from Heath Street in Hampstead to Strand in Charing Cross with a branch diverging from the main route to run under Drummond Street to serve Euston , St Pancras and King 's Cross stations . Following parliamentary review of the proposals and a change in name to the Charing Cross , Euston and Hampstead Railway ( CCE & HR ) , permission was granted for the route in 1893 , although the branch line was only permitted as far as Euston . 
 For the remainder of the 1890s , the CCE & HR struggled unsuccessfully to raise the capital it needed to fund the construction . Whilst it did so it continued to develop its route proposals . In 1899 , parliamentary permission was obtained to modify the route so that the Euston branch was extended northwards to connect to the main route at the south end of Camden High Street . The section of the main route between the two ends of the loop was omitted . In 1900 , the CCE & HR was taken over by a consortium led by American financier Charles Yerkes which raised the necessary money . 
 Also in 1900 , a proposal was presented to parliament by the Islington and Euston Railway ( I & ER ) for an extension of the City and South London Railway ( C & SLR ) from Angel to Euston . At the time , the C & SLR was in the process of constructing an extension to Angel from its recently opened terminus at Moorgate Street . The extension plan was initially permitted in 1901 , but delays in the parliamentary process meant that it had to be re @-@ submitted the following year . The second submission was opposed by the Metropolitan Railway , which saw the extension as competition to its service between King 's Cross and Moorgate , and the plan was rejected . A third attempt , presented to parliament in November 1902 by the C & SLR itself , was successful and approved in 1903 . 
 = = = = Construction and opening = = = = 
 With funding obtained , tunnelling for the CCE & HR was carried out between September 1903 and December 1905 , after which the station buildings and fitting @-@ out of the tunnels commenced . The C & SLR 's Euston extension was constructed at the same time from the newly opened Angel station and opened on 12 May 1907 , with the station building designed by Sidney Smith located on the east side of Eversholt Street . The CCE & HR opened on 22 June 1907 , its building , designed by Leslie Green , is located at the corner of Drummond Street and Melton Street . 
 Although built and initially operated as two separate stations by the two companies , the C & SLR and the CCE & HR platforms were sufficiently close together that a deep level interchange was constructed between the passages of the two stations with a small ticket office for passengers changing between the lines . Another passage led to lifts that surfaced within the main line station itself . With the entrance within the main line station able to serve both sets of platforms satisfactorily , the separate station buildings were unneeded and they both closed on 30 September 1914 . The CCE & HR building remains ( converted for use as an electrical substation ) , but the C & SLR 's building was demolished in 1934 to enable the construction of Euston House for the London , Midland and Scottish Railway . 
 = = = = Reconstruction and extension = = = = 
 Most of the C & SLR 's route had been constructed with tunnels 10 feet 2 inches ( 3 @.@ 10 m ) or 10 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 20 m ) in diameter , smaller than the 11 feet 6 inches ( 3 @.@ 51 m ) diameter that had been adopted as the standard for the CC & <unk> and other deep level tube lines . The smaller tunnel size restricted the capacity of the C & SLR 's trains and , in 1912 , the C & SLR published a bill for their enlargement . A separate bill was published at the same time by the London Electric Railway ( LER ) , that included plans to construct tunnels to connect the C & SLR at Euston to the CCE & HR 's station at Camden Town . Together , the works proposed in these bills would enable trains of each company to run over the route of the other , effectively combining the two separate railways . The reconstruction and extension works were postponed during World War I and did not begin until 1922 . The C & SLR platforms and the tunnels between Euston and Moorgate were closed for the reconstruction on 8 August 1922 . They reopened on 20 April 1924 along with the new link to Camden Town . 
 = = = London & North Western Railway = = = 
 In 1906 , the London and North Western Railway ( LNWR ) , operator of the main line station , announced proposals to construct an underground station of its own . The company planned to construct new tracks parallel with its line to Watford , the first section of which would have been constructed as a single @-@ track loop 1 @,@ 588 yards ( 1 @,@ 452 m ) long and 55 feet 6 inches ( 16 @.@ 92 m ) deep beneath the surface station . The single platform underground station would have been close to the CCE & HR 's platforms . The proposal was presented to parliament in November 1906 and received royal assent on 26 July 1907 . The LNWR did not proceed with the loop plan and the underground station , which were dropped in 1911 . 
 = = = Victoria line = = = 
 Plans for the route that eventually became the Victoria line date from the 1940s . A proposal for a new underground railway line linking north @-@ east London with the centre was included in the County of London Plan in 1943 . Between 1946 and 1954 , a series of routes were proposed by different transport authorities to connect various places in south and north or north @-@ east London . Each of these connected the three main line termini at King 's Cross , Euston and Victoria . A route was approved in 1955 with future extensions to be decided later , though funding for the construction was not approved by the government until 1962 . 
 At Euston , major reconstruction works were undertaken to incorporate the new Victoria line platforms so that cross @-@ platform interchanges could be provided with the Northern line 's Bank branch — the former C & SLR route to King 's Cross and Bank . Unlike the former CCE & HR platforms , which were in separate tunnels with side platforms , the Bank branch tracks served an island platform in a single large tunnel . These platforms suffered from dangerous overcrowding at peak times . To provide cross @-@ platform interchange , a new section of tunnel was constructed for northbound Bank branch trains , which were diverted to a new platform south of the original alignment . The redundant northbound track bed in the station tunnel was filled in to form a wider southbound platform . The new Victoria line platforms were excavated between and parallel to the original and the new Bank branch tunnels . Each pair of platforms was linked via a concourse served by escalators . 
 In conjunction with the reconstruction of the main line station above , a new ticket hall was excavated below the concourse with two sets of escalators replacing the lifts . The escalators provide access to and from an intermediate passenger circulation level , which , in turn , gives access to the Northern line Charing Cross branch platforms and two further sets of escalators ; one set each serving the northbound and southbound Victoria and Northern line Bank branch platforms . Interchanges between the northbound and southbound Victoria and Northern Bank Line platforms are made via a passageway at the lower level so as to avoid the need to use the escalators . An emergency stair to the intermediate interchange level is located midway along the passageway . The Victoria line platforms opened on 1 December 1968 when the second section of the line was opened between Highbury & Islington and Warren Street . Disused passages remain with tiling and posters from the 1960s . 
 = = Future proposals = = 
 Unlike the neighbouring main line termini , St Pancras and Kings Cross , Euston is not served by the Circle , Hammersmith & City and Metropolitan lines . Euston Square station , which is served by the Circle , Hammersmith & City and Metropolitan lines , is approximately 250 metres ( 270 yd ) to the south @-@ west . Plans for the redevelopment of the main line station for High Speed 2 include the construction of a direct connection to Euston Square . Proposals for Crossrail 2 include an underground station serving Euston and St Pancras that will be integrated with the existing London Underground station . 
 = = Services = = 
 The station is in Travelcard Zone 1 . On the Northern line 's Bank branch the station is between Camden Town and King 's Cross St Pancras . On the Charing Cross branch it is between Mornington Crescent and Warren Street . On the Victoria line it is between Warren Street and King 's Cross St. Pancras . Train frequencies vary throughout the day , but generally , Northern line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 49 to 00 : 45 northbound and 05 : 49 to 00 : 28 southbound . Victoria line trains operate every 2 – 6 minutes from approximately 05 : 41 to 00 : 42 northbound and 05 : 31 to 00 : 26 southbound . 
 = = Connections = = 
 London Bus routes 18 , 59 , 68 , 91 , 168 , 253 and 476 and night routes N5 , N20 , N91 and <unk> serve Euston bus station outside the main line station . 
 = Federer – Nadal rivalry = 
 The Federer – Nadal rivalry ( known by many as <unk> ) is between two professional tennis players , Roger Federer of Switzerland and Rafael Nadal of Spain . They are currently engaged in a storied rivalry , which many consider to be the greatest in tennis history . They have played 34 times , most recently in the 2015 Swiss Indoors final , and Nadal leads their twelve @-@ year @-@ old rivalry with an overall record of 23 – 11 . 
 Federer and Nadal are the only pair of men to have finished six consecutive calendar years as the top two ranked players on the ATP Tour , which they did from 2005 – 10 . This included a record 211 consecutive weeks sharing the top two rankings from July 2005 to August 2009 . 
 Of their 34 matches , 15 have been on clay , 16 have been on hard court , and three have been on grass . Federer has a winning record on grass ( 2 – 1 ) , while Nadal leads on clay ( 13 – 2 ) and hard court ( 9 – 7 ) . Nadal leads the head @-@ to @-@ head of their 11 Grand Slam matches ( 9 – 2 ) , with five of these wins on the clay courts of Roland Garros , and both losses on grass at Wimbledon . 
 As tournament seedings are based on rankings , with the top two seeds placed on opposite sides of the draw , 21 of Nadal and Federer 's 34 matches have been in tournament finals , including an all @-@ time record eight Grand Slam finals and 10 Masters Series finals . Another nine have been semifinals , two have been quarterfinals , with only two taking place before the last @-@ 8 stage . In 27 matches out of 34 between Nadal and Federer , the winner of the first set won the match . 
 From 2006 to 2008 they played in every French Open and Wimbledon final . Their 2008 Wimbledon final was lauded as the greatest match ever by many long @-@ time tennis analysts . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 2004 – 2005 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal played their first match in March 2004 at the third round of the Miami Masters . Nadal , only 17 years old and ranked No. 34 at the time , surprised many by beating the then No. 1 in straight sets . Their second meeting was one year later , again in Miami , but this time in a best @-@ of @-@ five @-@ set final . Federer recovered from a two @-@ set deficit to win in five sets . 
 They played again two months later in the semifinals of the French Open , which was their first match on clay . Nadal defeated Federer in four sets en route to his first Grand Slam title . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 In 2006 , Nadal and Federer faced each other in six matches . 
 Nadal won the first four , beginning with the Dubai final in February played on hard court . This was Federer 's first loss of the year and ended his Open era record of 56 consecutive wins on hard courts . 
 The clay season ensued , and Nadal continued his dominance on clay , defeating Federer in the finals of the Monte Carlo Masters , the Rome Masters , and the French Open , in what was their first Grand Slam final . Federer won the first set quickly , but Nadal fought back and took the next three sets to capture his second French Open title . In the Rome final , Federer held two championship points on Nadal 's serve at 5 – 6 in the 5th set , but failed to convert . Federer then led 5 – 3 in the 5th @-@ set tiebreaker , but Nadal won the next 4 points to claim the Championship . 
 They faced off again a month later in the final of the Wimbledon Championships , which was their first meeting on grass . Federer won in four sets to capture his fourth consecutive Wimbledon title . 
 They did not meet again until the semifinals of the year @-@ end Masters Cup . Federer won in straight sets , en route to his third Masters Cup title in four years . At year 's end , Nadal 's career head @-@ to @-@ head advantage had risen to 6 – 3 . 
 = = = 2007 = = = 
 Nadal and Federer faced each other five times in 2007 , and Federer won three of their matches . 
 For the second straight year , Federer and Nadal played in three finals on clay . Nadal won the first meeting in straight sets , winning his third consecutive Monte Carlo title . A few weeks later they met at the Hamburg Masters , where Federer defeated Nadal for the first time on clay and ended his 81 @-@ match winning streak on clay . 
 Their next encounter was the French Open final , and Nadal won their much @-@ anticipated rematch in four sets , capturing his third consecutive French Open title . 
 Their last two meetings in 2007 were also a repeat of 2006 : the finals of Wimbledon and the semifinals of the Masters Cup . Once again , Federer won both matches , though their Wimbledon final lasted five sets , instead of the previous year 's four sets . 
 By the close of the year Federer narrowed the head @-@ to @-@ head record to 6 – 8 . 
 = = = 2008 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal played four times in 2008 , and Nadal won all four times , extending his career advantage to 12 – 6 . For the third straight year , Federer and Nadal played in three clay @-@ court finals . Nadal beat Federer in the Monte Carlo Masters for the third straight year , capturing his Open era record fourth consecutive title there . A few weeks later Nadal avenged his only clay @-@ court loss to Federer by defeating him in three sets for his first Hamburg Masters <unk> had double break leads in the first sets of both Monte Carlo and Hamburg but could not close out the sets . 
 Also for the third straight year , they played in the finals of the French Open . Nadal won his fourth consecutive French Open title , by a score of 6 – 1 , 6 – 3 , 6 – 0 . The scoreline puts the match among the most one @-@ sided in Grand Slam finals history . Federer suffered from mononucleosis in 2007 and 2008 which seriously inhibited his energy levels and movement through most of the early hard court and clay season , and his fitness and training levels didn 't recover until sometime in 2009 . 
 Nadal and Federer also met in the finals of Wimbledon for the third straight year , in the most anticipated match of their rivalry . Amidst rain delays , they played the longest final in Wimbledon history ( 4 hours and 48 minutes ) , and Nadal captured the title by winning the fifth set in near darkness . This match broke Federer 's Open Era @-@ record 65 match winning streak on grass , which spanned more than five years . 
 = = = 2009 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal played each other only twice in 2009 , splitting their matches . 
 Both players began the year strong , reaching the finals of the Australian Open . This was the first hard @-@ court Grand Slam final for Nadal , but Federer was undefeated in eight hard @-@ court finals ( 5 US Open , 3 Australian ) . The final was a long ( 4 hours and 23 minutes ) and competitive in the first four sets with Nadal pulling away decisively in the fifth set to secure his first hard court championship . 
 Federer rebounded against Nadal at the Madrid Masters ( their first match on Spanish soil ) , defeating him in the final in straight sets . This was a pivotal match because it broke Nadal 's five @-@ match winning streak against Federer . The victory by Federer also ended Nadal 's 33 @-@ match winning streak on clay and foreshadowed the Swiss ' historic victory at Roland Garros , which completed his Career Grand Slam . 
 = = = 2010 = = = 
 In 2010 , Federer and Nadal played twice , with Nadal winning the first and Federer winning the second match . 
 The two met in the final of the Madrid Open , one year after their last match , and Nadal defeated Federer in straight sets . 
 Federer and Nadal met in the 2010 ATP World Tour Finals ' final , marking their third meeting at the year @-@ end championships and their first ever meeting in the finals . Federer continued his indoor dominance against Nadal , winning in three sets . This victory gave Federer a record @-@ tying fifth title at the year @-@ end tournament . 
 = = = 2011 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal played four singles matches , with Nadal winning the first three matches and Federer winning the last match . Their lone doubles match was at the BNP Paribas Open . Federer , partnering with Stanislas Wawrinka , defeated Nadal and Marc López in the semifinals . 
 In their first singles match of 2011 , the two met in the semifinals of the Miami Masters , where Nadal won in straight sets . 
 They met in the semifinal at the Mutua Madrid Open , and Nadal won in three sets . 
 They then met in the finals of the 2011 French Open , their first Grand Slam meeting since the 2009 Australian Open final . Although it was a competitive match , Nadal again defeated Federer in four sets to win his tenth Major title and sixth French Open crown . 
 Their final meeting of the year came in the round @-@ robin stage of the 2011 ATP World Tour Finals . Their match , a rematch of the previous year 's final , saw Federer win a lopsided match in straight sets . 
 = = = 2012 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal first met during 2012 in the semifinals of the 2012 Australian Open . Federer was leading by a set and a break before a 20 @-@ minute fireworks delay , due to the celebrations of Australia Day , changed the momentum of the match . Nadal improved his hard @-@ court record over Federer with a win in four sets . 
 They next met in the semifinals of the Indian Wells Masters , where Federer won the match in straight sets en route to claiming his fourth Indian Wells Masters title . 
 In August 2012 , Nadal revealed his doubt that he would be able to play in the 2012 US Open because of a knee injury which had prevented him from playing since Wimbledon . Federer expressed concern for Nadal , and Nadal ultimately withdrew . 
 = = = 2013 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal met four times in 2013 with Nadal prevailing on every occasion against a severely hampered Federer due to two serious back injuries sustained during the 2013 season . 
 Federer and Nadal met for the first time during the quarterfinals of the Indian Wells Masters . It is the earliest the pair have met in a tournament since 2004 . Federer entered the match having suffered a back injury in the previous round and was defeated in straight sets . 
 On 1 April , by winning the Miami Masters , Andy Murray passed Federer in the ATP Rankings for second place . This marked the first time since 10 November 2003 , that neither Federer nor Nadal was ranked in the ATP top 2 , a span of an unprecedented 490 weeks . 
 Nadal then defeated Federer in the 2013 Rome Masters final in two sets . 
 They finally played a match at the 2013 Western & Southern Open in Cincinnati , where Nadal unseated the five @-@ time champion in the quarterfinals after Federer played a dazzling first set with crisply struck groundstrokes . At several points Federer had openings in Nadal service games in the second set , including a 0 – 30 chance , but Nadal came back to win in three sets . Federer had been hampered by a back injury during most of the summer and had just switched back to his old racquet after experimenting with a larger frame in his previous two tournaments . 
 Nadal and Federer met in semi finals of the indoor event , 2013 ATP World Tour Finals in the O2 arena . Nadal beat Federer in straight sets . This would be Federer 's last career match played with his 90 @-@ inch racquet before permanently upgrading to a larger frame . 
 = = = 2014 – 2015 = = = 
 Federer and Nadal had their only meeting of the 2014 season in the semi finals of the Australian Open . Nadal won in straight sets and improved his record to 3 – 0 against Federer at the Australian Open ( 9 – 2 overall in majors ) . This was the first Grand Slam tournament ( and only second tournament overall ) that Federer played after switching to a new larger racquet for the first time in his career . 
 In November 2015 , Federer defeated Nadal in 3 sets at the final of the Swiss Indoors , this was their first encounter on Swiss soil , as Federer captured a 7th title in his hometown of Basel . It was Federer 's first victory over Nadal in over 3 and a half years , having lost the previous 5 meetings . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Significant aspects = = = 
 The rivalry between Federer and Nadal has been a huge part of both men 's careers . Their Grand Slam tournament histories are of particular interest , especially their all @-@ time record of eight finals encounters . This includes playing French Open and Wimbledon finals for three consecutive years ( 2006 – 08 ) , culminating in what is widely considered the greatest match in tennis history at Wimbledon 2008 . Nadal , who had to defeat Federer during each of his first six Grand Slam title runs , possesses a 6 – 2 advantage in their finals encounters plus three victories in semifinals . 
 Nadal denied Federer a Career Grand Slam plus two potential Calendar Year Grand Slams ( 2006 – 07 ) by defeating him at the French Open every year from 2005 – 08 . Federer would complete a Career Grand Slam by winning the French title in 2009 after Nadal was upset in the fourth round . Meanwhile , Federer twice denied Nadal from becoming the first man since Björn Borg in 1980 to win the " Channel Slam " ( both the French Open and Wimbledon in the same year ) by defeating him in their first two Wimbledon finals , but Nadal succeeded the following year . This was the first of three combined Channel Slams with Federer accomplishing it in 2009 followed by Nadal 's second in 2010 . Federer has also prevented Nadal from winning the Year End Championships by defeating him in the 2010 finals and eliminating Nadal from the tournament in the 2006 , 2007 , and 2013 semifinals preventing Nadal from becoming only the second man after Andre Agassi to win a Career Grand Slam , a gold singles Olympic medal , and the Year End Championships , a distinction dubbed as a " Career Super Slam " by Sports Illustrated . 
 Their record six consecutive calendar years atop the rankings from 2005 – 10 was due to their unprecedented combined performance in the Grand Slam and Masters Series tournaments . During this span they captured a combined record 21 of the 24 Grand Slam tournament titles ( 12 for Federer , 9 for Nadal ) , including a record 11 consecutive titles from 2005 – 07 . They also dominated the Masters Series , combining for 31 of the 54 titles ( 18 for Nadal , 13 for Federer ) , including 8 of 9 in 2005 ( 4 each ) . Additionally , Federer won 4 of 6 year @-@ end tournaments . 
 Finally , both men not only possess Open era records for consecutive wins on a single surface — Federer on both grass ( 65 ) and hard courts ( 56 ) , Nadal on clay courts ( 81 ) — but each of these streaks was broken by the other man . Their respective dominance on grass and clay was the impetus for the " Battle of Surfaces " , an exhibition match on a half @-@ grass , half @-@ clay court , which Nadal won in May 2007 when both the grass and clay streaks were still active . 
 Nearly half of the meetings between Federer and Nadal have come on clay which is statistically Nadal 's best surface and one of Federer 's weaker surfaces . Of their 34 matches , 15 have been on clay , 16 have been on hard court , and 3 have been on grass . Federer has a winning record on his best surface , grass ( 2 – 1 ) , while Nadal leads on clay ( 13 – 2 ) and hard court ( 9 – 7 ) . Nadal leads in Grand Slam Tournament matches ( 9 – 2 ) , with five of these wins coming on the clay courts of Roland Garros . On hard courts and grass , Federer holds an edge in overall career win percentage , but trails Nadal in head @-@ to @-@ head results on hard courts . 
 Analysts , commentators and pundits increasingly recognize that Nadal is just a bad matchup for Federer as the heavy topspin created by Nadal 's groundstrokes combined with his strategy of directing the majority of his serves & groundstrokes to Federer 's single handed backhand keeps Federer on the defensive and making it harder for Federer to use his aggressive groundstrokes to dominate baseline rallies as he typically does against other opponents . Federer says he is a " different player due to Nadal 's presence " citing Nadal 's game as a major reason for improvements in areas of his own game . 
 Two factors that the Nadal head @-@ to @-@ head advantage is built on include domination on clay and domination during two seasons when Federer was hobbled by illness and injury . The 13 – 2 record on clay masks a close record of 10 – 9 on all other surfaces . Also Nadal 's 8 – 0 advantage in 2008 and 2013 , when Federer was clearly hindered by mononucleosis and severe back injuries respectively , distorts a competitive 15 – 11 record in all other years . 
 = = = Comparison of Grand Slam tournament titles = = = 
 As of 2015 , Roger Federer holds the all @-@ time record for the most Grand Slam tournament titles with 17 . Federer 's Grand Slam tournament titles include 9 on hard courts , 7 on grass , and 1 on clay . Nadal has 14 in total : 9 on clay , 3 on hard courts , and 2 on grass . 
 Both players have won the Career Grand Slam ( winning all four majors at least once ) . 
 = = = Comparison of Year @-@ End Championships = = = 
 As of 2016 , Roger Federer holds the record for Year @-@ End Championship titles with 6 . While Nadal has not won a Year @-@ End Championship , he has made the finals twice , in 2010 and 2013 . Federer defeated Nadal in the 2010 finals , 6 @-@ 3 , 3 @-@ 6 , 6 @-@ 1 and leads Nadal 4 @-@ 1 at the event . 
 = = = Comparison of Masters 1000 titles = = = 
 Rafael Nadal holds 28 Masters 1000 titles , with 20 of his titles on clay and 8 on hard courts . Roger Federer has 24 , with 18 coming on hard courts and 6 on clay . Nadal is missing three Masters 1000 titles ( Miami , Shanghai , and Paris ) and Federer is missing two ( Monte Carlo , and Rome ) . 
 Nadal prevented Federer from winning Monte Carlo three times from 2006 to 2008 . He also beat Federer twice in the Rome finals , once in 2006 and again in 2013 . The 2006 Rome final , which was won by Nadal in a 5th @-@ set tiebreak , lasted for over five hours and is considered by some to be one of the greatest and most memorable matches ever contested on clay . 
 In 2005 , Federer prevented Nadal from winning Miami in a five @-@ set final . Nadal won the first and second sets , was up a break in the third set and was two points away from victory before Federer came back from two @-@ sets @-@ down to win . Nadal made it back to the Miami final in 2008 , 2011 , and 2014 but lost each time . 
 = = = Head @-@ to @-@ head tallies = = = 
 The following is a breakdown of their head @-@ to @-@ head results : 
 All matches : Nadal , 23 – 11 
 All finals : Nadal , 14 – 7 
 Grand Slam matches : Nadal , 9 – 2 
 Australian Open : Nadal , 3 – 0 
 French Open : Nadal , 5 – 0 
 Wimbledon : Federer , 2 – 1 
 US Open : Have not met 
 Grand Slam finals : Nadal , 6 – 2 
 Tennis Masters Cup / ATP World Tour Finals matches : Federer , 4 – 1 
 Tennis Masters Cup / ATP World Tour Finals finals : Federer , 1 – 0 
 ATP Masters Series / ATP World Tour Masters 1000 matches : Nadal , 12 – 4 
 ATP Masters Series / ATP World Tour Masters 1000 finals : Nadal , 7 – 3 
 ATP World Tour 500 / ATP International Series Gold matches : Tied , 1 – 1 
 ATP World Tour 500 / ATP International Series Gold finals : Tied , 1 – 1 
 Best of five set matches : Nadal , 11 – 3 
 Five @-@ set matches : Nadal , 3 – 2 
 Winning the match after losing 1st set : Nadal , 6 – 2 
 Best of three set matches : Nadal , 12 – 8 
 Outdoor courts : Nadal , 22 – 6 
 Indoor courts : Federer , 5 – 1 
 Tie @-@ breaks : Nadal , 11 – 10 
 = = = Head @-@ to @-@ head results on each court surface = = = 
 Clay courts : Nadal , 13 – 2 
 Hard courts : Nadal , 9 – 7 
 Outdoor : Nadal , 8 – 2 
 Indoor : Federer , 5 – 1 
 Grass courts : Federer , 2 – 1 
 = = = = Clay = = = = 
 Nadal and Federer have played 15 of their 34 matches on clay with Nadal holding a 13 – 2 advantage over Federer . From 2005 to 2008 , Nadal won every French Open , defeating Federer in each of those tournaments ( in the 2005 semifinal and the 2006 , 2007 , 2008 , 2011 finals ) , and won at least 2 of the 3 clay Masters events each year from 2005 – 2010 , defeating Federer in 6 of those . Statistically , Nadal has the highest win percentage on clay of any player in ATP history . As a result , some analysts and players , such as Pat Cash and Conchita Martínez , consider Nadal the greatest clay @-@ court player ever . Nadal has won all of their seven meetings in best of five set matches on clay . 
 = = = = Grass = = = = 
 Federer has won the Wimbledon Championships seven times , and Nadal has won the championships twice . Five of Federer 's titles were consecutive titles ( from 2003 to 2007 ) , and the sixth and seventh titles were won in 2009 and 2012 . Federer and Nadal met in three consecutive Wimbledon finals from 2006 to 2008 ; Federer won the first two finals , while Nadal won the last one . The 2008 Wimbledon final has been lauded as the greatest match ever by many long @-@ time tennis analysts . 
 = = = = Hard = = = = 
 Nadal and Federer have played 16 of their 34 matches on hard courts , with Nadal holding a 9 – 7 lead . An important distinction is the relative success of the two players on indoor and outdoor hard courts . In the former , Federer leads Nadal with a 5 – 1 record , while on outdoor hard courts , Nadal leads 8 – 2 . The quicker conditions and low bounce of the indoor hard courts fit Federer 's style , while the slower and high bouncing conditions of most outdoor ones favor Nadal . Federer has defeated Nadal in four out of five encounters they have had at the Year End Championships , including the 2010 final , which are played on indoor <unk> . 
 Despite Nadal 's success on hard courts , some analysts have criticized his lack of consistency in reaching tournament finals ( especially the <unk> finals ) for skewing the overall head @-@ to @-@ head results . Nadal has said that Federer is the " favourite " on " these kinds of surfaces " ( referring to their match at the 2012 Australian Open ) . 
 = = = Skill comparisons = = = 
 Federer is considered by many to be the greatest tennis player of all time while Nadal 's performance on clay has prompted many experts to regard him as the greatest clay court player and one of the best tennis players of all time . 
 Federer has been more successful than Nadal on fast courts because he hits a flatter forehand and has a faster serve . Grass and indoor hard courts are one of the faster surfaces , so Federer 's flatter shots there result in a lower bouncing , faster moving trajectory . Thus , Nadal 's topspin is less effective on such faster courts , but is most effective on slower courts such as clay . Nadal has improved his serving speed and placement over the years , but Federer still serves faster on average and earns more aces and service winners , while Nadal has an overall stronger ground stroke game . 
 While Nadal is statistically weaker than Federer on both hard and grass courts , Nadal has nonetheless achieved considerable success on both surfaces , including notable wins at the 2008 Summer Olympics , Wimbledon ( 2008 and 2010 ) , the Australian Open ( 2009 ) , the US Open ( 2010 and 2013 ) , and at various hard court Masters series tournaments . 
 = = = Media and player commentary = = = 
 During interviews , many fellow and former players have regarded both Federer and Nadal as among the best tennis players of all time . In November 2010 , former player Björn Borg stated that he believed Federer to be the greatest player of all time , but " Rafa has the chance to be the greatest player " if he stays healthy . 
 Former player and commentator John McEnroe was of a similar opinion , noting in 2010 that " there is an argument to be made that Rafael Nadal may be the greatest player eventually , even possibly now . " He has subsequently adjusted his opinion on several occasions , in 2013 noting that he thought Nadal was " the greatest player that ever lived " but later in 2014 bunched Federer , Nadal , Laver and Sampras together as the greatest ever . In July 2015 , he reversed his opinion and again backed Roger Federer for the title . 
 At the press conference following his 9th record French Open win in 2014 and a total of 14 Slams , three shy of Federer 's 17 , Nadal said that he really does not care much about records , " I 'll follow my own path . Then , when my career is over , then we 'll count . " 
 In May 2014 , eight @-@ time Grand Slam champion Andre Agassi told Singapore 's Straits Times newspaper , via <unk> : " I 'd put Nadal number one and Federer number two . Federer separated himself from the field for four years . He separated himself from Andy Roddick and Lleyton Hewitt . Nadal had to deal with Federer , Novak Djokovic , Andy Murray in the golden age of tennis . " 
 In November 2014 , former world number 1 player Andy Roddick , in noting his support for Federer , explained why he believes that head @-@ to @-@ head results are not a valid factor in determining the greatest of all time , " For me Roger Federer is still ahead in the greatest @-@ ever debate , with Rafael Nadal second . People talk about their head @-@ to @-@ head being the determining factor , but I can ’ t comprehend a single match @-@ up being the deciding factor . It ’ s about total wins at major tournaments , not an individual match @-@ up , in my mind . " 
 In December 2014 , Rafael Nadal 's uncle and coach , Toni Nadal , indicated to Spanish radio station Cadena COPE that he believed Federer to be the greatest of all time based on overall statistics and achievements , noting " I think he is ( the best of all @-@ time ) , the numbers say so . " 
 In March 2015 , former player Pete Sampras made similar arguments about Federer , " You look at the numbers of what he ’ s been able to do , you have to say he ’ s the greatest we ’ ve seen " These comments were echoed by Boris Becker in July 2015 , " Great respect for Roger Federer ! He is our greatest of all time " 
 = = Relationship and competitive dynamic = = 
 Both Federer and Nadal 's personal and professional relationship is good @-@ natured and gracious . Though they are both highly competitive , they maintain a healthy regard for each other and have had virtually no source of personal animosity . The two have made slight criticisms of one another in the past , nevertheless . For example , Federer complained of Nadal 's slow , deliberate style of play on the eve of the 2008 Wimbledon final . Nadal criticized Federer before the 2012 Australian Open for his failure to be more vocal about players ' grievances on issues such as scheduling and prize money . He subsequently apologized for making his views public , however , and both players maintained that they still enjoyed a good relationship and had high respect for each other , which can often be seen in interviews . Nadal was also once seen watching Federer play a match in his box , and their family members would congratulate each other on match wins . 
 Despite their cordial relationship , both men have a somewhat different attitude towards their rivalry . When Federer was securely atop the tennis world he was ambivalent towards the notion of a rivalry with an opponent five years younger than himself . But after their memorable 2008 Wimbledon final he had no choice but to acknowledge its significance , even admitting " it definitely becomes more and more special the more times we play against each other . " A few weeks later , after Nadal had officially surpassed him in the rankings , Federer offered this compliment : " Look at what he had to achieve to get it . That 's what I like to see . " Nadal has always cherished the rivalry because he looks up to Federer as both a role model and a measuring stick for success . 
 When interest in their rivalry increased , both Federer and Nadal collaborated to arrange occasional charity exhibition matches to benefit their charities ' philanthropic interests . The most recent was the Match for Africa , played on 21 December 2010 in Zurich , Switzerland , which Federer won , and a follow @-@ up match played in Madrid on the following day , titled " Joining Forces for the Benefit of Children " , which Nadal won . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 The rivalry has also increased overall interest in tennis . The highly anticipated 2008 Wimbledon final drew strong television ratings for tennis in both the U.S. and across Europe . The match was also featured on the cover of Sports Illustrated , which was the first time in years that tennis had made its cover . 
 = = Pairing Federer and Nadal = = 
 = = = Significant achievements = = = 
 From the 2003 Wimbledon Championships to the 2011 French Open , Federer and Nadal have won an unprecedented 26 out of 32 Major titles . In this time , both men have also completed the Career Grand Slam ( Nadal has also completed the Career Golden Slam by winning the 2008 Beijing Olympics ) . 
 From Nadal 's first Grand Slam tournament victory at the 2005 French Open until the 2011 French Open , Federer and Nadal had won 22 of 25 Major titles ( 12 for Federer , 10 for Nadal ) . The exceptions were the 2008 and 2011 Australian Open , won by Novak Djokovic , and the 2009 US Open , won by Juan Martín del Potro . 
 Federer and Nadal are the only No. 1 and No. 2 pair in the open era to contest the French Open and Wimbledon men 's finals back to back in a calendar year . They are also the only pair in the history of tennis to contest both of these finals back to back for three consecutive years ( 2006 – 08 ) . 
 In the history of tennis , Federer and Nadal are the only pair to face each other in eight Grand Slam singles finals ( 2006 – 08 Wimbledon , 2006 – 08 , 2011 French Open , 2009 Australian Open ) . This broke the previous record of seven finals set by Bill Tilden and William Johnston ( 1919 – 25 U.S. Championships ) . Their match at the 2012 Australian Open also marked a record 10th time two players had faced each other in Grand Slam men 's singles matches , tying with the record set by John McEnroe and Ivan Lendl . This record has now been surpassed by Federer @-@ Djokovic when they met for the 11th time in a Major at the 2012 Wimbledon semi @-@ finals . 
 Federer and Nadal are the only No. 1 and No. 2 pair to win 11 consecutive Grand Slam singles tournaments between them ( from the 2005 French Open to the 2007 US Open ) . In this period , Federer won 3 consecutive titles at both Wimbledon and the US Open and 2 consecutive titles at the Australian Open , while Nadal won 3 consecutive French Open titles . 
 During the open era , only two pairs of players have played each other in the final of the same Grand Slam singles tournament three consecutive years : Becker – Edberg ( 1988 – 90 Wimbledon ) and Federer @-@ Nadal ( 2006 – 08 French Open and 2006 – 08 Wimbledon ) . 
 Federer and Nadal are the only pair to win at least four consecutive finals at three different Majors during the same period ( 2005 – 08 and 2010 – 14 French Open for Nadal , 2003 – 07 Wimbledon and 2004 – 08 US Open for Federer ) . 
 From the 2004 Wimbledon Championships to the 2011 French Open , at least one of them appeared in 25 of 28 Major finals , winning all of them except the 2005 Australian Open , the 2008 Australian Open , the 2011 Australian Open , and the 2009 US Open . 
 Federer and Nadal have combined to win 8 consecutive Wimbledon ( 2003 – 10 ) and 10 consecutive French Open ( 2005 – 14 ) . 
 Federer and Nadal won the French Open , Wimbledon and US Open trio for 4 consecutive years ( 2005 – 08 ) . 
 One of only two pairs to have faced each other in a Major , having both already completed the career Grand Slam . They achieved this in ( the 2011 French Open final and the 2012 Australian Open semifinal ) . The other pair Roy Emerson and Rod Laver also met on two occasions after both completing the career Grand Slam . 
 = = List of all head @-@ to @-@ head matches = = 
 ATP , Davis Cup , and Grand Slam main draw results included . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 Federer – Nadal ( 11 – 23 ) 
 = = = Doubles = = = 
 Federer — Nadal ( 1 – 2 ) 
 = = = Exhibitions = = = 
 Federer — Nadal ( 2 – 7 ) 
 On 21 November 2006 they played an exhibition match on a hard court in Seoul , South Korea . Federer won 6 – 3 , 3 – 6 , 6 – 3 . 
 On 2 May 2007 they played in the " Battle of Surfaces " on a hybrid court that was half clay and half grass . This match was held at the Palma Arena in Palma , the capital city of Nadal 's native Mallorca . Nadal won 7 – 5 , 4 – 6 , 7 – 6 ( 12 – 10 ) . 
 On 21 December 2010 they played in Zurich , Switzerland on a hard court a charity tennis match for the Roger Federer Foundation . Federer won 4 – 6 , 6 – 3 , 6 – 3 . They played another exhibition match on 22 December 2010 in Madrid , Spain . Nadal won 7 – 6 ( 7 – 3 ) , 4 – 6 , 6 – 1 . This was a charity tennis match for the Fundación Rafa Nadal ( Rafael Nadal Foundation ) . 
 On 1 January 2011 they played in the final of the knockout exhibition tournament ; the Mubadala World Tennis Championship on a hard court . Federer had beaten Söderling in the previous round and Nadal had beaten Berdych in the previous round . Nadal won the encounter by a score of 7 – 6 ( 7 – 4 ) , 7 – 6 ( 7 – 3 ) . 
 On 8 March 2011 the two played a set at Matthew Knight Arena in Eugene , Oregon , USA . Nadal won the charity exhibition 7 – 5 . 
 On 31 December 2011 they played again at Mubadala 2011 Mubadala World Tennis Championship ( December ) on a hard court , this time for third place . Nadal won again 6 – 1 , 7 – 5 . 
 On 12 December 2015 they played two matches in New Delhi , India at 2015 International Premier Tennis League season on a hard court . Nadal won both a set of singles against Federer 6 – 5 ( 7 – 4 ) and , paired with Rohan Bopanna , a doubles set against Roger Federer and Marin <unk> 6 – 4 to lead the Indian Aces to a 30 – 19 victory over the UAE Royals . 
 = = Records = = 
 Only pair in Open Era history to have met 8 times in Grand Slam finals 
 Only pair in Open Era history to have met 4 times in finals at one Slam ( at the French Open ) 
 This rivalry is ranked eighth in terms of matches played in Open Era 
 = = Performance timeline comparison = = 
 = = = Grand Slam tournaments = = = 
 Bold = players met during this tournament 
 = = = = By Year = = = = 
 = = = = = 1999 – 2004 = = = = = 
 = = = = = 2005 – 2010 = = = = = 
 = = = = = 2011 – 2016 = = = = = 
 = = = = By Age ( end of season ) = = = = 
 = = = = = 18 – 22 = = = = = 
 = = = = = 23 – 27 = = = = = 
 = = = = = 28 – 32 = = = = = 
 = = = = = 33 – 37 = = = = = 
 = = = ATP Rankings = = = 
 = = = = Year @-@ end ranking timeline = = = = 
 = = Career evolution = = 
 Federer and Nadal were born just under four years and 10 months apart . Federer 's birthday is 8 August 1981 , while Nadal 's is 3 June 1986 . A different viewpoint of their career evolution is offered by taking the season they ended with an age of 18 as starting point , and comparing their accomplishments at the same age . For instance in 2007 , Federer finished the season being 26 years old having accumulated a career record of twelve Major titles , and ranked No.1. By comparison , Nadal finished the 2012 season also aged 26 , having accumulated eleven Major titles in total , and being ranked <unk> 
 ( ) = active record ( updated Monday 25 July 2016 ) 
 = = = Titles by tournaments played comparison = = = 
 Another way to view their respective careers and evolution is to look at the progression of titles won by the number of tournaments played to win each of their titles at each level of competition including Grand Slams , ATP World Tour Masters 1000 ( formerly ATP Masters Series ) , ATP World Tour Finals ( formerly Tennis Masters Cup ) , Olympic Games , ATP World Tour 500 Series ( formerly ATP International Series Gold ) , and ATP World Tour 250 Series ( formerly ATP International Series ) . For example , Federer won his 14th Grand Slam title at his 40th Grand Slam Tournament , while Nadal won his 14th at his 38th Grand Slam Tournament . 
 = = = Federer – Nadal Grand Slam era ( 2003 – 2014 ) = = = 
 = = = Combined singles performance timeline ( best result ) = = = 
 = = = Federer – Nadal ATP world No.1 era = = = 
 = ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful = 
 " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " is a song recorded by American singer Britney Spears for her seventh studio album Femme Fatale ( 2011 ) . It features guest vocals from American singer Sabi . The song was written by Jeremy Coleman , Joshua Coleman , Esther Dean , Mathieu Jomphe and Benjamin Levin . " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics , who deemed it as one of the best offerings of the album , despite criticizing Sabi 's verses . 
 After trying to choose between the song , " Criminal " and " Inside Out " to be the fourth single from Femme Fatale , " Criminal " was selected , although Sabi revealed she pictured a music video for " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " in a similar style to the performance of 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour . The performance consists of Spears singing and dancing to the song while her dancers are carrying picture frames . Sabi performed the song with Spears in selected cities . Despite not being released as a single , " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " managed to peak at number forty @-@ one on South Korea 's Gaon International Chart , due to digital sales separate from Femme Fatale , and also appeared on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Digital Songs chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 Spears spoke to V about the sessions for Femme Fatale , commenting that she had been recording the album for two years . During the recording sessions , the singer contacted songwriter Ester Dean in 2009 , after receiving a demo of the song " Drop It Low " , which Spears wanted to record . The song , however , was later released as Dean 's debut single . Spears then recorded two songs co @-@ written by Dean for Femme Fatale . " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " was written by Dean , Jeremy Coleman , Joshua Coleman , Mathieu Jomphe , and Benjamin Levin , while being produced by Blanco , Ammo , <unk> , and Billboard . It features American recording artist Sabi . Spears first heard about Sabi after listening to songs from The <unk> , an old music group the latter participated . Sabi explained that , after she was asked to collaborate with Spears , she felt it was so surreal that she refused to believe her luck until the song was recorded . 
 Although both singers worked with producer Benny Blanco in studio on " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " , Spears recorded her vocals for the song before Sabi , who actually raps on the track . The latter also revealed she felt lucky and honored because Spears does not do features often , while commenting that " it 's just pretty crazy , I mean , I grew up watching Britney Spears . All my friends watched Britney Spears and we even had a routine to [ ' ... Baby One More Time ' ] that we were gonna perform , like , for a middle @-@ school talent show . So it 's a dream come true . Never did I ever think that I 'd be in the mix with Britney . I 'm just lucky . " When asked about how she learned about Sabi in an interview with Rolling Stone , Spears revealed , " friends and people around me are always showing me new artists that they love and that 's how I learned about Sabi and ended up working with her on ' ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful ' . I have always wanted to feature a new artist on one of my albums and she is really cool . " A small teaser of the song was unveiled by the singer on March 7 , 2011 . Four days later , it leaked in full online , along with another Femme Fatale track , " Inside Out " . On August 5 , 2011 , Spears posted a poll on her Facebook page asking fans whether her next single should be " Criminal " , " Inside Out " or " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful . " After the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards , she revealed to MTV News that " Criminal " was chosen as the fourth single . 
 = = Composition = = 
 In an interview with Rolling Stone , Spears revealed that her idea initially was to make an album that was " fresh @-@ sounding [ ... ] for the clubs or something that you play in your car when you 're going out at night that gets you excited , but I wanted it to sound different from everything else out right now . " " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " is a party song with a heavy club beat . The elements used on the song 's background were compared to similar used on songs by The Black Eyed Peas , Usher , Rihanna , and Lady Gaga , while its bass line was said to be " a cousin of the ground " for the Eurythmics ' 1983 single " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " . 
 In the verses , Spears is flirting with a guy , in lyrics such as " Look at you / Look at you / Be my sweetie / Be my honey tonight / Look at you / Look at you / Be my sweetie / Be my honey tonight / ' Cause you 're beautiful / Drop dead " . Sabi rap 's also alludes to the theme of the song , with lines such as " I think I like you / Boy , boy , look at you / I want to get next to you / Got me kind of hot but I ain 't sweating you / Steaming like a pot full of vegetables " . Spears references The Notorious B.I.G. ' s hit " Hypnotize " in " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " in the line " You must be B.I.G. because you got me Hypnotized " . Spears ' vocals on " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " were deemed as " robotic " , but similar to the ones of " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " ( 2000 ) . Jocelyn Vena of MTV noted the singer uses her deep vocals in lines such as " And , yeah , your body looks so sick , I think I caught the flu " and " You must be B.I.G. ' cause you got me hypnotized " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " received mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . While reviewing Femme Fatale , Alexis Petridis of The Guardian noted Spears " does what pop stars invariably do in lieu of having a detectable character of their own : goes on and on about sex " , while commenting that " after a while , you get the feeling the lyricists just gave up trying in the face of her indifference : ' You got me kind of hot … Steaming like a pot full of vegetables , ' she sings , which somehow makes you think not of thrillingly sweaty congress but the smell of boiled cabbage . " Contemporary critic Robert Christgau noted the songs on the album are " such a convincing illusion that any guy who goes all the way with it has too much libido invested in the bimbo fantasy " , saying that the singer is " just too straight @-@ faced " on " the nauseous ' Your body look so sick I think I got the flu ' " . A reviewer of Samesame.com.au compared the background vocals of the song to Kesha 's " Blow " ( 2010 ) , and noted " guest rapper Sabi wish [ es ] she was Nicki Minaj " . Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani considered " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " one of the album 's " best offerings " , comparing the song to Christina Aguilera 's " <unk> " ( 2010 ) . 
 Keith Caufield of Billboard noted the song " doesn 't take itself too seriously . Halfway through the number , the luckiest rapper in the world , Sabi , appears , inexplicably rhyming ' <unk> ' you ' with ' vegetables ' , " while Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey considered it " self @-@ assured " . The A.V. Club 's Genevieve Koski commented that " inane lyrical premises like those " on the song " are salvaged by the mightiest of hooks , pummeling the listener into lobotomized musical escapism " . David Buchanan of Consequence of Sound said both " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " and " I Wanna Go " " brings Dirty Vegas memories , plus phoning in that Far East Movement ' Like a G6 ' backing track would have been put to better use with Spears ' producers " . Thomas Conner of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times noted Spears " drags her down low as if she 's Rihanna " in the song . MTV writer Eliot Glazer said that , " even as a mom with two kids , Britney still manages to ooze sex appeal in " Beautiful , " cementing her place as the world 's number one MILF " . Hannah Rishel of The Daily Collegian said " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " was " possibly [ her ] favorite song on the album " , commenting that " it ’ s cheesy and ridiculous , but Spears makes it work in the song " . Following the release of Femme Fatale , " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " reached number forty @-@ one on South Korea 's Gaon International Chart , after selling 7 @,@ 500 digital units of the song alone . The song also appeared on Billboard 's Dance / Electronic Digital Songs chart on the week of April 23 , 2011 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " was first performed by Sabi at the Wango Tango of 2011 . On 2011 's Femme Fatale Tour , a video interlude in which the stalker talks about femme fatales in history sees the beginning of the third section . Spears returns to the stage wearing a golden outfit and performs an Egyptian @-@ inspired version of " Gimme More " , containing a barge and fireworks . In her next number , " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " , Spears is surrounded by her dancers carrying picture frames , and includes an appearance by Sabi in select cities . Sabi revealed she pictured the music video for the song based on the live performance of the tour , saying , " what we do onstage is very Egyptian , Middle Eastern @-@ like feel and a lot of vanity kind of stuff . So I would just imagine what we kind of did for the green screen , where there 's mirrors and there 's boys that are like oiled up . [ ... ] I would imagine us in goddess @-@ looking outfits and us looking vain " . On August 3 , 2011 , ABC Family announced that " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " would be available for free download on their website , until the premiere of the Teen Spirit series on August 5 , 2011 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " ( Drop Dead ) Beautiful " adapted from Femme Fatale liner notes . 
 = Jacob 's Ladder ( film ) = 
 Jacob 's Ladder is a 1990 American psychological horror film directed by Adrian Lyne , written and produced by Bruce Joel Rubin and starring Tim Robbins , Elizabeth Peña and Danny Aiello . The Special Edition of the film was released on DVD by Artisan Entertainment in 1998 and on Blu @-@ ray Disc by Lions Gate Entertainment in 2010 . 
 The film 's protagonist , Jacob , is a Vietnam veteran whose experiences prior to and during the war result in strange , fragmentary flashbacks and bizarre hallucinations that continue to haunt him . As his ordeal worsens , Jacob desperately attempts to figure out the truth . 
 Jacob 's Ladder was made by Carolco Pictures ten years after being written by Rubin . It drew from several inspirations for its story and effects , including the short film An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge and the paintings of Francis Bacon . Though only moderately successful upon release , the film garnered a cult following and became a source of influence for various other works such as the horror franchise Silent Hill . A loose remake of Jacob 's Ladder was announced to be in works by LD Entertainment . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 On 6 October 1971 , American soldier Jacob Singer is with the 1st Air Cavalry Division , deployed in a village in the Mekong Delta during the Vietnam War , when his close @-@ knit unit comes under attack . As many of Jacob ’ s comrades are killed or wounded , others exhibit abnormal behavior , including catatonia and a bloody seizure . A terrified Jacob flees into the jungle , only to be bayoneted in the gut . 
 Jacob awakens in 1975 , on a New York City Subway , with the novel The Stranger . Despite having a PhD , Jacob works as a postal clerk and lives in a rundown apartment in Brooklyn with his seductive girlfriend , Jezzie . Jacob misses his wife and their three sons , especially the youngest , Gabe , who died before the war . He is increasingly beset by disturbing experiences , including inexplicably locked subway exits , faceless vibrating people , a car trying to run him down , a nurse with grotesque teeth on the top of her head , and a bat @-@ like monster penetrating Jezzie at a party , where Jacob collapses with a dangerous fever . 
 The comrade who had gone catatonic , Paul , contacts him to reveal having had similar terrifying experiences , but is immediately killed when his car explodes . <unk> after the funeral , the platoon @-@ mates confess that all but one have also been living a nightmare . Jacob explains that the army must have done something to them , and they hire a lawyer to investigate . The lawyer backs out after reading military files documenting that the soldiers were never in combat and were discharged for psychological reasons . Jacob ’ s comrades also back out , looking scared , as Jacob demands they tell him who got to them . Jacob himself is later thrown into a car with intimidating men in suits who tell him to stop nosing around in military business , but he is able to jump from the moving car . Taken to the hospital , he finds himself strapped to a stretcher being wheeled over bloody body parts , past demented , disfigured inmates . Trapped with doctors wielding barbaric metal instruments , he is told he is already dead , but denies it . 
 He is taken out of the hospital by his friend Louis , who quotes the 14th century Christian mystic Meister Eckhart : 
 Eckhart saw Hell too . He said : “ The only thing that burns in Hell is the part of you that won ’ t let go of life , your memories , your attachments . They burn them all away . But they ’ re not punishing you ” , he said . “ They ’ re freeing your soul . So , if you ’ re frightened of dying and ... you ’ re holding on , you ’ ll see devils tearing your life away . But if you ’ ve made your peace , then the devils are really angels , freeing you from the earth . ” 
 Jacob is approached by a distressed Michael Newman , the man who treated his wound in a medevac helicopter in Vietnam and who dragged him away from Paul ’ s burning car . Newman tells a story of having been a chemist with the Army ’ s chemical warfare division in Saigon . He designed “ the Ladder ” , a drug that massively increased aggression , taking people straight to their most primal urges . A dose was secretly given to Jacob ’ s unit , who then turned on each other in a homicidal frenzy . 
 At various times Jacob experiences the aftermath of his attack , such as being found gutted in the jungle and being evacuated under fire . At one point he awakens in his home before the war with his wife and all three sons , telling his wife he had a dream he was living with another woman , Jezzie . Eventually he re @-@ experiences the traumatic moment , where it is a fellow American soldier who bayonets him . 
 Finally given knowledge of what happened to him and why , in a calmer place , Jacob returns to his family 's apartment . He sorts through his mementos , including his combat dog tags and honorable discharge . He is surprised to see his son Gabe at the foot of the stairwell , who takes him by the hand and leads him up the steps into a bright light . In a wartime triage tent , military doctors declare Jacob dead after “ putting up quite a fight ” . He has an expression of peace on his face , implying that he is finally dead . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 The film 's title refers to the biblical story of Jacob 's Ladder , or the dream of a meeting place between Heaven and Earth ( Genesis 28 : 12 ) . Its little @-@ known alternate title is Dante 's Inferno , in a reference to Inferno by Dante Alighieri . Screenwriter and co @-@ producer Bruce Joel Rubin perceived the film as a modern interpretation of the Liberation Through Hearing During the Intermediate State , the Tibetan Book of the Dead . Rubin said : " The inspiration in a sense is my entire spiritual upbringing . Once you have a meditative life you start to see that the world is really far different than what it appears to be . What appears to be finite is really couched in the infinite , and the infinite imbues everything in our lives . " Before writing his scripts for Jacob 's Ladder and Ghost , which too was released in 1990 , the Jewish @-@ born Rubin spent two years in a Tibetan Buddhist monastery in Nepal ; previously , he has also written afterlife @-@ themed Brainstorm and Deadly Friend . His original screenplay for Jacob 's Ladder differs significantly at parts from the final film , especially towards the ending . 
 Rubin 's work on Jacob 's Ladder began in 1980 , sparked by his nightmare in which he dreamt about being trapped in a subway . For several years , Rubin tried to sell the script , without success ; Thom Mount of Universal Pictures said he " loved it , but it was not for his studio " . Directors Michael Apted , Sidney Lumet and Ridley Scott all expressed an interest in making the film , but still no major studio was ready to invest in Rubin 's " too metaphysical " stories as " Hollywood does not make ghost movies " . Eventually , after Deadly Friend was filmed by Wes Craven in 1986 , Rubin 's screenplays for both Jacob 's Ladder and Ghost were picked by Paramount Pictures . In 1988 , Adrian Lyne , who described Rubin 's work as " certainly one of the best scripts I 've ever read " , decided then to direct it instead of an adaptation of The Bonfire of the Vanities as he had originally planned ( incidentally , Tom Hanks , an actor originally considered by Lyne for the role of Jacob , ended up starring in Bonfire ) . The ownership and policy changes at Paramount resulted in the cancellation of the project ; the executives had doubts about the film 's ending and the scenes taking place in Vietnam . The independent film studio Carolco Pictures decided to take over the production of Jacob 's Ladder , giving Lyne a greater creative control and a budget of $ 25 million . Rubin became the film 's co @-@ producer , along with Mario Kassar , Alan Marshall and Andrew G. Vajna . 
 Lyne , who downplayed Rubin 's " intimidating " Old Testament themes , said that he prepared for making the film by watching " endless " documentary films about the war in Vietnam and reading " countless " chronicles of near @-@ death experiences . The film 's plot device of a long period of subjective time passing in an instant has been explored by several authors . A particularly strong inspiration for both Rubin and Lyne was Robert Enrico 's 1962 short film An Occurrence at Owl Creek Bridge , one of Lyne 's favourite movies , which was in turn based on Ambrose Bierce 's 1890 short story of the same name . 
 Hundreds of actors sought the main roles in the film , including Al Pacino , Dustin Hoffman and Richard Gere for Jacob , and Andie MacDowell , Julia Roberts and Madonna for Jezzie . Eventually , Tim Robbins and Elizabeth Peña were cast ; both auditioned early and neither of them had starred in a feature film before . Robbins said the film presented for him " a great opportunity to go in a different direction . I love doing comedy , but I know I can do other things as well . " The film 's military advisor was Vietnam veteran Captain Dale Dye , who provided a five @-@ day boot camp military training for the actors playing soldiers in the Vietnam storyline ( including Robbins , Pruitt Taylor Vince , Eriq La Salle and Ving Rhames ) . 
 All of the film 's special effect sequences were filmed in camera , with no use of post production effects . In several scenes of Jacob 's Ladder , Lyne used a body horror technique in which an actor is recorded waving his head around at a low frame rate , resulting in horrifically fast motion when played back . In the Special Edition 's commentary track , Lyne said he was inspired by the art of the painter Francis Bacon when developing the effect . In his screenplay , Rubin used traditional imagery of demons and hell . However , Lyne decided to use images similar to thalidomide deformities to achieve a greater shock effect . After many heated arguments , Lyne managed to convert Rubin to his vision . Lyne and Rubin used the works of the artist H. R. Giger and the photographers Diane Arbus and Joel @-@ Peter Witkin for inspiration ; another influence came from the Brothers Quay 's 1986 stop motion short film Street of Crocodiles . 
 In the film , Jacob is told by Michael that the horrific events he experienced on his final day in Vietnam were the product of an experimental drug called " the Ladder " , which was used on troops without their knowledge . At the end of the film , a message is displayed saying that reports of testing of BZ , NATO code for a deliriant and hallucinogen known as 3 @-@ <unk> <unk> , on U.S. soldiers during the Vietnam War were denied by the Pentagon . Lyne said a part of the inspiration for this motif was Martin A. Lee 's book Acid Dreams : The CIA , LSD and Sixties Rebellion , but noted that " nothing in the book suggests that the drug BZ — a super @-@ hallucinogen that has a tendency to elicit maniac behavior — was used on U.S. troops . " The war scenes were filmed in Puerto Rico , in the area of Vega Baja , and the UH @-@ 1 helicopters were provided by the Puerto Rico National Guard . 
 According to Lyne 's audio commentary , test screenings indicated that the initial version of the film was overwhelming for the audience . In response , about 20 minutes of disturbing scenes , mostly from the last third of the film , were removed from the final cut . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Theatrical release = = = 
 Jacob 's Ladder opened on November 2 , 1990 , distributed by TriStar Pictures . Jacob 's Ladder : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack with the music by Maurice Jarre was released by Varèse Sarabande in 1993 . Rubin 's companion book , released by Applause Theater Book Publishers on the same day as the film , features a final draft of the screenplay , including the deleted scenes , and his essay on making of the screenplay and the film . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The Special Edition DVD was released by Artisan Entertainment on July 14 , 1998 , containing three deleted scenes ( " Jezzie 's Transformation " , " The Antidote " and " The Train Station " ) along with several other special features , such as audio commentary by Adrian Lyne and a 26 @-@ minute making @-@ of documentary " Building Jacob 's Ladder " . On September 14 , 2010 , the film was released on Blu @-@ ray Disc by Lions Gate Entertainment and retains all of the special features of the DVD version , along with two trailers , omitting only a TV spot that came with the DVD . On June 3 , 2016 , the film was made available for free in the United States on YouTube by Paramount Studios . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film took the number one spot at the weekend box office in North America , garnering ticket sales of $ 7 @.@ 5 million from 1 @,@ 052 screens . However , the attendance dropped fast and its overall domestic box office result was only $ 26 @,@ 118 @,@ 851 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 According to aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , 69 % of reviews of the film were positive based on 61 reviews . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times wrote that watching it left him " reeling with turmoil and confusion , with feelings of sadness and despair , " and called it " thoroughly painful and depressing experience - but , it must be said , one that has been powerfully written , directed and acted . " He awarded the film three and a half out of a possible four stars . Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that this " slick , riveting , viscerally scary film about what in other hands would be a decidedly unsalable subject , namely death , " is " both quaint and devastating . " However , Desson Thomson of The Washington Post felt disappointed with the film that is " ultimately flat on its surrealistic face , the victim of too many fake @-@ art sequences . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Jacob 's Ladder is so ' dark ' it sucks Robbins right down with it . By the time Jacob is being strapped to a bed and wheeled down a hospital corridor strewn with bloody limbs , it 's hard to care whether the Orwellian image is a hallucination or not . You just want out . " Kim Newman called the film " effectively the blunt remake " of Carnival of Souls . 
 According to IGN 's review of the DVD release in 2004 , " After movies like Se7en , it may not pack the same subtle horror for today 's audiences it did when it was first released , but it 's still a great film . " IGN 's review of Jacob 's Ladder 's 2010 Blu @-@ ray release called it is " an emotionally poignant , creepy horror masterpiece . " According to Slant Magazine , Jacob 's Ladder is " a bizarrely cohesive hybrid of war movie , character study , art film , and horror flick " and " the very act of watching the film is so emotionally draining that the viewer leaves the film feeling worked @-@ in ; the thought of repeat viewings is daunting yet insatiable . " In 2011 , John Kenneth Muir called the film 's nightmarish hospital scene " one of the most terrifying moments in all of 1990s horror cinema . " Muir further wrote : " In its musings about death , about the end we all fear , Jacob 's Ladder proves a deeply affecting and meaningful motion picture . After a screening , you 'll immediately want to hug the people you love and then go outside and breathe the fresh air , or otherwise affirm your very existence . " 
 The film 's screenplay was included on the list of " Hollywood 's ten best unproduced screenplays " by American Film magazine in 1983 . In 1991 , Jacob 's Ladder was nominated at Horror Hall of Fame II for best horror film , losing to The Silence of the Lambs . The film was also featured in Bravo 's 2004 documentary miniseries The 100 Scariest Movie Moments and in the 2009 book 1001 Movies You Must See Before You Die . In 2012 , Total Film ranked it as the 31st best independent horror film of all time . That same year , the film 's elements were included on the list of top ten scariest movie demons by CraveOnline and ranked as the 19th best movie plot twist by Complex ; similarly , it was also included on the 2013 list of 20 shocking movie plot twists by Digital Spy . In 2013 , Slate ranked it as the 146th greatest horror film of all time , the Jacob Burns Film Center <unk> Andrew Robinson chose it as his favourite scary movie , and IGN 's Lucy O 'Brien wrote a feature article about this " brilliant " film , where she called it " the movie every survival horror fan should watch " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Influence = = = 
 Jacob 's Ladder greatly inspired the horror fiction franchise Silent Hill , including the video games Silent Hill ( 1999 ) , Silent Hill 2 ( 2001 ) , Silent Hill 3 ( 2003 ) and Silent Hill : Homecoming ( 2007 ) , as well as the series ' 2006 film adaptation by Christophe Gans . Kim Manners prepared for directing The X @-@ Files episode " Grotesque " by listening to the music from Jacob 's Ladder . The film 's influence on their works was recognised by Ryan Murphy , writer of the 2011 TV series American Horror Story : Asylum , and Shinji Mikami , director of the video game The Evil Within . Jacob 's Ladder as a film is directly referenced in Silent Hill 3 , as well as in the 2002 The Twilight Zone episode " Night Route " , the 2005 film Wallace & Gromit : The Curse of the Were @-@ Rabbit and the 2010 The Simpsons episode " The Squirt and the Whale " . 
 In 1991 , <unk> Troupe used a sample of Newman 's quote " It 's a fast trip ... " at the beginning of the track " Rainbow 's Edge " in their album Out There . The band UNKLE sampled dialogue from the film in their 1998 song " Rabbit in Your Headlights " and again in 2003 in the song " Inside " . VNV Nation 's track " Forsaken " from the 1998 album Praise the Fallen ends with the quotation from Eckhart , while " Devils " from <unk> 's 2011 album <unk> begins with the same quotation ; a sample of Jacob 's yell " Stop it , you 're killing me ! " is used in the song " Next in Line " in Nevermore 's 1996 album The Politics of Ecstasy . The music video for the 2010 song " Nightmare " by Avenged Sevenfold is a homage to the famous hospital scene from the film , chosen because the band 's deceased drummer The Rev was a fan of the film . One of the directors of Linkin Park 's music video " Papercut " stated that " some inspiration for the video was taken from the film Jacob 's Ladder , especially with the twitching blue man in one of the rooms of the house " . 
 Scholars have seen the film 's influence in works ranging from M. Night Shyamalan 's 1999 hit psychological horror film The Sixth Sense to Peter Arnett 's controversial 1998 CNN report " Valley of Death " about the Vietnam War 's 1970 Operation Tailwind . Jeff Millar of Houston Chronicle wrote that Giuseppe <unk> 's 1994 psychological thriller A Pure Formality uses the plot device of Jacob 's Ladder mixed with several other sources . According to Premiere , Massy <unk> 's 2005 psychological thriller The Jacket " is a film for those who don 't remember Jacob 's Ladder , perhaps for someone like Jacob himself " , as it " resembles Jacob 's Ladder too much for its own good " . PopMatters called Michael Hurst 's 2006 horror film Room 6 a " Jacob 's Ladder lift " . Adam <unk> 's 2014 horror film Fractured was " described as a classic film noir with a Jacob 's Ladder @-@ like vibe " . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 In 2013 , Jeff Buhler ( The Midnight Meat Train ) was reported as writing a script for LD Entertainment 's new version of Jacob 's Ladder , which is based on an earlier draft by Jake Wade Wall . According to The Hollywood Reporter , " the producers are looking to make something more akin to an homage and not mimic the original . The plan is to contemporize the story with new situations and characters but still maintain a story that examines issues and poses existential questions . " James Foley has been attached to direct the project . 
 Buhler said that since , due to two recent wars , the American " cultural understanding of the experience of warfare and what it does to people mentally " has become " a completely different place than it was " in 1990 , he decided to not be " necessarily going to the same conclusion , and finding a new way to give the audience an experience that is similar in terms of impact and feeling , but that doesn ’ t play the same tune . It was a very tricky situation in the sense that we were trying to recreate something , but honor the spirit and concept ( of the original ) , while telling a different story . " 
 On March 21 , 2016 , Deadline.com announced that LD Entertainment has greenlit a " re @-@ imagining " of the 1990 supernatural thriller Jacob 's Ladder . The film will star Michael Ealy , with Nicole <unk> and Jesse Williams , and be directed by David M. Rosenthal , who directed Ealy in the 2015 thriller The Perfect Guy . Co @-@ produced by Gaeta / Rosenzweig Films and Will Packer Productions , and written by Jeff Buhler and Sarah Thorp , the remake is described as a " modern @-@ day paranoid action thriller about two brothers . " Principal photography on the film is scheduled to begin in May 2016 . 
 = = = Similar films = = = 
 = Mississippi @-@ class battleship = 
 The Mississippi class of battleships comprised two ships which were authorized in the 1903 naval budget : Mississippi and Idaho ; these were named for the 20th and 43rd states , respectively . These were the last predreadnought battleships to be designed for the United States Navy , but not the last to be built , because one more ship of a prior design was completed later under the 1904 naval budget . While the quality and technology of the weaponry and armor were first @-@ rate , these ships included a variety of main , intermediate , secondary , and tertiary gun sizes in a predreadnought configuration which became obsolete before the ships were completed . 
 The first several years of the 20th century were a period of confusion and transition in U.S. naval strategy , tactics , and ship design . The Mississippi class , along with the preceding Connecticut class , were designed based on lessons learned in the Spanish – American War , but while they were under construction , the Russo @-@ Japanese War , war games , and experimentation demonstrated new priorities and concepts which would influence future designs . This was also a period where rapid development of techniques and training in the use of large guns made the inclusion of rapid @-@ fire intermediate and secondary weapons unnecessary . Future U.S. designs would reduce the confusing array of guns sizes in predreadnought battleships and rely on one gun size for the main armament , the " all @-@ big @-@ gun " concept , along with many small guns of a uniform caliber to combat small vessels in close proximity . 
 The Mississippi @-@ class ships were smaller than the several preceding classes of U.S. battleships . They were designed in an attempt to reduce the rapid growth in the size and cost of U.S. battleships . Also , a theory existed among influential naval leaders , including Dewey and Mahan , that many small battleships could be strategically useful , as were small ships of the line in the 18th and 19th centuries . In essence , the Mississippi @-@ class ships were smaller versions of the preceding Connecticut class with virtually the same armament and armor , but the reduction in length , engine size , and fuel capacity caused them to be slow and short @-@ ranged . Other design compromises caused them to perform poorly in terms of steering , stability , and sea keeping . 
 These ships served in the U.S. Navy from 1908 to 1914 , when they were sold to Greece . Most U.S. service was with the Atlantic Fleet , though these ships did not perform well in fleet operations due to their lower speeds and shorter ranges . The ships were frequently detached for special tasks , including goodwill tours , and Mississippi was used for a time as a seaplane support vessel . Both ships took part in U.S. military interventions in Mexico and the Caribbean , including landing Marines and supporting early air operations . 
 In 1914 , both Mississippi @-@ class ships were sold to Greece ; this was the only sale of functional U.S. battleships to a foreign government . From 1914 to the early 1930s , the ships were active in the Greek Navy , serving mostly in coastal defense and attack roles . In these missions and in the calmer waters of the Mediterranean , their limitations were less pronounced . They served in the Russian Civil War and the Greco @-@ Turkish War . By the mid @-@ 1930s , they were relegated to reserve and auxiliary roles , and Idaho 's guns were removed to coastal fortifications . Both were sunk by German aircraft in 1941 , and raised in the 1950s to be sold for scrap . 
 = = Purpose = = 
 In the early 20th century , the U.S. Navy was growing rapidly . The Navy commissioned its first battleships in 1895 , and by the middle of the next decade , Jane 's Fighting Ships ranked its battle line second only to the British Navy . However , this rapid growth was not universally supported either within the government or within the Navy . Compromises between powerful groups were frequently necessary to get funding . 
 The Mississippi @-@ class ships were designed to meet Congressional and Navy Department objectives of reducing the escalating cost of new battleships , the quantity , size , and cost of which had increased dramatically over the first two decades of U.S. battleship production . A division occurred among U.S. naval planners in the early years of the 20th century over whether to have technically superior ships or many less expensive ones , with President Theodore Roosevelt among those supporting the former and Admiral of the Navy George Dewey along with Captain Alfred Thayer Mahan supporting the latter approach . The 1903 naval budget effected a compromise by calling for five ships : three more ships of the 16 @,@ 000 @-@ ton Connecticut class and two ships of a new less expensive class of about 13 @,@ 000 tons , with the design still to be determined . 
 The ships that became the Mississippi class were intended to serve as the modern equivalent of 19th @-@ century third @-@ rate ship of the line , offering what was thought to be an efficient compromise between sailing ability ( speed , handling ) , fire power , and cost . This concept had formed the backbone of the sailing battle fleets of the previous century , but trends in early 20th century naval strategies were making the third @-@ rate concept obsolete . Prevailing strategies called for a consistent battle line of first @-@ rate units . The next U.S. battleship design , the South Carolina class , was a completely different approach returning to the displacement of the Connecticut class and using the all @-@ big @-@ gun format similar in concept to the HMS Dreadnought . 
 = = Design = = 
 The Mississippi @-@ class battleships were the last predreadnought U.S. battleship class to be designed ; however , New Hampshire , the last ship of the prior Connecticut @-@ class design , was authorized and completed after these ships ; therefore , it was the last U.S. predreadnought ship to be built . 
 While Congress had authorized three vessels in the 13 @,@ 000 @-@ ton range , the design was not specified in the 1903 naval budget . Three approaches were initially considered : a scaled @-@ down version of the preceding 16 @,@ 000 @-@ ton Connecticut class , five of which had been approved with the 1902 and 1903 budgets ; a scaled @-@ up version of the 12 @,@ 500 @-@ ton Maine class , an 1898 design , three of which were commissioned from 1902 to 1904 ; and a completely new design which might incorporate new ideas and technology . Interesting adaptations were considered for new designs , and weight @-@ saving technology could allow increased efficiencies to be achieved from the older Maine class design , which was closest to the weight goal . 
 As with most U.S. naval designs , coal storage and engine efficiency were more important than in European designs . U.S. ships might have to fight far from their home shores , especially in the Pacific . Even in the Caribbean , U.S. forces might be farther from their coaling stations than a European power with colonial bases . Draft was a concern , since southern U.S. harbors tended to have shallow entrances , and some proponents felt that all ships should be able to egress all major harbors . Beams were typically limited by the width of dry docks . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 In 1903 , differing concepts of the ultimate combination of guns were available , with many ideas based on various experiences and interpretations from recent naval battles , war games , and other experimentation . Recent U.S. battleship designs had included primary guns , intermediate guns , secondary guns , and tertiary guns , which were typical in the predreadnought configuration . In 1890 , the U.S. Navy had pioneered the use of 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) intermediate guns with the Indiana class , but had not used these consistently in their previous designs because opinions and experiences varied . 
 The quality of guns , armor , ordnance , and design was changing rapidly , so experience could quickly become irrelevant . Combat experience in the Spanish – American War had shown the value of many smaller guns at close range , where the larger guns had been inaccurate . In the Russo Japanese War of 1904 – 1905 , just six years later , decisive effects were obtained at long ranges , well beyond the effective limits of 8 @-@ inch ( 200 mm ) ordnance . However , by this point the designs were established for the Mississippi class and the keels had already been laid down . 
 = = = = Main batteries = = = = 
 Recent American designs had continued to include large primary batteries of either 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) or 13 @-@ inch ( 330 mm ) guns , along with several intermediate 8 @-@ in guns for faster fire in closer combat with armored vessels . The lighter intermediate guns were considered valuable for penetrating upper @-@ level armor , where the heavy guns were more effective on the main belt and heavy turrets . The former were likely to diminish the fighting ability of the opponent , while the latter were more likely to sink her . 
 Earlier U.S. battleships had used 13 @-@ in guns with black powder propellant ; the 1898 design of the Maine class used more powerful but smaller 12 @-@ in guns using smokeless powder , giving a greater velocity and flatter trajectory . The 12 @-@ in rifles available in 1904 had a range of 9 @,@ 000 yards ( 8 @,@ 200 m ) , about double the range of the black powder main armament used in the Spanish – American War . These were considered an excellent compromise between weight and firepower , since limitations in gunnery control made longer @-@ range guns impractical . The contemporary consideration was not whether to go larger , but whether to go with more . In 1902 , naval officers , with the backing of President Theodore Roosevelt , began to develop superior fire control techniques and equipment . The development of better spotting and range finders led to improvements in range capacity and accuracy . At the same time , superior training and systems significantly reduced the time required to load and fire the large guns , from three minutes to one minute . 
 Intermediate 8 @-@ in guns had been discontinued in 1896 with the Illinois class , but based on experience in the Spanish – American War in 1898 , 8 @-@ in 45 @-@ caliber guns were reinstated in the Virginia class and continued in the Connecticut class . Typically , these were carried in two @-@ gun turrets , but the placement of the turrets had been inconsistent in prior designs ; in two prior designs , the turrets for the 8 @-@ inch guns were superimposed over the turrets for the 12 @-@ inch guns ( see Kearsarge and Virginia classes ) . Some designers felt that 8 @-@ in guns were redundant to the faster firing 7 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns carried in casemates . Others argued that increases in the rate of fire and accuracy of the 12 @-@ inch guns eliminated the need for any smaller guns in the main battery . 
 = = = = Secondary batteries = = = = 
 In 1903 , secondary batteries were typically considered to be a combination of torpedo defense — defense against smaller boats armed with torpedoes , such as torpedo boats or destroyers — and weapons to attack the lightly armored upper structures of capital ships . 
 Recent U.S. warships had mounted a combination of a few 7 @-@ inch or 6 @-@ inch guns and many smaller guns in the 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) to 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) range ( 6 @-@ pounder to 12 @-@ pounder in the traditional terms ) . The larger of these guns were typically protected in casemates and the smaller ones open on the deck or in lightly protected casemates . 
 A fast @-@ firing 7 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber gun had been adopted with the previous battleship class to replace earlier 6 @-@ inch guns ; these brought a significant improvement in ballistics , expanding the potential beyond torpedo defense , but came with drawbacks . Various opinions on the best combination of guns existed : all 8 @-@ inch , all 7 @-@ inch , or a mix . Though considered to be quick @-@ firing , the propellant for 7 @-@ inch guns was loaded in bags , making them slower than contemporary 6 @-@ inch guns . The Navy considered these to be excellent for the intended role ; however , in World War I North Atlantic convoy duty , the disadvantages in seakeeping outweighed the utility ; they were removed from battleships remaining in U.S. service in 1918 . 
 Beginning with the Maine @-@ class vessels , commissioned in 1902 , the 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber gun ( 12 @-@ pounder ) was used on most U.S. battleships as an <unk> @-@ boat weapon . These and smaller weapons are frequently referred to as tertiary guns . This role was filled back to the earliest U.S. battleships , including the Texas and first Maine , by the 6 @-@ pounder 2 @.@ 24 @-@ inch ( 57 mm ) . Most 3 @-@ in guns were removed from U.S. battleships before combat operations in World War I. 
 = = = = Competing designs = = = = 
 The future of battleship weaponry was at a crossroads . Opinions varied among top naval leaders ; some U.S. naval leaders were discussing the all @-@ big @-@ gun concept in parallel with the British HMS Dreadnought , while other designers felt that the torpedo would completely replace the gun , and battleships should become heavily armored launch platforms . Other proposals included even more but smaller primary guns , in the 11 @-@ inch ( 280 mm ) size to save on weight . In 1903 , analysis of war games had determined that one battleship with 12 11 @-@ inch or 12 @-@ inch guns , in a hexagonal turret placement , could be superior to three conventional battleships in individual actions . Other analysis suggested that in fleet actions , only broadsides were effective , thus maximizing the number of centerline guns was the most efficient approach . While neither approach was incorporated in the Mississippi class , the centerline maximum broadside concept was followed in all subsequent U.S. battleship designs . 
 = = = = Final design = = = = 
 In the end , these ships were built with main batteries identical to the Connecticut class , while reducing by four guns the secondary 7 @-@ inch battery , omitting eight of the tertiary 3 @-@ inch guns , and sacrificing two torpedo tubes . Subsequent designs would eliminate the 7 @-@ inch batteries completely , and most of the 3 @-@ inch guns were removed from other battleships before combat in World War I , so in this respect , the design did not suffer by comparing forward . 
 The main battery consisted of four 12 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns , meaning that the gun is 45 times as long as it is in diameter . These were considered quick @-@ firing guns and were arranged in two twin turrets , one forward and one to the rear of the main superstructure . The eight 8 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns were arranged in four twin turrets outboard of the main superstructure on each side of the ship . 
 The remaining eight 7 @-@ inch 45 @-@ caliber guns were distributed four per side , in casemates on the side of the ship , below the main deck . Four 3 @-@ inch ( 76 mm ) 50 @-@ caliber guns were mounted in the upper casemates ( on the main deck ) , two per side , behind 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) of armor plate . Another two , one per side , were mounted in blister casemates on the gun deck , near the bow . The remaining eight guns were on open mounts on the upper deck , the bridge , and other deck spaces . Two submerged torpedo tubes were fitted on the broadside , near the bow of the ships . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 Prior to the mid 1870s , armor was made of wrought iron plate , sometime backed with wood . In the 1870s , compound armor was developed , where a hardened steel face was cemented to a softer iron backing , which prevented cracking . During the late 1880s , nickel @-@ steel armor was devised and in 1890 , the Harvey process was developed , where a nickel @-@ steel plate was treated with carbon and hardened in cold water . This process allowed one homogeneous steel plate to have both a hard surface and a softer back which was less likely to crack . During the 1890s , Krupp armor further refined the Harvey process by including additional metals in the alloy and developing a system where the hardening process penetrated more deeply into the plates . Tests showed that 5 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 146 mm ) of Krupp armor was equal to 7 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 197 mm ) of Harvey armor , 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) of compound armor , and 12 @-@ inch ( 300 mm ) of wrought iron plate , while in thinner plates , Harvey armor was basically equal to Krupp . 
 The Mississippi @-@ class ships used a combination of <unk> and Krupp @-@ style armor ( American @-@ made ) , with much of the side armor backed with teak wood , consistent with other U.S. capital ships of the decade . The amount of armor and its strength was consistent with the preceding Connecticut class and in some cases was more complete in coverage and was thicker , especially compared to the earliest ships in that series . The belt armor was thinner , 9 in ( 230 mm ) compared to 11 in ( 280 mm ) , but longer , 244 ft ( 74 m ) compared to 200 ft ( 61 m ) , despite the Mississippi class being shorter , 382 ft ( 116 m ) compared to 456 ft ( 139 m ) . The primary turret armor was thicker by an inch — 12 in ( 300 mm ) thick — as opposed to 11 in ( 280 mm ) on the USS Connecticut . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 When these ships were designed , the older technology of reciprocating steam engines was slowly being replaced by the newer technology of steam turbine propulsion . While turbines generally meant more speed , they were less fuel @-@ efficient and limited the range of the ships unless more fuel could be stored . Early Dreadnought designs , which were in simultaneous development with the Mississippi class , used primitive direct @-@ drive turbines . The U.S. Navy was slow to fully adopt turbines , and only used them exclusively in battleship production when indirect transmissions became refined ( gear reduction or turbo @-@ electric ) . Several subsequent battleship classes were built where otherwise identical vessels had different types of engines ( for example , the Delaware and Nevada classes ) . 
 Mississippi and Idaho were equipped with two @-@ shaft vertical triple @-@ expansion steam engines , which drove two propellers . These were reciprocating engines where the steam was used multiple times ( triple expansion ) for greater efficiency . Steam was provided by eight Babcock & Wilcox boilers . Their engines were rated at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) , which produced a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . On trials , Mississippi reached 13 @,@ 607 ihp ( 10 @,@ 147 kW ) and a maximum speed of 17 @.@ 11 kn ( 31 @.@ 69 km / h ; 19 @.@ 69 mph ) . In terms of speed , this class of ships was inferior to several preceding classes , and was only slightly superior to the Illinois class which was laid down in 1896 . 
 The ships carried 600 long tons ( 610 t ) of coal in purpose @-@ designed coal bunkers and up to another 1 @,@ 200 long tons ( 1 @,@ 200 t ) of coal could be stored in voids in the sides of the hull . This provided the ships with a range of 5 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 700 km ; 6 @,@ 700 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 kn ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . The range was less than the previous class . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The final design was a scaled @-@ down version of the preceding Connecticut class . By comparison , these ships were a knot slower and had a lower freeboard , so they did not perform as well in heavy seas . The two Mississippi @-@ class ships were 382 ft ( 116 m ) long overall , had a beam of 77 ft ( 23 m ) and a draft of 24 ft 8 in ( 7 @.@ 52 m ) . The ships were designed to displace 13 @,@ 000 long tons ( 13 @,@ 209 t ) at normal displacement and up to 14 @,@ 465 long tons ( 14 @,@ 697 t ) at full combat load . Each ship had a crew of 34 officers and 710 enlisted men . 
 The World Cruise of 1907 – 1909 tested the seakeeping of the U.S. designs . Even the earlier designs , including the Connecticut class with their higher freeboard , carried their secondary armament too close to the waterline . The ships initially carried a pole mast above the conning tower , though shortly after commissioning , both ships had lattice masts added aft , and in 1910 , the forward masts were also replaced with lattice masts . 
 The reduced length while retaining the same beam as the prior Connecticut class resulted in a disadvantageous length @-@ to @-@ beam ratio , causing reduced performance relative to that class . Not only was their top speed a knot slower , but also their economical speed was reduced by one and half knots . They also had 25 % less coal storage , further reducing their operating range . 
 The Mississippi ships had poor seakeeping qualities , making them poor gunnery platforms underway in Atlantic waters . Their motion was irregular , and their low length @-@ to @-@ beam ratio caused excessive rolling and pitching , which made it difficult to keep the guns on target . The reduced length , significantly cut away from the aft , made it difficult to keep the ships on a consistent course , even in smoother waters . 
 = = Ships = = 
 = = = USS Mississippi ( BB @-@ 23 ) = = = 
 The second Mississippi ( Battleship No. 23 ) was laid down in 1904 , launched in 1905 , and commissioned in early 1908 , She was given a shakedown cruise off the coast of Cuba in 1908 , then returned to Philadelphia for final fitting out . 
 In early 1909 , she attended the inauguration of the President of Cuba , met the Great White Fleet upon its return , and was reviewed by the President . For the remainder of the year and into 1910 , she traveled the waters off New England , the Caribbean , and the Gulf of Mexico , took a voyage up the Mississippi River , and participated in war games out of Guantanamo Bay . 
 In late 1910 , she sailed to Europe as part of Atlantic Fleet maneuvers , following which she spent about 14 months off the Atlantic coast , based alternately in Philadelphia and Norfolk , serving as a training ship and conducting operational exercises . In June 1912 , she landed a Marine detachment at El Cuero , Cuba , to protect American interests . Following exercises with the fleet , she returned to Philadelphia Navy Yard , where she was put in the First Reserve in August 1912 . 
 In late 1913 , she was assigned duty as an aeronautic station ship at Pensacola , Florida . With the outbreak of fighting in Mexico in April 1914 , Mississippi sailed to Veracruz , arriving with the first detachment of naval aviators to go into combat . In June 1914 she returned to Hampton Roads , where in July she was decommissioned and transferred to the Greek Navy . 
 = = = USS Idaho ( BB @-@ 24 ) = = = 
 The second Idaho ( Battleship No. 24 ) was laid down in 1904 , launched in 1905 , and commissioned in mid @-@ 1908 . She was given shakedown cruise off the coast of Cuba in 1908 , then returned to Philadelphia for final fitting out and repairs . 
 In the summer of 1908 , she transported a detachment of marines to Colon in the Canal Zone to support a peaceful election process . 
 In early 1909 , she met the Great White Fleet upon its return to the U.S. and was reviewed by the President . For the remainder of the year and into 1910 , she alternated between the waters off New England and southern waters , including the Caribbean and the Gulf of Mexico , along with a voyage in the Mississippi River and war games out of Guantanamo Bay . 
 In late 1910 , she sailed across the Atlantic with the Third Division of the Atlantic Fleet to Gravesend Bay , England , and then to Brest , France , returning to Guantanamo Bay in early 1911 . 
 After routine service with the Atlantic Fleet and in Cuban waters , Idaho toured Gulf of Mexico and the Mississippi River in 1911 , visiting many ports on the Mississippi River . 
 In February 1913 , unrest in Mexico led to a coup d 'état and the death of deposed President Francisco I. Madero . For the protection of American interests , Idaho deployed to Tampico in May and to Veracruz in June . Upon returning , she was placed in the Atlantic Reserve Fleet on October 27 , 1913 . 
 Idaho remained in reserve until recommissioned at Philadelphia in March 1914 . In mid @-@ year , she steamed to the Mediterranean with a group of midshipmen on board . After visiting several ports , she arrived at the French port of Villefranche on July 17 , 1914 . There , she was formally transferred to the Greek Navy on July 30 , 1914 . 
 = = = Greek service = = = 
 Diplomatic tensions between Greece and the Ottoman Empire following the 1912 – 13 Balkan Wars resulted in each seeking to buy powerful warships abroad that would enable them to control the Aegean Sea . Idaho and Mississippi were sold on July 8 , 1914 , to Fred J. Gauntlett , an intermediary , who in turn sold them to the Greek government . The proceeds of the sale were used to increase the budget for the 1915 fiscal year , funding the building of a third New Mexico @-@ class super @-@ dreadnought , Idaho ( BB @-@ 42 ) . 
 Mississippi was renamed Kilkis for the crucial battle of the Second Balkan War , while Idaho became Limnos in honor of a victorious naval battle over the Turkish Navy during the First Balkan War . Though their service was uneventful , these ships served to balance German capital ships which were acquired by rival Turkey . The design limitations and poor seakeeping tendencies were not as critical in that strategic environment and the calmer seas of the Mediterranean . U.S. Ambassador to Turkey Henry Morgenthau , Sr. wrote , " Those battleships immediately took their places as the most powerful vessels of the Greek Navy , and the enthusiasm of the Greeks in obtaining them was unbounded . " 
 = = = = World War I = = = = 
 In 1916 , a serious division in the Greek government developed between King Constantine I and Prime Minister Eleftherios Venizelos over whether Greece should enter World War I. This became known as the " National Schism " , where separate governments emerged . Defections by units of the Greek Navy to the Venizelist factions provoked a Royalist purge of Venizelist officers and men from the Greek Navy . French Admiral Fournet , the Commander in Chief of the Allied Squadron , perceived the Greek fleet as a menace to the Entente powers in the Aegean . He delivered an ultimatum to the Greeks to sequester the small ships and disable the large ones . On October 19 , 1916 , the breech blocks , munitions , and torpedoes were removed from Limnos and Kilkis . At the same time , the crews were reduced to one @-@ third of normal size . 
 In June 1917 , Greece was reunified under Venizelos and declared war against the Central Powers . Restoration of the Greek Navy was slow due to British and French disagreements and the difficulty in guaranteeing the officers and crews would support a war against the Central Powers . When France returned the ships , Limnos and Kilkis took part in Allied operations in the Aegean . The greatest Allied need in the Mediterranean was for antisubmarine units , thus battleships were not a priority . 
 After World War I , both ships saw action in 1919 under the command of Rear Admiral G. <unk> , RHN , when the Greek Navy took part in the Allied expedition in support of Denikin 's White Armies in the Ukraine . 
 = = = = Later careers = = = = 
 The ships were also active in the operations of the Greco @-@ Turkish War in Asia Minor from 1919 to 1922 . As the Greeks had been on the winning side in World War I and the Ottoman Empire was one of the defeated powers , the Greeks were awarded large areas of mixed Turkish and Greek populations on the Asian coast of the Aegean Sea . On May 15 , 1919 , 20 @,@ 000 Greek soldiers landed in Smyrna and took control of the city and its surroundings under cover of the Greek , French , and British navies . Limnos was the flagship to the Second Fleet , based in Smyrna , under Rear Admiral G. <unk> ; her mission was surveillance of the Black Sea , Dardanelles , and Asia Minor coasts . Over time , France and Italy became supportive of the emerging Turkish republic . Britain remained supportive of Greece , but opposed Greek moves against Istanbul in 1922 . With waning support , the Greek army was defeated , and Greece was driven out of Asia by the Turks in late 1922 , resulting in years of political and economic turmoil . 
 Both battleships were relegated to reserve and auxiliary roles in the mid @-@ 1930s . Kilkis , which had been upgraded in the mid @-@ 1920s , became a naval artillery training facility in 1932 . Limnos ' guns were removed and installed in a coastal defense battery on the island of Aegina . While they were both anchored in the Salamis Naval Base on April 23 , 1941 , both ships were sunk during the German invasion of Greece by Junkers Ju 87 Stuka dive bombers . Kilkis was hit by bombs and went down in shallow water at her moorings ; Limnos was also hit , but was able to get underway enough to be beached . The wrecks were refloated and sold for scrap in the 1950s . 
 = Beaded lizard = 
 The Mexican beaded lizard ( Heloderma horridum ) is the most famous of the four species of venomous beaded lizards found principally in Mexico and southern Guatemala . It and its congener the Gila monster ( Heloderma suspectum ) are the only lizards known to have evolved an overt venom delivery system . The beaded lizard is larger than the Gila monster , but has duller coloration , black with yellowish bands of differing width depending on the species . As it is a specialized predator that feeds primarily upon eggs , the primary use of its venom is still a source of debate among scientists . However , this venom has been found to contain several enzymes useful for manufacturing drugs in the treatment of diabetes , and research on the pharmacological use of its venom is ongoing . 
 Threatened throughout its range by <unk> and habitat loss , it is a CITES protected species . The Guatemalan beaded lizard ( H. <unk> ) is one of the rarest lizards in the world , with a wild population of fewer than 200 . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The beaded lizard has one close living relative , the Gila monster ( H. suspectum ) , as well as many extinct relatives in the <unk> , whose genetic history may be traced back to the Cretaceous period . The genus Heloderma has existed since the Miocene , when H. texana ranged over most of North America . Because the <unk> have remained relatively unchanged morphologically , they are occasionally regarded as living fossils . Although the beaded lizard appears closely related to the monitor lizards ( varanids ) of Africa , Asia , and Australia , the wide geographical separation and unique features not found in the varanids indicate the beaded lizard is better placed in a separate family . 
 The species was first described in 1829 by Arend Wiegmann as <unk> horridum , but he renamed it Heloderma horridum six months later . Its generic name Heloderma means " studded skin " , from the Ancient Greek words <unk> ( <unk> ) — the head of a nail or stud — and <unk> ( <unk> ) , meaning skin . Its specific name , <unk> , is the Latin word meaning rough or rude . 
 = = Species = = 
 The four subspecies of beaded lizard , elevated to full species in 2013 , are : 
 = = Description = = 
 Adult beaded lizards range from 57 to 91 cm ( 22 to 36 in ) in length . They are substantially larger than the Gila monster , which only reaches lengths of 30 to 56 cm ( 12 to 22 in ) . The snout @-@ to @-@ vent length of a beaded lizard averages 33 to 48 cm ( 13 to 19 in ) . The average body mass of an adult beaded lizard is 800 g ( 1 @.@ 8 lb ) , about 45 % heavier than the average mass of a <unk> monster , with large specimens exceeding 2 @,@ 000 g ( 4 @.@ 4 lb ) . Maximum weight known is 4 @,@ 000 g ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) Although males are slightly larger than females , the lizards are not sexually dimorphic . Both males and females are stocky with broad heads , although the males ' tend to be broader . The beaded lizard 's scales are small , <unk> , and not overlapping . Except for the lizard 's underside , the majority of its scales are underlaid with bony osteoderms . 
 Their base color is black and marked with varying amounts of yellow spots or bands , with the exception of H. alvarezi , which tends to be all black in color . The beaded lizard has a short tail which is used to store fat so it can survive during months of estivation . Unlike many other lizards , this tail does not <unk> and cannot grow back if broken . The beaded lizard has a forked , black tongue which it uses to smell , with the help of a Jacobson 's organ ; it sticks its tongue out to gather scents and touches it to the opening of the organ when the tongue is retracted . 
 = = Habitat and range = = 
 The beaded lizard is found in the Pacific drainages from southern Sonora to southwestern Guatemala and two Atlantic drainages , from central Chiapas to southeastern Guatemala . Their habitats are primarily in the desert , tropical deciduous forests and thorn scrub forests , but are found in pine @-@ oak forests , with elevations from sea level to 1500 m . In the wild , the lizards are only active from April to mid @-@ November , spending about an hour per day above the ground . 
 The Mexican beaded lizard H. horridum is found in Mexico , from Sonora to Oaxaca . The Rio Fuerte beaded lizard ( H. <unk> ) is found from southern Sonora to northern Sinaloa . The Chiapan beaded lizard ( H. alvarezi ) is found in the northern Chiapas and the depression of the Río <unk> in Huehuetenango to northwestern Guatemala . The ranges of these three species overlap , making them sympatric . The Guatemalan beaded lizard ( H. <unk> ) is the only allopatric one , separated from the nearest population ( H. alvarezi ) by 250 km of unsuitable habitat . The Guatemalan beaded lizard is the most endangered of the species , if not of all lizards ; it is found only in the dry valley of the Río Motagua in northeastern Guatemala ; less than 200 are believed to exist in the wild . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The beaded lizard is a specialized vertebrate nest predator , feeding primarily on bird and reptile eggs . A semi @-@ arboreal species , it is found climbing deciduous trees in search of prey when encountered above ground . It occasionally preys upon small birds , mammals , frogs , lizards , and insects . Steve Angeli and Robert Applegate , noted captive breeders of the beaded lizard , have remarked that captive specimens do best on a diet of small vertebrates primarily mice and rats . Confiscated wild @-@ caught specimens can be made to feed by using egg on the prey item . 
 = = = Venom = = = 
 The venom glands of the beaded lizard are modified salivary glands located in the reptile 's lower jaw . Each gland has a separate duct leading to the base of its grooved teeth . When biting , the beaded lizard hangs on its victim and chews to get its venomous saliva into the wound . Although its jaw grip is strong , its <unk> teeth are easily broken off at their bases . The beaded lizard 's venom is a weak <unk> , and although human deaths are rare , it can cause respiratory failure . It consists of a number of components , including L @-@ amino acid oxidase , hyaluronidase , phospholipase A , serotonin , and highly active <unk> that release vasoactive <unk> . The venom contains no enzymes that significantly affect coagulation . Almost all documented human bites ( eight in the past century ) have resulted from prodding captive lizards with a finger or bare foot . 
 While invertebrates are essentially immune to the effects of this venom , effects on vertebrates are more severe and varied . In mammals such as rats , major effects include a rapid reduction in carotid blood flow followed by a marked fall in blood pressure , respiratory irregularities , tachycardia , and other cardiac anomalies , as well as hypothermia , edema , and internal hemorrhage in the gastrointestinal tract , lungs , eyes , liver , and kidneys . In humans , the effects of bites are associated with excruciating pain that may extend well beyond the area bitten and persist up to 24 hours . Other common effects of bites on humans include local edema ( swelling ) , weakness , sweating , and a rapid fall in blood pressure . Beaded lizards are immune to the effects of their own venom . 
 The compounds in its venom have been studied have pharmacological properties relating to diabetes , Alzheimer 's disease , and even HIV . This hormone was named exendin @-@ 3 and is marketed by <unk> Pharmaceuticals as the drug exenatide . One study reported in 1996 revealed that it binds to cell receptors from breast cancer cells and may stop the growth of lung cancer cells . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 The beaded lizard becomes sexually mature at six to eight years and mates between September and October . Males engage in ritual combat that often lasts several hours ; the victor mates with the female . The female lays her clutch of two to 30 eggs between October and December , the clutch hatching the following June or July . 
 Young lizards are seldom seen . They are believed to spend much of their early lives underground , emerging at two to three years of age after gaining considerable size . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 The beaded lizard is surrounded by myth and superstition in much of its native range . It is incorrectly believed , for example , to be more venomous than a rattlesnake , can cause lightning strikes with its tail , or make a pregnant woman miscarry by merely looking at her . As a result of this superstition , locals often kill the lizard on sight . 
 The seldom @-@ seen lizard is poached and sold into the illegal exotic animal trade . It does not reproduce well in captivity , and its scarcity means a high price for collectors . As a direct result , the beaded lizard is protected by Mexican law under the category A ( Threatened ) , and it dwells within the range of several protected areas . In Guatemala , it is protected by national legislation , and part of its range is within protected areas . It is listed on Appendix II of CITES . 
 Fewer than 200 lizards remain in the dry forest habitat of the Motagua Valley , and this species of beaded lizard ( H. <unk> ) was facing extinction due to local extermination and loss of habitat for agricultural purposes . A conservation effort has been launched known as Project Heloderma to preserve the semiarid habitat of the Motagua Valley by the Nature Conservancy and partners such as <unk> , <unk> , the International Reptile Conservation Foundation , Lincoln Park Zoo , Zoo Atlanta , and the San Diego Zoo . This effort has been successful in getting the Guatemalan government to list the beaded lizard under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species as an Appendix I animal , making it illegal to export the species . 
 = = External = = 
 <unk> 's Guatemalan Beaded Lizard Conservation Project 
 Mexican Beaded Lizard at the LA Zoo 
 Mexican Beaded Lizard at the Saint Louis Zoo 
 http : / / <unk> 
 http : / / <unk> / home / conservation _ efforts / <unk> _ beaded _ lizards _ conservation _ project ? <unk> _ <unk> = http % 3A % 2F % <unk> % <unk> % <unk> _ efforts 
 = 1872 North Cascades earthquake = 
 The 1872 North Cascades earthquake occurred at 5 : 40 a.m. local time in northern Washington state on December 15 . A maximum Mercalli intensity of VIII ( Severe ) was assessed for several locations , though less intense shaking was observed at many other locations in Washington , Oregon , and British Columbia . Some of these intermediate outlying areas reported V ( Moderate ) to VII ( Very strong ) shaking , but intensities as high as IV ( Light ) were reported as far distant as Idaho and Montana . Due to the remote location of the mainshock and a series of strong aftershocks , damage to man made structures was limited to a few cabins close to the areas of the highest intensity . 
 Because the earthquake occurred before seismometers were operating in the region , the magnitude of the shock and its location were never precisely determined , but the intensity reports that are available for the event were studied , and various epicenters for the event were proposed based on these limited data . One study presented an estimated moment magnitude of 6 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 0 , with a proposed location on the east side of the Cascade Range near Lake Chelan . The results of a separate study indicated that it may have been a larger event , placing the shock in the North Cascades , just south of the Canada – United States border at Ross Lake . 
 = = Preface = = 
 The Cascadia subduction zone rarely influences the western portion of Washington state , but the November 1873 M7.3 shock near the California – Oregon border may have been associated with it . Although activity in the Pacific Northwest ( especially west of the Cascades in Washington ) has occasionally been located near the subduction zone , earthquakes there ( 1949 Olympia , 1965 Puget Sound , 2001 Nisqually ) have mostly been <unk> events . A large M7 earthquake on the Seattle Fault in 900 C.E. may have generated a tsunami in Puget Sound . The 1872 event east of the Cascades is not understood well due to the lack of instrumental records and reliable felt intensity reports . 
 = = Earthquake = = 
 As there were only six seismometers operating in Washington state and western British Columbia even as late as 1969 , there are insufficient instrumental records for older events in the region . Focal depths are unknown for shocks that occurred before that time , but seismologists Bakun et al. concluded that the event occurred on a shallow fault on the east side of the Cascade Range . They employed a method that was developed by W. H. Bakun and C. M. Wentworth for using earthquake intensity information that could be mapped to a corresponding moment magnitude . The intensities for twelve 20th @-@ century Pacific Northwest earthquakes were used for calibration before analyzing the known intensities for the 1872 event in an attempt to resolve the location and magnitude . The reports were interpreted in a way that placed the epicenter near the south end of Lake Chelan , but other considerations left other plausible focal points both north and northeast of the lake . The magnitude was estimated to be 6 @.@ 5 – 7 @.@ 0 with 95 % confidence . 
 Using a similar strategy , S. D. Malone and S. Bor analyzed the known intensities for the 1872 shock , then compared intensity patterns for a number of instrumentally recorded earthquakes that also occurred in the Pacific Northwest . A factor that was taken into consideration was that for earthquakes that have either circular or slightly elliptical isoseismal maps , the epicenter is usually close to the center of the pattern , but that for shocks where instrumental information are also available , the epicenter is sometimes not where it would have been assumed to be , had only the intensity information ( and no instrumental information ) been available . An isoseismal map of the 1949 Olympia earthquake was presented as an example of a distorted or convoluted pattern that was attributed to local geological conditions that either attenuated or amplified the seismic waves , and it was emphasized that not taking into account these local features could lead to a misinterpretation of the felt intensities and to a misplaced epicenter . 
 Malone and Bor ran three simulations , with a projected <unk> event occurring at a depth of 37 miles ( 60 km ) , but took into consideration the differences in attenuation both east and west of the Cascades . Three exploratory locations were investigated , including the setting at the south end of Lake Chelan that reportedly had significant ground disturbances , their preferred location near Ross Lake , and a third location north of the Canada – United States border that had been proposed much earlier by W. G. Milne . The Ross Lake site was chosen because it most closely matched their isoseismal pattern , but it was not strongly preferred over the Milne site , and the Lake Chelan location was excluded as being the epicenter , due to the regional attenuation characteristics that required a location further to the west . Several depths were investigated , but each had little impact on the isoseismal patterns below intensity VI , and since most northwest earthquakes occur between 25 – 37 miles ( 40 – 60 km ) deep , they believe the shock was also near that depth , but did not dismiss the possibility that it was a shallower event . 
 = = = Damage = = = 
 Though the earthquake was felt over a very wide area ( from the Pacific Ocean to Montana , and British Columbia to Oregon ) the area that was most affected was largely unpopulated , and very few homes existed . A log building that was built on unconsolidated river sediment close to the mouth of the Wenatchee River had dislodged roof logs , and the kitchen became detached from the rest of the structure . Another log cabin between Entiat and Winesap also had roof damage . Mercalli intensities as high as VI ( Strong ) reached the western portion of the state , near the highly populated Puget Sound region , and to the southeast beyond where the Hanford nuclear reactor site later stood . 
 = = = Aftershocks = = = 
 A relationship exists between the depth of the mainshock and the occurrence of aftershocks , and several Pacific Northwest earthquakes illustrate this link , like the February 1981 <unk> Elk Lake event in southwest Washington that was followed by more than 1 @,@ 000 in the first two years . The M7.3 1959 Hebgen Lake earthquake in Montana had a significant sequence of aftershocks , and the shallow M7 1983 Borah Peak event was followed by four aftershocks . In opposition , the <unk> events ( and crustal shocks above the subduction zone ) on the west side of the Cascades have had insignificant aftershock sequences , usually amounting to a minimal number of small aftershocks . For example , the 2001 Nisqually shock occurred nearly 18 @.@ 6 miles ( 30 km ) deep and was followed by only four small aftershocks , and there was a similar procession for the 1946 Vancouver Island earthquake , a <unk> crustal shock that also had a focal depth near 18 @.@ 6 miles ( 30 km ) . 
 Aftershocks did follow the 1872 event , and during the initial 24 hours they were strong enough to be felt over a broad area , from Idaho and into southern British Columbia . The intensity of the shocks waned as time passed , and after a year they were still occurring , but were only being felt at Wenatchee , Lake Chelan , and Entiat . Bakun et al. listed the considerable aftershock sequence as a strong indication that the initial event was shallow . 
 = I Do Do = 
 " I Do Do " is the twenty @-@ second episode and season finale of the fourth season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock , and the 80th overall episode of the series . It was directed by series producer Don Scardino , and written by series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) network in the United States on May 20 , 2010 . Guest stars in this episode include Elizabeth Banks , Craig Castaldo , Matt Damon , Will Forte , Susan Heyward , Kristin McGee , Julianne Moore , Paula Pell , Michael Sheen , and Jason Sudeikis . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Fey ) meets the man of her dreams ( Damon ) . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy 's ( Alec Baldwin ) love triangle with Avery Jessup ( Banks ) and Nancy Donovan ( Moore ) comes to a head . At the same time , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) tries to avoid a promotion that would send him to Los Angeles , and Jenna Maroney 's ( Jane Krakowski ) new relationship may be ruined after her boyfriend ( Forte ) falls for another woman . 
 " I Do Do " was generally , though not universally , well received among television critics . According to the Nielsen Media Research , this episode was watched by 5 @.@ 5 million households during its original broadcast , and received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 8 share among viewers in the 18 – 49 demographic . " I Do Do " received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series and Outstanding Costumes for a Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The episode starts where the previous one ended , at Kaitlin ( Kristin McGee ) and Floyd DeBarber 's ( Jason Sudeikis ) wedding . Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , who is scheduled to do a reading at the ceremony , wastes time so that her boss , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) , after sending her a text message to stall for time , can talk things over with Nancy Donovan ( Julianne Moore ) . He has admitted to Nancy that he is in love with both her and Avery Jessup ( Elizabeth Banks ) , but she cannot cope with what Jack has told her . The two talk the situation over , and Jack eventually tells Nancy that he cares for her and decides he wants to be with her . 
 After Floyd 's wedding , Liz goes to the office of her fiancé , Wesley Snipes ( Michael Sheen ) , to retrieve his shoes for Cerie Xerox 's ( Katrina Bowden ) wedding . At Wesley 's office , she meets an airline pilot named Carol ( Matt Damon ) . When she learns that Carol is a big fan of The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) , for which Liz is the head writer , she asks Carol to go with her to Cerie 's wedding , which he accepts . At Cerie 's wedding , Wesley is distraught that Liz ended their engagement through a text message she sent to him . Liz tells him that fate brought them together so that she would meet Carol , with whom she can see herself spending the rest of her life . Wesley is devastated and leaves . Unbeknownst to Liz , Carol , who Liz thought had stepped out from the party area , heard everything she told Wesley , which shocks Carol , prompting him to leave . At the same time , at Cerie 's wedding , Nancy learns that Avery is pregnant after having a conversation with her in the ladies room , and tells Jack before she leaves him . When Jack finds Avery , he tells her he wants to marry her , which she accepts . 
 Meanwhile , NBC page Kenneth Parcell ( Jack McBrayer ) is notified by TGS producer Pete Hornberger ( Scott Adsit ) that he has received a promotion as " junior @-@ in @-@ charge @-@ boy of the entire NBC page program " but that he will have to move out to Los Angeles , which does not sit well with Kenneth . Kenneth tells Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) about this , but Tracy advises him to do a lousy job so that he loses the promotion . While giving a tour around the 30 Rock building , Kenneth does a terrible job , and as a result of his behavior , Pete is forced to dismiss him . At the same time , Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) is shocked to see her boyfriend and Jenna impersonator , Paul ( Will Forte ) , dressed as singer Cher . At Feyoncé ( Susan Heyward ) and Grizz Griswold 's ( Grizz Chapman ) wedding , which is being held at the TGS set , Jenna is not amused that Paul showed up dressed as Cher , but is surprised that Paul is dressed as her on his left side and Cher on his right , and as a result , the two make @-@ up . Later , at Grizz 's wedding , Jack tells Liz that Carol is looking for her . Carol tells Liz that he would like to give her a chance so that the two can have a relationship . At the same time , Kenneth , who is drunk , gets on stage , and gives a ranting speech to his former co @-@ workers , ultimately telling them that he loves them all and hopes that they get everything they want in life . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I Do Do " was written by series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey , and directed by series producer Don Scardino . This was Fey 's twenty @-@ first writing credit , and Scardino 's twenty @-@ seventh directed episode . " I Do Do " originally aired on NBC in the United States on May 21 , 2010 , as the twenty @-@ second episode and season finale of the show 's fourth season and the 80th overall episode of the series . This episode of 30 Rock was filmed on March 16 , April 7 , and April 8 , 2010 . Saint Cecilia 's Catholic Church in Greenpoint , Brooklyn served as the church for Floyd and Kaitlin 's wedding . 
 In March 2010 , it was confirmed that actor Matt Damon would guest star on 30 Rock , and in this season finale episode , he played Carol , an airline pilot and love interest for Fey 's character , Liz Lemon . In December 2009 , Entertainment Weekly informed Damon that he was at the top of Fey 's guest star wish list for the show . When told about this , Damon , a fan of the show , responded " I would do [ 30 Rock ] in a heartbeat if they asked me to come on . She should call my people – or even better me . Or I could call her . Let 's make this happen . " Damon has worked with Alec Baldwin , the latter who plays Jack Donaghy , in the 2006 feature films The Departed and The Good Shepherd . Damon 's role on the show made it his second prime @-@ time television appearance following his guest spot on Will & Grace — a series that previously aired on NBC — in 2002 . When asked if he would return as Carol in the show 's fifth season , Damon said " If they 'll have me , I would love to pop in and see the gang again . I had a great time doing it . " 
 In " I Do Do " , actors Elizabeth Banks , Will Forte , Julianne Moore , Michael Sheen , and Jason Sudeikis reprised their roles as Avery Jessup , Paul , Nancy Donovan , Wesley Snipes , and Floyd DeBarber , respectively . This episode concluded Jack 's love triangle arc with Avery and Nancy , which first began in " Lee Marvin vs. Derek Jeter " , after it was revealed that Avery was pregnant with Jack 's child , and Jack ultimately choosing Avery . Show producer and writer Paula Pell made an appearance on the episode as Paula <unk> , the wife of Pete <unk> , played by Scott Adsit . In one scene of this episode , Jack sees Avery and tells her he wants to be with her , though , music is played in the background as Jack talks to Avery . Jack then asks that the music be turned down , which is shut off by a man . The man was credited as " Moonvest " and was played by Craig Castaldo , or known as Radio Man . Castaldo has made numerous appearances on the show . 
 The cake shown briefly in Grizz Griswold 's wedding was designed by bakers from Food Network 's reality television show Ace of Cakes . There was an entire episode of Ace of Cakes devoted to designing this cake and the cake for the season four wrap party . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode opens with Liz at Kaitlin and Floyd 's wedding , and she plays Mash with the Bible . " So I 'm going to marry ... <unk> . And we 're going to live in ... Nineveh . And I 'm going to be a ... prostitute . " Afterwards , Liz <unk> the lyrics to " The Wedding Song ( There Is Love ) " by folk @-@ singing trio Peter , Paul and Mary . Nancy tells Jack that she cannot share him with another woman . She says , " I can 't share you with another woman like you 're that Mormon guy on HBO who was in that tornado movie with that blond woman who was married to that Jewish guy . " Her statement is a reference to actor Bill Paxton who appeared in the 1996 movie Twister , and currently stars in the HBO show Big Love , a series about a fundamentalist Mormon family in Utah who practice polygamy . The " blonde woman " and " Jewish guy " Nancy is referring to are actors Helen Hunt and Paul Reiser in their sitcom Mad About You . 
 Jenna is shocked that Paul is dressing up as singer Cher . She tells him that she expected fidelity from him , as he is a Jenna impersonator , and says " Fidelity , Paul . It 's not just the name of a bank that sued me . " Fidelity Investments is one of the largest mutual fund groups in the world . Later , Nancy recognizes Avery from an <unk> commercial . In a flashback , Avery repeatedly pronounces the letter " O " with a Maryland accent . The commercial is a parody to <unk> 's commercials , an online seller of surplus merchandise . During her speech , Liz cites her foot problem , meaning she has never let anyone see her feet , which is a real life trait of Fey 's . After Liz 's speech , Wesley tells her that losing him is her loss and " There 's only one Wesley Snipes in this world " , though , Liz says " You know there isn 't " , a reference to the other Wesley Snipes , an American actor . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen Media Research , " I Do Do " was watched by 5 @.@ 5 million households in its original American broadcast . The rating was a 12 percent increase in viewership from the previous week 's episode , " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " , which was seen by 4 @.@ 996 million American viewers . The show claimed a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 8 share among viewers aged 18 to 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 8 percent of all people in that group , and 8 percent of all people from that group watching television at the time , watched the episode . Don Scardino received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for his work in " I Do Do " at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards , but lost it to Ryan Murphy . In addition , Tom Broecker , Remy Pearce , and Joanna Brett , costume designers on the show , received a nomination for Outstanding Costumes for a Series for this episode at the same awards show , however , they lost the award to Joan Bergin and Susan Cave of The Tudors . 
 Bob Sassone of AOL 's TV Squad said that he was not certain if " this was a great 30 Rock episode " but that it " had all of the elements that make the good ones : funny one @-@ liners and Liz and Jack both looking for something better in their lives . " He was complimentary towards Matt Damon 's appearance , writing that he " was one of the best things about this season finale episode " , but admitted he could not see Damon " being Liz 's boyfriend or husband next season . " The A.V. Club 's Nathan Rabin wrote that he enjoyed Kenneth 's rant against his former co @-@ workers , and said that this episode " was a terrific end to a season that wobbled for a while but ended strongly . " Sean Gandert of Paste magazine said that Kenneth 's story was " an enjoyable diversion " . In regard to the finale , itself , Gandert noted that it was " pretty good , but not outstanding , which is a fitting way to conclude a season that never quite hit its stride but was still consistently entertaining . " Entertainment Weekly contributor Emily Exton noted that Damon 's character was a " perfect match " for Liz . Meredith Blake , writing for the Los Angeles Times , wrote that Damon was " perfectly Damon @-@ esque " . Blake reported that she had been rooting for the Avery character since first appearing in the series , but acknowledged " that there 's something undeniably sweet about Jack and Nancy . " IGN contributor Robert Canning complimented Julianne Moore 's performance , writing that she was " engaging " . Canning said that Kenneth and Jenna 's plots " added more hilarity to the episode " and that on their own " these storylines [ were ] very entertaining . But combine them into one fantastic , fast and funny half hour and you 're left with near perfection . " Alexandra Martell of New York magazine said that Avery 's pregnancy was " going to drive much of next season , but if that means more Elizabeth Banks , we 're cool . " Martell wrote that Kenneth getting fired was a " nice twist " , but that " the highlight " of " I Do Do " was Jenna discovering Paul dressing up as Cher . TV Guide 's Adam Mersel opined that the " biggest twist in the series ' history " was Nancy revealing that Avery was pregnant . 
 Not all reviews were positive . Television columnist Alan Sepiwall for HitFix wrote that the finale had " funny throwaway lines and moments " but that overall " it was another largely flat episode , and one that leaned too heavily on the guest stars . " Callie Carmichael of CNN was less positive , writing that " I Do Do " fell " a bit flat " , and concluded " As a rule of thumb , sitcoms usually fall short when you take the characters out of their element , and this one definitely did with three weddings in three separate places . " Eleanor Barkhorn from The Atlantic had issues with the plot twists , citing that they would not " bode well for the future of the series . " She explained that Jack and Avery having a child was " problematic " , observing that it puts a " relatively definite end " to the sexual tension between Liz and Jack that occurred in the show 's first season . In addition , Barkhorn noted that Damon 's character was a " great match " for Tina Fey 's Liz , but believed that the relationship between the two would not last . 
 = Battle of Vizagapatam = 
 The Battle of Vizagapatam was a minor naval engagement fought in the approaches to Vizagapatam harbour in the Coastal Andhra region of British India on the Bay of Bengal on 15 September 1804 during the Napoleonic Wars . A French squadron under Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois in the ship of the line Marengo attacked the British Royal Navy fourth rate ship HMS Centurion and two East Indiaman merchant ships anchored in the harbour roads . Linois was engaged in an extended raiding campaign , which had already involved operations in the South China Sea , in the Mozambique Channel , off Ceylon and along the Indian coast of the Bay of Bengal . The French squadron had fought one notable engagement , at the Battle of Pulo Aura on 15 February 1804 , in which Linois had attacked the Honourable East India Company 's ( HEIC ) China Fleet , a large convoy of well @-@ armed merchant ships carrying cargo worth £ 8 million . Linois failed to press the attack and withdrew with the convoy at his mercy , invoking the anger of Napoleon when the news reached France . 
 Since his failure at Pulo Aura , Linois had been cruising the Indian Ocean , and during August and September 1804 had seized a number of valuable merchant ships as his squadron travelled north from Ceylon along the Indian coast of the Bay of Bengal . From a ship captured off Masulipatam , Linois learned of the presence of the East Indiamen at Vizagapatam and determined to attack , unaware that British Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier had replaced the small frigate HMS Wilhelmina with the larger Centurion as the convoy 's escort . Arriving off the port at 06 : 00 , Linois advanced on the convoy , causing one of the East Indiamen to drive ashore in panic . The other merchant vessel failed to support the outnumbered Centurion and was captured , but Centurion continued fighting alone . Initially supported by the fire of gun batteries on shore , Centurion later moved out of their range while engaging the French flagship Marengo , which remained well offshore to avoid the coastal shoals . After an engagement lasting four hours Marengo withdrew , the badly damaged Centurion attempting to pursue but without success . Linois 's squadron was forced to return to Île de France in the aftermath of the engagement , where Marengo required six months of repairs . 
 = = Background = = 
 During the Napoleonic Wars , the British economy depended on the movement of trade from the British Empire , particularly the trading posts and colonies in British India , managed by the Honourable East India Company ( HEIC ) . This company transported goods from India to Europe using a fleet of large and well @-@ armed merchant ships named East Indiamen , which travelled in convoys for protection , and were escorted during wartime by ships provided by the Royal Navy . The main Royal Navy base in the Bay of Bengal was at the city of Madras , but East Indiamen sailed from ports all around the Bay . As a result , the force in Madras was often dispersed to provide escorts to smaller convoys travelling to Madras or Calcutta to merge with other ships to form the large oceanic convoys . At the outbreak of the Napoleonic War , the commander of British forces in the Indian Ocean was Rear @-@ Admiral Peter Rainier . The principal threat to British control of the region was a squadron sent from France shortly before war broke out , led by Contre @-@ Admiral Charles @-@ Alexandre Durand Linois in the ship of the line Marengo . 
 Rainier and Linois had clashed in June 1803 , before news of the outbreak of war had reached India . Linois had anchored at Pondicherry , a French Indian port , and Rainier had led a powerful squadron to anchor off the harbour in anticipation of the declaration of war . Concerned that Rainier 's numerically superior force would overwhelm his squadron before they could operate against the British merchant convoys in the region , Linois slipped away under cover of darkness and eventually reached Île de France , where he learned that the Napoleonic Wars had begun on 16 May . Sailing to Batavia in the Dutch East Indies , Linois resupplied and then departed for a cruise in the South China Sea on 28 December , seeking the large annual convoy of HEIC merchant ships from Canton , known as the China Fleet . This convoy was normally escorted from Canton by several Royal Navy ships of the line , but in 1804 the escort had been delayed . Linois discovered the convoy near the island of Pulo Aura at the eastern entrance to the Strait of Malacca at 08 : 00 on 14 February and advanced . The convoy commander Commodore Nathaniel Dance had disguised several of the East Indiamen as ships of the line in the hope of convincing Linois that the convoy was well protected . Linois hesitated for over a day , eventually attacking on the morning of 15 February . Dance resisted and Linois withdrew without contesting the engagement . Dance 's merchant ships chased Linois 's squadron away before resuming their course and meeting their escorts several days later . Linois 's failure to engage and defeat the China Fleet infuriated a number of his officers and provoked an angry letter from Napoleon , who accused Linois of believing " that war can be made without running risks " . 
 In the aftermath of the engagement , Linois returned to Batavia and then to Île de France , arriving on 2 April . There he was criticised by the governor , General Charles Decaen , who wrote a letter to Napoleon complaining of Linois 's conduct at the Battle of Pulo Aura . In mid @-@ June 1804 , Linois departed Île de France with Marengo and the frigates Atalante under Captain Camille @-@ Charles @-@ Alexis Gaudin @-@ Beauchène and Sémillante under Captain Léonard @-@ Bernard Motard , cruising off Madagascar in stormy weather before sailing to the coast of Ceylon . He enjoyed some success against individual merchant vessels , and gradually moved northwards during the late summer . The squadron passed Madras 60 nautical miles ( 110 km ) off the coast to avoid encountering Rainier 's squadron and raided along the Coastal Andhra region , visiting Masulipatam and <unk> . On 14 September 1804 off Masulipatam , Linois captured a country ship and learned from the crew that a small convoy was anchored at Vizagapatam to the north . The convoy was reported to consist of two East Indiamen with the 36 @-@ gun frigate HMS Wilhelmina , a former Dutch vessel captured in 1798 , as their escort . Linois immediately sailed for Vizagapatam , expecting an easy victory over the convoy . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At Madras Admiral Rainier had become increasingly concerned during September by Linois 's depredations , and had decided to strengthen his convoy escorts . He replaced Wilhelmina with the 50 @-@ gun HMS Centurion . Centurion was under the nominal command of Captain John <unk> Rainier , who was seriously ill at Madras , so Captain James Lind assumed temporary command . Lind sailed from Madras to Vizagapatam earlier in the month with the Indiamen Barnaby and Princess Charlotte and anchored in the roads , while the Indiamen loaded cargo ready for the return journey to Madras . The ships were still anchored in the roads at 06 : 00 on 15 September when Linois 's squadron appeared on the horizon to the south @-@ west , approximately 12 nautical miles ( 22 km ) away . The only flag visible on the strange ships was on board one of the frigates , which displayed the St George 's Cross . Lieutenant James Robert Phillips , in command of Centurion while Lind was ashore , was not convinced by this ensign : he was aware that a French squadron was in the region , and positioned his ship so that his broadside faced the approaching vessels . At 09 : 45 the French came within range and Phillips opened fire , cautiously at first until he could be sure of the identity of the strangers . 
 The ship of the line exchanged signals with the frigates as Centurion began to fire , and as the signals were different from those used by the Royal Navy , Phillips was certain he was facing an overwhelming enemy squadron . Centurion made urgent signals to the Indiamen , warning them of the approaching threat . The crew of Barnaby panicked and cut her anchor cables , causing her to drift on shore where she was wrecked . Captain John Logan on Princess Charlotte was calmer and remained at anchor , although he ignored requests from Phillips for assistance from his ship 's gun battery . Linois 's ships spread out , Atalante closing to within 0 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 900 m ) of Centurion , with Sémillante close behind . Marengo remained out of range , as Linois was unwilling to risk his flagship in shallow coastal waters for which he did not have accurate charts : the approaches to Vizagapatam were protected by a series of sandbars and if Marengo grounded during the engagement then his flagship could have been wrecked . When the French frigates came within 200 yards ( 180 m ) , Phillips opened fire on Atalante as Sémillante attempted to reach the other side of the British ship to batter from the other side . The French frigates also came under long range fire from the three @-@ gun battery at Vizagapatam , under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Campbell , on detached service from the 74th Regiment of Foot . Campbell despatched 50 sepoys in small boats to assist the crew of Princess Charlotte , whose armament of 24 guns continued to remain silent . 
 By 10 : 00 , all three French ships were within range of Centurion and a heavy exchange of fire began . Within 15 minutes , both Centurion and Marengo had their colours shot away and at 10 : 45 the ship of the line turned away for open water , followed by the frigates , her rigging in disarray . Damage had rendered Centurion unable to manoeuvre rapidly and she began slowly limping inshore to shelter from Marengo among the coastal shoals . Captain Lind rejoined his ship by boat , hailing the Princess Charlotte , which had still not participated in the battle , to cut her anchor cables and go ashore to avoid being captured . Logan refused and at 11 : 15 surrendered without a fight as the whole French squadron moved back towards the harbour . Marengo again remained beyond the sandbars that marked the entrance . The boatloads of sepoys , who were still en route to Princess Charlotte , turned about and rowed back to shore to avoid capture . Sémillante took possession of the merchant ship while Marengo and Atalante engaged Centurion , which had moved out of range of support from the shore batteries . 
 Despite her 50 guns , Centurion 's armament left her vulnerable as most were carronades , short @-@ range heavy cannon that were useless in the face of the long @-@ range gunnery from Marengo . Centurion consequently suffered severe damage and by 13 : 15 had been holed , with her rigging wrecked and her anchor cable shot through , which caused her to slowly drift away from the shore , out of control . Seeing that his opponent was disabled , Linois decided not to press the attack and issued orders for his squadron , accompanied by their prize , to sail away . Lind gradually regained control of his ship and even managed to raise some sail in pursuit , but the French were too far ahead . After some final parting shots , Centurion anchored as her crew set about repairing the damage . Linois remained within sight for the rest of the day , but showed no sign of renewing the action ; he disappeared on the north @-@ east horizon at dusk . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite the destruction of Barnaby and the capture of Princess Charlotte , British losses were mild , Centurion having one man killed and nine wounded . The ship was very badly damaged , however , with a number of holes shot in her hull and badly torn rigging and masts . There were no recorded casualties among the troops onshore . The French suffered slightly heavier losses , Marengo having two men killed and an officer wounded and Atalante with three killed and five wounded . Sémillante , which had not been closely engaged in the battle , suffered no casualties . Damage to the French ships was severe , and Linois was forced to abandon further operations and slowly make his way back to Île de France , arriving in November . There Marengo underwent a full refit , lasting six months . 
 Both nations claimed the encounter as a victory , the French for the capture of Princess Charlotte and the British for the survival of Centurion in the face of overwhelming French numerical superiority . Linois justified his withdrawal in a letter , explaining that risking irreparable damage his squadron in a close engagement with Centurion would have curtailed his raiding operations . Privately however , Napoleon was angered by the survival of Centurion and wrote in response that " France cared for honour , not for a few pieces of wood . " British historians have echoed Napoleon 's criticism , judging that Centurion was at Linois 's mercy and that he had failed to destroy her , in words of William Laird Clowes , because of his " half @-@ hearted and timid action . . . [ that ] cannot but provoke censure . 
 = FutureSex / LoveSound = 
 " FutureSex / LoveSound " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for his second studio album , FutureSex / LoveSounds ( 2006 ) . It was written and produced by Timberlake , Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley and Nate " Danja " Hills . The song was produced following Timberlake 's two @-@ year hiatus from the music industry , when he felt " burnt out " after the release of his debut solo album Justified in 2002 . " FutureSex / LoveSound " incorporates elements of new wave and industrial rock into its production . The song received generally mixed reviews from music critics , with some of them praising its production and others criticizing its simplistic lyrics . Following the release of the album , " FutureSex / LoveSound " peaked at number 13 on the Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . It was included on the set list of Timberlake 's second worldwide tour FutureSex / LoveShow ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 After the release of his debut solo album Justified in 2002 , Timberlake thought he " lost his voice " in the sense that he did not like what he was doing . He felt " burnt out " after Justified ; this partly changed his career 's direction , and he took a break from the music industry and instead appeared in films . The first role he took during this time was as a journalist in the thriller Edison Force , filmed in 2004 and released on July 18 , 2006 . He also appeared in the films Alpha Dog , Black Snake Moan , Richard Kelly 's Southland Tales , and voiced Prince Artie Pendragon in the animated film Shrek the Third , released on May 18 , 2007 . 
 When he felt inspired to compose songs again , he did not choose to reunite with his former band ' NSYNC , although he considered it after his first record . Instead , he went to Justified collaborator Timothy " Timbaland " Mosley 's studio in Virginia Beach , Virginia to begin sessions for his second album . However , neither of them had an idea of what the album would be – no plan for it and even a title . " FutureSex / LoveSound " was written and produced by Timbaland , Nate " Danja " Hills and Timberlake himself . The song was recorded by Jimmy Douglas , while its mixing was done by Douglas with Timbaland at The Hit Factory Criteria in Miami . The keys were played by Danja , who also provided the drums with Timbaland . Paul Blake played the guitar and Timberlake sang the background vocals . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " FutureSex / LoveSound " incorporates elements of new wave and industrial rock into its production . It was written in the key of F # minor , in common time , with a tempo of 104 beats per minute . Timberlake 's vocal range spans from the low note of A3 to the high note of G # 5 . Timberlake sings in a " muted whisper slink " and his distorted voice " drones " over a " very produced " beat . Bernard Zuel of The Sydney Morning Herald stated that Timberlake morphs into " Michael Hutchence at his most lizard @-@ like " . According to Spence D. of IGN , the beat is a " throwback from the future past of disco 's demented dimension " . 
 The song contains a " rolling " synth bassline and " truncated " percussion , that according to Zuel , comes across as both " alluring and ever @-@ so @-@ slightly sinister " . It contains " slow breaks " , that according to Jamil Ahmad of musicOMH , " wrap this record round you like walking into an exclusive club with a million dollar sound system – you know you are going to have one of those nights " . The pace of the song changes with its chorus , which Mikey MiGo cited as being " a bit off setting " . 
 " FutureSex / LoveSound " is " brimming over with attitude , sharp beats and rhythm " , according to Linda McGee of <unk> The song , which was described as being " suavely portentous " by Pitchfork Media 's Tim Finney , was cited as being a mixture between " the carnal strut " of Nine Inch Nails ' " Closer " and the " masochistic flutter " of the Junior Boys . Finney said the song " derives its charm " from its " lofty " aspirations , " like a familiar lover staging an elaborately exaggerated seduction " . According to Alexis Petridis of The Guardian , " FutureSex / LoveSound " and the other opening songs of the album are heavily influenced by David Bowie 's Diamond Dogs ( 1974 ) . The song sounds " horny " which can be seen through the lines " Slide a little bit closer to me , little girl / Daddy ’ s on a mission to please . " The chorus of the song reminded 411mania 's Mikey MiGo of Prince 's " New Power Generation " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 " FutureSex / LoveSound " received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Mikey MiGo of 411mania wrote that the song is a " welcomed change " from Timberlake 's past work . She stated that the song " has qualities of Prince that I 've never seen anyone muster up before " . Amanda Murray of Sputnikmusic called the song " musically and melodically great " , but criticized its lyrics . She wrote that the lyrics sound like the dialogue of a " low @-@ rent porn film " , highlighting the lines : " She 's pressed up on me ; I think she 's ready to blow ? " and " All I need is a moment alone , to give you my tongue and get you out of control " . According to Murray , " It makes one question exactly what films Timberlake was starring in during his sabbatical . " She concluded that " FutureSex / LoveSound " establishes a pattern for the rest of FutureSex / LoveSounds : " infectiously catchy and in many cases accomplished pop music , marred by <unk> retarded lyrics " . 
 In a review of FutureSex / LoveSounds , Ben Williams of New York cited the album 's first five tracks , including " FutureSex / LoveSound " , as updating the early 1980s Minneapolis sound : " tense drum machines , high @-@ pitched synth squiggles and staccato funk bass lines " . While reviewing the album , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic noted that the first three songs of the album include the word " sex " in their titles , " as if mere repetition of the word will magically conjure a sex vibe , when in truth it has the opposite effect : it makes it seem that Justin is singing about it because he 's not getting it . " Lucy Davies of BBC Music stated that it is initially " difficult to listen to the lyrics of the opening tracks and give an objective opinion " . She wrote that it is like Timberlake is " trying to find redeemable qualities about some guy who has zero social skills and stares at women on his own from the corner of a bar . Only he seems to have found some similarly unreconstructed creepy friends shouting words of encouragement to his clunky chat @-@ up lines , like Timbaland " . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 " FutureSex / LoveSound " was used as the opening song on Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveShow in 2007 . His performance in New York City is featured on the singer 's video album FutureSex / LoveShow : Live from Madison Square Garden ( 2007 ) . Timberlake performed the song at DIRECTV Super Saturday Night on February 2 , 2013 in New Orleans . Prior to the 2013 Grammy Awards , Timberlake held a concert at the Hollywood Palladium in Los Angeles . The singer performed " FutureSex / LoveSound " in a medley with " Need You Tonight " ( 1987 ) by INXS and his single " LoveStoned / I Think She Knows " ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Thomas Crown Studios , Virginia Beach ; mixed at The Hit Factory Criteria , Miami , FL . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of FutureSex / LoveSounds , Jive Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Following the release of the album , " FutureSex / LoveSound " did not enter the US Billboard Hot 100 , but peaked at number 13 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 = The Sandman ( Vertigo ) = 
 The Sandman is an American comic book series written by Neil Gaiman and published by DC Comics imprint Vertigo . Its artists include Sam Kieth , Mike Dringenberg , Jill Thompson , Shawn McManus , Marc Hempel , and Michael <unk> , with lettering by Todd Klein and covers by Dave McKean . Beginning with issue No. 47 , it was placed under the Vertigo imprint . It tells the story of Dream of the Endless , who rules over the world of dreams . The original series ran for 75 issues from January 1989 to March 1996 , with Gaiman 's contract stipulating that the series would end when he left it . 
 The main character of The Sandman is Dream , also known as Morpheus and other names , who is one of the seven Endless . The other Endless are Destiny , Death , Desire , Despair , Delirium – who was once Delight – and Destruction – who turned his back on his duties . The series is famous for Gaiman 's trademark use of anthropomorphic personification of various metaphysical entities , while also blending mythology and history in its horror setting within the DC Universe . The Sandman is a story about stories and how Morpheus , the Lord of Dreams , is captured and subsequently learns that sometimes change is inevitable . The Sandman was Vertigo 's flagship title , and is available as a series of ten trade paperbacks , a recolored five @-@ volume Absolute hardcover edition with slipcase , in a black @-@ and @-@ white Annotated edition , and is available for digital download . Critically acclaimed , The Sandman was one of the first few graphic novels ever to be on the New York Times Best Seller list , along with Maus , Watchmen and The Dark Knight Returns . It was one of five graphic novels to make Entertainment Weekly 's " 100 best reads from 1983 to 2008 , " ranking at No. 46 . Norman Mailer described the series as " a comic strip for intellectuals . " The series is noted for having a large influence over the fantasy genre and graphic novel medium since then . 
 Various film and television versions of Sandman have been developed unsuccessfully since the 1990s . In a panel at the San Diego Comic @-@ Con International in 2007 , Gaiman remarked that " [ he 'd ] rather see no Sandman movie made than a bad Sandman movie . " In 2013 , Warner Bros. announced that David S. Goyer will be producing a film adaptation of the comic book series with Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt within its upcoming Vertigo film slate . Gordon @-@ Levitt dropped out on Mar 5th , 2016 , after Eric Heisserer was brought on as screenwriter . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The Sandman grew out of a proposal by Neil Gaiman to revive DC 's 1974 – 1976 series The Sandman , illustrated by Jack Kirby and Ernie Chua and written by Joe Simon and Michael Fleisher . Gaiman had considered including characters from the " Dream Stream " ( including the Kirby Sandman , Brute , Glob , and the brothers Cain and Abel ) in a scene for the first issue of his 1988 miniseries Black Orchid . While the scene did not make it into later drafts because Roy Thomas was using the characters in Infinity , Inc . , Gaiman soon began constructing a treatment for a new series . Gaiman mentioned his treatment in passing to DC editor Karen Berger . While months later Berger offered Gaiman a comic title to work on , he was unsure his Sandman pitch would be accepted . Weeks later , Berger asked Gaiman if he was interested in doing a Sandman series . Gaiman recalled , " I said , ' Um ... yes . Yes , definitely . What 's the catch ? ' [ Berger said , ] ' There 's only one . We 'd like a new Sandman . Keep the name . But the rest is up to you . ' " 
 Gaiman crafted the new character from an initial image of " a man , young , pale and naked , imprisoned in a tiny cell , waiting until his captors passed away ... deathly thin , with long dark hair , and strange eyes . " Gaiman patterned the character 's black attire on a print of a Japanese kimono as well as his own wardrobe . Gaiman wrote an eight @-@ issue outline and gave it to Dave McKean and Leigh <unk> , who drew character sketches . Berger reviewed the sketches ( along with some drawn by Gaiman ) and suggested Sam Kieth as the series ' artist . Mike Dringenberg , Todd Klein , Robbie Busch , and Dave McKean were hired as inker , letterer , colorist , and cover artist , respectively . McKean 's approach towards comics covers was unconventional , for he convinced Berger that the series 's protagonist did not need to appear on every cover . 
 = = = Original series = = = 
 The debut issue of The Sandman went on sale 29 November 1988 and was cover @-@ dated January 1989 . Gaiman described the early issues as " awkward " , since he , as well as Kieth , Dringenberg , and Busch , had never worked on a regular series before . Kieth quit after the fifth issue ; he was replaced by Dringenberg as penciler , who was in turn replaced by Malcolm Jones III as inker . Dave McKean was the cover artist for the series through its entire run . 
 The character then appeared in two of DC 's " Suggested for Mature Readers " titles . In Swamp Thing vol . 2 No. 84 ( March 1989 ) , Dream and Eve allow Matthew Cable to live in the Dreaming , because he died there , resurrecting him as a raven . He then meets John Constantine in Hellblazer No. 19 leading into the latter 's guest appearance in Sandman No. 3 ( March 1989 ) . 
 Gaiman revisited Hell as depicted by Alan Moore in Swamp Thing , beginning with a guest appearance by Jack Kirby 's Etrigan the Demon in issue No. 4 ( April 1989 ) . The story introduces Hell 's Hierarchy ( as their entry is titled in Who 's Who in the DC Universe ) , headed by Lucifer ( who would spin off into his own series in 1999 ) , Beelzebub ( later adversary to Kid Eternity ) , and Azazel , whom Dream defeated later in the series . Dream visited the Justice League International in the following issue , No. 5 ( May 1989 ) . Although DC superheroes appeared in the series as late as issue No. 72 ( November 1995 ) , this would not be the norm . Gaiman and artist Mike Dringenberg introduced Death , the older sister of Dream , in issue No. 8 ( August 1989 ) . 
 Gaiman began incorporating elements of the Kirby Sandman series in issue No. 11 ( December 1989 ) , including the changes implemented by Roy Thomas . Joe Simon and Michael Fleisher had treated the character , who resembled a superhero , as the " true " Sandman . The Thomas and Gaiman stories revealed that the character 's existence was a sham created by two nightmares who had escaped to a pocket of the Dreaming . Brute and Glob would later attempt this again on Sanderson Hawkins , sidekick to Wesley Dodds , the Golden Age Sandman . Gaiman gave Jed Walker a surname and made him related to several new characters . The Thomas Sandman was Hector Hall , who married the already @-@ pregnant Fury in the Dreaming in Infinity , Inc . No. 51 . It was explained that Dr. Garrett Sanford , the 1970s Simon and Kirby version of the Sandman , had gone insane from the loneliness of the Dream Dimension and taken his own life . Brute and Glob put the spirit of Hector Hall , which had been cast out of his own body into Sanford 's body , and it eventually began to resemble Hall 's . Fury , in her civilian guise as Lyta Hall was the only superhero recurring character in the series . Even at that , her powers had come to her via the Fury Tisiphone , and the Furies , under the euphemism , " the Kindly Ones " , a translation of " Eumenides " , a name they earned during the events of Aeschylus 's Oresteia trilogy , are major characters in the series . 
 The series follows a tragic course in which Dream , having learned a great deal from his imprisonment , tries to correct the things he has done wrong in the past . Ultimately , this causes him to mercy kill his own son , which leads to his own death at the hands of the Furies . Dream , having found himself a replacement early on in Daniel Hall , dies in issue No. 69 ( July 1995 ) . The remaining issues deal with Dream 's funeral , Hob <unk> choosing to remain immortal in spite of Dream 's death , and two stories from the past . The series wraps with the story of William Shakespeare creating his other commission for Dream , The Tempest , his last work not in collaboration with other writers . 
 The Sandman became a cult success for DC Comics and attracted an audience unlike that of mainstream comics : much of the readership was female , many were in their twenties , and many read no other comics at all . Comics historian Les Daniels called Gaiman 's work " astonishing " and noted that The Sandman was " a mixture of fantasy , horror , and ironic humor such as comic books had never seen before . " DC Comics writer and executive Paul Levitz observed that " The Sandman became the first extraordinary success as a series of graphic novel collections , reaching out and converting new readers to the medium , particularly young women on college campuses , and making Gaiman himself into an iconic cultural figure . " By the time the series concluded in 1996 , it was outselling the titles of DC 's flagship characters of Superman and Batman . Gaiman had a finite run in mind for the series , and it concluded with issue No. 75 . Gaiman said in 1996 , " Could I do another five issues of Sandman ? Well , damn right . And would I be able to look at myself in the mirror happily ? No . Is it time to stop because I 've reached the end , yes , and I think I 'd rather leave while I 'm in love . " The final issue , No. 75 , was dated March 1996 . 
 = = = Additions and spin @-@ offs = = = 
 The Sandman has inspired numerous spin @-@ offs . While most of these are not written by Gaiman , he did write two miniseries focusing on the character of Death . Death : The High Cost of Living was published from March 1993 to May 1993 and was based around the fable that Death takes human form once a century , to remain grounded and in touch with humanity . This was followed in 1996 by Death : The Time of Your Life , featuring the characters of <unk> and Hazel from A Game of You . Other spin @-@ offs include The Dreaming , Lucifer and Dead Boy Detectives . 
 A set of Sandman trading cards was issued in 1994 by SkyBox International . 
 In 1999 , Gaiman wrote The Sandman : The Dream Hunters , a novella illustrated by Yoshitaka Amano . As in many of the single @-@ issue stories throughout The Sandman , Morpheus appears in Dream Hunters , but only as a supporting character . In Gaiman 's afterword to the book , he describes the story as a retelling of an existing Japanese legend . There is no trace of it in the primary source he cites , and when asked , Gaiman has stated that he made up the " legend " . The novel was later adapted into a four @-@ issue miniseries by P. Craig Russell and released by Vertigo from January 2009 to April 2009 . 
 Gaiman and Matt Wagner co @-@ wrote Sandman Midnight Theatre , a 1995 prestige format one @-@ shot in which Dream and Wesley Dodds meet in person after the events in the storyline , " The Python , " which ended with Dodds 's lover , Dian Belmont , going to England , which eventually brings both her and Dodds to Roderick Burgess 's mansion . In 2001 , Dream appeared in a flashback in Green Arrow vol . 3 , No. 9 , which takes place at a point during the 70 years of the first issue . 
 Gaiman wrote several new stories about Morpheus and his siblings , one story for each , which were published in 2003 as the Endless Nights anthology . The stories are set throughout history , but two take place after the final events of the monthly series . It was written by Gaiman and featured a different illustrator for each story . This collection was the first hardcover graphic novel ever to appear on the New York Times Hardcover Best Seller list . 
 Writer / artist Jill Thompson wrote and illustrated several stories featuring the Sandman characters . These include the manga @-@ style book Death : At Death 's Door , one of DC 's best selling books of 2003 , set during the events of Season of Mists , and The Little Endless Storybook , a children 's book using childlike versions of the Endless . 
 To commemorate the twenty @-@ fifth anniversary of The Sandman , Gaiman wrote a new tale involving the battle that had exhausted Morpheus prior to the beginning of the original story . Written by Gaiman and with art by J. H. Williams III , Overture tells the previously hinted story of Dream 's adventure prior to Preludes and Nocturnes which had exhausted him so much that it made Burgess ' actions capable of capturing him . The limited series had six issues . Issue one was released on 30 October 2013 , and although it was planned to have a bi @-@ monthly release schedule , issue 2 was delayed until March 2014 , which Gaiman explained was " mostly due to the giant signing tour I was on from June , and me not getting script written on the tour , with knock @-@ on effects " . Special editions are to be released approximately a month after the original editions , which will contain interviews with the creative team , alongside rare artwork . 
 = = Summary = = 
 The Sandman 's main character is Dream , the titular Sandman , also known to various characters throughout the series as Morpheus , <unk> , the Shaper , the Shaper of Form , Lord of the Dreaming , the Dream King , Dream @-@ Sneak , the Cat of Dreams , Murphy , Kai <unk> and Lord L <unk> , who is the anthropomorphic personification of dreams . At the start of the series , Morpheus is captured by an occult ritual and held prisoner for 70 years . Morpheus escapes in the modern day and , after avenging himself upon his captors , sets about rebuilding his kingdom , which has fallen into disrepair in his absence . The character 's initial haughty and often cruel manner begins to soften after his years of imprisonment at the start of the series , but the challenge of undoing past sins and changing old ways is an enormous one for a being who has been set in his ways for billions of years . In its beginnings , the series is a very dark horror comic . Later , the series evolves into an elaborate fantasy series , incorporating elements of classical and contemporary mythology , ultimately placing its protagonist in the role of a tragic hero . 
 The storylines primarily take place in the Dreaming , Morpheus 's realm , and the waking world , with occasional visits to other domains , such as Hell , Faerie , Asgard , and the domains of the other Endless . Many use the contemporary United States of America and the United Kingdom as a backdrop . The DC Universe was the official setting of the series , but well @-@ known DC characters and places were rarely featured after 1990 . A notable exception is Lyta Hall , formerly Fury of the 1980s super @-@ team Infinity , Inc . , who figures prominently in the " Kindly Ones " story arc , and her superhuman abilities are not ignored . Most of the storylines take place in modern times , but many short stories are set in the past , taking advantage of the immortal nature of many of the characters , and deal with historical individuals and events such as in the short story " Men of Good Fortune . " 
 = = Themes and genre = = 
 The Sandman comic book series falls within the dark fantasy genre , albeit in a more contemporary and modern setting . Critic Marc Buxton described the book as a " masterful tale that created a movement of mature dark fantasy " which were largely unseen in previous fantasy works before it . The comic book also falls into the genres of urban fantasy , epic fantasy , historical drama , superhero , and is written as a metaphysical examination of the elements of fiction , in which Neil Gaiman accomplished through the artistic use of unique anthropomorphic personifications , mythology , legends , historical figures and occult culture , making up most of the major and minor characters as well as the plot device and even the settings of the story . In its earliest story arcs , the Sandman mythos existed primarily in the DC Universe , and as such numerous DC characters made some appearances or were mentioned . The series would later move away from referencing the DCU , but still exists in the same universe nonetheless . 
 Critic Hilary Goldstein described the comic book as " about the concept of dreams more so than the act of dreaming . " In the early issues , responsibility and rebirth were the primary themes of the story . As Dream finally liberates himself from his occultist captors , he returns to his kingdom which had fallen on hard times due to his absence , while also facing his other siblings , who each have their own reaction to his return . The story is structured not as a series of unconnected events nor as an incoherent dream , but by having each panel have a specific purpose in the flow of the story . Dreams became the core of every story arc written in the series , and the protagonist 's journey became more distinct and deliberate . Many Vertigo books since , such as Transmetropolitan and Y : The Last Man , have adopted this kind of format in their writing , creating a traditional prose only seen in the imprint . 
 = = Collected editions = = 
 The Sandman was initially published as a monthly serial , in 32 @-@ page comic books with some exceptions to this pattern . The stories within were usually 24 pages long , with eight exceptions within the main story arc : issue # 1 , " Sleep of the Just " ( 40 pages ) ; issue # 14 , " Collectors " ( 38 pages ) ; issue # 32 , " Slaughter on Fifth Avenue " ( 25 pages ) ; issue # 33 , " Lullabies of Broadway " ( 23 pages ) ; issue # 36 , " Over the Sea to Sky " ( 39 pages ) ; issue # 50 , " Distant Mirrors — Ramadan " ( 32 pages ) ; issue # 52 , " <unk> 's Tale " ( 25 pages ) ; issue # 75 , " The Tempest " ( 38 pages ) . As the series increased in popularity , DC Comics began to reprint them in hardcover and trade paperback editions , each representing either a complete novel or a collection of related short stories . 
 DC first published " The Doll 's House " storyline in a collection called simply The Sandman . Shortly thereafter , the first three volumes were published and named independently and collected in an eponymous boxed set . ( Death 's debut story , " The Sound of Her Wings " from issue # 8 , appeared both at the beginning of early editions of The Doll 's House and at the end of Preludes and Nocturnes , creating overlap between the first two volumes . In 1998 , the cover images from The Sandman were released as one compiled volume titled <unk> : The Collected Sandman Covers . Dave McKean 's covers use techniques such as painting , sculpture , photography , drawing , and computer manipulation . 
 = = = The Sandman library = = = 
 A total of ten trade paperbacks contain the full run of the series and have all been kept in print . In 2010 , Vertigo began releasing a new edition of Sandman books , featuring the new coloring from the Absolute Editions . 
 Preludes and Nocturnes collecting The Sandman # 1 – 8 , 1988 – 1989 : Dream is imprisoned for decades by an occultist seeking immortality . Upon escaping , he must reclaim his objects of power while still in a weakened state , confronting an addict to his dream powder , the legions of Hell , and an all @-@ powerful madman ( Doctor Destiny ) in the process . Guest starring several DC Comics characters including John Constantine , Mister Miracle , the Martian Manhunter , the Scarecrow , Etrigan the Demon , and the original Sandman . It features the introduction of Lucifer , with a cameo by Batman . 
 The Doll 's House collecting The Sandman # 9 – 16 , 1989 – 1990 , : Morpheus tracks down rogue dreams that escaped the Dreaming during his absence . In the process , he must shatter the illusions of a family living in dreams , disband a convention of serial killers , and deal with a " dream vortex " that threatens the existence of the entire Dreaming . Features Hector Hall as the Bronze Age Sandman . 
 Dream Country collecting The Sandman # 17 – 20 , 1990 : This volume contains four independent stories . The imprisoned muse Calliope is forced to provide story ideas , a cat seeks to change the world with dreams , William Shakespeare puts on a play for an unearthly audience , and a shape @-@ shifting immortal ( obscure DC Comics character Element Girl ) longs for death . 
 Season of Mists collecting The Sandman # 21 – 28 , 1990 – 1991 : Dream travels to Hell to free a former lover , Nada , whom he condemned to torment thousands of years ago . There , Dream learns that Lucifer has abandoned his domain . When Lucifer gives Hell 's key ( and therefore , the ownership of Hell ) to the Sandman , Morpheus himself becomes trapped in a tangled network of threats , promises , and lies , as gods and demons from various pantheons seek ownership of Hell . Wesley Dodds and Hawkman ( Carter Hall ) appear in one panel . 
 A Game of You collecting The Sandman # 32 – 37 , 1991 – 1992 : Barbie , a New York divorcée ( introduced in The Doll 's House ) , travels to the magical realm that she once inhabited in her dreams , only to find that it is being threatened by the forces of the Cuckoo . This series introduces the character of Thessaly , who will play a key role in Morpheus ' eventual fate . 
 Fables and Reflections collecting The Sandman # 29 – 31 , 38 – 40 , 50 ; Sandman Special # 1 ; and Vertigo Preview No. 1 , 1991 – 1993 : A collection of short stories set throughout Morpheus ' history , most of them originally published directly before or directly after the " Game of You " story arc . Four issues , dealing with kings and rulers , were originally published under the label Distant Mirrors , while three others , detailing the meetings of various characters , were published as the " <unk> " arc . Fables and Reflections includes the Sandman Special , originally published as a stand @-@ alone issue , which assimilates the myth of Orpheus into the Sandman mythos , as well as a very short Sandman story from the Vertigo Preview promotional comic . 
 Brief Lives collecting The Sandman # 41 – 49 , 1992 – 1993 : Dream 's erratic younger sister Delirium convinces him to help her search for their missing brother , the former Endless Destruction , who left his place among the " family " three hundred years before . Their quest is marred by the death of all around them , and eventually Morpheus must turn to his son Orpheus to find the truth , and undo an ancient sin . 
 Worlds ' End collecting The Sandman # 51 – 56 , 1993 : A " reality storm " strands travelers from across the cosmos at the " Worlds ' End Inn " . To pass the time , they exchange stories . Guest @-@ starring Prez and Wildcat . 
 The Kindly Ones collecting The Sandman # 57 – 69 and Vertigo Jam No. 1 , 1993 – 1995 : In the longest Sandman story , Morpheus becomes the prey of the Furies , avenging spirits who torment those who spill family blood . 
 The Wake collecting The Sandman # 70 – 75 , 1995 – 1996 : The conclusion of the series , wrapping up the remaining loose ends in a three @-@ issue " wake " sequence , followed by three self @-@ contained stories . Features a guest appearance by Wesley Dodds , and cameos by Batman , the Martian Manhunter , Clark Kent , Darkseid , the Phantom Stranger , Doctor Occult , John Constantine , and the Black Spider . 
 The Sandman , written by Neil Gaiman and illustrated by J. H. Williams III , returned in October 2013 as a limited series . The six part prequel , Overture , tells the previously untold story that lead to Morpheus ' capture by Roderick Burgess in the first issue of the monthly series . 
 = = = Absolute editions = = = 
 The DC Comics Absolute Edition series are large 8 " by 12 " prints of a considerably higher quality and price than the library edition , and include a leather @-@ like cover and a slipcase . Many of the early stories have been extensively retouched and / or recolored with Gaiman 's approval . 
 The Absolute Sandman , Vol . 1 collecting The Sandman # 1 – 20 , November 2006 
 The Absolute Sandman , Vol . 2 collecting The Sandman # 21 – 39 , October 2007 
 The Absolute Sandman , Vol . 3 collecting The Sandman # 40 – 56 , along with Vertigo Preview No. 1 and Sandman Special No. 1 , June 2008 
 The Absolute Sandman , Vol . 4 collecting The Sandman # 57 – 75 , November 2008 
 The Absolute Death collecting The Sandman No. 8 and No. 20 , Death : The High Cost of Living , " Death Talks About Life " AIDS pamphlet , Death : The Time of Your Life , Vertigo : Winter 's Edge 2 , " Death and Venice " from Endless Nights , " The Wheel " from 9 @-@ 11 and extras from A Death Gallery , November 2009 
 The Absolute Sandman , Vol . 5 collecting The Sandman : Endless Nights plus The Dream Hunters and Sandman Midnight Theatre , November 2011 
 The first volume of The Absolute Sandman was published in November 2006 ; it collected the first 20 issues ( Preludes and Nocturnes , The Doll 's House , and Dream Country ) . The volume features a copy of the original series outline and other bonus features , such as a new introduction by the president of DC Comics , a new afterword , and a reproduction of the original comic draft and notes for " A Midsummer Night 's Dream " . In promotion of this reissuing , DC issued a refurbished edition of the first issue of the series . 
 = = = Annotated editions = = = 
 While initially hesitant about releasing annotated editions , Gaiman eventually changed his mind when he forgot a reference when asked about it by a reader . The task of annotating the series was undertaken by Gaiman 's friend Leslie S. Klinger of The New Annotated Sherlock Holmes who worked from the original scripts given to him by Gaiman . 
 The first volume of The Annotated Sandman was published by DC Comics in January 2012 as a large 12 " by 12 " black @-@ and @-@ white book with an introduction by Gaiman and included issues # 1 @-@ 20 . The annotations are presented on a page @-@ by @-@ page , panel @-@ by @-@ panel basis , with quoted sections from Gaiman 's scripts and insight into the various historical , mythological and DC Universe references included in the comic . The second volume annotating issues # 21 @-@ 39 was released in November 2012 . The third volume covering issues # 40 @-@ 55 , The Sandman Special No. 1 and the story " How They Met Themselves " from Vertigo : Winter 's Edge # 3 was released in October 2014 . The fourth volume including issues # 57 @-@ 75 and the story " The Castle " from Vertigo Jam # 1 was released in December 2015 . 
 The first volume was nominated for the 2012 Bram Stoker Award for Best Non @-@ Fiction . 
 = = = Omnibus edition = = = 
 The Sandman Omnibus , a massive two @-@ volume hardcover edition was released in 2013 to commemorate the 25th anniversary of The Sandman . Volume 1 collects issues # 1 @-@ 37 and The Sandman Special No. 1 with Volume 2 collecting issues # 38 @-@ 75 with stories from Vertigo Jam No. 1 and Vertigo : Winter 's Edge . Both volumes are printed with the Absolute edition recoloring , feature a leather @-@ like cover in black and red , and have over 1000 pages . 
 A special Silver version of The Sandman Omnibus was released as well . Limited to 500 copies and autographed by Gaiman , the Silver edition includes both volumes with a slipcase , silver @-@ like finish and a numbered page with Gaiman 's signature . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The Sandman No. 19 , " A Midsummer Night 's Dream " , won the World Fantasy Award in 1991 for Best Short Fiction . The Sandman and its spin @-@ offs have won more than 26 Eisner Awards , including three for Best Continuing Series , one for Best Short Story , four for Best Writer ( Neil Gaiman ) , seven for Best Lettering ( Todd Klein ) , and two for Best Penciller / Inker ( one each for Charles Vess and P. Craig Russell ) . The Sandman : The Dream Hunters was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Related Book in 2000 . The Dream Hunters and Endless Nights won the Bram Stoker Award for Best Illustrated Narrative in 1999 and 2003 , respectively . That same year , Season of Mists won the Angoulême International Comics Festival Prize for Scenario . In 2005 , IGN declared The Sandman as the best Vertigo comic ever . 
 Hillary Goldstein of IGN praised the comic book , saying that it " is truly the cream of the crop when it comes to Vertigo books . Neil Gaiman 's work on the series is considered legendary for a reason . This story , in its entirety , is every bit as good as Watchmen and of equal ( if not greater ) literary merit . Were I to list the 100 best single comic @-@ book issues I have ever read , three would come from this collection . Whether you have read The Sandman before or are a first timer , this is the one book you need to buy this fall . The stories within are magnificent and the care taken in reproducing Gaiman 's work is the same you 'd expect for any great work of literature . " 
 = = Adaptations into other media = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Throughout the late 1990s , a film adaptation of the comic was periodically planned by Warner Bros. , parent company of DC Comics . Roger Avary was originally attached to direct after the success of Pulp Fiction , collaborating with Pirates of the Caribbean screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio in 1996 on a revision of their first script draft , which merged the " Preludes and Nocturnes " storyline with that of " The Doll 's House . " Avary intended the film to be in part visually inspired by animator Jan Švankmajer 's work . Avary was fired after disagreements over the creative direction with executive producer Jon Peters , best known for Batman and Superman Lives . It was due to their meeting on the Sandman film project that Avary and Gaiman collaborated one year later on the script for Beowulf . The project carried on through several more writers and scripts . A later draft by William Farmer , reviewed at Ain 't It Cool News , was met with scorn from fans . Gaiman called the last screenplay that Warner Bros. would send him " not only the worst Sandman script I 've ever seen , but quite easily the worst script I 've ever read . " Gaiman has said that his dissatisfaction with how his characters were being treated had dissuaded him from writing any more stories involving the Endless , although he has since written Endless Nights . 
 By 2001 , the project had become stranded in development hell . In a Q & A panel at Comic @-@ Con 2007 , Gaiman remarked , " I 'd rather see no Sandman movie made than a bad Sandman movie . But I feel like the time for a Sandman movie is coming soon . We need someone who has the same obsession with the source material as Peter Jackson had with Lord of the Rings or Sam Raimi had with Spider @-@ Man . " That same year , he stated that he could imagine Terry Gilliam as a director for the adaptation : " I would always give anything to Terry Gilliam , forever , so if Terry Gilliam ever wants to do Sandman then as far as I 'm concerned Terry Gilliam should do Sandman . " In 2013 , DC President Diane Nelson says that a Sandman film will be as rich as the Harry Potter universe . David S. Goyer announced in an interview in early December that he will be producing an adaptation of the graphic novel , alongside Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt and Neil Gaiman . Jack Thorne has been hired to write the script . On 16 October 2014 , Gaiman clarified that while the film was not announced with the DC slate by Warner Bros. , that the film will be distributed by Vertigo and will be announced with those slate of films . Goyer told Deadline.com in an interview that the studio is very happy with the film 's script . According to Deadline.com , the film will be distributed by New Line Cinema . In October 2015 , Goyer revealed that a new screenwriter was being brought on board to revise the script by Jack Thorne and stated that he believes the film will go into production next year . In March 2016 , The Hollywood Reporter has reported that Eric Heisserer will be writing the film 's script . The next day , Gordon @-@ Levitt announced that he dropped out due to disagreements with the studio over the film . 
