 = = = Television = = = 
 Due to the prolonged development period of the film , in 2010 , DC Entertainment shifted focus onto developing a television series adaptation . Film director James Mangold pitched a series concept to cable channel HBO , whilst consulting with Gaiman himself on an unofficial basis , but this proved to be unsuccessful . It was reported in September 2010 that Warner Bros. Television was licensing the rights to produce a TV series , and that Supernatural creator Eric Kripke was their preferred candidate to adapt the saga . In March 2011 , it was announced via Neil Gaiman 's web blog that while he and DC liked Eric Kripke and his approach , it didn 't feel quite right . The author hoped to launch the series in another form but plans for a television adaptation are on hold as production moves forward on the film . As the film adaptation of Morpheus ' story were being planned , DC and Fox discussed in September about a possible TV series based on the Sandman character Lucifer . 
 = = = = Lucifer = = = = 
 On 16 September 2014 , Deadline.com reported that DC and Fox were developing a television series based on the Sandman character Lucifer created by Neil Gaiman . On 19 February 2015 , the official pilot order was given . According to the premise reported by The Hollywood Reporter , the potential series will greatly differ from the comic book version of the character featured in the Sandman and his own solo comic book series . Lucifer will be featured in a CSI @-@ like or Elementary style television show with supernatural elements . 
 On 27 February 2015 , Newsarama reported that Rush and Once Upon A Time actor Tom Ellis was cast as Lucifer Morningstar . The writer of the pilot episode will be Tom <unk> and the director and executive producer will be Underworld director , Len Wiseman . The role of Maze had to be recast . CSI actress Lina <unk> was originally cast as Maze but was replaced by Lesley @-@ Ann Brandt . In May 2015 , the series was officially picked up . 
 = = = Audio / Video = = = 
 Neil Gaiman and Chip Kidd : 20th Anniversary of Sandman , 92nd Street Y , 25 June 2009 
 = Holnicote Estate = 
 Holnicote / <unk> / ( pronounced " Hunnicutt " ) in the parish of Selworthy , West Somerset , England , is a historic estate consisting of 12 @,@ 420 acres ( 5 @,@ 026 hectares ) of land , much situated within the Exmoor National Park . 
 There have been several houses on the estate over the last 500 years . In 1705 a new mansion was built which was burned down in 1779 . It was rebuilt as a hunting lodge and survived until another fire in 1851 and replaced ten years later . It became one of the centres for the Devon and Somerset Staghounds . The main building was damaged by another fire in 1941 . The house and surrounding estate were given to the National Trust in 1944 by Sir Richard Thomas Dyke Acland , 15th Baronet . The house is now operated as an hotel . The surrounding land which includes Dunkery and Selworthy Beacons , and the villages and hamlets of Selworthy , Allerford , Bossington , Horner and Luccombe as well as the Dunkery and Horner Woods National Nature Reserve contains more than 240 kilometres ( 150 mi ) of footpaths and bridleways . 
 In the 13th and 14th centuries the estate was held by the de Holne family . During the 17th century the <unk> were lords of the manor and in the 18th descendents of FitzMartin by then known as the Martyn family had taken over . William Martin sold Holnicote to William Blackford and it descended through his family and then passed to the Dyke family . Sir Thomas Acland married into the family and added the surname to become Sir Thomas Dyke Acland , 7th Baronet and it remained in his family until the donation in 1944 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early = = = 
 Alternative derivations of the name Holnicote , which was spelled variously as <unk> , <unk> or <unk> , have been suggested . It may relate to <unk> , the Anglo @-@ Saxon word for holly . Eilert Ekwall supports the claim that places which start Holne come from the Old English <unk> meaning holly , while Stephen Robinson , in his book on local place names prefers an explanation " The Honey Cottage " from the Old English <unk> and cot . In the 19th century , the Rector of Selworthy , the Rev. F. Hancock , who was said to have extensively studied the place @-@ names of his parish , preferred the old English personal name <unk> for the first element . 
 There are several references in the Domesday Book to <unk> , <unk> or <unk> in the hundred of Carhampton . One records land held by one William of the tenant @-@ in @-@ chief , Roger de <unk> ; prior to the Norman Conquest , this land belonged to two <unk> called <unk> and <unk> . Odo , son of Gamelin , held a detached portion of this land . The second record shows two nuns holding two and half virgates . The local historian and lawyer Charles <unk> @-@ Healey identifies these manors with modern Holnicote , the National Archives agrees with him in their catalogue , and the Open Domesday project lists them under Holnicote , but the editors of the Victoria County History series only identify the land held by the nuns with Holnicote and state that de <unk> 's manor was actually <unk> in Wootton Courtney . 
 There is scarce evidence regarding the holders of Holnicote in the period immediately after Domesday . William de Holne held the manor in the reign of Edward I. Although <unk> @-@ Healey described it is " very probable " that this William de Holne is the same man recorded elsewhere with a son , Richard , whose daughter <unk> married John , son of Walter <unk> , the evidence is not conclusive . By the late 15th century , the Steynings family were claiming descent from the Huish and de Holne dynasties . Their origins are obscure and the earliest record of them is the will of William Steynings , which was proved in 1491 . His son , Edward , died in 1524 / 5 and was succeeded by his son Walter ; Edward Steynings 's will refers to property at Holnicote . Eventually , his grandson Thomas became owner of the manor and house of Holnicote ; he is listed in Crown account books as early as 1558 . His younger brother , Philip ( died 1588 / 9 ) , succeeded him at Holnicote . 
 = = = Martyn and Blackford families = = = 
 The Steynings family owned Holnicote until the direct male line became extinct with the death of Charles <unk> ( 1622 – 1700 ) . His wife , Susanna ( died 1685 ) , was a daughter of Sir Nicholas Martyn of <unk> and Steynings 's heir was their nephew , William Martyn . According to records of the Heralds ' Visitations of Devon and research by the Victorian historian J. L. Vivian , this William Martyn lived in <unk> in the parish of Kenton , Devon ; he was Susanna Martyn 's great @-@ nephew and died in 1710 , aged 30 . He sold the estate to William Blackford , a Master in Chancery . Blackford then bought the manors of Bossington and Avill , the latter from Anthony Stocker and his wife , Sarah ; this estate extended from the ridge of Grabbist nearly to the sea @-@ shore and also included land in the parishes of Dunster , Carhampton , Crowcombe , <unk> , Timberscombe and St. Decumans . He married Elizabeth , a daughter of John Dyke of Pixton , and died in 1728 . His son , William , succeeded him and married Henrietta Collet ( died 1727 ) , a daughter and co @-@ heiress of Joseph Collet of Hertford Castle in Hertfordshire . However , he died only three years after his father . Their only daughter and heiress , Henrietta Blackford , inherited the estate as an infant , but died aged 7 in 1733 . The estates were divisible upon a great @-@ aunt , Elizabeth Dyke ( died 1737 ) , and a second cousin , Elizabeth , a daughter of Thomas Dyke of <unk> and Mary , a daughter of Elizabeth Dyke ( died 1737 ) . Later in 1733 , Elizabeth Dyke ( died 1737 ) conveyed her share in the estate to her only surviving son , Edward Dyke ( died 1746 ) who in turn conveyed his portion to his niece in 1744 , making her the sole owner of the entire estate . 
 = = = Acland family = = = 
 Elizabeth Dyke married Sir Thomas Dyke Acland , 7th Baronet ( 1722 – 1785 ) of Killerton in Devon and Petherton Park in Somerset in 1745 . A prominent member of the West Country gentry , Acland was a famous <unk> who used his wife 's Exmoor estates of Holnicote and Pixton as his hunting seats . He built kennels for the North Devon Staghounds and kept his own pack of dogs . He became forester or ranger of Exmoor under grant from the Crown , a title for the king 's chief officer of the royal forest . According to the Victorian author , Charle Palk <unk> , he " hunted the country in almost princely style . Respected and beloved by all the countryside , he was solicited at the same time to allow himself to be returned as member of Parliament for the counties of Devon and Somerset . He preferred , however , the duties and pleasures of life in the country , where he bore without abuse the grand old name of gentleman " . Although he had three of his own kennels , he had a further method of keeping hounds at Holnicote , Jury and Highercombe , whereby he made the keeping of one hound a term a stipulation of many of the tenancies he granted . In his manor of Bossington ( near Holnicote ) alone an estate survey of 1746 – 7 lists twelve tenements let , either by Acland or Dyke , with the requirement to keep a hound . 
 In 1775 he handed over the mastership to the then Major Basset , and in 1779 his beloved collection of stag heads and antlers at Holnicote was lost in a fire which also destroyed the house . He declared that " he minded the destruction of his valuables less bitterly than the loss of his fine collection of stags ' heads " . He was known on his estates as " Sir Thomas his Honour " ( as later was his son the 9th Baronet ) and was renowned for his generous hospitality at Holnicote or at Pixton , whichever was closest , to all riders " in at the death " , and it is said that by the architect Anne Acland that " open house was kept at Pixton and Holnicote throughout the hunting season " . 
 Acland 's eldest son died an infant and so his second son , Thomas Dyke Acland ( 1752 – 1794 ) , became the ninth Baronet . Like his father , he was known locally in Devon and Somerset as " Sir Thomas his Honour " and they shared a passion for staghunting . He followed him into the <unk> of the North Devon Staghounds and virtually abandoned the family 's main seat of Killerton in mid @-@ Devon to live at Holnicote and Highercombe , near Dulverton , on the north and south edges respectively of the ancient royal forest of Exmoor , renown for its herds of red deer . During the period 1785 to his death in 1794 he killed 101 stags , the heads and antlers of many of which are still displayed in the stables at Holnicote . He was a stern employer of his hunt @-@ staff , and on one occasion when his hounds had killed several sheep , possibly belonging to his farming tenants , he ordered his huntsman " to hang himself and the whole pack " . 
 The estate passed down through the Acland family until February 1944 , when Sir Richard Dyke Acland , 15th Baronet ( 1906 – 1990 ) donated the Holnicote and Killerton Estates to the National Trust , comprising 16 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 500 ha ) , which was the largest ever donation received by the National Trust . 
 = = Estate = = 
 The estate had a role , together with the Acland family 's other Exmoor estate of Pixton , as a home of West Country staghunting in the 18th century . There was some controversy locally and nationally when the National Trust banned staghunting on the estate in the early 21st century . 
 Holnicote Estate covers more than 12 @,@ 000 acres ( 4 @,@ 900 ha ) and contains more than 240 kilometres ( 150 mi ) of footpaths and bridleways . It includes Dunkery and Selworthy Beacons , and the villages and hamlets of Selworthy , Allerford , Bossington , Horner and Luccombe as well as the Dunkery and Horner Woods National Nature Reserve . The estate also plays host to a point to point course on which many Exmoor hunts hold their meetings throughout the spring . 
 Dunkery Beacon is the summit of Dunkery Hill , and the highest point on Exmoor and in Somerset . The sandstone hill rises to 1 @,@ 705 feet ( 520 m ) and provides views over the surrounding moorland , the Bristol Channel and hills up to 86 miles ( 138 km ) away . The site has been visited by humans since the Bronze Age with several burial mounds in the form of cairns and bowl barrows . Sweetworthy on the lower slopes is the site of two Iron Age hill forts or enclosures and a deserted medieval settlement . At the top of Selworthy Beacon is a National Trust plaque and a view of the south coast of Wales across the Bristol Channel . The South West Coast Path also climbs the hill and ends slightly shy of the summit . Its elevation is 1 @,@ 013 feet ( 309 m ) . Behind the hill , there are precipitous cliffs . Near the summit are a series of cairns , thought to be the remains of round barrows , and the Iron Age Bury Castle . The round cairns have been scheduled as an ancient monument . In the 16th century , Selworthy Beacon was the site of a beacon to warn of impending invasions . The mausoleum of Sir Thomas Dyke Acland is about 0 @.@ 25 miles ( 400 m ) from Selworthy Beacon . The hills have a deep purple colour during the summer due to the covering of heather . Ling and bell heather , gorse , sessile oak , ash , rowan , hazel , bracken , mosses , liverworts , lichens and ferns all grow here or in surrounding woodland , as well as some unique whitebeam species . Exmoor ponies , red deer , pied flycatchers , wood warblers , lesser spotted woodpeckers , redstarts , dippers , snipe , skylarks and kestrels are some of the fauna to be found here and in nearby Horner Woods . Horner Woods are also the home to 14 of the 16 UK bat species , which include barbastelle and Bechstein 's bats . 
 Selworthy is a small village and civil parish which includes the hamlets of Bossington , <unk> , Lynch , <unk> Street and Allerford . Bossington is separated from Porlock Bay by a shingle beach , through which flows the River Horner , forming part of the Porlock Ridge and Saltmarsh Site of Special Scientific Interest . In the 1990s rising sea levels created salt marshes , and lagoons developed in the area behind the boulder bank . The village is on the South West Coast Path . Selworthy was rebuilt as a model village , to provide housing for the aged and infirm of the Holnicote estate , in 1828 by Sir Thomas Acland . Many of the other cottages , some of which are now rented out , are still thatched and are listed buildings , whose walls are painted with limewash that has been tinted creamy yellow with ochre . On the hill above the village is the whitewashed 15th @-@ century Church of All Saints , with a 14th @-@ century tower . One of Allerford 's main attractions is the much @-@ photographed packhorse bridge . Built as a crossing over the River Aller ( from which the village gets its name ) , it is thought to be medieval in origin . The village is also home to Allerford House , childhood home of Admiral John Moresby , who explored the coastline of New Guinea and for whom Port Moresby , the capital city of Papua New Guinea , was named . Other features of the village include thatched cottages , a forge and an old @-@ fashioned red telephone box . There is also a Reading Room , built by the Acland family to foster adult education . One of the thatched cottages operated as the local Primary School between 1821 and 1981 and is now a museum containing the West Somerset Rural Life Museum and Victorian School . The museum houses the West Somerset Photographic Archive . 
 The village of Luccombe lies at the foot of Dunkery Hill . Along with Stoke Pero and Horner it forms a civil parish . Horner is on the eastern bank of Horner Water on which there is a restored , but non @-@ working , watermill . The river is crossed by two medieval packhorse bridges , one of which is known as <unk> Way Bridge which is crossed by the Coleridge Way . The parish Church of St Mary has a chancel dating from about 1300 , with the nave and tower being added around 1450 . Stoke Pero Church has a 13th @-@ century tower . The Dovecot at Blackford Farm is part of the estate . It was built in the 11th century and is a Grade II * listed building , and ancient monument . It was attached to a mansion house which burnt down in 1875 . 
 Since 2009 the estate has been one of three Multi @-@ Objective Flood Management Demonstration Schemes , funded by the Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs , to examine how changes in the management of river catchment areas can influence the incidence and severity of flooding in the area . 
 = = House and outbuildings = = 
 There have been at least four successive mansion houses at Holnicote . Limited information is available about the early buildings . One is known to have been built between 1493 and 1521 , based on dendrochronology from surviving timbers . The Grade II * listed gatehouse and attached cottage were built together with a new house in the early 17th century . Following the purchase of the estate by the Blackford family in 1705 , a new mansion house was built on the site of the previous structure . Only the stable block from that building survives . The house was destroyed by fire in 1779 . The Acland family re @-@ built it as a thatched hunting lodge , which was also destroyed by fire in 1851 , and replaced in 1861 . A kitchen extension was added in 1874 . The lodge was built in the 19th century . The estate includes several cottages including Rose Bower and the 17th @-@ century Butlers Cottage . An 18th @-@ century Flemish bond red brick granary also exists on the estate . 
 In 1936 the lodge became a hotel , but was badly damaged by yet another fire in 1941 . During the early 1940s the property was used by the Somerset County Council as a children 's home where many children born from liaisons between African American service men and local women were housed , after being given up for adoption . 
 It was donated to the National Trust in 1944 by Sir Richard Thomas Dyke Acland , 15th Baronet of Killerton in Devon , whose ancestors had owned it since 1745 . The house is now operated as a hotel . 
 = Coloman , King of Hungary = 
 Coloman the Learned , also the Book @-@ Lover or the <unk> ( Hungarian : <unk> <unk> ; Croatian : <unk> ; Slovak : <unk> <unk> ; c . 1070 – 3 February 1116 ) was King of Hungary from 1095 and King of Croatia from 1097 until his death . Coloman and his younger brother Álmos were still under @-@ age when their father King Géza I of Hungary died and their uncle Ladislaus I ascended the throne in 1077 . The king decided to prepare Coloman — who was physically disabled , according to late medieval Hungarian chronicles — for a church career . Coloman was appointed bishop of Eger or Várad ( Oradea , Romania ) in the early 1090s . 
 The dying King Ladislaus preferred Álmos to Coloman when nominating his heir in early 1095 . Coloman fled from Hungary but returned around 19 July 1095 when his uncle died . Coloman was crowned in early 1096 ; the circumstances of his accession to the throne are unknown . He granted the so @-@ called " duchy " — one @-@ third of the Kingdom of Hungary — to Álmos . 
 In the year of Coloman 's coronation , at least five large groups of crusaders arrived in Hungary on their way to the Holy Land . Coloman allowed the organized groups to pass through Hungary peacefully but mercilessly annihilated the bands entering his kingdom unauthorized or pillaging the countryside . He invaded Croatia and defeated its last native king Petar Svačić in 1097 . Coloman was crowned king of Croatia in 1102 . According to the late 14th @-@ century Pacta conventa , the authenticity of which is not universally accepted by scholars , Coloman was only crowned after having ratified a treaty with the leaders of the Croatian nobility . After Coloman 's coronation , the Hungarian monarchs were also the kings of Croatia for centuries . 
 Coloman had to face his brother 's lust for power throughout his life ; Álmos devised plots to overthrow him on at least five occasions . In retaliation , Coloman seized his brother 's duchy in 1107 or 1108 and had Álmos and Álmos ' son , Béla blinded in about 1114 . Hungarian chronicles , which were compiled in the reign of kings descending from his mutilated brother and nephew , depict Coloman as a bloodthirsty and unfortunate monarch . On the other hand , Coloman is portrayed as " the most well @-@ versed in the science of letters among all the kings of his day " by the contemporaneous chronicler Gallus Anonymus . Coloman 's decrees , which governed many aspects of life — including taxation , trade and relations between his Christian and non @-@ Christian subjects — remained unmodified for more than a century . He was the first Hungarian king to renounce the control of the appointment of prelates in his realms . 
 = = Early years ( till 1095 ) = = 
 Coloman was the elder of the future King Géza I 's two sons who survived infancy . Géza 's Byzantine second wife — whose baptismal name is unknown — left Hungary after her husband 's death , implying that she was childless . Consequently , the mother of Coloman and his younger brother , Álmos , must have been Géza 's first wife , Sophia , whose family is unknown . According to historians Gyula Kristó and Márta Font , Coloman and Álmos were born around 1070 , . Coloman 's uncommon baptismal name was recorded as <unk> or <unk> in medieval documents written in Latin . Kristó and Font write that he was most probably named after Saint Coloman of Stockerau , a missionary who was martyred in Austria in the early 11th century . Another possibility is that his name is of Turkish origin , meaning " rest " . 
 Coloman 's father ascended the throne in 1074 . Because Coloman and Álmos were still minors when he died on 25 April 1077 , Géza 's brother Ladislaus I succeeded him . The new king decided that Coloman should be prepared for a career in the Church . The king 's decision was unusual because Coloman was older than Álmos . According to the 14th @-@ century Illuminated Chronicle , Coloman was " of mean stature , but astute and quick of apprehension " , which may have induced his uncle 's decision . The chronicler states that Coloman was " shaggy and hirsute , half @-@ blind and humpbacked , and he walked with a limp and stammered in his speech " . However , the reliability of this description is doubtful because the chronicle was completed in the reign of kings descending from Álmos . 
 In preparation for his clerical life , Coloman learnt to read and write and acquired a good knowledge of Latin . His proficiency in canon law was eulogized in a letter that Pope Urban II addressed to him in 1096 . According to Kristó , having finished his studies , Coloman was ordained priest and in the early 1090s he was appointed bishop . According to late medieval chronicles , Coloman was bishop of either Eger or of Várad ( Oradea , Romania ) . The Illuminated Chronicle narrates that Ladislaus I wanted to appoint Coloman " bishop of Agria " but the same source also says that Coloman was " bishop of <unk> " . 
 According to the Illuminated Chronicle , both Coloman and Álmos accompanied their uncle on a military campaign against Bohemia in early 1095 . Before reaching the border of his kingdom , Ladislaus I " was overcome by a grave infirmity " and decided to appoint Álmos as his heir . However , Coloman did not want to respect his uncle 's decision and fled to Poland . He returned to Hungary around 29 July 1095 when his uncle died . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , Ladislaus had invited Coloman back from Poland . The same source adds that Álmos , " in the true simplicity of his heart honoured his brother , Coloman , and yielded to him the crown of the kingdom " , which suggests that Coloman ascended the throne without bloodshed . Coloman was crowned king in early 1096 , the delay implying that the two brothers had been fighting for the crown before they reached an agreement . It is also possible , as proposed by Márta Font , that Coloman could only be crowned after Pope Urban II had exempted him of his clerical status . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Facing the crusaders ( 1095 – 1096 ) = = = 
 Coloman was crowned in Székesfehérvár by Archbishop <unk> of Esztergom . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , at the same time he " granted the dukedom with full rights " to Álmos . This report shows that Álmos only acknowledged his brother 's rule in exchange for receiving the one @-@ time ducatus or duchy of their father and grandfather , which comprised one third of the kingdom . 
 Shortly after his coronation , Coloman had to face problems the armies of the First Crusade caused while passing through Hungary . The first army , which was led by Walter Sans Avoir , reached the frontier on 8 May 1096 , and proceeded through the kingdom without any disturbances . The next arrivals , who were headed by Peter the Hermit , also passed through the country without incidents until they reached <unk> ( Zemun , Serbia ) , where a dispute between the crusaders and the local inhabitants caused a riot . The crusaders besieged and took the town , where they massacred " [ a ] bout four thousand Hungarians " , according to the contemporaneous Albert of Aix . They only withdrew when Coloman 's troops were approaching them . A third band of crusaders reached Nyitra ( present @-@ day Nitra , Slovakia ) around the same time and started to plunder the region . These were soon routed by the locals . A fourth army pillaged the region between Moson and Székesfehérvár , but they were defeated and massacred by Coloman 's troops . 
 [ The crusaders ] were even granted a licence to buy and sell necessary supplies , and peace was proclaimed on both sides according to [ Coloman 's ] instructions , lest a dispute might arise from such a large army . But when they were delayed there for some days , they began to wander , and the Bavarians and Swabians , a bold race , and the rest of the soldiers foolishly drank too much ; they violated the proclaimed peace , little by little stealing wine , barley , and other necessities from the Hungarians , finally seizing sheep and cattle in the fields and killing them ; they destroyed those who stood up to them and wanted to drive them out . The others committed several crimes , all of which we cannot report , like a people foolish in their boorish habits , unruly and wild . For , as those say who were present , they stabbed a certain young Hungarian in the market street with a stake through his private parts , because of a most <unk> dispute . ... [ Coloman ] was disturbed by this scandal , ... so he ordered ... that the signal should be given to the whole of Hungary to stir to battle in vengeance of this crime and the other insults , and not one of the pilgrims was to be spared because they had carried out this vile deed . 
 Coloman , alarmed by these incidents , refused to authorize the new crusaders who arrived under the leadership of one Count Emicho six weeks later to enter Hungary . However , they broke through the defensive lines and laid siege to Moson . In six weeks , Coloman mustered his armies , causing a panic among the crusaders which enabled the garrison of the fortress to carry out a sortie and route the crusader bands . According to Albert of Aix , contemporaneous Christians thought that the Hungarians ' victory over Count Emicho was a punishment that God inflicted on the pilgrims because they had massacred many Jews " rather from greed for their money than for divine justice " . 
 The first properly organized crusader army which reached the borders of Hungary in September 1096 was led by Godfrey of Bouillon , Duke of Lower Lorraine . He had a meeting with Coloman in Sopron , where they reached an agreement . The king authorized the crusaders to march through his kingdom but stipulated that Duke Godfrey 's younger brother Baldwin and his family should stay with him as hostages . The crusaders passed through Hungary peacefully along the right bank of the Danube ; Coloman and his army followed them on the left bank . Coloman only released his hostages after all the crusaders had crossed the river Sava , which marked the kingdom 's southern frontier . After the uneventful march of the main crusader army across Hungary , Coloman 's fame quickly spread throughout Europe . 
 The contemporaneous Cosmas of Prague wrote that " some of the Jews " who had been persecuted by the crusaders in Bohemia arrived in Hungary and " secretly took their wealth away with them " . Although Cosmas does not specify their number , László <unk> and other historians say that the Jews represented a large influx . Coloman issued a number of decrees and separate statutes — Capitula de <unk> — regulating the position of Jews in Hungary . For instance , he forbade them from holding Christian slaves and residing " outside episcopal sees " . Historian Nora Berend writes that the " defence of purity of Christians by <unk> against mingling with Jews plays a very minor role " in Coloman 's legislation in comparison with late 12th @-@ century canon law . Whereas Coloman did not try to convert the Jews , he issued decrees aimed at the conversion of his Muslim subjects . For instance , he prescribed that if a Muslim " has a guest , or anyone invited to dinner , both he and his table companions shall eat only pork for meat " in order to prevent Muslims from observing their dietary laws . 
 = = = Expansion , internal conflicts and legislation ( 1096 – 1105 ) = = = 
 After Coloman 's victories over the marauding crusaders , Henry IV , Holy Roman Emperor , whom Ladislaus I had supported against Pope Urban II in his last years , wrote a letter to Duke Álmos . The emperor stated that Coloman had neglected imperial interests " because of his own necessities " , and asked the duke to intervene on his behalf . However , Coloman — a former bishop — abandoned his predecessor 's foreign policy and supported the pope . Historian Gyula Kristó writes that the fact that his brother , Álmos had for years had a close relationship with Emperor Henry may also have influenced Coloman 's decision . Coloman married Felicia , a daughter of Roger I of Sicily — a close ally of the Holy See — in 1097 . In 1095 , her sister Constance had married Conrad , the elder son of Emperor Henry IV , after he rebelled against his father and joined the pope 's camp . 
 Coloman invaded Croatia in 1097 . Its last native king , Petar Svačić , who had for years resisted Coloman 's predecessor , died in the Battle of Gvozd Mountain . The Hungarian troops reached the Adriatic Sea and occupied Biograd na Moru , an important port . Threatened by the advance of Coloman 's army , the citizens of the towns Trogir and Split swore fidelity to the Doge of Venice , Vitale Michiel , who had sailed to Dalmatia . Having no fleet , Coloman sent his envoys with a letter to the doge to " remove all the former misunderstandings concerning what is due to one of us or the other by right of our predecessors " . Their agreement of 1098 — the so @-@ called <unk> <unk> — determined the spheres of interest of each party by allotting the coastal regions of Croatia to Hungary and Dalmatia to the Republic of Venice . 
 Taking advantage of Coloman 's absence , Álmos began to conspire against the king and mustered his armies . Coloman returned from Croatia and marched towards his brother 's duchy with his troops in 1098 . The two armies met at Tiszavárkony , with only the river Tisza separating them . However , the commanders of the two troops started negotiations and decided not to fight each other , compelling the king and the duke to make peace . 
 [ Coloman ] and his army marched to [ Tiszavárkony ] against [ Álmos ] , and [ Álmos ] drew near to [ Tiszavárkony ] from the opposite direction , and between them was the river [ Tisza ] . But loyal Hungarians sought to bring about a truce , in order that they could talk with each other , and they said : " Why do we fight ? If they defeat us in battle , we shall die ; and if they escape , they will flee : in times past our fathers fought against each other and brothers against brothers , and they died . Nor do we see any ground for fighting . Let those two fight if fighting pleases them ; and whichever of them shall win , let us take as lord . " Having taken this decision , the chief men dispersed . When <unk> told [ Coloman ] of their decision and Ilia informed [ Álmos ] , they kept the peace , though it was not by their own will . 
 Grand Prince Svyatopolk II of Kiev sent his son Iaroslav — who was the husband of one of Coloman 's nieces — to Hungary to seek assistance from Coloman against the princes of the westernmost regions of Rus ' in 1099 . Iaroslav persuaded Coloman to intervene in the conflict . The king and his army crossed the Carpathian Mountains and laid siege to Peremyshl ( Przemyśl , Poland ) — the seat of Volodar Rostislavich , one of the rebellious princes . David Igorevich , one of Volodar Rostislavich 's allies , persuaded the Cumans to attack the Hungarians . In the ensuing battle , the Hungarian army was soundly defeated . The Illuminated Chronicle says that " [ r ] arely did Hungarians suffer such slaughter as in this battle " . According to the Russian Primary Chronicle , many Hungarians " were drowned , some in the <unk> and others in the San " after the battle . Coloman himself narrowly escaped from the battlefield through the valley of the San . In the same year , Coloman hastened towards the Bohemian border to assist the dukes of Moravia — Svatopluk and Otto — against Duke Bretislaus II of Bohemia . Coloman and Bretislaus had a meeting on the border river Olšava " in the field of <unk> " where " they renewed their age @-@ old bonds of friendship and peace and confirmed them with oaths " , according to Cosmas of Prague . 
 Around 1100 , Coloman " assembled the magnates of the kingdom and reviewed with the advice of the entire council the text of the laws of " King Saint Stephen . The assembly of <unk> passed new decrees , which regulated several aspects of the economy and tempered the harshness of the legislation of Coloman 's predecessor . One of the decrees prohibited the persecution of <unk> — vampires or mares — because they " do not exist " . The same law also dealt with <unk> or " sorcerers " , punishing their misdeeds . Taxes on trade were increased under Coloman , implying that commerce flourished in his reign . However , his legislation prohibited the export of Hungarian slaves and horses . Coins minted under Coloman were smaller than those issued in his predecessor 's reign , which prevented the cutting down of their smooth edge . 
 Coloman was crowned king of Croatia in Biograd na Moru in 1102 . The 13th @-@ century Thomas the Archdeacon writes that the union of Croatia and Hungary was the consequence of conquest . However , the late 14th @-@ century manuscript known as the Pacta conventa narrates that Coloman was only crowned after he had reached an agreement with twelve leading Croatian noblemen , because the Croats were preparing to defend their kingdom against him by force . Whether this document is a forgery or an authentic source is a subject of scholarly debate . According to the historian Pál Engel , even if the document is a forgery , its content " is concordant with reality in more than one respect " concerning the special status of Croatia throughout the Middle Ages . For instance , in case of a foreign invasion , Croatian noblemen were obliged to fight at their own expense only up to the river Drava , which was considered the border between Croatian territories and Hungary . 
 Coloman was a man of warlike spirit , and resolved to subjugate to his lordship all the land to the Adriatic Sea . He came with a force of arms and took possession of the remaining part of Slavonia , which Ladislas had passed over . 
 In an attempt to prevent an alliance between Coloman and Bohemond I of Antioch , the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos arranged a marriage between his son and heir , John , and Coloman 's cousin , Piroska , in 1104 or 1105 . Coloman invaded Dalmatia in 1105 . According to the Life of the blessed John of Trogir , Coloman personally commanded his troops besieging Zadar , the most influential among the Dalmatian towns . The siege lasted until Bishop John of Trogir negotiated a treaty between the king and the citizens who accepted Coloman 's suzerainty . Split likewise surrendered after a short siege , but two other Dalmatian towns — Trogir and Šibenik — capitulated without resistance . Based on the Life of St Christopher the Martyr , the historian Paul Stephenson writes that a Hungarian fleet subjugated the islands of the Gulf of Kvarner , including Brač , Cres , Krk , and Rab . Thomas the Archdeacon narrates that Coloman granted each Dalmatian town its own " charter of liberties " to secure their loyalty . These liberties included the citizens ' right to freely elect the bishop of their town and their exemption from any tribute payable to the monarch . Following his conquest of Dalmatia , Coloman assumed a new title — " King of Hungary , Croatia and Dalmatia " — which was first recorded in 1108 . 
 = = = Family affairs ( 1105 – 1113 ) = = = 
 Coloman had his four @-@ year @-@ old son Stephen crowned in 1105 , which caused Álmos to openly rebel against the king . The duke left Hungary and sought the assistance of Emperor Henry IV against Coloman . Having realized that the emperor , who was facing a rebellion of his own son , could not help him , Álmos returned to Hungary in 1106 . In the same year , Álmos fled to his brother @-@ in @-@ law , Boleslaw III of Poland . With Polish assistance he captured the fortress of Abaújvár in Hungary . Coloman had a meeting with Boleslaw III and the two monarchs " vowed perpetual friendship and brotherhood " . Without the Polish monarch 's support , Álmos was forced to yield to Coloman . 
 Coloman sent his envoys to the Council of Guastalla , which had been convoked by Pope <unk> II . In October 1106 , they solemnly informed the pope of Coloman 's renunciation of his royal prerogative to appoint the prelates . According to historians Ferenc Makk and Márta Font , without this declaration the Holy See would not have acknowledged Coloman 's conquest of Dalmatia . During the civil war between Boleslaw III and his brother Zbigniew , Coloman intervened on the former 's behalf and helped him overcome the latter 's army in Mazovia in 1107 . Coloman also sent Hungarian reinforcements to the Byzantine Emperor Alexios I Komnenos against Bohemond I of Antioch , who invaded Byzantine territories in October 1107 . Bohemond suffered a sound defeat and was forced to accept the humiliating treaty of Devol in 1108 . 
 In 1107 or 1108 , Álmos made a pilgrimage to the Holy Land . Coloman decided to take advantage of his absence and seized his duchy . Although Álmos was allowed to keep his own private property , the annexation of his duchy ensured the integrity of Coloman 's kingdom . Having returned from the Holy Land , Álmos set up a monastery at Dömös . On the occasion of its consecration , at which Coloman was also present , Álmos was — falsely according to the Illuminated Chronicle — accused of trying to assassinate the monarch . Coloman had his brother arrested but " the most reverend bishops and other well @-@ disposed dignitaries " intervened on Álmos 's behalf and " thus reconciliation was solemnly sworn " between the king and his brother . 
 Álmos left for Passau . Upon his request , Henry V of Germany invaded Hungary and laid siege to Pressburg ( Bratislava , Slovakia ) in September 1108 . At the same time , Duke Svatopluk of Bohemia , who also supported Álmos , made an incursion into the regions north of the Danube . Coloman 's ally Boleslaw III invaded Bohemia , forcing the Czech duke to withdraw . The emperor 's attempt to take Pressburg was a total failure , but he persuaded Coloman to forgive Álmos , who was allowed to return to Hungary . 
 In the same year , Coloman visited Dalmatia and confirmed the privileges of Split , Trogir and Zadar . He returned to Zadar around 1111 and reaffirmed the Dalmatian towns ' liberties . Hungarian historian Font writes that Coloman seems to have set up a new diocese at Nyitra ( Nitra , Slovakia ) between 1111 and 1113 . According to the contrasting view of Slovak historians , the bishopric had already been established before 1086 . Coloman 's first charter of grants , which was issued in 1111 , for the Zobor Abbey only mentions a provost in Nyitra , but his second charter of 1113 refers to the bishop . These two royal charters also mention a Mercurius as " princeps <unk> " , which implies he was the first voivode of Transylvania , but he may have been only an important landowner in the province without holding any specific office . In 1112 , Coloman made an incursion into Austria , possibly in retaliation for Margrave Leopold III 's participation in the 1108 German campaign against Hungary , according to Ferenc Makk . 
 In 1112 , Coloman — who had been widowed — married Euphemia of Kiev , a daughter of Vladimir Monomakh , Prince of Pereyaslavl in 1112 . However , according to the Illuminated Chronicle , the queen " was taken in the sin of adultery " in 1113 or 1114 . Euphemia was soon sent back to her father , who had become Grand Prince of Kiev . 
 = = = Last years ( 1113 – 1116 ) = = = 
 In 1113 , Duke Boleslaw III of Poland , who had blinded his rebellious brother Zbigniew , causing his death , " undertook a journey of pilgrimage to St. Gilles and St. Stephen the King " to the Somogyvár Abbey and to the holy king 's shrine at Székesfehérvár in Hungary . Coloman received the Polish monarch cordially in Somogyvár . Shortly afterwards — between 1113 and 1115 — Coloman discovered that Álmos was again conspiring to seize the throne . Having lost his patience , Coloman had Álmos and Álmos 's young son Béla blinded to secure a peaceful succession for his own son . On the same occasion , many of his brother 's partisans were likewise mutilated . According to one of the two versions of these events recorded in the Illuminated Chronicle , the king even ordered that Béla should be castrated but the soldier who was charged with this task refused to execute the order . The chronicle also writes that the child was believed to have died after his blinding , but he was actually kept in a monastery for more than a decade . 
 [ The ] King took the Duke and his infant son Bela and blinded them . He also gave orders that the infant Bela should be castrated . But the man who was instructed to blind them feared God and the sterility of the royal line , and therefore he castrated a dog and brought its testicles to the King . 
 The fleet of Venice , commanded by Doge Ordelafo Faliero , invaded Dalmatia in August 1115 . The Venetians occupied the Dalmatian islands and some of the coastal cities but could not take Zadar and Biograd na Moru . By that time , Coloman was gravely ill . The symptoms recorded in the Illuminated Chronicle indicate a serious otitis , which caused encephalitis . Before his death , he " instructed his son and his great men that after his death they should take vengeance on Russia for the injury done to him " during his campaign of 1099 . Upon his councillor 's advice , he also had Álmos , who had taken refuge in the monastery of Dömös , imprisoned . 
 The King now began to be gravely ill , and he had a Latin doctor , named Draco , in whom he placed too much trust . This doctor applied a poultice to the ears of the King , who was oppressed by headaches , and the strength of the poultice drew out through the cavities of his ears no small part of his brain . When the poultice had been removed because he could endure it no longer , he showed it to Count Othmar . When he inspected it and saw upon it the matter drawn forth from the brain , he said to the King : " Lord , it <unk> you to prepare yourself for extreme unction " . When the King heard this , he groaned and was afraid . 
 Coloman died on 3 February 1116 . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , " divine vengeance made him drink the bitterness of early death " because of his " shedding of innocent blood " when ordering the punishment of Álmos , Béla and their partisans . Coloman was buried in the Székesfehérvár Cathedral , near the holy King Stephen I. 
 = = Title = = 
 " King of Hungary , Slavonia , Croatia and Dalmatia " ( 1108 ) . 
 = = Family = = 
 Coloman 's first wife Felicia — who is incorrectly named <unk> in earlier historiography — was the daughter of Count Roger I of Sicily . There is scholarly uncertainty whether her mother was the count 's first wife Judith of Évreux or his second wife <unk> of Mortain . The marriage of Coloman and Felicia took place in the spring of 1097 . She gave birth to at least three children . According to Font , the eldest child Sophia was born in or before 1100 . In 1101 , Sophia was followed by twin brothers Stephen and Ladislaus . Felicia 's death preceded that Ladislaus , who died in 1112 . 
 Coloman married his second wife Eufemia in the summer of 1112 . Born in 1096 or 1097 , she was at least 25 years younger than Coloman . She was the daughter of Vladimir Monomakh , who was Prince of Pereyaslavl at the time of her marriage . After Coloman repudiated her on a charge of adultery , Eufemia fled to Kiev , where she gave birth to a son , Boris , who was never regarded as Coloman 's son by his Hungarian relatives . 
 The following family tree presents Coloman 's ancestors and some of his relatives who are mentioned in the article . 
 * Whether Géza 's first or second wife was his children 's mother is uncertain . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Late medieval Hungarian chronicles , written under kings descended from Álmos who was blinded upon Coloman 's order , preserved an unfavorable image of Coloman and his rule . According to the Illuminated Chronicle , many " evil things were done " in Coloman 's reign . It states that the saintly Ladislaus I predicted that Coloman " would shed blood " . Modern historians — including Márta Font , László Kontler and Gyula Kristó — agree that this negative view was a form of " revenge " by his brother 's descendants , who persuaded their chroniclers to emphasize Coloman 's failures and to hide his successes . However , the one @-@ time existence of a favorable image of Coloman can be proven . For instance , the 13th @-@ century Roger of Torre Maggiore writes that Coloman was " inscribed in the catalogue of saints " along with the members of the Árpád dynasty who were actually canonized . Coloman 's decrees , which moderated the severity of Ladislaus I 's laws , also contradict to the chroniclers ' report of his bloodthirsty nature . His scribe clearly mentions him as " the most Christian King Columban " , who is " endowed with the artless grace of a dove and with all discernment of the virtues " in the preamble to his decrees . 
 Coloman 's statesmanship is appreciated in modern historiography . According to László Kontler , " it was ... under Coloman 's reign that the medieval Hungarian state became consummate and acquired its final structure " . Font and Kristó wrote that Coloman 's laws governed his kingdom without modifications for more than a century , even under monarchs hostile towards his memory . Likewise , coinage in Hungary followed the pattern established by Coloman 's small denars throughout the 12th century . 
 His contemporaries Pope Urban II and Gallus Anonymus were aware of Coloman 's " uncommon erudition " . According to the chronicles , the Hungarians called him <unk> or <unk> — the Learned or the Book @-@ Lover — " because of the books he owned " . The Illuminated Chronicle says that Coloman " read the canonical hours like a bishop " in his books . According to Kristó , Coloman 's court was a center of learning and literature . Bishop Hartvik compiled his Life of King Saint Stephen under Coloman . Kristó writes that it is probable that the Lesser Legend of Saint Gerard of Csanád ( Cenad , Romania ) was also written during Coloman 's reign . Historians attribute the first compilation of Hungarian historical records , which gave rise to the development of Hungarian historiography , to Coloman 's efforts . 
 = Italian cruiser Confienza = 
 Confienza was the last of four Goito @-@ class torpedo cruisers built for the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) in the 1880s . She was armed with a variety of light guns and five 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes , and was capable of a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . The ship was built in the late 1880s , with her keel laying in September 1887 at the Arsenale di La Spezia ; she was completed in April 1890 and thereafter entered service with the Italian fleet . Confienza had a short and uneventful career ; she spent her time in Italian waters and did not see any action . Stricken from the naval register in August 1901 , she was thereafter broken up for scrap . 
 = = Design = = 
 Confienza was 73 @.@ 4 meters ( 241 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 8 @.@ 05 m ( 26 @.@ 4 ft ) and an average draft of 3 @.@ 04 m ( 10 @.@ 0 ft ) . She displaced 756 metric tons ( 744 long tons ; 833 short tons ) normally . Her propulsion system consisted of two double @-@ expansion steam engines each driving a single screw propeller , with steam supplied by four coal @-@ fired locomotive boilers . Confienza was slightly slower than her three sister ships , with a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) from 1 @,@ 962 indicated horsepower ( 1 @,@ 463 kW ) ; the other members of her class were a knot faster . Confienza had a cruising radius of 1 @,@ 100 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 000 km ; 1 @,@ 300 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . She had a crew of between 105 and 121 . 
 The primary armament for Confienza was five 14 in ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . She carried a heavier gun armament than her sisters , and was the only vessel of the class to carry a medium @-@ caliber weapon , a single 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) 32 @-@ caliber ( cal . ) gun mounted on the bow . She was also equipped with six 57 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 40 @-@ cal. guns and two 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 20 @-@ cal. guns , all mounted singly . The ship was protected with an armored deck that was 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) thick . 
 = = Service history = = 
 The keel for Confienza was laid down at the Arsenale di La Spezia in September 1887 , the last member of her class to begin construction . She was launched on 28 July 1889 , and fitting @-@ out work was completed on 11 April 1890 . She then began her sea trials , which concluded in June . In 1894 , the ship was assigned to the Third Division of the Italian fleet , along with the ironclad San Martino and the newly commissioned protected cruiser Liguria . The following year , Confienza was stationed in the 2nd Maritime Department , split between Taranto and Naples , along with most of the torpedo cruisers in the Italian fleet . These included her sister ships Monzambano , Montebello , and Goito , the eight Partenope @-@ class cruisers , and Tripoli . 
 The ship was stationed in Naples in 1900 , along with the old ironclads Regina Maria Pia , Castelfidardo , and Affondatore , the armored cruiser Marco Polo , the other three Goito @-@ class cruisers , Tripoli , and the two new Agordat @-@ <unk> . Confienza 's career was the shortest of the members of her class , having spent just over a decade in service before she was stricken from the naval register on 26 August 1901 and broken up for scrap . 
 = Halo : Combat Evolved = 
 Halo : Combat Evolved is a 2001 military science fiction first @-@ person shooter video game developed by Bungie and published by Microsoft Game Studios . The first game of the Halo franchise , it was released on November 15 , 2001 , as a launch title for the Xbox gaming system , and is considered the platform 's " killer app " . More than five million copies were sold worldwide by November 2005 . Microsoft released versions of the game for Microsoft Windows and Mac OS X in 2003 , and the surrounding storyline was adapted and elaborated into a series of novels , comic books , and live @-@ action web series . The game was later released as a downloadable Xbox Original for the Xbox 360 . A high @-@ definition remake , Halo : Combat Evolved Anniversary , was released for Xbox 360 on the 10th anniversary of the original game 's launch , and was rereleased as part of Halo : The Master Chief Collection on November 11 , 2014 , for the Xbox One . 
 Halo is set in the twenty @-@ sixth century , with the player assuming the role of the Master Chief , a cybernetically enhanced supersoldier . The player is accompanied by Cortana , an artificial intelligence who occupies the Master Chief 's neural interface . Players battle various aliens as they attempt to uncover the secrets of the eponymous Halo , a ring @-@ shaped artificial world . The game has been commended for elements such as its story , the variety of strategies players can employ , and its multiplayer mode ; however , the repetitive nature of its level design was criticized by some reviewers . 
 Halo has been praised as one of the greatest video games of all time , and was ranked by IGN as the fourth @-@ best first @-@ person shooter ever made . The game 's popularity has led to labels such as " Halo clone " and " Halo killer " , applied respectively to games either similar to or anticipated to be better than it . In addition , the game inspired and was used in the fan @-@ created Red vs. Blue video series , which is credited as the " first big success " of machinima ( the technique of using real @-@ time 3D engines , often from video games , to create animated films ) . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As a first @-@ person shooter , the gameplay of Halo : Combat Evolved is fundamentally similar to that of its peers , focusing on combat in a 3D environment that is viewed almost entirely from a character 's eye view . The player can move around and look up , down , left , or right . The game features vehicles , ranging from armored jeeps and tanks to alien hovercraft and aircraft , many of which can be controlled by the player . The game switches to a third @-@ person perspective during vehicle use for pilots and mounted gun operators ; passengers maintain a first @-@ person view . The game 's heads @-@ up display includes a " motion tracker " that registers moving allies , moving or firing enemies , and vehicles , in a certain radius of the player . 
 The player character is equipped with an energy shield which nullifies damage from weapons fire and forceful impacts . The shield 's charge appears as a blue bar in the corner of the game 's heads @-@ up display , and it automatically recharges if no damage is sustained for a brief period . When the shield is fully depleted , the player is highly vulnerable , and further damage reduces the hit points of a secondary health meter . When this health meter reaches zero , the character dies and the game reloads from a saved checkpoint . Health can be replenished through the collection of health packs scattered around the game 's levels , but the game 's introduction of a regenerating shield mechanic represented a departure from FPS games of the time . 
 Halo 's arsenal consists of weapons from science fiction . The game has been praised for giving each weapon a unique purpose , thus making each useful in different scenarios . For example , plasma weapons need time to cool if fired too rapidly , but cannot be reloaded and must be discarded upon depletion of their batteries , whereas conventional firearms cannot overheat , but require reloading and ammunition . In contrast to the large weapon inventories of contemporary FPS games , Halo players may carry only two weapons at once , calling for strategy when managing firearms . 
 Halo departs from traditional FPS conventions by not forcing the player character to holster its firearm before deploying grenades or melee @-@ range blunt instruments ; instead , both attacks can be utilized while a gun is still equipped , supplanting or supplementing small @-@ arms fire . All weapons may be used to bludgeon enemies , which allows Master Chief to silently kill opponents without alerting other nearby enemies . The Chief can also carry up to eight grenades at a time : up to four fragmentation and four plasma grenades each . Like the game 's other weapons , the two types of grenades differ ; the fragmentation grenade bounces and detonates quickly , whereas the plasma grenade adheres to targets before exploding , sometimes with blackly comic results . 
 = = = Combatants = = = 
 The game 's main enemy force is the Covenant , a group of alien species allied by belief in a common religion . Their forces include Elites , fierce warriors protected by recharging energy shields much like the player 's own ; Grunts , which are short , comically cowardly creatures who are usually led by Elites in battle , and often flee in terror instead of fighting in the absence of a leading Elite ; Jackals , originally space pirates , they wear a highly durable energy shield on one arm and a form of handgun on the other ; and Hunters , large , powerful creatures with thick armor plates that cover the majority of their bodies and a large cannon that fires explosive rounds of plasma . 
 A secondary enemy is the Flood , a parasitic alien life form that appears in three main variants . Infection Forms , the true form of the Flood , are fragile beings and do little damage individually , but often travel in swarms of several dozen in order to infect their prey . Combat Forms result from humans and Covenant Elites who have succumbed to the Infection Forms , and have hideously deformed bodies as a result . Bloated Carrier Forms are the result of an aged or unused Combat Form and serve as incubators for new Infection Forms ; when wounded or near a potential victim , they explode to damage other nearby life @-@ forms and to release their spores , thus perpetuating the Flood life cycle . 
 Battling the Flood , Covenant , and human forces are the Sentinels : robotic drones designed by an extinct race called the Forerunners to protect their structures and prevent Flood outbreaks . Sentinels are able to hover around in enclosed spaces and produce an energy shield when under attack . They lack durability , but use powerful laser beam weapons and are immune to infection by the Flood . 
 The artificial intelligence in Halo has been favorably received . Enemies take cover and use suppressive fire and grenades . Some enemies retreat when their superiors are killed . The player is often aided by United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) Marines , who offer ground support , such as manning gun turrets or riding shotgun while the player is driving a vehicle . 
 = = = Multiplayer = = = 
 A split screen mode allows two players to cooperatively play through Halo 's campaign . The game also includes five competitive multiplayer modes , which all can be customized , for between two and 16 players ; up to four players may play split @-@ screen on one Xbox , and further players can join using a " System Link " feature that allows up to four Xbox consoles to be connected together into a local area network . Halo lacks artificially intelligent game bots , and was released before the launch of the Xbox Live online multiplayer service ; therefore LAN parties are needed to reach the game 's 16 @-@ player limit , a setup that was a first for a console game , but was often deemed impractical by critics . Aside from this limitation , Halo 's multiplayer components were generally well received by critics , and it is widely considered one of the best multiplayer games of all time . 
 Although the Xbox version of Halo lacks official support for online multiplayer play , third @-@ party packet tunneling software provide unofficial ways around this limitation . The Windows and Macintosh ports of Halo support online matches involving up to 16 players and include multiplayer maps not in the original Xbox release . However , co @-@ operative play was removed from the ports because it would have required large amounts of recoding to implement . In April 2014 , it was announced that GameSpy 's servers and matchmaking , on which Halo PC relied , would be shut down by May 31 of the same year . A team of fans and Bungie employees announced they would produce a patch for the game to keep its multiplayer servers online . The patch was released on May 16 , 2014 . 
 = = = Halo : Custom Edition = = = 
 On March 15 , 2004 , Gearbox Software released Halo : Custom Edition for Windows , which enabled players to use custom @-@ made maps and game modifications via the Halo Editing Kit developed by Bungie . Halo : Custom Edition is multiplayer @-@ only , and requires an original copy of Halo for PC to install . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Halo : Combat Evolved takes place in a science fiction universe created by Bungie Studios . According to the story , the realization of faster @-@ than @-@ light travel has allowed the human race to colonize other planets after the overpopulation of Earth . A keystone of these efforts is the planet Reach , an interstellar naval yard and a hub of scientific and military activity . A secret military endeavor , dubbed the SPARTAN Project , is established on Reach to create an army of biologically engineered , cyborg " supersoldiers . " Twenty @-@ seven years before the beginning of the game , a technologically advanced collective of alien races , the Covenant , begin to attack human settlements , declaring humanity an affront to their gods . The United Nations Space Command experiences a series of crushing defeats ; although the supersoldiers of the SPARTAN @-@ II Project are effective against the Covenant , they are too few in numbers to turn the tides of war . 
 To prepare for a mission to discover the location of the Covenant 's homeworld , SPARTAN @-@ II soldiers are recalled to Reach . Two days before the mission was to begin , Covenant forces attack Reach and destroy the colony . A starship , the Pillar of Autumn , survives the onslaught with the SPARTAN @-@ II Master Chief on board . The ship initiates a jump to slipspace ( similar to hyperspace ) , hoping to lead the enemy away from Earth . The game starts with the Pillar of Autumn encountering Halo . 
 The titular Halo is an enormous , ring @-@ shaped artificial space station / planet , which ( according to Bungie Studios ) has a diameter of ten thousand kilometers . Halo sits at a Lagrange point between a planet and its moon . Centrifugal force created by the rotation of the station provides the ring 's gravity . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The player character is Master Chief Petty Officer John @-@ 117 , one of the few ( see Halo : The Fall of Reach and its sequels for more information ) surviving supersoldiers of the SPARTAN @-@ II project , and the main character of the story . Accompanying Master Chief is the Pillar of Autumn 's feminine artificial intelligence construct , Cortana , who resides in a neural implant connected to his battle armor , code @-@ named MJOLNIR Mark V. The Pillar of Autumn 's captain , Jacob Keyes , is also a major character , with Staff Sergeant Avery Junior Johnson as a supporting character . Playing a mainly antagonistic role in the game 's events is 343 Guilty Spark , an eccentric artificial intelligence responsible for monitoring and maintaining Halo 's systems . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game opens just following the events of Halo : Reach , as the Pillar of Autumn exits slipspace near a mysterious ring @-@ shaped space station , called " Halo " by the enemy in the game , the Covenant . A Covenant fleet attacks and heavily damages the Pillar of Autumn . Captain Keyes initiates " The Cole Protocol , " a procedure which destroys all navigation data and is designed to prevent the Covenant from learning the location of Earth . Master Chief and Cortana fight their way to an escape pod , where they eject from the ship along with a group of Marines . As they fly away they can see Keyes attempting to crash land Pillar on Halo . 
 Master Chief and Cortana are the only survivors of their pod 's crash landing , but they soon contact other survivors and help collect them into a fighting force . The survivors tell them that Keyes survived the Pillar of Autumn 's crash landing , but has been captured by the Covenant and is being held aboard the Covenant ship Truth and Reconciliation . Master Chief and a force of Marines board the ship and rescue Keyes , who orders Master Chief to beat the Covenant to Halo 's control center and to discover Halo 's purpose . Master Chief and Cortana travel to a map room called the Silent <unk> , which leads them to the control room . There , Cortana enters the systems and , discovering something urgent , suddenly sends Master Chief to find Captain Keyes while she stays behind . Keyes was searching for what he believed was a cache of powerful weapons , but when he reaches his position Master Chief finds only signs of a battle and a recording revealing they have accidentally released the Flood , a parasitic alien race capable of spreading itself by infesting other sentient life @-@ forms . 
 The release of the Flood prompts Halo 's AI monitor , 343 Guilty Spark , to recruit Master Chief in retrieving the Index , a device that will activate Halo and prevent the Flood from spreading beyond the facility . After Master Chief retrieves and prepares to use the Index , Cortana re @-@ appears and warns him against the activation . She has discovered that Halo 's defense system is a weapon designed to kill all sentient life in the galaxy , which will deny the host bodies the Flood requires to spread , a revelation which Guilty Spark confirms . 
 Faced with this information , Master Chief and Cortana decide to destroy Halo to prevent its activation . While fighting the Flood , the Covenant , and Guilty Spark 's Sentinels , Cortana discovers that the best way to accomplish this is to cause the crashed Pillar of Autumn to self @-@ destruct . However , Captain Keyes ' authorization is required to destroy the Autumn , forcing the Chief and Cortana to return to the now @-@ Flood @-@ infested Truth and Reconciliation to search for him . By the time they reach Keyes , however , he has been infected beyond the point of no return by the Flood . Master Chief retrieves Keyes ' neural implants directly from his brain and retreats to the Autumn , where Cortana activates the ship 's self @-@ destruct sequence . However , 343 Guilty Spark reappears and deactivates the countdown , discovering the record of human history in the process . Master Chief manually destabilizes the Pillar of Autumn 's fusion reactors , and he and Cortana narrowly escape the destruction of the ring via a fighter . Cortana scans nearby space and finds that they are apparently the only survivors . Cortana justifies the sacrifices of the other humans on Halo , stating that they had no choice due to the threat posed by Halo , the Covenant and the Flood . Cortana believes it 's over but the Master Chief tells her that they 're just getting started . 
 In a brief post @-@ credits scene , 343 Guilty Spark is seen fleeing Halo 's destruction and into the unknown of deep space . 
 = = = Voice cast = = = 
 Steve Downes as Master Chief 
 Jen Taylor as Cortana 
 Pete Stacker as Captain Keyes 
 David Scully as Avery Johnson / Elites ( voice pitch @-@ altered and reversed ) 
 Tim Dadabo as 343 Guilty Spark 
 <unk> <unk> @-@ Wates as <unk> 
 Chris <unk> as Pvt. Jenkins 
 Mike <unk> as Pvt. <unk> 
 Mark Dias as Pvt. Mendoza 
 Andrew <unk> as Pvt. Chipps Dubbo 
 Joseph Staten as Grunts 
 = = Development = = 
 On July 21 , 1999 , during the Macworld Conference & Expo , Steve Jobs announced that Halo would be released for Mac OS and Windows simultaneously . Before this public announcement , game industry journalists under a non @-@ disclosure agreement had previewed the game in a private showing during E3 1999 , and were reportedly amazed . Bungie Studios later stated an even earlier development build of the game centered on real @-@ time strategy and was " basically Myth in a sci @-@ fi universe . " 
 At E3 2000 , the first trailer of Halo was well received . The version shown there differed greatly from the one exhibited previously , marking the first major overhaul in the game 's development . At this point , Halo was a third @-@ person action game , in which a transport starship <unk> on a mysterious ring world that orbits a star . Early versions of Covenant aliens appear in great numbers and loot what they can , and war erupts between them and the humans . Unable to match the technologically advanced alien race , the humans on the ring world resort to guerrilla warfare . This version of the game featured Halo @-@ specific fauna , which were later dropped because of design difficulties and the creatures ' " detract [ ion ] from the surprise , drama and impact of the Flood . " 
 As rumors had predicted , Microsoft announced on June 19 , 2000 , that it had acquired Bungie Studios . Halo became an exclusive game for Microsoft 's Xbox video game console , and Bungie Studios rewrote the game 's engine , heavily altering its presentation and turning it into a first @-@ person shooter . Originally a key element , the game 's online multiplayer component was dropped because Xbox Live would be unfinished at the time of Halo 's release . While a playable demonstration of the game at <unk> 2001 was well @-@ received , critics had mixed reactions to its exhibition at E3 2001 . The game was released in North America simultaneously with the Xbox , on November 15 , 2001 ; the " Combat Evolved " subtitle was an addition by marketers at Microsoft , who felt that Halo alone was not a descriptive enough title to compete with other military @-@ themed games . 
 On July 12 , 2002 , a Halo port for Windows was announced to be under development by Gearbox Software . Its showing at E3 2003 was positively received by some critics , with skepticism by others . It was released on September 30 , 2003 , and included support for online multiplayer play and featured sharper graphics , but had compatibility issues that caused poor performance . Halo was later released for Mac OS X on December 11 , 2003 . On December 4 , 2007 , the game became available for the Xbox 360 via download from the Xbox Live Marketplace . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Halo 's soundtrack was created by Bungie 's audio director , Martin O 'Donnell , and received enthusiastic praise from many critics . O 'Donnell has stated that his goal was to provide " a feeling of importance , weight , and sense of the ' ancient ' . " He designed the music so that it " could be <unk> and remixed in such a way that would give [ him ] multiple , interchangeable loops that could be randomly recombined in order to keep the piece interesting as well as a variable length . " Development involved the creation of " alternative middle sections that could be transitioned to if the game called for such a change ( i.e. less or more intense ) . " 
 O 'Donnell has remarked that he " sat with the level designers and ' spotted ' the level as though it was a movie , with the knowledge that the music would have to be malleable rather than static .... [ T ] he level designer would tell me what he hoped a player would feel at certain points or after accomplishing certain tasks . " Based on this information , O 'Donnell would " go back and develop appropriate music cues , then have the designer script the cues into the level , and then we 'd play through it to see if it worked as desired . " He explained that the use of music in Halo is sparse because he believes that " [ music ] is best used in a game to quicken the emotional state of the player and it works best when used least , " and that " [ if ] music is constantly playing it tends to become sonic wallpaper and loses its impact when it is needed to truly enhance some dramatic component of game play . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 On its release Halo broke sales records ; by April 8 , 2002 , a little under five months after its release , one million units had been sold : this pace was faster than that of any previous sixth @-@ generation console game . During the two months following Halo 's release , the game sold alongside more than fifty percent of Xbox consoles . By July 14 , 2003 , the game had sold three million copies worldwide , and by January 28 , 2004 , it had reached four million copies . As of November 9 , 2005 , Halo has sold over five million copies worldwide . 
 Halo gained positive reviews ; on Metacritic , it currently holds an aggregated score of 97 out of 100 , based on reviews from 68 professional critics . Ste Curran 's review for Edge praised the game as " the most important launch game for any console , ever " and commented , " GoldenEye was the standard for multiplayer console combat . It has been surpassed . " GameSpot claimed that " Halo 's single @-@ player game is worth picking up an Xbox for alone , " concluding , " Not only is this easily the best of the Xbox launch games , but it 's easily one of the best shooters ever , on any platform . " IGN remarked similarly , calling Halo a " can 't miss , no @-@ brainer , sure thing , five star , triple A game . " Among the specific aspects that reviewers praised were the balance of weapons , the role of drivable vehicles , and the artificial intelligence of enemies . 
 The game received numerous Game of the Year awards , including those of the Academy of Interactive Arts & Sciences , Electronic Gaming Monthly , Edge , and IGN . The British Academy of Film and Television Arts awarded Halo " Best Console Game , " and Rolling Stone presented it with their " Best Original Soundtrack " award . According to Xbox.com , the game received a total of 48 awards . 
 Although Halo 's overall reception was largely positive , the game received criticism for its level design . GameSpy commented , " you 'll trudge through countless hallways and control rooms that all look exactly the same , fighting identical @-@ looking groups of enemies over and over and over ... it is simply frustrating to see a game with such groundbreaking sequences too often degenerate [ into ] this kind of mindless , repetitive action . " Similarly , an article on Game <unk> remarked , " In the latter part of the game , the scenarios rely on repetition and quantity rather than innovativeness and quality . " Eurogamer concluded , " Halo is very much a game of two halves . The first half is fast , exciting , beautifully designed and constantly full of surprises . The second half is festooned with <unk> plot twists and great cinematics but let down by repetitive paint by numbers level design . " Halo was released prior to the launch of Xbox Live , and the lack of both online multiplayer and bots to simulate human players was criticised by GameSpy ; in 2003 GameSpy included Halo in a list of " Top 25 Most Overrated Games of All Time . " 
 Halo 's PC port garnered mixed reactions and received a score of 83 % on Metacritic . GameSpot stated that it was " still an incredible action game ... [ and ] a true classic , " awarding it 9 @.@ 0 out of 10 . It received a score of 8 @.@ 2 out of 10 from IGN , who stated , " If you 've played the game on the Xbox , there 's not much for you here . " Eurogamer called the game " a missed opportunity , " but stated that the online multiplayer component was " a massive draw ... for Halo veterans . " 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 According to GameSpot , Halo 's " numerous subtle innovations have been borrowed by countless other games since . " The game is often cited as the main reason for the Xbox 's success , and it began what is commonly regarded as the system 's flagship franchise . Game designer Vox Day credited the game with using science @-@ fiction environments to follow Half @-@ Life in eschewing static levels and a similarity to dungeon crawls , which the FPS genre inherited from Akalabeth . Day further wrote that Halo spurred a sustained trend of many other FPS console games . In July 2006 , Next @-@ <unk> published an article estimating Halo as the second @-@ highest revenue @-@ generating 21st century console video game in the United States , behind Grand Theft Auto : Vice City . The game 's popularity sparked the usage of terms like " Halo clone " and " Halo killer . " The Halo engine has been used for the game Stubbs the Zombie in Rebel Without a Pulse . 
 Halo has been featured at both Major League Gaming and the World Cyber Games . In machinima , the game was used as the basis for the popular web series Red vs. Blue . The game 's sequel , Halo 2 , made US $ 125 million with unit sales of 2 @.@ 38 million on the first day of its release , earning it the distinction of the fastest @-@ selling United States media product in history . Three years later , Halo 3 shattered that record with the biggest opening day in entertainment history , taking in US $ 170 million in its first 24 hours . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The story surrounding Halo : Combat Evolved has been adapted into novels , the first of which was Halo : The Fall of Reach , a prequel . Published in October 2001 , this novel was written by Eric Nylund , who reportedly completed it in seven weeks . The novel became a Publishers Weekly bestseller with almost two hundred thousand copies sold . The following novel , entitled Halo : The Flood , is a tie @-@ in to Halo : Combat Evolved , describing not only the experiences of the Master Chief , but also those of other characters on Installation 04 . Written by William C. Dietz , this novel appeared on the Publishers Weekly bestsellers list during May 2003 . Nylund returned to write the third novel , Halo : First Strike , which takes place between the events of Halo : Combat Evolved and those of Halo 2 . Written in 16 weeks , it was published in December 2003 . Later novels , Halo : Ghosts of Onyx ( written by Nylund and released on October 31 , 2006 ) and Halo : Contact Harvest by Joseph Staten further extended the Halo storyline . More recently , a collection of new stories in Halo : Evolutions and Greg Bear 's first book of his Forerunner series Halo : Cryptum was released continuing to flesh out the stories . Two additional books : Karen Traviss 's Halo : Glasslands , the first in a new Post @-@ Halo 3 series and Greg Bear 's Book 2 of his Forerunner series entitled Halo : Primordium will be released in the near future . 
 Another adaptation is The Halo Graphic Novel , a collection of four short stories released by Marvel Comics in July 2006 . It was written and illustrated by Lee Hammock , Jay Faerber , Tsutomu Nihei , Brett Lewis , Simon Bisley , Ed Lee and Jean Giraud . Bungie regards Halo 's adaptations as canon . Marvel subsequently released the four @-@ issue miniseries Halo : Uprising , which was written by Brian Michael Bendis and illustrated by Alex Maleev , which premiered in August 2007 . Halo Wars : Genesis , a supplemental graphic novel featuring art by Graeme Devine and Eric Nylund , was included with Halo Wars : Limited Edition in March 2009 . Marvel then published Halo : Helljumper , a five @-@ issue miniseries written by Peter David and illustrated by Eric Nguyen , which premiered in July 2009 . Additionally Halo : Blood Line and Halo : Fall of Reach were released , the latter being a comic retelling of the novel Halo : The Fall of Reach premiered in 2010 and 2011 respectively . 
 = = = Remake = = = 
 During the Microsoft press conference at the 2011 E3 Expo , it was revealed that Halo : Combat Evolved would be remade by 343 Industries with an in @-@ house game engine and would include achievements , Terminals , and Skulls . It was released for the Xbox 360 on November 15 , 2011 . The release date marks the 10th anniversary of the original game 's release . The remastered version of the original game includes online multiplayer and cooperative play functionality . The remake is also the first Halo game to include Kinect support . The game is a mix of two game engines — the original Halo engine created by Bungie which provides gameplay and a new engine created by 343 and Saber which is responsible for improved graphics — and the player is able to switch between the improved and classic modes of the game at any time . The game is also the first in the series to support 3D televisions ; however , this is only available for the improved mode within the game . The game 's multiplayer component uses the Halo : Reach gameplay engine , tailored with a map playlist to mimic the original multiplayer , as opposed to including the original game 's multiplayer mode . 
 The Anniversary version of the game is the version contained in The Master Chief Collection for Xbox One . The single @-@ player game is identical to the Xbox 360 version , including the ability to swap between the updated " anniversary " graphics and the original game graphics . However , unlike the Xbox 360 release , the multiplayer component is the original multiplayer engine from Combat Evolved as opposed to Halo : Reach and is playable over Xbox Live , something not possible until The Master Chief Collection . 
 = History of the Jews in Puerto Rico = 
 The Jewish immigration to Puerto Rico began in the 15th century with the arrival of the <unk> ( variously called conversos , Crypto @-@ Jews , or Secret Jews and <unk> ) who accompanied Christopher Columbus on his second voyage . An open Jewish community did not flourish in Puerto Rico because Judaism was prohibited by the Spanish Inquisition , however many migrated to mountainous parts of the island , far from the central power of San Juan , and continued to self @-@ identify as Jews and practice Crypto @-@ Judaism . 
 It would be hundreds of years before an open Jewish community would be established on the island . Very few American Jews settled in Puerto Rico after the island was ceded by Spain to the United States under the terms of the 1898 Treaty of Paris , which ended the Spanish – American War . 
 The first large group of Jews to settle in Puerto Rico were European refugees fleeing German – occupied Europe in the 1930s and 1940s . The second influx of Jews to the island came in the 1950s , when thousands of Cuban Jews ( most of Eastern @-@ European descent ) fled after Fidel Castro came to power , the majority immigrating to Miami , Florida , with a sizable portion choosing to establish and integrate themselves on the neighboring island because of the cultural , linguistic , racial , and historic similarities shared by both islands . 
 Puerto Rican Jews have made many contributions in multiple fields , including business and commerce , education , and entertainment . Puerto Rico has the largest and richest Jewish community in the Caribbean , with over 3 @,@ 000 Jewish inhabitants . It is also the only Caribbean island in which all three major Jewish denominations — Orthodox , Conservative , and Reform — are represented . 
 = = First Jews to arrive in Puerto Rico = = 
 According to historians , the first Jews to arrive in Puerto Rico were conversos , Jews who were forced to convert to Catholicism and were members of Christopher Columbus ' crew during his second voyage on November 19 , 1493 to the so @-@ called " New World " . Historians believe that Luis de Torres , who spoke Hebrew among other languages and who accompanied Columbus as his interpreter , was the first " converso " Jew to set foot in Puerto Rico . The Jews who arrived and settled in Puerto Rico were referred to as " Crypto @-@ Jews " or " secret Jews " . 
 In 1478 , the Catholic Monarchs of Spain , Ferdinand II of Aragon and Isabella I of Castile , established an ecclesiastical tribunal known as the Spanish Inquisition . It was intended to maintain Catholic orthodoxy in their kingdoms . Hundreds of Jews were killed , and their synagogues destroyed . One of the consequences of these disturbances was the mass forced conversion of Jews . 
 When the Crypto Jews arrived on the island of Puerto Rico , they were hoping to avoid religious scrutiny , but the Inquisition followed the colonists . The Inquisition maintained no rota or religious court in Puerto Rico . However , heretics were written up and if necessary remanded to regional <unk> tribunals in Spain or elsewhere in the western hemisphere . As a result , many secret Jews settled the island 's remote mountainous interior far from the concentrated centers of power in San Juan and lived quiet lives . They practiced Crypto @-@ Judaism which meant that they secretly practiced Judaism while publicly professing to be Roman Catholic . Still , since Jews weren 't permitted to worship , the Crypto Jews eventually intermarried with Catholics and therefore , Puerto Rico virtually had no Jewish history of which to speak . 
 = = 19th century = = 
 By the 19th century , the Spanish Crown had lost most of its possessions in the Americas . Two of its remaining possessions were Puerto Rico and Cuba , both of which were demanding more autonomy and had pro @-@ independence movements . The Spanish Crown issued the Royal Decree of Graces ( Real <unk> de Gracias ) which was originated August 10 , 1815 , with the intention of attracting European settlers who were not of Spanish origin to the islands . 
 The Spanish government , believing that the independence movements would lose their popularity , granted land and initially gave settlers " Letters of <unk> " . However , those Europeans who were of the Jewish and Protestant faith were excluded from direct acquisition of state land since it was expected of the settlers to swear loyalty to the Spanish Crown and allegiance to the Roman Catholic Church . The opening of new lands to Catholics resulted in some sales of existing cultivated lands to others . This , however , did not keep people of Jewish descent from settling in Puerto Rico . Among the Puerto Rican Jews who lived in Puerto Rico in the 19th century was Mathias Brugman . 
 Mathias Brugman ( 1811 – 1868 ) was the son of Pierre Brugman from Curaçao of Dutch @-@ Jewish ancestry and Isabel <unk> from Puerto Rico . His parents met and married in New Orleans , Louisiana where Brugman was born , raised and educated . The Brugman family moved to Puerto Rico and settled in the City of Mayagüez where Brugman met and married Ana Maria Laborde . He opened a <unk> ( grocery store ) and became rather successful , only to lose a good part of his fortune attempting to grow coffee . Like many other residents of Puerto Rico at the time , he resented the political injustices practiced by Spain on the island . This led him to become a believer in the cause of the Puerto Rican independence movement . 
 Brugman admired independence advocates Ramón Emeterio Betances and Segundo Ruiz Belvis . Together with his son , Hector , he joined them in a conspiracy to revolt against Spain and formed a revolutionary committee code named : " <unk> Prieto " ( a tree known as Spanish Elm , Ecuador Laurel , <unk> or <unk> and used for its wood to build ships , among other things ) . On September 23 , 1868 , Brugman and his son participated in the short @-@ lived revolt against Spanish rule known as El " Grito de Lares " ( English : Cry of Lares ) . Brugman and his son refused to surrender to the Spanish authorities and eventually were executed . 
 After the failed revolution , the Spanish Courts passed the " Acta de <unk> <unk> " ( Conditional Cult Act ) in 1870 . The law was an attempt to attract more settlers who would be faithful to the Spanish Crown by granting the right of religious freedom to all who wished to worship a religion other than Catholicism . Even so , the first synagogue was not established until after Puerto Rico was ceded by Spain to the United States at the end of the Spanish – American War in 1898 . In the late 1800s during the Spanish – American War many Jewish American servicemen gathered together with local Puerto Rican Jews at the Old Telegraph building in Ponce to hold religious services . 
 = = 20th century = = 
 = = = 1930s = = = 
 Jewish @-@ American soldiers were assigned to the military bases in Puerto Rico and many choose to stay and live on the island . Large numbers of Jewish immigrants began to arrive in Puerto Rico in the 1930s as refugees from Nazi occupied Europe . The majority settled in the island 's capital , San Juan , where in 1942 they established the first Jewish Community Center of Puerto Rico . 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 The President of the Puerto Rican Senate , Luis Muñoz Marín together with Governor Rexford Tugwell , the last non @-@ Puerto Rican Governor of Puerto Rico appointed by an American president , helped advance legislation geared towards agricultural reform , economic recovery and industrialization . This program became known as Operation Bootstrap . As a result of the program , many Jews migrated to the city of Ponce located in the southern region of the island and worked in the agricultural industry . Operation Bootstrap also attracted clothing manufactures from New York and many of the people in the industry who came to the island were Jews . 
 In 1942 , President Franklin D. Roosevelt appointed Aaron Cecil Snyder ( 1907 – 1959 ) , born in Baltimore , Maryland as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico . Snyder became the first Jew and the last non @-@ Puerto Rican appointed to that court . In 1953 , Governor Luis Muñoz Marín appointed him Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Puerto Rico , the first appointment that a Puerto Rican governor made to the court , addressing the nomination to " A. Cecilio Snyder " . Snyder actually used the name " Cecilio " when sworn in as Chief Justice . After his departure from the court , Snyder practiced law in San Juan until his death in 1959 . 
 = = = 1950s @-@ 1960s = = = 
 In 1952 , Puerto Rico achieved U.S. commonwealth status and officially became the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico ( Spanish : " Estado Libre <unk> de Puerto Rico " ) . That same year a handful of American Jews established the island 's first synagogue in the former residence of William <unk> , a wealthy Puerto Rican of German descent , which was designed and built by Czech architect Antonin <unk> . The synagogue , called Sha 'are Zedeck , hired its first rabbi in 1954 . 
 After the success of the Cuban Revolution , led by Fidel Castro in 1959 , almost all of Cuba 's 15 @,@ 000 Jews went into exile . The majority of them fled to Miami , Florida ; however , Puerto Rico also received a large influx of Jewish emigres from Cuba . 
 Abe Fortas , who was an associate judge for the United States Supreme Court , and the son of Orthodox Jews , was a friend of Luis Munoz Marin and frequented Puerto Rico often during Roosevelt 's , Kennedy 's , and Lyndon B. Johnson 's administrations . He participated in the drafting of the Constitution of Puerto Rico and gave Luis Munoz Marin and his administrators legal advice whenever called upon . According to Abe Fortas 's biographer Laura Kalman , " Puerto Rico engaged Fortas . It became the one cause to which he was unconditionally committed . " 
 = = Establishment of a Jewish community = = 
 Puerto Rico is home to the largest and wealthiest Jewish community in the Caribbean with almost 3 @,@ 000 Jewish inhabitants . Some Puerto Ricans have converted to Judaism , not only as individuals but as entire families . Puerto Rico is the only Caribbean island in which the Conservative , Reform and Orthodox Jewish movements are represented . Sha 'are Zedeck , established in 1953 , represents Conservative Judaism ; Beth Shalom , established in 1967 , represents Reform Judaism ; and Chabad Center , established in 1997 , represents Orthodox Judaism . 
 The Reform congregation utilizes the English and Hebrew languages in their teachings , while the Conservative congregation uses English , Hebrew and Spanish . On November 30 , 2005 , the Puerto Rican Jewish community established their first synagogue outside of the Metropolitan San Juan area . The synagogue , which is located in the City of Mayagüez in the island 's west coast , is called " Centro <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " . The Sha 'are Zedeck , which has been designated by the Puerto Rican government as a National Historic Monument . , and Reform congregations are located in San Juan and the Chabad Center is located in Isla Verde , in the city of Carolina . In the 1950s , the Puerto Rican musician Augusto Rodríguez , founder of the Choir of the University of Puerto Rico , founded the Hebrew Festival Chorus of San Juan 's Jewish Community . 
 = = Jewish influence in Puerto Rican and popular culture = = 
 The municipality of Yauco has a street with the word " <unk> " ( Jewish ) in it . It is the “ Calle Cuesta de los <unk> ” which in the English language means " Jewish Slope Street " 
 Puerto Rican Jews have made many contributions to the Puerto Rican way of life . Their contributions can be found , but are not limited to , the fields of education , commerce and entertainment . Among the many successful businesses which they have established are <unk> Pueblo ( Pueblo Supermarkets ) founded by George and Harold <unk> , <unk> Kress ( clothing store ) , founded by Jorge <unk> , Doral Bank , <unk> and Me Salve , founded by Israel Kopel . 
 They have also made an impact in Puerto Rico 's music industry . In 1970 , <unk> Leavitt organized a band with an original sound and style that became one of Puerto Rico 's greatest salsa orchestras , " La Selecta " . He selected the band 's repertoire from songs with a particular , positive social message and philosophy , and arranged his new band 's sound to be as raw and powerful as the typical all @-@ trombone salsa sound in vogue at the time . This genre was made popular by Willie Colón , but La Selecta featured the addition of trumpets to lighten up the sound melodically . Brenda K. Starr is a salsa singer who in 2002 won two Latin Grammy Awards , one for " Best Salsa Album " , for " Temptation " and the other in the category " Best Salsa Single " for " Por Ese Hombre " . In 2006 , the Billboard Latin Music Awards nominated her for a " Best Salsa Single " award for " Tu Eres " . 
 Puerto Rican literature has also been enriched with the works of <unk> Alegría <unk> who wrote the book for Broadway 's musical In the Heights . Her play , Elliot , a Soldier 's Fugue , was a Pulitzer Prize finalist in 2007 . ; author ( history based fiction writer ) the Ethiopian Yosef Alfredo Antonio Ben @-@ <unk> whose two better known works are " Black Man of the Nile " and " His Family and Africa : Mother of Major Western Religions " ; author and poet Aurora <unk> Morales with her work " Remedios : Stories of Earth and Iron from the History of <unk> " and <unk> <unk> , author of " Emily Goldberg Learns to Salsa " ; and author Stephen Earley Jordan II 's short story " The Jew of Condado " ( 2014 ) . In July 2003 , members and friends of Temple Beth Shalom published " What 's Cooking / Que se <unk> en Puerto Rico " , a Spanish / English cookbook which includes Jewish recipes and Jewish holidays . 
 Some American personages with Puerto Rican and Jewish roots are : Geraldo Rivera , Freddie Prinze , Jr . , David Blaine , Bruno Mars , Benjamin Agosto , Hila Levy , Ian Gomez , Leslie Kritzer , Julio Kaplan , Joaquin Phoenix , and Jenna Wolfe . 
 The American television sitcom " Welcome Back , Kotter " , which originally aired on the ABC network from September 9 , 1975 to June 8 , 1979 , had a character named Juan Epstein , played by Robert <unk> . According to script Epstein was a fiercely proud Puerto Rican Jew . In the 2008 film " Nothing Like the Holidays " , actor John Leguizamo plays the role of Mauricio Rodriguez , a Puerto Rican whose wife Sarah ( played by actress Debra Messing ) is of the Jewish faith . In one scene of the film , the family discusses the fact that there are many Jewish Puerto Ricans and that in San Juan there is a large Jewish community . 
 = = Resolution 1480 = = 
 On October 31 , 2005 , the Senate of Puerto Rico approved Senate Resolution 1480 , recognizing the contributions which the Jewish community has made to the way of life of Puerto Rico and the friendship which exists between the peoples of Puerto Rico and Israel . 
 = Evan Bayh presidential campaign , 2008 = 
 Democratic Senator and former Governor Evan Bayh of Indiana began a movement for the 2008 Democratic nomination for president of the United States shortly following the 2004 presidential election . 
 Although he was frequently mentioned as a possible challenger to frontrunner Hillary Clinton , Bayh stopped short of a full @-@ fledged candidacy , withdrawing from the race in December 2006 despite accumulating approximately $ 10 @.@ 4 million for the campaign . His withdrawal was tied to his public image , which characterized the candidate as " dependable " but " dull " . 
 Bayh spent a considerable amount of time campaigning throughout the early primary states ( particularly Iowa and New Hampshire ) for most of 2005 and 2006 . The staff from his All America Political Action Committee ( PAC ) worked as his campaign team . 
 Two weeks prior to his withdrawal , Bayh filed his organization with the Federal Elections Commission as an exploratory committee , under the header Friends of Evan Bayh . Following his exit from the race , Bayh endorsed and campaigned for Hillary Clinton for president , switching his support to Democratic nominee Barack Obama following Clinton 's withdrawal . He was a finalist to become Obama 's running mate , losing , in a close decision , to Delaware Senator Joe Biden . 
 = = Early stages = = 
 Following the re @-@ election of President George W. Bush and Bayh 's re @-@ election as a Senator from Indiana , Bayh considered the possibility of running for president in 2008 . Although Bush carried Bayh 's home state by 20 points , Bayh won 61 % of the vote , solidifying the Senator 's appeal to moderate and Republican voters . After serving four years as the chair of the Democratic Leadership Council , Bayh hoped to even further demonstrate his position as a moderate by helping to found the Third Way Political Action Committee in January 2005 . 
 As word increased of Bayh 's intentions , political scientists opined on the detractions of a run . Citing the fact that his eight years as governor may be nullified by its distance in time and that his visibility in the Senate was low , critics pondered whether moderate voters may be more inclined to line with possible candidate Mark Warner of Virginia . However , this criticism subsided once Warner decided against a run in October 2006 . 
 = = On the campaign trail = = 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 Bayh traveled to the first primary state of New Hampshire on July 10 , 2005 on his first campaign trip since the 2004 election . He held a " meet and greet " at Democratic headquarters in Manchester , and visited Concord the following day to meet with Governor John Lynch and environmental leaders . The next month he traveled to the first caucus state of Iowa , meeting with Congressman Leonard Boswell to discuss methamphetamine use . He also attended party fundraisers and met with activists during his three @-@ day stay . While in Des Moines , Bayh stated that Democrats must gain credibility on national security , and commented that he would begin a full @-@ fledged presidential campaign if he felt he had the means to win the Democratic nomination . Throughout the month , he visited Iowa and reflected similar rhetoric to the 2004 Kerry campaign , advocating energy independence , fair trade , lowering the federal deficit and an improved handling of the war in Iraq . He explained to reporters that his visits to Iowa were " the beginning of a longer conversation " . 
 The following month , Bayh decided to vote against the confirmation of John Roberts as Chief Justice of the Supreme Court . This move was judged by some political commentators as " posturing " for the 2008 race . Detractors stated that Bayh voted against the judge to appeal to the liberals of the party , as other possible candidates voted in a similar manner . The next month , Bayh attended the annual Jefferson @-@ Jackson dinner in New Hampshire . At the event he accused President Bush of dividing the nation and stated that he believed Democrats could win in red states ( traditional Republican states ) if they stood up for " American values " . 
 Bayh continued to campaign in Iowa and New Hampshire as November 2005 approached . Media outlets reported that 10 potential presidential candidates had visited Iowa in October . When asked about the attention given to the state 26 months prior to the caucus , Bayh replied that he " wish [ ed ] the process didn 't begin this early , but it does " . Later in the month , former chief counsel and master political strategist for Bayh , Federal District Judge David Hamilton ruled that prayer could not be conducted prior to the opening of the state legislature in Indiana , reasoning that the mention of " Jesus Christ " as " Savior " or " Son of God " is unconstitutional . Commentators argued that the decision diminished Bayh 's label as the " centrist candidate " for the Democratic nomination due to his connections to the judge . 
 It was revealed in December 2005 that Bayh had raised $ 1 @.@ 2 million in the first two quarters of 2005 , more than any other potential candidate with the exception of Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee . But the cash did not translate into high marks among possible voters as a CNN poll conducted December 9 – 11 found that Bayh had the support of only 1 % of self @-@ identified Democrats , placing him seventh among possible candidates . Later in the month , Bayh was criticized by the video game industry for political posturing in his quest along with Senator Hillary Clinton to crack down on explicit content in video games . The manufacturers claimed that the movements were simply attempts to increase his appeal to values voters for his presidential run . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 As 2006 began , Bayh had $ 9 @.@ 5 million on hand , $ 3 @.@ 1 million of which he raised the previous year . A large portion of his time in the first month was spent positioning himself . He took a hard @-@ line against the government of Iran , referring to leader Mahmoud Ahmadinejad as having a " radical , almost delusional nature , " and then criticized the Bush administration for " ignoring " the situation , stating that " diplomacy , economic sanctions , [ and ] other means " needed to be used . For balance , just as he had in the previous year , Bayh voted against the appointment of a George W. Bush Supreme Court nominee when he cast his " no " vote for Samuel Alito . However , his fellow potential Democratic presidential peers , voted in a similar fashion . Late in January , Bayh gained the position as speaker at the Jefferson @-@ Jackson dinner in North Carolina for the upcoming April . The gain came as a loss for North Carolinian John Edwards , who also was considered a potential candidate for the Democratic nomination . A Bayh spokesman , commented that the Senator was chosen because he " has a lot of ideas about how to fix Washington and make America better " . Prior to the event , in the beginning of February , Bayh made an appearance at the Congressional Black Caucus political action committee , spoke to the United Auto Workers conference , and made a trip back to Iowa for a plethora of events during the February 11 – 13 weekend . By the end of the month and into March , Bayh criticized the Bush administration from the right , attempting to appeal to all segments of the political spectrum by speaking out against the plan to sell American ports to United Arab Emirates companies . 
 March for Bayh began with reports that the potential candidate was one of the most conservative Democrats of the Senate . However , it was later revealed that he was the 19th most conservative Democrat during the 109th Congress , demonstrating a sharp trend to the left during his run . This came as the Senator made the keynote speech at the American Israel Public Affairs Committee , where according to a campaign aide , he " la [ id ] out a tough and smart approach to deal with Iran and Hamas " . While on a campaign stop in Manchester late in March , Bayh revealed to a New Hampshire crowd that he supported the continuation of the New Hampshire Primary as the first in the nation and that he would " do everything " he could " to keep it that way " . 
 Bayh headlined the Jefferson @-@ Jackson dinner for Michigan in the first week of April , and made rounds on political talk shows throughout the month . He weighed in on the immigration debate , stating that the government should come up with a solution " without rewarding [ and ] violating the law , to bring [ illegal immigrants ] out of the shadows " and to " impose fines , [ perform ] criminal background checks " while making sure the immigrants " pay back taxes [ and ] learn English . " He elaborated that it was in America 's " national security interest " to give the immigrants " some kind of regular status here . " Later in the month , he traveled to North Carolina to deliver the keynote address at the Jefferson @-@ Jackson dinner , just as he planned earlier in the year . 
 Bayh continued campaigning in Iowa during May , making appearances in Osceola , Council Bluffs , and Sioux City . But polls of Iowa in June showed that the candidate had only single digit support . In an attempt to improve his standing on the unpopular war in Iraq , Bayh along with many of his fellow potential Democratic presidential candidates , voted for a resolution that would set July 2007 as the deadline to remove American forces from the nation . At the end of the month , Bayh traveled to Slidell , Louisiana to view the damage brought about by Hurricane Katrina the previous year . Stating that he " just want [ ed ] to help , " Bayh became the first member of Congress outside of Louisiana to visit the site . On a larger scale , Bayh commented on the rebuilding of the area , conveying that it " is a test of America " . 
 While campaigning in Des Moines during the first week of July , Bayh commented that he would campaign for embattled Senator Joe Lieberman in his Connecticut primary fight against Ned Lamont if asked to do so , but stopped short of proclaiming support for the candidate if he lost the primary and decided to run as an Independent . As he completed his fifth trip to Iowa , party officials in the state remarked that he was " making inroads " in the state , commenting that " Democrats are looking for somebody who is new and fresh . " The candidate revealed his economic goals during a speech , stating " that creating opportunity for middle @-@ class Americans will be a centerpiece of my campaign . " He then listed his objectives including : tax credits to pay for college tuition of low to mid @-@ level income Americans , covering insurance costs of small businesses for its sickest employees , and incentives for saving and buying automobiles with " good gas mileage . " However , in order to pay for these proposals , Bayh stated that raising taxes would be " a decision worth making " . 
 In August , with $ 10 @.@ 4 million on hand , Bayh spread his staffers trained at " Camp Bayh " throughout the critical early primary and caucus states , sending 25 to Iowa , 15 to New Hampshire , three to Nevada , two to South Carolina , and leaving five to remain in Indiana . He returned to Iowa in mid @-@ August , with a packed schedule that included fundraisers and a news conference for the " Wake Up Wal @-@ Mart " organization . During the event , Bayh tried to appeal to populist voters stating that " Wal @-@ Mart has become emblematic of the anxiety around the country , and the middle class squeeze . " The next month , Bayh traveled to Iowa to speak to the United Auto Workers for a second time in 2006 . During a separate trip to New Hampshire later in the month , Bayh tried to appeal to anti @-@ war voters by remarking that the Iraq War was not a central part of the War on Terrorism and that it was " taking the focus away from Afghanistan and Iran " . 
 Following Mark Warner 's withdrawal from the race in October , Bayh looked to gain the most in the field of candidates . He immediately began to call former Warner supporters , hoping they would support his campaign . During a visit to New Albany , Indiana , the candidate called for the 9 / 11 Commission 's recommendations to be enacted . Later in the month , he made a stop in Nevada to discuss senior issues with Nevada 's gubernatorial candidate Dina Titus . 
 The Democratic takeover of Congress during the 2006 Mid @-@ term elections was a victory for Bayh , who had helped three Iowan congressional candidates win their races during campaigning , and whose efforts culminated in a Democratic majority in the state 's legislature . In regards to the election , he stated that " we ( the Democrats ) won by turning the red states of the heartland blue " . In mid @-@ November , the candidate traveled to the West Coast for a fundraising tour . Late in the month , polls revealed that Bayh had a 43 @.@ 3 % likability rating among the American public , slightly ahead of the last placed finisher John Kerry at 39 @.@ 6 % . 
 = = = Exploratory Committee = = = 
 On December 3 , 2006 , Bayh announced that he would form an exploratory committee in order for him to travel and raise funds more effectively for a presidential run . Upon this declaration , the candidate appeared on This Week , articulating that Americans " need someone who can deal with the dysfunction here in this city ( Washington D.C. ) so that our government begins to empower our people to fulfill their potential ... if I can be that individual , so be it . " His spokesman remarked that the committee would help " to put an infrastructure in place " for the campaign . Bayh immediately returned to the campaign trail following his announcement , traveling back to Iowa on December 4 with approximately $ 10 @.@ 6 million to continue spreading his message . The next weekend , Bayh visited New Hampshire to discuss his views on energy independence , global warming and the war in Iraq . But due to the two sold out appearances to the state by Barack Obama , who was recently named a potential candidate , Bayh 's trip did not garner much media attention . 
 = = = Withdrawal = = = 
 Two weeks following his announcement , Bayh withdrew from the race , citing that " the odds were longer than I felt I could responsibly pursue " . He further commented that a run would cause him to be " absent from the Senate ... instead of working to help the people of my state and the nation . " 
 = = Employees = = 
 The following individuals worked as advisors to Bayh as members of the All America PAC and at the candidate 's Senate office . Media consultant Anita Dunn was slated to be given a promotion and replaced as the Friends of Evan Bayh committee was formed , but the campaign 's brevity prevented any notable action . Dunn would go on to serve as President Barack Obama 's interim @-@ White House Communications Director , replaced by another Bayh campaign employee , Daniel Pfeiffer , who currently holds the post . 
 The campaign also featured Thurgood Marshall , Jr . , son of the late U.S. Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall , the first African @-@ American to serve on the court . Marshall , Jr . , previously worked in the Bill Clinton administration . 
 Senate Office 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Bayh was criticized throughout his campaign for being " boring " or " dull , " but media outlets also described the candidate as " folksy " and displaying a " Midwest charm , " that some compared to President Harry Truman . The Washington Post commented that he was " unexciting but very dependable and electable , " and that he would " have a great shot " if the Democratic Party was " feeling pragmatic " . The Wall Street Journal lauded the Senator as a " genuinely fiscally conservative Democrat . " His record as a governor and Senator were also portrayed as desirable assets . Pollster Frank Luntz summed up Bayh 's campaign , describing the Senator from the perspective of his audience : 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Nine months following his withdrawal , Bayh endorsed Senator Hillary Clinton , stating that he believed she would " run a campaign that is both tough and smart when it comes to protecting our nation 's security " . He campaigned with the former First Lady , sticking to her when the race tightened with the surging Senator Barack Obama . 
 After Obama secured the nomination , Bayh endorsed the Senator from Illinois and was mentioned as a possible running mate . He was included on the initial shortlist , which was then whittled down to four names : Bayh , Senator Joe Biden of Delaware , Governor Tim Kaine of Virginia and Governor Kathleen Sebelius of Kansas . On August 22 , the eve of Obama 's scheduled unveiling of his running mate , NBC News reported that Bayh and Kaine had been informed that they were not chosen . Obama opted instead for Biden . Obama 's campaign manager David Plouffe later wrote in his book The Audacity to Win , which was published in November 2009 , that Bayh had been a " coin toss " away from becoming Obama 's running mate . Plouffe and David Axelrod had interviewed the finalists and Plouffe said that Bayh 's answers were " substantively close to perfect , if cautiously so . " He recalled that at the time of the interview he thought to himself , " there 's no way this guy will color outside the lines ... Bayh 's up side and down side are probably the closest spread of the three " , compared to Biden , who could " reach higher heights but could cause us real pain . " As Obama approached a decision , he told Plouffe " it 's a coin toss now between Bayh and Biden , but Kaine is still a distinct possibility . " On August 17 , Obama told Axelrod simply , " I 've decided . It 's Biden . " 
 Bayh later appeared at the 2008 Democratic National Convention , delivering a speech in support of the Democratic nominee stating : " The time for change has come and Barack Obama is the change we need " . 
 = König @-@ class battleship = 
 The König class was a group of four battleships built for the German Kaiserliche Marine on the eve of World War I. The class was composed of König , Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and Kronprinz . The most powerful warships of the German High Seas Fleet at the outbreak of war in 1914 , the class operated as a unit throughout World War I — the V Division of the III Battle Squadron . The ships took part in a number of fleet operations during the war , including the Battle of Jutland , where they acted as the vanguard of the German line . They survived the war and were interned at Scapa Flow in November 1918 . All four ships were scuttled on 21 June 1919 when Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter ordered the sinking of the entire High Seas Fleet . 
 The Königs were an improvement over the preceding Kaiser class ; one of the primary changes being in the disposition of the main gun battery . The Kaiser @-@ class ships mounted ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 in ) SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets ; one turret was mounted fore , two aft in a superfiring arrangement , and the other two as wing turrets in a zig @-@ zag " echelon " configuration amidships . For the König class , the use of main @-@ gun wing turrets was abandoned . Instead , a second turret was moved forward and placed in a superfiring arrangement , and a single rear @-@ facing turret was mounted centerline amidships ; with a traverse allowing for broadsides but not forward @-@ fire . The two superfiring aft turrets remained . This allowed for a wider angle of fire on the broadside , as all 10 guns could fire on a large area . It did , however , reduce the ship 's forward @-@ fire capabilities ; from six guns with only limited traverse on the two wing turrets , to four guns with full traverse . 
 = = Design = = 
 The König @-@ class battleships were authorized under the Second Amendment to the Naval Law , which had been passed in 1908 as a response to the revolution in naval technology created with the launch of the British HMS Dreadnought in 1906 . Dreadnoughts were significantly larger — and correspondingly more expensive — than the old pre @-@ dreadnought battleships . As a result , the funds that had been appropriated for the Navy in 1906 were going to be used up before they were scheduled to be replenished in 1911 . Along with the additional funding secured in the 1908 bill , the service life of all large warships was to be reduced from 25 years to 20 years ; this was done in an effort to force the Reichstag to allocate more funds for additional ships . In his effort to force the Reichstag to pass the bill , Admiral Alfred von Tirpitz threatened to resign from his post as the State Secretary for the Navy . As a result of von Tirpitz 's ultimatum , the bill was passed in March 1908 by a large margin . 
 The reduction in service life necessitated the replacement of the coastal defense ships of the Siegfried and Oldenburg classes as well as the Brandenburg @-@ class battleships . In the terms of the First Amendment to the Naval Law of 1906 , von Tirpitz had requested but failed to secure funding for new battleships ; they had now been approved by the Reichstag . The Naval Law also increased the naval budget by an additional 1 billion marks . After the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads had been replaced by the four Nassaus , and the six Siegfried @-@ class ships had been replaced by the Helgoland and Kaiser classes , the next vessels to be replaced were the old Brandenburg @-@ class battleships . König and her three sisters were ordered under the provisional names S , Ersatz Kurfürst Friedrich Wilhelm , Ersatz Weissenburg , and Ersatz Brandenburg . 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The König @-@ class ships were 174 @.@ 7 m long at the waterline , and 175 @.@ 4 m long overall . With a beam of 29 @.@ 5 m , a forward draft of 9 @.@ 19 m and a rear draft of 9 @.@ 0 m , the Königs were designed to displace 25 @,@ 796 metric tons normally , but at full combat load , they displaced 28 @,@ 600 tons . The hulls were constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames , over which the outer hull plates were riveted . The ships ' hulls each contained 18 watertight compartments , each equipped with a double bottom that ran for 88 % of the length of the hull . 
 German naval historian Erich Gröner , in his book German Warships 1815 – 1945 , stated that the German navy considered the ships to be " very good sea @-@ boats . " They suffered a slight loss of speed in a swell , and with the rudder hard over , the ships lost up to 66 % speed and heeled over 8 degrees . The battleships had a transverse metacentric height of 2 @.@ 59 m . König , Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and Kronprinz each had a standard crew of 41 officers and 1095 enlisted men ; König , the flagship of the III Squadron , had an additional crew of 14 officers and another 68 sailors . The ships carried several smaller boats , including one picket boat , three barges , two launches , two yawls , and two dinghies . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 It was originally intended that the König @-@ class battleships would be powered by two sets of turbines on the outer shafts , while the center shaft would have utilized a MAN 6 @-@ cylinder 2 @-@ stroke diesel engine producing 12 @,@ 000 shp at 150 rpm . Development of the diesel was protracted , however , and it was later decided that the diesel would be installed only in Grosser Kurfürst and Markgraf . Ultimately , the diesel was never installed in any of the König @-@ class battleships . They were instead equipped with three sets of Parsons ( König and Kronprinz ) , AEG @-@ Vulcan ( Grosser Kurfürst ) , or Bergmann ( Markgraf ) turbines driving 3 @.@ 8 m @-@ wide three @-@ bladed screws . Steam was supplied by three oil @-@ fired and 12 coal @-@ fired Schulz @-@ Thornycroft boilers operating at up to 16 atmospheres of pressure . 
 The power plant was rated at 30 @,@ 576 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 801 kW ) . On trials , the ships produced between 40 @,@ 834 – 45 @,@ 568 shp ( 30 @,@ 450 – 33 @,@ 980 kW ) . The designed top speed was 21 knots ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) . The ships had a designed range of 8 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 15 @,@ 000 km ; 9 @,@ 200 mi ) at a cruising speed of 12 knots , which decreased to 4 @,@ 000 nautical miles at 18 knots . Maximum bunkerage was 3 @,@ 000 tons of coal and 600 tons of oil . Each ship had two rudders . Electrical power was supplied by four turbo @-@ generators and a pair of diesel generators ; total electrical output was 2 @,@ 040 kilowatts at 225 volts . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Königs were armed with a main battery of ten 30 @.@ 5 cm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) SK L / 50 guns in five twin turrets . Two turrets were mounted forward of the main superstructure in a superfiring pair , the third was placed on the centerline between the two funnels amidships , and the fourth and fifth turrets were also arranged in a superfiring pair , aft of the rear conning tower . Each gun turret had a working chamber beneath it that was connected to a revolving ammunition hoist leading down to the magazine below it . The turrets were electrically controlled , though the guns were elevated hydraulically . In an effort to reduce the possibility of a fire , everything in the turret was constructed of steel . The centerline arrangement was an improvement over the preceding Kaiser class , as all ten guns could fire on a wide arc on the broadside , and four guns could fire directly ahead , as opposed to only two on the Kaisers . The guns were supplied with 900 rounds , or 90 shells per gun . The 30 @.@ 5 cm gun had a rate of fire of between 2 – 3 405 @.@ 5 @-@ kilogram ( 894 @-@ pound ) armor @-@ piercing shells per minute , and was expected to fire 200 shells before replacement was necessary . The guns were also capable of firing 405 @.@ 9 kg ( 894 @.@ 8 lb ) high explosive shells . Both types of shells were loaded with two propellant charges : an RP C / 12 main charge in a brass cartridge that weighed 91 kg ( 201 lb ) and an RP C / 12 fore charge in a silk bag that weighed 34 @.@ 5 kg ( 76 lb ) . This provided a muzzle velocity of 855 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 805 ft / s ) . The turrets on the König @-@ class battleships initially allowed elevation up to 13 @.@ 5 degrees ; this enabled a maximum range of 16 @,@ 200 m ( 17 @,@ 700 yd ) . After modifications , elevation was increased to 16 degrees , which correspondingly increased the range of the guns to 20 @,@ 400 m ( 22 @,@ 300 yd ) . 
 Secondary armament consisted of fourteen 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , each mounted in MPL C / 06 @.@ 11 casemates in the side of the top deck . These guns were intended for defense against torpedo boats , and were supplied with a total of 2 @,@ 240 shells . These guns could engage targets out to 13 @,@ 500 m , and after improvements in 1915 , their range was extended to 16 @,@ 800 m . The guns had a sustained rate of fire of 5 to 7 rounds per minute . The shells were 45 @.@ 3 kg ( 99 @.@ 8 lb ) , and were loaded with a 13 @.@ 7 kg ( 31 @.@ 2 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge in a brass cartridge . This provided a muzzle velocity of 835 meters per second ( 2 @,@ 740 ft / s ) . Service life was estimated at approximately 1 @,@ 400 shells fired before the guns would need to be replaced . 
 The Königs also carried six 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 45 quick @-@ firing guns , mounted in casemates . The six guns were located on either side of the forward conning tower and were all directed forward . These guns were supplied with a total of 3 @,@ 200 rounds , or 200 shells per gun , and could fire at a rate of 15 shells per minute . The high @-@ explosive shells fired by these guns weighed 10 kg ( 22 @.@ 05 lb ) and were loaded with a 3 kg ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) RPC / 12 propellant charge . These guns had a life expectancy of around 7 @,@ 000 rounds . These were later removed and replaced with four 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns , which were mounted on either side of the rear conning tower . 
 As was customary for capital ships of the dreadnought era , the ships were armed with five 50 cm ( 20 in ) submerged torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow , the other four were placed on the broadside , two on each side of the ship . The tubes were supplied with 16 torpedoes . The torpedoes were the G7 type ; they were 7 @.@ 02 m ( 23 ft ) long and were armed with a 195 kg ( 430 lb ) explosive warhead . At 37 knots , the torpedoes had a range of 4 @,@ 000 m ( 4 @,@ 370 yd ) ; at 27 knots the range more than doubled , to 9 @,@ 300 m ( 10 @,@ 170 yards ) . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The König @-@ class ships were protected with Krupp cemented steel armor , as was the standard for German warships of the period . They had an armor belt that was 350 mm ( 14 in ) thick in the central citadel of the ship , where the most important parts of the ship were located . This included the ammunition magazines and the machinery spaces . The belt was reduced in less critical areas , to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) forward and 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) aft . The bow and stern were not protected by armor at all . A 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) -thick torpedo bulkhead ran the length of the hull , several meters behind the main belt . The main armored deck was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick in most places , though the thickness of the sections that covered the more important areas of the ship was increased to 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) . 
 The forward conning tower was protected with heavy armor : the sides were 300 mm ( 12 in ) thick and the roof was 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick . The rear conning tower was less well armored ; its sides were only 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) thick and the roof was covered with 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) of armor plate . The main battery gun turrets were also heavily armored : the turret sides were 300 mm thick and the roofs were 110 mm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) thick . The casemated 15 cm guns had 170 mm ( 6 @.@ 7 in ) worth of armor plating in the casemates ; the guns themselves had 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) -thick shields to protect their crews from shell splinters . 
 = = Construction = = 
 König , the name ship of the class , was built at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven , under construction number 33 . She was laid down in 1911 , was launched on 1 March 1913 , and was commissioned into the fleet on 9 August 1914 . Grosser Kurfürst was the second ship of the class . She was built at the AG Vulcan shipyard in Hamburg , under construction number 4 . She too was laid down in 1911 ; she was launched on 5 May 1913 , and was commissioned before König on 30 July 1914 . Markgraf was built at the AG Weser dockyard in Bremen , under construction number 186 . She was laid down in 1911 , launched on 4 June 1913 , and commissioned on 1 October 1914 , shortly after the outbreak of World War I. Kronprinz , the final ship of the class , was laid down at the Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel in 1912 . She was launched on 21 February 1914 and commissioned just under 9 months later on 8 November . 
 = = = Ships = = = 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby = = = 
 The first major operation of the war in which the König @-@ class ships participated was the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby on 15 – 16 December 1914 . The raid was primarily conducted by the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . The König @-@ class ships , along with the Nassau , Helgoland , and Kaiser classes , steamed in distant support of Franz von Hipper 's battlecruisers . Friedrich von Ingenohl , the commander of the High Seas Fleet , decided to take up station approximately in the center of the North Sea , about 130 miles east of Scarborough . 
 The Royal Navy , which had recently received the German code books captured from the beached cruiser Magdeburg , was aware that an operation was taking place , but uncertain as to where the Germans would strike . Therefore , the Admiralty ordered David Beatty 's 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , the six battleships of the 2nd Battle Squadron , and a number of cruisers and destroyers to attempt to intercept the German battlecruisers . However , Beatty 's task force nearly ran headlong into the entire High Seas Fleet . At 6 : 20 , Beatty 's destroyer screen came into contact with the German torpedo boat V155 . This began a confused two @-@ hour @-@ long battle between the British destroyers and the German cruiser and destroyer screen , frequently at very close range . At the time of the first encounter , the König @-@ class battleships were less than 10 miles away from the six British dreadnoughts ; this was well within firing range , but in the darkness , neither British nor German admiral were aware of the composition of their opponents ' fleets . Admiral Ingenohl , loathe to disobey the Kaiser 's order to not risk the battlefleet without his express approval , concluded that his forces were engaging the screen of the entire Grand Fleet , and so 10 minutes after the first contact , he ordered a turn to port to a south @-@ east course . Continued attacks delayed the turn , but by 6 : 42 , it had been carried out . For about 40 minutes , the two fleets were steaming on a parallel course . At 7 : 20 , Ingenohl ordered a further turn to port , which put his ships on a course for German waters . 
 = = = Bombardment of Yarmouth and Lowestoft = = = 
 The König @-@ class ships took part in another raid on the English coast , again as support for the German battlecruiser force in the I Scouting Group . The battlecruisers left the Jade Estuary at 10 : 55 on 24 April 1916 , and the rest of the High Seas Fleet followed at 13 : 40 . The battlecruiser Seydlitz struck a mine while en route to the target , and had to withdraw . The other battlecruisers bombarded the town of Lowestoft largely without incident , but during the approach to Yarmouth , they encountered the British cruisers of the Harwich Force . A short artillery duel ensued before the Harwich Force withdrew . Reports of British submarines in the area prompted the retreat of the I Scouting Group . At this point , Admiral Reinhard Scheer , who had been warned of the sortie of the Grand Fleet from its base in Scapa Flow , also withdrew to safer German waters . 
 = = = Battle of Jutland = = = 
 The four ships took part in the fleet sortie that resulted in the battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 . The operation again sought to draw out and isolate a portion of the Grand Fleet and destroy it before the main British fleet could retaliate . König , Grosser Kurfürst , Markgraf , and Kronprinz made up the V Division of the III Battle Squadron , and they were the vanguard of the fleet . The III Battle Squadron was the first of three battleship units ; directly astern were the Kaiser @-@ class battleships of the VI Division , III Battle Squadron . Astern of the Kaiser @-@ class ships were the Helgoland and Nassau classes of the II Battle Squadron ; in the rear guard were the elderly Deutschland class pre @-@ dreadnoughts of the I Battle Squadron . 
 Shortly before 16 : 00 CET , the battlecruisers of I Scouting Group encountered the British 1st Battlecruiser Squadron , under the command of David Beatty . The opposing ships began an artillery duel that saw the destruction of Indefatigable , shortly after 17 : 00 , and Queen Mary , less than a half an hour later . By this time , the German battlecruisers were steaming south in order to draw the British ships towards the main body of the High Seas Fleet . At 17 : 30 , König , the leading German battleship , spotted both the I Scouting Group and the 1st Battlecruiser Squadron approaching . The German battlecruisers were steaming down to starboard , while the British ships steamed to port . At 17 : 45 , Scheer ordered a two @-@ point turn to port to bring his ships closer to the British battlecruisers , and a minute later at 17 : 46 , the order to open fire was given . 
 König , Grosser Kurfürst , and Markgraf were the first to reach effective gunnery range ; they engaged the battlecruisers Lion , Princess Royal , and Tiger , respectively , at a range of 21 @,@ 000 yards . König 's first salvos fell short of her target , and so she shifted her fire to the nearest British ship , Tiger . Simultaneously , the leading König @-@ class battleships began firing on the destroyers Nestor and Nicator . The two destroyers closed in on the German line and , having endured a hail of gunfire , maneuvered into a good firing position . Each ship launched two torpedoes apiece at König and Grosser Kurfürst , though all four weapons missed . In return , a secondary battery shell from one of the battleships hit Nestor and wrecked her engine room . The ship , along with the destroyer Nomad , was crippled and lying directly in the path of the advancing German line . Both of the destroyers were sunk , but German torpedo boats stopped to pick up survivors . At around 18 : 00 , the four Königs shifted their fire to the approaching Queen Elizabeth @-@ class battleships of the V Battle Squadron , though the firing lasted only a short time before the range widened too far . 
 Shortly after 19 : 00 , the German cruiser Wiesbaden had become disabled by a shell from Invincible ; Rear Admiral Behncke in König attempted to maneuver his ships in order to cover the stricken cruiser . Simultaneously , the British III and IV Light Cruiser Squadrons began a torpedo attack on the German line ; while advancing to torpedo range , they smothered Wiesbaden with fire from their main guns . The Königs fired heavily on the British cruisers , but even sustained fire from the Germans ' main guns failed to drive off the British cruisers . In the ensuing melee , the British armored cruiser Defence was struck by several heavy @-@ caliber shells from the German dreadnoughts . One salvo penetrated the ship 's ammunition magazines and , in a massive explosion , destroyed the cruiser . 
 By the time the German fleet returned to the Jade estuary , the Nassau @-@ class battleships Nassau , Westfalen , and Posen and the Helgoland @-@ class battleships Helgoland and Thüringen took up guard duties in the outer roadstead . The Kaiser @-@ class battleships Kaiser , Kaiserin , and Prinzregent Luitpold , took up defensive positions outside the Wilhelmshaven locks . The four König @-@ class ships , along with other capital ships — those that were still in fighting condition — had their fuel and ammunition stocks replenished in the inner harbor . 
 = = = Fleet advance of 18 – 19 August = = = 
 During the fleet advance on 18 – 19 August , the I Scouting Group was to bombard the coastal town of Sunderland in an attempt to draw out and destroy Beatty 's battlecruisers . As Moltke and Von der Tann were the only two remaining German battlecruisers still in fighting condition in the Group , three dreadnoughts were assigned to the unit for the operation : Markgraf , Grosser Kurfürst , and the newly commissioned Bayern . Admiral Scheer and the rest of the High Seas Fleet , with 15 dreadnoughts of its own , would trail behind and provide cover . The British were aware of the German plans and sortied the Grand Fleet to meet them . By 14 : 35 , Scheer had been warned of the Grand Fleet 's approach and , unwilling to engage the whole of the Grand Fleet just 11 weeks after the decidedly close call at Jutland , turned his forces around and retreated to German ports . 
 = = = Operation Albion = = = 
 In early September 1917 , following the German conquest of the Russian port of Riga , the German navy decided to expunge the Russian naval forces that still held the Gulf of Riga . To this end , the Admiralstab ( the Navy High Command ) planned an operation to seize the Baltic islands of Ösel , particularly the Russian gun batteries on the Sworbe peninsula . On 18 September , the order was issued for a joint Army @-@ Navy operation to capture Ösel and Moon islands ; the primary naval component was to comprise the flagship , Moltke , along with the III Battle Squadron of the High Seas Fleet . The V Division included the four Königs , and was by this time augmented with the new battleship Bayern . The VI Division consisted of the five Kaiser @-@ class battleships . Along with nine light cruisers , three torpedo boat flotillas , and dozens of mine warfare ships , the entire force numbered some 300 ships , and were supported by over 100 aircraft and six zeppelins . The invasion force amounted to approximately 24 @,@ 600 officers and enlisted men . Opposing the Germans were the old Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts Slava and Tsesarevich , the armored cruisers Bayan , Admiral Makarov , and Diana , 26 destroyers , and several torpedo boats and gunboats . The garrison on Ösel numbered some 14 @,@ 000 men . 
 The operation began on 12 October , when Moltke , Bayern , and the Königs began firing on the Russian shore batteries at Tagga Bay . Simultaneously , the Kaisers engaged the batteries on the Sworbe peninsula ; the objective was to secure the channel between Moon and Dagö islands , which would block the only escape route of the Russian ships in the Gulf . Both Grosser Kurfürst and Bayern struck mines while maneuvering into their bombardment positions ; damage to the former was minimal , but Bayern was severely wounded ; the ship had to be withdrawn to Kiel for repairs . 
 On 16 October , it was decided to detach a portion of the invasion flotilla to clear the Russian naval forces in Moon Sound ; these included the two Russian pre @-@ dreadnoughts . To this end , König and Kronprinz , along with the cruisers Strassburg and Kolberg and a number of smaller vessels were sent to engage the Russian battleships . They arrived by the morning of 17 October , but a deep Russian minefield kept the ships temporarily at bay . A rude surprise came to the Germans , when they discovered that the 30 @.@ 5 cm guns of the Russian battleships out @-@ ranged their own 30 @.@ 5 cm guns . The Russian ships managed to keep the distance wide enough to prevent the German battleships from being able to return fire , while still firing effectively on the German ships — at several points the Germans had to take evasive maneuvers to avoid the Russian shells . However , by 10 : 00 , the minesweepers had cleared a path through the minefield , and König and Kronprinz dashed into the bay ; the two big dreadnoughts engaged the Russian battleships , König dueled with Slava and Kronprinz fired on both Slava and the cruiser Bayan . The Russian vessels were hit dozens of times , until at 10 : 30 the Russian naval commander , Admiral Bakhirev , ordered their withdrawal . Slava had taken too much damage , and was unable to make good her escape ; instead , she was scuttled and her crew was evacuated on a destroyer . 
 By 20 October , the naval operations were effectively over ; the Russian ships had been destroyed or forced to withdraw , and the German army held their objectives . However , on 29 October , Markgraf struck a mine during the German withdrawal from the Gulf of Riga . 
 = = = Fate = = = 
 Following the capitulation of Germany in November 1918 , the majority of the High Seas Fleet , under the command of Rear Admiral Ludwig von Reuter , was interned in the British naval base at Scapa Flow . The fleet remained in captivity during the negotiations that ultimately produced the Versailles Treaty . It became apparent to Reuter that the British intended to seize the German ships on 21 June , which was the deadline for Germany to have signed the peace treaty . Unaware that the deadline had been extended to the 23rd , Reuter ordered his ships be sunk . On the morning of 21 June , the British fleet left Scapa Flow to conduct training maneuvers ; at 11 : 20 Reuter transmitted the order to his ships . 
 Of the four ships , Kronprinz was the first to sink . She slipped beneath the waters of Scapa Flow at 13 : 15 . Grosser Kurfürst followed 15 minutes later at 13 : 30 . König sank at approximately 14 : 00 , but Markgraf did not sink until 16 : 45 ; she was one of the last capital ships to be successfully scuttled — only the battlecruiser Hindenburg sank afterwards , at 17 : 00 . Grosser Kurfürst was eventually raised , on 29 April 1938 . The ship was towed to Rosyth , where she was broken up for scrap metal . The other three ships remain on the sea floor , though the wrecks were sold to Britain in 1962 . 
 = New Model Army ( band ) = 
 New Model Army are an English post @-@ punk / alternative rock band formed in Bradford , West Yorkshire in 1980 by lead singer and main composer Justin Sullivan , bassist Stuart Morrow and drummer Phil Tompkins . Sullivan has been the only continuous member of the band , which has seen numerous line @-@ up changes in its 35 year history . Their music draws on influences across the musical spectrum , from punk and folk to soul , metal and classical . Sullivan ’ s lyrics , which range from directly political through to spiritual and personal , have always been considered as a key part of the band ’ s appeal . By the time they began making their first records in 1983 , Robert Heaton , a former drum technician for Hawkwind , had replaced Tompkins . 
 Whilst having their roots in punk rock , the band have always been difficult to categorise . In 1999 , when asked about this , Sullivan said " We 've been labelled as punks , post @-@ punks , Goth , metal , folk – the lot , but we 've always been beyond those style confines " . Following a large turnover of personnel , both permanent and as touring members , as of January 2016 New Model Army comprise Sullivan , Dean White ( keyboards and guitar ) , Michael Dean ( drums ) , Marshall Gill ( guitar ) and Ceri Monger ( bass ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation and Vengeance ( 1980 – 84 ) = = = 
 The band were formed in Bradford , West Yorkshire in the autumn of 1980 , taking their name from Thomas Fairfax 's English Revolution militia , and played their first concert in Bradford in October , playing songs based on their shared love of punk rock and Northern soul . Sullivan used the alter ego of " Slade the <unk> " until the mid @-@ 1980s , supposedly so that he would not lose his unemployment benefits if the authorities realized he was making money from music . They continued to gig around the United Kingdom with little recognition , but in 1983 released their first singles " Bittersweet " and " Great Expectations " on Abstract Records , and were given airplay by Radio 1 's John Peel . In February 1984 they were invited to play on popular music show " The Tube " , being introduced by presenter Muriel Gray as " the ugliest band in rock and roll " . The producers of the show however were concerned about the lyrics of " Vengeance " , which the band were due to perform ( " I believe in justice / I believe in vengeance / I believe in getting the bastards " ) and so the band played " Christian Militia " and " Great Expectations " . Following this performance , the band 's first mini @-@ album Vengeance reached Number 1 in the UK independent chart in early 1984 , pushing The Smiths from that position . After a further single " The Price " also reached a high placing in the independent charts , the band were signed by major label EMI . 
 = = = The major label years ( 1985 – 93 ) = = = 
 The band then made five studio albums ( plus a live album ) for EMI and one studio album for Epic , in a period of eight years . 1985 's No Rest for the Wicked and associated single " No Rest " both made the mainstream Top 30 in the UK , the latter leading to some controversy when the band sported t @-@ shirts with the phrase " Only Stupid Bastards Use Heroin " during an appearance on Top of the Pops . During the " No Rest " tour , Morrow left the band , and after some delay was replaced by 17 @-@ year @-@ old Jason " Moose " Harris . However the band were refused work permits to enter the United States , as the US Immigration Department had said the band 's work was of " no artistic merit " . 
 In December 1986 the band finally got permission to tour in the US . By this time The Ghost of Cain , produced by notable producer Glyn Johns , had been released , and was named best album of the year for 1986 in The Times by lead music writer David Sinclair , who said that it " was the best thing to happen to English rock music since the first Clash album " . Concerts included Reading Festival and a gig with David Bowie in front of the Reichstag in Berlin , and the band for the first time expanded their touring line @-@ up to include a second guitarist in the shape of Ricky Warwick , as well as harmonica player Mark Feltham from Nine Below Zero . 
 Thunder and Consolation was released in February 1989 , and saw the band moving towards a more folk @-@ rock sound , especially on the tracks including violinist Ed Alleyne @-@ Johnson . Described as the band 's " landmark " album , it reached <unk> in the UK charts , the singles " Stupid Questions " and " Vagabonds " made an impression in America and the band was able to tour the album there with Alleyne @-@ Johnson also providing additional guitar and keyboards . At the end of the year however , Harris left the band , to be replaced by Peter " Nelson " Nice , who would play with the band for more than 20 years . 1990 's <unk> , continued the folk @-@ driven theme with Alleyne @-@ Johnson still to the fore , and Adrian Portas joining the band on guitar . 
 The next album was to be a musical change of direction ; as Sullivan later said , " just as this folk @-@ cum @-@ rave @-@ cum @-@ crusty @-@ cum @-@ new @-@ age thing broke and became big in the early 1990s , we went – whoosh – done that – and went and made a very angry hard rock album " . The Love of Hopeless Causes , New Model Army 's only release on Epic Records , appeared in 1993 and led with the single " Here Comes the War " , which spawned controversy when it came packaged with instructions on how to construct a nuclear device . 
 = = = Hiatus and return to independence ( 1994 – 2000 ) = = = 
 The band had previously decided to take a year out to concentrate on personal and other musical issues , and reconvened in late 1994 with Dean White , playing keyboards and guitar , replacing Alleyne @-@ Johnson . It became clear , that all was not well between Sullivan and Heaton ; Sullivan later said " We wrote Thunder and Consolation and it was brilliant , but very shortly after that , we started falling out , which went on during the making of that album . His life went in one direction and mine went in another " . It was agreed that they would go their separate ways after the forthcoming album and tour . Strange Brotherhood was released in May 1998 to unsurprisingly mixed reviews , but then Heaton was diagnosed with a brain tumour . He suggested that his drum technician Michael Dean take over from him to tour the album . By this time the band had formed their own independent label , Attack Attack , and former tour manager Tommy Tee had returned to manage the band . A live album " ... & Nobody Else " followed in 1999 , and eighth studio album Eight in 2000 . 
 = = = Death of Robert Heaton , and Carnival to Today is a Good Day ( 2001 – 09 ) = = = 
 After touring Eight , the band again took time out , most notably so that Sullivan could concentrate on his solo album Navigating by the Stars which was eventually released in 2003 , and toured by Sullivan , Dean and White . As the band got together to record their ninth album , Robert Heaton died from pancreatic cancer on 4 November 2004 . Carnival was finally released in September 2005 , and includes Sullivan 's reaction to Heaton 's death , " Fireworks Night " . Dave Blomberg was unable to take part in touring the album , and was replaced by current guitarist Marshall Gill . 
 The band 's tenth studio album , High , was produced relatively quickly and was released in August 2007 . The tour suffered a slight setback when the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services again denied the band visas ; this time the issue was relatively quickly resolved and the dates rescheduled for early 2008 . Soon afterwards , the band was again shaken as manager Tommy Tee died unexpectedly at the age of 46 . By 2009 , though , the band were again back in the studio . Today Is a Good Day was a far more uncompromising album , the heavy rock title track and others directly referencing the stock market crash of 2008 . As the tour to promote the album came to an end , it was drawing close to 30 years since the band had started . 
 = = = 30th anniversary to present ( 2010 – ) = = = 
 Towards the end of 2010 , the band 's 30th anniversary was celebrated with special shows across four continents every weekend from September until early December ; in most cities , the shows were across two nights with completely different sets , the band having promised to play at least four songs from each of their eleven studio albums plus Lost Songs and B @-@ Sides and Abandoned Tracks , their rarities and B @-@ sides collections . The final shows at the Kentish Town Forum in London were collected on a double CD and DVD release containing all 58 songs played over the nights of 3 and 4 December . 
 After the band had played their traditional Christmas shows the following year , the news was released that Nelson had decided to leave the band for personal reasons , a decision that had been taken some time before . A few days later , on Christmas Eve , a fire destroyed the band 's studio and rehearsal space in Bradford . Numerous guitars and other instruments were lost along with recording equipment and memorabilia . However , the studio was back in operation within three months , and after a number of auditions , Ceri Monger was announced as the band 's new bassist and multi @-@ instrumentalist . 
 In 2013 , the band 's twelfth studio album , Between Dog and Wolf , produced by Joe Barresi , was released and became the band 's most successful since The Love of Hopeless Causes 20 years earlier . The album showed a marked shift away from the band 's traditional sounds , including rhythms that were described as " tribal " , though Sullivan claimed they were merely different ways of using drums – " We really like complex tom @-@ tom rhythms , we really like that pounding ( beat ) " . A year later , Between Wine and Blood was released , including six previously unreleased studio tracks from the Between Dog and Wolf sessions , along with eleven live tracks from that album . In October 2014 , a documentary feature film about the band 's career , Between Dog and Wolf : The New Model Army Story by director Matt Reid premiered at the Raindance Film Festival in London and the Festival du nouveau cinéma in Montreal . In April 2016 , the band announced that their 14th studio album , entitled Winter , would be released in late August . 
 = = = Timeline of major contributors = = = 
 This is a list of musicians who were ( or currently have been ) a permanent - not touring - member of the band for a significant amount of time . 
 = = " The Family " = = 
 Over the years , New Model Army have gathered a wide selection of fans , many of whom <unk> follow the band . Originally calling themselves " The Militia " , after the song " Christian Militia " , the term " The Family " was later universally adopted for what is a multi @-@ generational and gendered group . <unk> Denby , long @-@ time collaborator of Sullivan and the band 's main artist has referred to The Family as " not a formal , contrived organisation , but a spontaneous sense of fellowship that has developed over the years " , whilst elsewhere it has been described as " sanctuary ... and acceptance " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Vengeance ( 1984 ) 
 No Rest for the Wicked ( 1985 ) 
 The Ghost of Cain ( 1986 ) 
 Thunder and Consolation ( 1989 ) 
 <unk> ( 1990 ) 
 The Love of Hopeless Causes ( 1993 ) 
 Strange Brotherhood ( 1998 ) 
 Eight ( 2000 ) 
 Carnival ( 2005 ) 
 High ( 2007 ) 
 Today Is a Good Day ( 2009 ) 
 Between Dog and Wolf ( 2013 ) 
 Between Wine and Blood ( 2014 ) 
 Winter ( 2016 ) 
 = Sir Gawain and the Green Knight = 
 Sir Gawain and the Green Knight ( Middle English : Sir <unk> and þe Grene <unk> ) is a late 14th @-@ century Middle English chivalric romance . It is one of the best known Arthurian stories , with its plot combining two types of folklore motifs , the beheading game and the exchange of winnings . The Green Knight is interpreted by some as a representation of the Green Man of folklore and by others as an allusion to Christ . Written in stanzas of alliterative verse , each of which ends in a rhyming bob and wheel , it draws on Welsh , Irish and English stories , as well as the French chivalric tradition . It is an important poem in the romance genre , which typically involves a hero who goes on a quest which tests his prowess , and it remains popular to this day in modern English renderings from J. R. R. Tolkien , Simon Armitage and others , as well as through film and stage adaptations . 
 It describes how Sir Gawain , a knight of King Arthur 's Round Table , accepts a challenge from a mysterious " Green Knight " who challenges any knight to strike him with his axe if he will take a return blow in a year and a day . Gawain accepts and beheads him with his blow , at which the Green Knight stands up , picks up his head and reminds Gawain of the appointed time . In his struggles to keep his bargain Gawain demonstrates chivalry and loyalty until his honour is called into question by a test involving Lady Bertilak , the lady of the Green Knight 's castle . 
 The poem survives in a single manuscript , the Cotton Nero <unk> , which also includes three religious narrative poems : Pearl , Purity and Patience . All are thought to have been written by the same unknown author , dubbed the " Pearl Poet " or " Gawain Poet " , since all three are written in a North West Midland dialect of Middle English . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In Camelot on New Year 's Day , King Arthur 's court is exchanging gifts and waiting for the feasting to start when the king asks first to see or hear of an exciting adventure . At this a gigantic figure , entirely green in appearance and riding a green horse , rides unexpectedly into the hall . He wears no armour but bears an axe in one hand and a holly bough in the other . Refusing to fight anyone there on the grounds that they are all too weak to take him on , he insists he has come for a friendly " Christmas game " : someone is to strike him once with his axe on condition that the Green Knight may return the blow in a year and a day . The splendid axe will belong to whoever takes him on . Arthur himself is prepared to accept the challenge when it appears no other knight will dare , but Sir Gawain , youngest of Arthur 's knights and his nephew , begs for the honour instead . The giant bends and bares his neck before him and Gawain neatly beheads him in one stroke . However , the Green Knight neither falls nor falters , but instead reaches out , picks up his severed head and remounts , holding up his bleeding head to Queen Guinevere while its writhing lips remind Gawain that the two must meet again at the Green Chapel . He then rides away . Gawain and Arthur admire the axe , hang it up as a trophy and encourage Guinevere to treat the whole matter lightly . 
 As the date approaches , Sir Gawain sets off to find the Green Chapel and keep his side of the bargain . Many adventures and battles are alluded to ( but not described ) until Gawain comes across a splendid castle where he meets Bertilak de Hautdesert , the lord of the castle , and his beautiful wife , who are pleased to have such a renowned guest . Also present is an old and ugly lady , unnamed but treated with great honour by all . Gawain tells them of his New Year 's appointment at the Green Chapel and that he only has a few days remaining . Bertilak laughs , explains that the Green Chapel is less than two miles away and proposes that Gawain rest at the castle till then . Relieved and grateful , Gawain agrees . 
 Before going hunting the next day Bertilak proposes a bargain : he will give Gawain whatever he catches on the condition that Gawain give him whatever he might gain during the day . Gawain accepts . After Bertilak leaves , Lady Bertilak visits Gawain 's bedroom and behaves seductively , but despite her best efforts he yields nothing but a single kiss in his unwillingness to offend her . When Bertilak returns and gives Gawain the deer he has killed , his guest gives a kiss to Bertilak without divulging its source . The next day the lady comes again , Gawain again courteously foils her advances , and later that day there is a similar exchange of a hunted boar for two kisses . She comes once more on the third morning , this time offering Gawain a gold ring as a keepsake . He gently but steadfastly refuses but she pleads that he at least take her belt , a girdle of green and gold silk which , the lady assures him , is charmed and will keep him from all physical harm . Tempted , as he may otherwise die the next day , Gawain accepts it , and they exchange three kisses . That evening , Bertilak returns with a fox , which he exchanges with Gawain for the three kisses – but Gawain says nothing of the girdle . 
 The next day , Gawain leaves for the Green Chapel with the girdle wound twice around his waist . He finds the Green Knight sharpening an axe and , as promised , Gawain bends his bared neck to receive his blow . At the first swing Gawain flinches slightly and the Green Knight belittles him for it . Ashamed of himself , at the Green Knight 's next swing Gawain does not flinch ; but again the full force of the blow is withheld . The knight explains he was testing Gawain 's nerve . Angrily Gawain tells him to deliver his blow and so the knight does , causing only a slight wound on Gawain 's neck . The game is over . Gawain seizes his sword , helmet and shield , but the Green Knight , laughing , reveals himself to be the lord of the castle , Bertilak de Hautdesert , transformed by magic . He explains that the entire adventure was a trick of the ' elderly lady ' Gawain saw at the castle , who is actually the sorceress Morgan le Fay , Arthur 's sister , who intended to test Arthur 's knights and frighten Guinevere to death . Gawain is ashamed to have behaved deceitfully but the Green Knight laughs and professes him the most blameless knight in all the land . The two part on cordial terms . Gawain returns to Camelot wearing the girdle as a token of his failure to keep his promise . The Knights of the Round Table absolve him of blame and decide that henceforth that they will wear a green sash in recognition of Gawain 's adventure and as a reminder to be always honest . 
 = = " Pearl Poet " = = 
 Though the real name of " The Gawain Poet " ( or poets ) is unknown , some inferences about him or her can be drawn from an informed reading of his or her works . The manuscript of Gawain is known in academic circles as Cotton Nero <unk> , following a naming system used by one of its owners , Robert Cotton , a collector of Medieval English texts . Before the Gawain manuscript came into Cotton 's possession , it was in the library of Henry Savile of Bank in Yorkshire . Little is known about its previous ownership , and until 1824 , when the manuscript was introduced to the academic community in a second edition of Thomas Warton 's History edited by Richard Price , it was almost entirely unknown . Even then , the Gawain poem was not published in its entirety until 1839 . Now held in the British Library , it has been dated to the late 14th century , meaning the poet was a contemporary of Geoffrey Chaucer , author of The Canterbury Tales , though it is unlikely that they ever met . The three other works found in the same manuscript as Gawain ( commonly known as Pearl , Patience , and Purity or Cleanliness ) are often considered to be written by the same author . However , the manuscript containing these poems was transcribed by a copyist and not by the original poet . Although nothing explicitly suggests that all four poems are by the same poet , comparative analysis of dialect , verse form , and diction have pointed towards single authorship . 
 What is known today about the poet is largely general . As J. R. R. Tolkien and E. V. Gordon , after reviewing the text 's allusions , style , and themes , concluded in 1925 : 
 He was a man of serious and devout mind , though not without humour ; he had an interest in theology , and some knowledge of it , though an amateur knowledge perhaps , rather than a professional ; he had Latin and French and was well enough read in French books , both romantic and instructive ; but his home was in the West Midlands of England ; so much his language shows , and his metre , and his scenery . 
 The most commonly suggested candidate for authorship is John Massey of Cotton , Cheshire . He is known to have lived in the dialect region of the Pearl Poet and is thought to have written the poem St. Erkenwald , which some scholars argue bears stylistic similarities to Gawain . St. Erkenwald , however , has been dated by some scholars to a time outside the Gawain poet 's era . Thus , ascribing authorship to John Massey is still controversial and most critics consider the Gawain poet an unknown . 
 = = Verse form = = 
 The 2 @,@ 530 lines and 101 stanzas that make up Sir Gawain and the Green Knight are written in what linguists call the " <unk> Revival " style typical of the 14th century . Instead of focusing on a metrical syllabic count and rhyme , the alliterative form of this period usually relied on the agreement of a pair of stressed syllables at the beginning of the line and another pair at the end . Each line always includes a pause , called a caesura , at some point after the first two stresses , dividing it into two half @-@ lines . Although he largely follows the form of his day , the Gawain poet was somewhat freer with convention than his or her predecessors . The poet broke the alliterative lines into variable @-@ length groups and ended these nominal stanzas with a rhyming section of five lines known as the bob and wheel , in which the " bob " is a very short line , sometimes of only two syllables , followed by the " wheel , " longer lines with internal rhyme . 
 = = Similar stories = = 
 The earliest known story to feature a beheading game is the 8th @-@ century Middle Irish tale Bricriu 's Feast . This story parallels Gawain in that , like the Green Knight , Cú Chulainn 's antagonist feints three blows with the axe before letting his target depart without injury . A beheading exchange also appears in the late 12th @-@ century Life of Caradoc , a Middle French narrative embedded in the anonymous First Continuation of Chrétien de Troyes ' Perceval , the Story of the Grail . A notable difference in this story is that Caradoc 's challenger is his father in disguise , come to test his honour . Lancelot is given a beheading challenge in the early 13th @-@ century <unk> , in which a knight begs him to chop off his head or else put his own in jeopardy . Lancelot reluctantly cuts it off , agreeing to come to the same place in a year to put his head in the same danger . When Lancelot arrives , the people of the town celebrate and announce that they have finally found a true knight , because many others had failed this test of chivalry . 
 The stories The Girl with the Mule ( alternately titled The Mule Without a Bridle ) and Hunbaut feature Gawain in beheading game situations . In Hunbaut , Gawain cuts off a man 's head and , before he can replace it , removes the magic cloak keeping the man alive , thus killing him . Several stories tell of knights who struggle to stave off the advances of voluptuous women sent by their lords as a test ; these stories include Yder , the Lancelot @-@ Grail , Hunbaut , and The Knight of the Sword . The last two involve Gawain specifically . Usually the temptress is the daughter or wife of a lord to whom the knight owes respect , and the knight is tested to see whether or not he will remain chaste in trying circumstances . 
 In the first branch of the medieval Welsh collection of tales known as the Mabinogion , Pwyll exchanges places for a year with Arawn , the lord of Annwn ( the Otherworld ) . Despite having his appearance changed to resemble Arawn exactly , Pwyll does not have sexual relations with Arawn 's wife during this time , thus establishing a lasting friendship between the two men . This story may , then , provide a background Gawain 's attempts to resist to the wife of the Green Knight ; thus , the story of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight may be seen as a tale which combines elements of the Celtic beheading game and seduction test stories . Additionally , in both stories a year passes before the completion of the conclusion of the challenge or exchange is complete . Some scholars disagree with this interpretation , however , as Arawn seems to have accepted the notion that Pwyll may reciprocate with his wife , making it less of a " seduction test " per se , as seduction tests typically involve a Lord and Lady conspiring to seduce a knight , seemingly against the wishes of the Lord . 
 After the writing of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , several similar stories followed . The Greene Knight ( 15th – 17th century ) is a rhymed retelling of nearly the same tale . In it , the plot is simplified , motives are more fully explained , and some names are changed . Another story , The Turke and Gowin ( 15th century ) , begins with a Turk entering Arthur 's court and asking , " Is there any will , as a brother , To give a <unk> and take another ? " At the end of this poem the Turk , rather than buffeting Gawain back , asks the knight to cut off his head , which Gawain does . The Turk then praises Gawain and showers him with gifts . The Carle of Carlisle ( 17th century ) also resembles Gawain in a scene in which the Carle ( <unk> ) , a lord , takes Sir Gawain to a chamber where two swords are hanging and orders Gawain to cut off his head or suffer his own to be cut off . Gawain obliges and strikes , but the Carle rises , laughing and unharmed . Unlike the Gawain poem , no return blow is demanded or given . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Temptation and testing = = = 
 At the heart of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight is the test of Gawain 's adherence to the code of chivalry . The typical temptation fable of medieval literature presents a series of tribulations assembled as tests or " proofs " of moral virtue . The stories often describe several individuals ' failures after which the main character is tested . Success in the proofs will often bring immunity or good fortune . Gawain 's ability to pass the tests of his host are of utmost importance to his survival , though he does not know it . It is only by <unk> or " instinctive @-@ courtesy " that Sir Gawain is able to pass his test . There are also hints in the poem that it is really Bertilak who is testing Gawain . ( Fit 67 , Verse 12 ) ( David M. Wright . Memoria Press . <unk> ) 
 In addition to the laws of chivalry , Gawain must respect another set of laws concerning courtly love . The knight 's code of honour requires him to do whatever a damsel asks . Gawain must accept the girdle from the Lady , but he must also keep the promise he has made to his host that he will give whatever he gains that day . Gawain chooses to keep the girdle out of fear of death , thus breaking his promise to the host but honouring the lady . Upon learning that the Green Knight is actually his host ( Bertilak ) , he realises that although he has completed his quest , he has failed to be virtuous . This test demonstrates the conflict between honour and knightly duties . In breaking his promise , Gawain believes he has lost his honour and failed in his duties . 
 = = = Hunting and seduction = = = 
 Scholars have frequently noted the parallels between the three hunting scenes and the three seduction scenes in Gawain . They are generally agreed that the fox chase has significant parallels to the third seduction scene , in which Gawain accepts the girdle from Bertilak 's wife . Gawain , like the fox , fears for his life and is looking for a way to avoid death from the Green Knight 's axe . Like his counterpart , he resorts to trickery in order to save his skin . The fox uses tactics so unlike the first two animals , and so unexpectedly , that Bertilak has the hardest time hunting it . Similarly , Gawain finds the Lady 's advances in the third seduction scene more unpredictable and challenging to resist than her previous attempts . She changes her evasive language , typical of courtly love relationships , to a more assertive style . Her dress , relatively modest in earlier scenes , is suddenly voluptuous and revealing . 
 The <unk> and boar @-@ hunting scenes are less clearly connected , although scholars have attempted to link each animal to Gawain 's reactions in the parallel seduction scene . Attempts to connect the deer hunt with the first seduction scene have unearthed a few parallels . Deer hunts of the time , like courtship , had to be done according to established rules . Women often favoured suitors who hunted well and skinned their animals , sometimes even watching while a deer was cleaned . The sequence describing the deer hunt is relatively unspecific and nonviolent , with an air of relaxation and exhilaration . The first seduction scene follows in a similar vein , with no overt physical advances and no apparent danger ; the entire exchange is humorously portrayed . 
 The boar @-@ hunting scene is , in contrast , laden with detail . Boars were ( and are ) much more difficult to hunt than deer ; approaching one with only a sword was akin to challenging a knight to single combat . In the hunting sequence , the boar flees but is cornered before a ravine . He turns to face Bertilak with his back to the ravine , prepared to fight . Bertilak dismounts and in the ensuing fight kills the boar . He removes its head and displays it on a pike . In the seduction scene , Bertilak 's wife , like the boar , is more forward , insisting that Gawain has a romantic reputation and that he must not disappoint her . Gawain , however , is successful in parrying her attacks , saying that surely she knows more than he about love . Both the boar hunt and the seduction scene can be seen as depictions of a moral victory : both Gawain and Bertilak face struggles alone and emerge triumphant . 
 = = = Nature and chivalry = = = 
 Some argue that nature represents a chaotic , lawless order which is in direct confrontation with the civilisation of Camelot throughout Sir Gawain and the Green Knight . The green horse and rider that first invade Arthur ’ s peaceful halls are iconic representations of nature 's disturbance . Nature is presented throughout the poem as rough and indifferent , constantly threatening the order of men and courtly life . Nature invades and disrupts order in the major events of the narrative , both symbolically and through the inner nature of humanity . This element appears first with the disruption caused by the Green Knight , later when Gawain must fight off his natural lust for Bertilak ’ s wife , and again when Gawain breaks his vow to Bertilak by choosing to keep the green girdle , valuing survival over virtue . Represented by the sin @-@ stained girdle , nature is an underlying force , forever within man and keeping him imperfect ( in a chivalric sense ) . In this view , Gawain is part of a wider conflict between nature and chivalry , an examination of the ability of man 's order to overcome the chaos of nature . 
 Several critics have made exactly the opposite interpretation , reading the poem as a comic critique of the Christianity of the time , particularly as embodied in the Christian chivalry of Arthur 's court . In its zeal to extirpate all traces of paganism , Christianity had cut itself off from the sources of life in nature and the female . The green girdle represents all the pentangle lacks . The Arthurian enterprise is doomed unless it can acknowledge the unattainability of the ideals of the Round Table , and , for the sake of realism and wholeness , recognize and incorporate the pagan values represented by the Green Knight . 
 = = = Games = = = 
 The word gomen ( game ) is found 18 times in Gawain . Its similarity to the word <unk> ( man ) , which appears 21 times , has led some scholars to see men and games as centrally linked . Games at this time were seen as tests of worthiness , as when the Green Knight challenges the court 's right to its good name in a " Christmas game " . The " game " of exchanging gifts was common in Germanic cultures . If a man received a gift , he was obliged to provide the giver with a better gift or risk losing his honour , almost like an exchange of blows in a fight ( or in a " beheading game " ) . The poem revolves around two games : an exchange of beheading and an exchange of winnings . These appear at first to be unconnected . However , a victory in the first game will lead to a victory in the second . Elements of both games appear in other stories ; however , the linkage of outcomes is unique to Gawain . 
 = = = Times and seasons = = = 
 Times , dates , seasons , and cycles within Gawain are often noted by scholars because of their symbolic nature . The story starts on New Year 's Eve with a beheading and culminates on the next New Year 's Day . Gawain leaves Camelot on All Saints Day and arrives at Bertilak 's castle on Christmas Eve . Furthermore , the Green Knight tells Gawain to meet him at the Green Chapel in " a year and a day " — a period of time seen often in medieval literature . Some scholars interpret the yearly cycles , each beginning and ending in winter , as the poet 's attempt to convey the inevitable fall of all things good and noble in the world . Such a theme is strengthened by the image of Troy , a powerful nation once thought to be invincible which , according to the Aeneid , fell to the Greeks due to pride and ignorance . The Trojan connection shows itself in the presence of two virtually identical descriptions of Troy 's destruction . The poem 's first line reads : " Since the siege and the assault were ceased at Troy " and the final <unk> line ( before the bob and wheel ) is " After the siege and the assault were ceased at Troy " . 
 = = Symbolism = = 
 = = = Significance of the color green = = = 
 Given the varied and even contradictory interpretations of the color green , its precise meaning in the poem remains ambiguous . In English folklore and literature , green was traditionally used to symbolise nature and its associated attributes : fertility and rebirth . Stories of the medieval period also used it to allude to love and the base desires of man . Because of its connection with faeries and spirits in early English folklore , green also signified witchcraft , devilry and evil . It can also represent decay and toxicity . When combined with gold , as with the Green Knight and the girdle , green was often seen as representing youth 's passing . In Celtic mythology , green was associated with misfortune and death , and therefore avoided in clothing . The green girdle , originally worn for protection , became a symbol of shame and cowardice ; it is finally adopted as a symbol of honour by the knights of Camelot , signifying a transformation from good to evil and back again ; this displays both the spoiling and regenerative connotations of the color green . 
 = = = The Green Knight = = = 
 Scholars have puzzled over the Green Knight 's symbolism since the discovery of the poem . He could be a version of the Green Man , a mythological being connected with nature in medieval art , a Christian symbol , or the Devil himself . British medieval scholar C. S. Lewis said the character was " as vivid and concrete as any image in literature " and J. R. R. Tolkien said he was the " most difficult character " to interpret in Sir Gawain . His major role in Arthurian literature is that of a judge and tester of knights , thus he is at once terrifying , friendly , and mysterious . He appears in only two other poems : The Greene Knight and King Arthur and King Cornwall . Scholars have attempted to connect him to other mythical characters , such as Jack in the green of English tradition and to Al @-@ Khidr , but no definitive connection has yet been established . 
 However , there is a possibility , as Alice Buchanan has argued , that the colour green is erroneously attributed to the Green Knight due to the poet 's mistranslation or misunderstanding of the Irish word glas , which could either mean grey or green . In the Death of Curoi ( one of the Irish stories from Bricriu 's Feast ) , Curoi stands in for Bercilak , and is often called " the man of the grey mantle " . Though the words usually used for grey in the Death of Curoi are <unk> or <unk> , roughly meaning milk @-@ coloured and shadowy respectively , in later works featuring a green knight , the word glas is used and may have been the basis of misunderstanding . 
 = = = Girdle = = = 
 The girdle 's symbolic meaning , in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , has been construed in a variety of ways . Interpretations range from sexual in nature to spiritual . Those who argue for the sexual inference view the girdle as a " trophy " . However , it is not entirely clear who the " winner " is : Sir Gawain or Lady Bertilak . The girdle is given to Gawain by Lady Bertilak in order to keep him safe when he confronts the Green Knight . When Lord Bertilak returns home from his hunting trip , Gawain does not reveal the girdle to his host but , instead , hides it . This introduces the spiritual interpretation , that Gawain ’ s acceptance of the girdle is a sign of his faltering faith in God , at least in the face of death . To some , the Green Knight is Christ , who overcomes death , while Gawain is the Every Christian , who in his struggles to follow Christ faithfully , chooses the easier path . In Sir Gawain , the easier choice is the girdle , which promises what Gawain most desires . Faith in God , alternatively , requires one ’ s acceptance that what one most desires does not always coincide with what God has planned . It is arguably best to view the girdle not as an either – or situation , but as a complex , multi @-@ faceted symbol that acts to test Gawain in more ways than one . While Gawain is able to resist Bertilak ’ s wife ’ s sexual advances , he is unable to resist the powers of the girdle . Gawain is operating under the laws of chivalry which , evidently , have rules that can contradict each other . In the story of Sir Gawain , Gawain finds himself torn between doing what a damsel asks ( accepting the girdle ) and keeping his promise ( returning anything given to him while his host is away ) . 
 = = = Pentangle = = = 
 The pentangle on Gawain 's shield is seen by many critics as signifying Gawain 's perfection and power over evil . The poem contains the only representation of such a symbol on Gawain 's shield in the Gawain literature . What is more , the poet uses a total of 46 lines to describe the meaning of the pentangle ; no other symbol in the poem receives as much attention or is described in such detail . The poem describes the pentangle as a symbol of faithfulness and an " endless knot " . In line 625 , it is described as " a sign by Solomon " . Solomon , the third king of Israel , in the 10th century BC , was said to have the mark of the pentagram on his ring , which he received from the archangel Michael . The pentagram seal on this ring was said to give Solomon power over demons . 
 Along these lines , some academics link the Gawain pentangle to magical traditions . In Germany , the symbol was called a <unk> and was placed on household objects to keep out evil . The symbol was also associated with magical charms that , if recited or written on a weapon , would call forth magical forces . However , concrete evidence tying the magical pentagram to Gawain 's pentangle is scarce . 
 Gawain ’ s pentangle also symbolises the " phenomenon of physically endless objects signifying a temporally endless quality . " Many poets use the symbol of the circle to show infinity or endlessness , but Gawain ’ s poet insisted on using something more complex . In medieval number theory , the number five is considered a " circular number " , since it " reproduces itself in its last digit when raised to its powers " . Furthermore , it replicates itself geometrically ; that is , every pentangle has a smaller pentagon that allows a pentangle to be embedded in it and this " process may be repeated forever with decreasing <unk> " . Thus , by reproducing the number five , which in medieval number symbolism signified incorruptibility , Gawain 's pentangle represents his eternal incorruptibility . 
 = = = The Lady 's Ring = = = 
 Gawain 's refusal of the Lady Bertilak 's ring has major implications for the remainder of the story . While the modern student may tend to pay more attention to the girdle as the eminent object offered by the lady , readers in the time of Gawain would have noticed the significance of the offer of the ring as they believed that rings , and especially the embedded gems , had talismanic properties . This is especially true of the lady 's ring as scholars believe it to be a ruby or carbuncle , indicated when the Gawain @-@ Poet describes it as a " <unk> sunne " ( line 1819 ) , a " fiery sun . " Given the importance of magic rings in Arthurian romance , this remarkable ring would also have been believed to protect the wearer from harm . 
 = = = Numbers = = = 
 The poet highlights number symbolism to add symmetry and meaning to the poem . For example , three kisses are exchanged between Gawain and Bertilak 's wife ; Gawain is tempted by her on three separate days ; Bertilak goes hunting three times , and the Green Knight swings at Gawain three times with his axe . The number two also appears repeatedly , as in the two beheading scenes , two confession scenes , and two castles . The five points of the pentangle , the poet adds , represent Gawain 's virtues , for he is " faithful five ways and five times each " . The poet goes on to list the ways in which Gawain is virtuous : all five of his senses are without fault ; his five fingers never fail him , and he always remembers the five wounds of Christ , as well as the five joys of the Virgin Mary . The fifth five is Gawain himself , who embodies the five moral virtues of the code of chivalry : " friendship , generosity , chastity , courtesy , and piety " . All of these virtues reside , as the poet says , in the " Endless Knot " of the pentangle , which forever <unk> and is never broken . This intimate relationship between symbol and faith allows for rigorous allegorical interpretation , especially in the physical role that the shield plays in Gawain 's quest . Thus , the poet makes Gawain the epitome of perfection in knighthood through number symbolism . 
 The number five is also found in the structure of the poem itself . Sir Gawain is 101 stanzas long , traditionally organised into four ' Fits ' of 21 , 24 , 34 , and 22 stanzas . These divisions , however , have since been disputed ; scholars have begun to believe that they are the work of the copyist and not of the poet . The original manuscript features a series of capital letters added after the fact by another scribe , and some scholars argue that these additions were an attempt to restore the original divisions . These letters divide the manuscript into nine parts . The first and last parts are 22 stanzas long . The second and second @-@ to @-@ last parts are only one stanza long , and the middle five parts are eleven stanzas long . The number eleven is associated with transgression in other medieval literature ( being one more than ten , a number associated with the Ten Commandments ) . Thus , this set of five elevens ( 55 stanzas ) creates the perfect mix of transgression and incorruption , suggesting that Gawain is faultless in his faults . 
 = = = Wounds = = = 
 At the story 's climax , Gawain is wounded superficially in the neck by the Green Knight 's axe . During the medieval period , the body and the soul were believed to be so intimately connected that wounds were considered an outward sign of inward sin . The neck , specifically , was believed to correlate with the part of the soul related to will , connecting the reasoning part ( the head ) and the courageous part ( the heart ) . Gawain 's sin resulted from using his will to separate reasoning from courage . By accepting the girdle from the lady , he employs reason to do something less than courageous — evade death in a dishonest way . Gawain 's wound is thus an outward sign of an internal wound . The Green Knight 's series of tests shows Gawain the weakness that has been in him all along : the desire to use his will <unk> for personal gain , rather than submitting his will in humility to God . The Green Knight , by engaging with the greatest knight of Camelot , also reveals the moral weakness of pride in all of Camelot , and therefore all of humanity . However , the wounds of Christ , believed to offer healing to wounded souls and bodies , are mentioned throughout the poem in the hope that this sin of prideful " <unk> " will be healed among fallen mortals . 
 = = Interpretations = = 
 = = = Gawain as medieval romance = = = 
 Many critics argue that Sir Gawain and the Green Knight should be viewed , above all , as a romance . Medieval romances typically recount the marvellous adventures of a chivalrous , heroic knight , often of super @-@ human ability , who abides by chivalry 's strict codes of honour and demeanour , embarks upon a quest and defeats monsters , thereby winning the favour of a lady . Thus , medieval romances focus not on love and sentiment ( as the term " romance " implies today ) , but on adventure . 
 Gawain 's function , as medieval scholar Alan Markman says , " is the function of the romance hero … to stand as the champion of the human race , and by submitting to strange and severe tests , to demonstrate human capabilities for good or bad action . " Through Gawain 's adventure , it becomes clear that he is merely human . The reader becomes attached to this human view in the midst of the poem 's romanticism , relating to Gawain 's humanity while respecting his knightly qualities . Gawain " shows us what moral conduct is . We shall probably not equal his behaviour , but we admire him for pointing out the way . " 
 In viewing the poem as a chivalric romance , many scholars see it as intertwining chivalric and courtly love laws under the English Order of the Garter . The group 's motto , ' <unk> soit qui mal y pense ' , or " Shamed be he who finds evil here , " is written at the end of the poem . Some critics describe Gawain 's peers wearing girdles of their own as evidence of the origin of the Order of the Garter . However , in the parallel poem The Greene Knight , the lace is white , not green , and is considered the origin of the collar worn by the knights of the Bath , not the Order of the Garter . The motto on the poem was probably written by a copyist and not by the original author . Still , the connection made by the copyist to the Order is not extraordinary . 
 = = = Christian interpretations = = = 
 The poem is in many ways deeply Christian , with frequent references to the fall of Adam and Eve and to Jesus Christ . Scholars have debated the depth of the Christian elements within the poem by looking at it in the context of the age in which it was written , coming up with varying views as to what represents a Christian element of the poem and what does not . For example , some critics compare Sir Gawain to the other three poems of the Gawain manuscript . Each has a heavily Christian theme , causing scholars to interpret Gawain similarly . Comparing it to the poem Cleanness ( also known as Purity ) , for example , they see it as a story of the apocalyptic fall of a civilisation , in Gawain 's case , Camelot . In this interpretation , Sir Gawain is like Noah , separated from his society and warned by the Green Knight ( who is seen as God 's representative ) of the coming doom of Camelot . Gawain , judged worthy through his test , is spared the doom of the rest of Camelot . King Arthur and his knights , however , misunderstand Gawain 's experience and wear garters themselves . In Cleanness the men who are saved are similarly helpless in warning their society of impending destruction . 
 One of the key points stressed in this interpretation is that salvation is an individual experience difficult to communicate to outsiders . In his depiction of Camelot , the poet reveals a concern for his society , whose inevitable fall will bring about the ultimate destruction intended by God . Gawain was written around the time of the Black Death and Peasants ' Revolt , events which convinced many people that their world was coming to an apocalyptic end and this belief was reflected in literature and culture . However , other critics see weaknesses in this view , since the Green Knight is ultimately under the control of Morgan le Fay , usually viewed as a figure of evil in Camelot tales . This makes the knight 's presence as a representative of God problematic . 
 While the character of the Green Knight is usually not viewed as a representation of Christ in Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , critics do acknowledge a parallel . Lawrence <unk> , a specialist in medieval literature , explains that " the Green Knight is not a figurative representative of Christ . But the idea of Christ 's divine / human nature provides a medieval conceptual framework that supports the poet 's serious / comic account of the Green Knight 's supernatural / human qualities and actions . " This duality exemplifies the influence and importance of Christian teachings and views of Christ in the era of the Gawain Poet . 
 Furthermore , critics note the Christian reference to Christ 's crown of thorns at the conclusion of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight . After Gawain returns to Camelot and tells his story regarding the newly acquired green sash , the poem concludes with a brief prayer and a reference to " the thorn @-@ crowned God " . <unk> theorises that " with these final words the poet redirects our attention from the circular girdle @-@ turned @-@ sash ( a double image of Gawain 's " <unk> / <unk> " ) to the circular Crown of Thorns ( a double image of Christ 's humiliation turned triumph ) . " 
 Throughout the poem , Gawain encounters numerous trials testing his devotion and faith in Christianity . When Gawain sets out on his journey to find the Green Chapel , he finds himself lost , and only after praying to the Virgin Mary does he find his way . As he continues his journey , Gawain once again faces anguish regarding his inevitable encounter with the Green Knight . Instead of praying to Mary , as before , Gawain places his faith in the girdle given to him by Bertilak 's wife . From the Christian perspective , this leads to disastrous and embarrassing consequences for Gawain as he is forced to reevaluate his faith when the Green Knight points out his betrayal . Another interpretation sees the work in terms of the perfection of virtue , with the pentangle representing the moral perfection of the connected virtues , the Green Knight as Christ exhibiting perfect fortitude , and Gawain as slightly imperfect in fortitude by virtue of flinching when under the threat of death . 
 An analogy is also made between Gawain 's trial and the Biblical test that Adam encounters in the Garden of Eden . Adam succumbs to Eve just as Gawain surrenders to Bertilak 's wife by accepting the girdle . Although Gawain sins by putting his faith in the girdle and not confessing when he is caught , the Green Knight pardons him , thereby allowing him to become a better Christian by learning from his mistakes . Through the various games played and hardships endured , Gawain finds his place within the Christian world . 
 = = = Feminist interpretations = = = 
 Feminist literary critics see the poem as portraying women 's ultimate power over men . Morgan le Fay and Bertilak 's wife , for example , are the most powerful characters in the poem — Morgan especially , as she begins the game by enchanting the Green Knight . The girdle and Gawain 's scar can be seen as symbols of feminine power , each of them diminishing Gawain 's masculinity . Gawain 's misogynist passage , in which he blames all of his troubles on women and lists the many men who have fallen prey to women 's wiles , further supports the feminist view of ultimate female power in the poem . 
 In contrast , others argue that the poem focuses mostly on the opinions , actions , and abilities of men . For example , on the surface , it appears that Bertilak 's wife is a strong leading character . By adopting the masculine role , she appears to be an empowered individual , particularly in the bedroom scene . This is not entirely the case , however . While the Lady is being forward and outgoing , Gawain 's feelings and emotions are the focus of the story , and Gawain stands to gain or lose the most . The Lady " makes the first move " , so to speak , but Gawain ultimately decides what is to become of those actions . He , therefore , is in charge of the situation and even the relationship . 
 In the bedroom scene , both the negative and positive actions of the Lady are motivated by her desire . Her feelings cause her to step out of the typical female role and into that of the male , thus becoming more empowered . At the same time , those same actions make the Lady appear adulterous ; some scholars compare her with Eve in the Bible . By forcing Gawain to take her girdle , i.e. the apple , the pact made with Bertilak — and therefore the Green Knight — is broken . In this sense , it is clear that at the hands of the Lady , Gawain is a " good man seduced " . 
 = = = Postcolonial interpretations = = = 
 From 1350 to 1400 — the period in which the poem is thought to have been written — Wales experienced several raids at the hands of the English , who were attempting to colonise the area . The Gawain poet uses a North West Midlands dialect common on the Welsh – English border , potentially placing him in the midst of this conflict . Patricia Clare Ingham is credited with first viewing the poem through the lens of postcolonialism , and since then a great deal of dispute has emerged over the extent to which colonial differences play a role in the poem . Most critics agree that gender plays a role , but differ about whether gender supports the colonial ideals or replaces them as English and Welsh cultures interact in the poem . 
 A large amount of critical debate also surrounds the poem as it relates to the bi @-@ cultural political landscape of the time . Some argue that Bertilak is an example of the hybrid Anglo @-@ Welsh culture found on the Welsh – English border . They therefore view the poem as a reflection of a hybrid culture that plays strong cultures off one another to create a new set of cultural rules and traditions . Other scholars , however , argue that historically much Welsh blood was shed well into the 14th century , creating a situation far removed from the more friendly hybridisation suggested by Ingham . To support this argument further , it is suggested that the poem creates an " us versus them " scenario contrasting the knowledgeable civilised English with the uncivilised borderlands that are home to Bertilak and the other monsters that Gawain encounters . 
 In contrast to this perception of the colonial lands , others argue that the land of Hautdesert , Bertilak ’ s territory , has been misrepresented or ignored in modern criticism . They suggest that it is a land with its own moral agency , one that plays a central role in the story . Bonnie Lander , for example , argues that the denizens of Hautdesert are " intelligently immoral " , choosing to follow certain codes and rejecting others , a position which creates a " distinction … of moral insight versus moral faith " . Lander thinks that the border dwellers are more sophisticated because they do not unthinkingly embrace the chivalric codes but challenge them in a philosophical , and — in the case of Bertilak 's appearance at Arthur ’ s court — literal sense . Lander ’ s argument about the superiority of the denizens of Hautdesert hinges on the lack of self @-@ awareness present in Camelot , which leads to an unthinking populace that frowns on individualism . In this view , it is not Bertilak and his people , but Arthur and his court , who are the monsters . 
 = = = Gawain 's journey = = = 
 Several scholars have attempted to find a real @-@ world correspondence for Gawain 's journey to the Green Chapel . The Anglesey islands , for example , are mentioned in the poem . They exist today as a single island off the coast of Wales . In line 700 , Gawain is said to pass the " Holy Head " , believed by many scholars to be either Holywell or the Cistercian abbey of Poulton in Pulford . Holywell is associated with the beheading of Saint Winifred . As the story goes , Winifred was a virgin who was beheaded by a local leader after she refused his sexual advances . Her uncle , another saint , put her head back in place and healed the wound , leaving only a white scar . The parallels between this story and Gawain 's make this area a likely candidate for the journey . 
 Gawain 's trek leads him directly into the centre of the Pearl Poet 's dialect region , where the candidates for the locations of the Castle at Hautdesert and the Green Chapel stand . Hautdesert is thought to be in the area of Swythamley in northwest Midland , as it lies in the writer 's dialect area and matches the topographical features described in the poem . The area is also known to have housed all of the animals hunted by Bertilak ( deer , boar , fox ) in the 14th century . The Green Chapel is thought to be in either Lud 's Church or Wetton Mill , as these areas closely match the descriptions given by the author . Ralph Elliott located the chapel ( " two myle henne " <unk> ) from the old manor house at Swythamley Park at the bottom of a valley ( " <unk> of the <unk> <unk> " <unk> ) on a hillside ( " <unk> a <unk> on the <unk> , on thi <unk> <unk> " <unk> ) in an enormous fissure ( " an olde <unk> , / or a <unk> of an olde <unk> " <unk> @-@ 83 ) . 
 = = = <unk> interpretations = = = 
 According to medieval scholar Richard Zeikowitz , the Green Knight represents a threat to homosocial friendship in his medieval world . Zeikowitz argues that the narrator of the poem seems entranced by the Knight 's beauty , <unk> him in poetic form . The Green Knight 's attractiveness challenges the homosocial rules of King Arthur 's court and poses a threat to their way of life . Zeikowitz also states that Gawain seems to find Bertilak as attractive as the narrator finds the Green Knight . Bertilak , however , follows the homosocial code and develops a friendship with Gawain . Gawain 's embracing and kissing Bertilak in several scenes thus represents not a homosexual but a homosocial expression . Men of the time often embraced and kissed and this was acceptable under the chivalric code . Nonetheless , the Green Knight blurs the lines between homosociality and homosexuality , representing the difficulty medieval writers sometimes had in separating the two . 
 Carolyn Dinshaw argues that the poem may have been a response to accusations that Richard II had a male lover — an attempt to reestablish the idea that heterosexuality was the Christian norm . Around the time the poem was written , the Catholic Church was beginning to express concerns about kissing between males . Many religious figures were trying to make the distinction between strong trust and friendship between males and homosexuality . Still , the Pearl Poet seems to have been simultaneously entranced and repulsed by homosexual desire . In his other poem Cleanness , he points out several grievous sins , but spends lengthy passages describing them in minute detail . His obsession seems to carry into Gawain in his descriptions of the Green Knight . 
 Beyond this , Dinshaw proposes that Gawain can be read as a woman @-@ like figure . He is the passive one in the advances of Lady Bertilak , as well as in his encounters with Lord Bertilak , where he acts the part of a woman in kissing the man . However , while the poem does have homosexual elements , these elements are brought up by the poet in order to establish heterosexuality as the normal lifestyle of Gawain 's world . The poem does this by making the kisses between Lady Bertilak and Gawain sexual in nature , but rendering the kisses between Gawain and Lord Bertilak " unintelligible " to the medieval reader . In other words , the poet portrays kisses between a man and a woman as having the possibility of leading to sex , while in a heterosexual world kisses between a man and a man are portrayed as having no such possibility . 
 = = Modern adaptations = = 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Though the surviving manuscript dates from the fourteenth century , the first published version of the poem did not appear until as late as 1839 , when Sir Frederic Madden of the British Museum recognized the poem as worth reading . Madden 's scholarly , Middle English edition of the poem was followed in 1898 by the first Modern English translation – a prose version by literary scholar Jessie L. Weston . In 1925 , J.R.R. Tolkien and E.V. Gordon published a scholarly edition of the Middle English text of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight ; a revised edition of this text was prepared by Norman Davis and published in 1967 . The book , featuring a text in Middle English with extensive scholarly notes , is frequently confused with the translation into Modern English that Tolkien prepared , along with translations of Pearl and Sir Orfeo , late in his life . Many editions of the latter work , first published in 1975 , shortly after his death , list Tolkien on the cover as author rather than translator . 
 For students , especially undergraduate students , the text is usually given in translation . Notable translators include Jessie Weston , whose 1898 prose translation and 1907 poetic translation took many liberties with the original ; Theodore Banks , whose 1929 translation was praised for its adaptation of the language to modern usage ; and Marie <unk> , whose imitative translation was first published in 1967 and " entered the academic canon " in 1968 , in the second edition of the Norton Anthology of English Literature . In 2010 , her ( slightly revised ) translation was published as a Norton Critical Edition , with a foreword by Laura Howes . In 2007 , Simon Armitage , who grew up near the Gawain poet 's purported residence , published a translation which attracted attention in the US and the United Kingdom , and was published in the United States by Norton , which replaced <unk> 's translation with Armitage 's for the ninth edition of the Norton Anthology of English Literature . Other modern translations include those by Larry Benson , Brian Stone , James <unk> , Helen Cooper , W. S. Merwin , Jacob Rosenberg , William <unk> , Joseph Glaser , Bernard O 'Donoghue , John Gardner , and Francis <unk> . 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 The poem has been adapted to film twice , on both occasions by writer @-@ director Stephen Weeks : first as Gawain and the Green Knight in 1973 and again in 1984 as Sword of the Valiant : The Legend of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight , featuring Miles O 'Keeffe as Gawain and Sean Connery as the Green Knight . Both films have been criticised for deviating from the plot . Gawain , for example , has an adventure in the 1973 version which is not a part of the poem between the time he leaves Camelot and the time he arrives at Bertilak 's castle , in which he travels through New Earth to find his parents . Also , Bertilak and the Green Knight are never connected . French / Australian director Martin Beilby directed a short ( 30 ' ) film adaptation in 2014 . There have been at least two television adaptations , Gawain and the Green Knight in 1991 and the animated Sir Gawain and the Green Knight in 2002 . The BBC broadcast a documentary presented by Simon Armitage in which the journey depicted in the poem is traced , utilising what are believed to be the actual locations . 
 = = = Theatre = = = 
 The Tyneside Theatre company presented a stage version of Sir Gawain and the Green Knight at the University Theatre , Newcastle at Christmas 1971 . It was directed by Michael Bogdanov and adapted for the stage from the translation by Brian Stone . The music and lyrics were composed by Iwan Williams using medieval carols , such as the Boar 's Head Carol , as inspiration and folk instruments such as the Northumbrian pipes , whistles and <unk> to create a " rough " feel . Stone had referred Bogdanov to Cuchulain and the <unk> Game , a sequence which is contained in The <unk> Sword dance . Bogdanov found the pentangle theme to be contained in most sword dances , and so incorporated a long sword dance while Gawain lay tossing uneasily before getting up to go to the Green Chapel . The dancers made the knot of the pentangle around his <unk> head with their swords . The interlacing of the hunting and wooing scenes was achieved by frequent cutting of the action from hunt to bed @-@ chamber and back again , while the locale of both remained on @-@ stage . 
 In 1992 Simon <unk> created an adaptation with medieval songs and music for The <unk> Actors ' Company. performed as walkabout productions in the summer 1992 at <unk> Common and Beeston Castle and in August 1995 at <unk> Rocks , North Yorkshire . <unk> later wrote a substantially revised version which was produced indoors at the O 'Reilly Theatre , Oxford in February 2014 . 
 = = = Opera = = = 
 Sir Gawain and the Green Knight was first adapted as an opera in 1978 by the composer Richard Blackford on commission from the village of <unk> , Oxfordshire . The libretto was written for the adaptation by the children 's novelist John Emlyn Edwards . The " Opera in Six Scenes " was subsequently recorded by Decca between March and June 1979 and released on the Argo label in November 1979 . 
 Sir Gawain and the Green Knight was adapted into an opera called Gawain by Harrison Birtwistle , first performed in 1991 . Birtwistle 's opera was praised for maintaining the complexity of the poem while translating it into lyric , musical form . Another operatic adaptation is Lynne Plowman 's Gwyneth and the Green Knight , first performed in 2002 . This opera uses Sir Gawain as the backdrop but refocuses the story on Gawain 's female squire , Gwyneth , who is trying to become a knight . Plowman 's version was praised for its approachability , as its target is the family audience and young children , but criticised for its use of modern language and occasional preachy nature . 
 = Blood Relatives ( Millennium ) = 
 " ' Blood Relatives " is the seventh episode of the first season of the American crime @-@ thriller television series Millennium . It premiered on the Fox network on December 6 , 1996 . The episode was written by Chip Johannessen , and directed by Jim Charleston . " Blood Relatives " featured guest appearances by John Fleck , Sean Six and Lynda Boyd . 
 Forensic profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , a member of the private investigative organisation Millennium Group , is asked to investigate a killer who targets mourners after visiting the funerals of strangers . 
 " Blood Relatives " saw the series ' first writing credit for Johannessen , who would contribute another twelve episodes across three seasons . The episode ; which opens with a quotation from the Christian Gospel of Luke ; went on to receive positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At a funeral in Seattle , James Dickerson ( Sean Six ) , approaches the mourning family . He introduces himself as " Ray Bell " and pretends to have known the deceased at university . He embraces the dead man 's mother <unk> , and leaves . Later that night , the mother is visiting her son 's grave , and is pulled into an open grave as she passes it . Her body is found the next day , although the rest of her family have been told they cannot see it . Speaking to clinical social worker Catherine Black ( Megan Gallagher ) , Seattle police officer Bob Bletcher ( Bill Smitrovich ) reveals that the victim had been graphically mutilated during the murder . 
 Catherine Black 's husband , offender profiler Frank Black ( Lance Henriksen ) , is asked to consult on the case as a member of the Millennium Group , a private investigative organisation . Black senses that the killer feels rage towards someone — not the victim — and is taking it out on strangers . Speaking to the family , Black finds that the victim 's dead son has had a sports team badge taken from his body ; he also realizes that the strange " Ray Bell " must be the killer . 
 Back at his halfway house Dickerson is wearing the missing badge , as the house 's trustee Connor scolds him for breaking curfew — and threatens not to cover up for him any more . After Connor leaves , James finds an obituary in the newspaper and circles it . Elsewhere , Black finds the name " Ray Bell " in the same newspaper as the victim 's son 's obituary , and deduces that the killer may have been frequenting funerals before , probably taking souvenirs like the badge . He believes that the victim is his first , but that killing will become easier for him . 
 Dickerson visits another funeral , and befriends a mourner , Tina , by pretending to have been a childhood friend of the deceased . They visit a nearby lake to reminisce , but she feels something is wrong . Dickerson apologises and leaves ; however , Tina is soon attacked from behind . Her body is found with the words " stop looking " carved into her stomach , and Black believes there may be a message somewhere on the first victim 's body . He asks fellow Group member Peter Watts ( Terry O 'Quinn ) to look for it ; Watts is also able to find fingerprints on Tina 's hair clip that identify Dickerson — a paroled convict . They track him down to the halfway home , although Connor secretly helps him to escape to a nearby scrapyard . In Dickerson 's room , a hidden cache of souvenirs is found , along with a journal and a stack of letters marked " return to sender " . 
 Catherine Black identifies Dickerson as an archetypal " lost child " , raised in poor foster care and neglected . He visits funerals to connect with society , leaving her to wonder what has pushed him to murder . Meanwhile , Dickerson remains in hiding at the scrapyard , while Connor brings him food . Frank Black has noticed that the " S " carved in Tina 's stomach matches that seen in the logo for Skorpion Salvage , the scrapyard Dickerson is hiding in . When he and the police arrive to find Dickerson , Connor is able to escape while the yard 's dogs attack Dickerson . 
 Catherine Black has found Dickerson 's biological mother , a Mrs. <unk> ( Lynda Boyd ) . Having given Dickerson up for adoption as a teenager , she is now a suburban housewife . Dickerson had tried several years previously to reconnect with her , though she wanted nothing to do with him . Catherine asks her for help , and she begrudgingly agrees to see her son . She recoils when he hugs her , blaming the government for making him what he is . Rejected , Dickerson confesses to the murders . Connor is able to see all of this , his connection to it not yet uncovered . Frank Black is unconvinced that everything has been wrapped up , and realizes that Connor is involved — he wants Dickerson to himself . " Stop looking " was his message to Dickerson , to stop looking for affection anywhere else . 
 Mrs. <unk> returns home , and is about to take a bath when she is attacked by Connor . Black has followed her , and interrupts the attack ; he and Connor struggle , with Black almost being strangled until he is able to hold Connor under the bathwater until he stops fighting . Connor is arrested and charged , while the now @-@ cleared Dickerson resumes circling obituaries in the newspaper . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Blood Relatives " is the first of two episodes of Millennium to be directed by James Charleston , who would return later in the first season to helm " Wide Open " . The episode also marks the first writing credit in the series for Chip Johannessen , who would go on to write an additional twelve episodes across all three seasons , including the series ' final episode " Goodbye to All That " . After Millennium 's cancellation , Johannessen would also contribute an episode to its sister show The X @-@ Files , 1999 's " Orison " . 
 " Blood Relatives " featured the second of three appearances by Brian Markinson as Seattle police detective Teeple ; Markinson had previously played the character in " The Judge " , and would reprise the role in " Sacrament " . Guest star Deanna Milligan , who portrayed the second victim Tina , would also appear in the third season episode " The Sound of Snow " in an unrelated role . Bob Morrisey , who played the first victim 's husband , also appeared in the third season , playing a sheriff in " <unk> " . 
 The episode opens with a quotation from the Gospel of Luke , the third and longest of the four canonical Gospels of the Christian New Testament . Biblical verses were also used at the beginning of other episodes in the series , including the Book of Job in " Wide Open " and " Dead Letters " ; the Book of Jeremiah in " Weeds " ; and the Book of Exodus in " Kingdom Come " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Blood Relatives " was first broadcast on the Fox Network on December 6 , 1996 ; and earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 5 , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 5 percent of all television @-@ equipped households were tuned in to the episode . The episode was watched by approximately 7 @.@ 3 million households . 
 " Blood Relatives " received positive reviews from critics . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode five stars out of five , comparing it favourably to " Irresistible " , a second season episode of The X @-@ Files . Shearman and Pearson lauded Johannessen 's " subtle writing " , especially in the handling of the James Dickerson character ; they felt the episode was " a study of a sociopath " which " <unk> " its villain . Writing for The A.V. Club , Zack Handlen rated the episode a B , finding that its depiction of the character of James Dickerson added " some shades of gray " to the series ' usual " black and white morality " . Handlen also felt that while the scene in which a woman is killed by a lake shore was " shocking without being exploitative " , and was carried out in such a manner that " we don 't feel as though she 's targeted because she 's a woman " ; however , the climactic scene in which Dickerson 's mother is attacked while stripping for a bath was seen as " a reminder of the show 's inability to separate its lofty goals from its willingness to take the cheapest shots " . Bill Gibron , writing for DVD Talk , rated " Blood Relatives " 5 out of 5 , describing it as being " as shocking as it is sentimental " . Gibron compared the episode to " Best Boys " , an episode of the English series Cracker , and praised its " atmospheric , moody tone " . 
 = Air Hong Kong = 
 Air Hong Kong ( Chinese : <unk> ) is the only all @-@ cargo airline based in Hong Kong , with its main hub at Hong Kong International Airport . The airline operates an express freight network to 12 destinations in nine countries , including China , Japan , Malaysia , Philippines , Republic of China ( Taiwan ) , Singapore , South Korea , Thailand and Vietnam . It has a fleet of Airbus A300 @-@ 600F General Freighters , which the airline was the launch customer of this new variant . Its head office is located on the fourth floor of the South Tower of Cathay Pacific City . 
 Air Hong Kong was founded in November 1986 by three local businessmen and commenced charter services with a Boeing 707 @-@ 320C freighter on 4 February 1988 . In June 1994 , Hong Kong 's largest carrier , Cathay Pacific acquired 75 % holdings of the airline ; and acquired the remaining 25 % in February 2002 . In October , Cathay Pacific entered into a joint venture with DHL Worldwide Express ( DHL ) , eventually saw DHL took a 40 % stake in the cargo airline , while Cathay Pacific retained the other 60 % holdings . 
 = = History = = 
 Air Hong Kong was established in November 1986 by three local businessmen from London 's Stansted Airport , which included Roger <unk> . Roger teamed up with Tomas Sang from Hong Kong to help fund the business . The airline commenced charter services with a Boeing 707 @-@ 320C freighter on 4 February 1988 , to Bombay ( now known as Mumbai ) , Britain and Kathmandu ; and scheduled services began on 18 October 1989 . By early 1990 , the airline had two Boeing 707 @-@ 320C and operated a scheduled cargo service to Manchester , with traffic rights to Auckland , Brussels , Fukuoka , Guam , Melbourne , Nagoya , Osaka , Perth , Pusan , Singapore , Sydney , Vienna and Zurich . Schedule cargo service to Nagoya was introduced and new traffic rights to Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City granted by April 1991 . In March 1992 , Air Hong Kong was granted additional traffic rights to Cairns , Darwin , Dhaka , Dubai , Kathmandu , Kuala Lumpur and Townsville . By March 1993 , the airline operated scheduled cargo services to Brussels , Dubai , Ho Chi Minh City , Manchester , Nagoya and Singapore with a fleet of two Boeing 747 @-@ 100SF and one Boeing 707 @-@ 320C freighters . 
 Polaris Aircraft Leasing , a subsidiary of General Electric Capital , entered into agreement in 1993 to suspend lease payments on the airline 's three Boeing 747 @-@ <unk> in return for an option to buy up to 49 percent of the airline in January 1995 . However , Cathay Pacific acquired 75 percent of the airline 's shares for HK $ 200 million in June 1994 and the option was cancelled . Facing weak demands and heavy financial losses , the airline was forced to terminate the lease on its Boeing 707 @-@ 320C and one of its Boeing 747 @-@ 100SF on November 1994 and January 1995 , respectively , with only two Boeing 747 @-@ <unk> remaining . By 2000 , the airline had a fleet of three Boeing 747 @-@ 200Fs with scheduled cargo services to Brussels , Dubai , Manchester and Osaka . 
 The airline 's parent , Cathay Pacific , acquired the remaining 25 percent of the airline 's shares in February 2002 and became a wholly owned subsidiary . An operational restructure followed on 1 July , where Air Hong Kong ceased services to Brussels , Dubai and Manchester to focus on services in Asia . In October 2002 , Cathay Pacific entered into a joint venture agreement with DHL Worldwide Express ( DHL ) by selling a 30 percent stake in the cargo airline in exchange for funds to purchase medium @-@ size freighters to operate DHL 's network in the Asia @-@ Pacific region from Hong Kong . The airline set aside $ 300 million to purchase five freighters by 2004 and another $ 100 million towards at least three more freighters by 2010 . In March 2003 , Cathay Pacific sold another 10 percent stake to DHL and retained 60 percent of the airline . 
 Air Hong Kong was the launch customer for the Airbus A300 @-@ 600F General Freighter , which is a new variant of the Airbus A300 @-@ 600F . This new variant has a cargo loading system capable of handling virtually every type of container and pallet , and a side door at the rear of the lower deck capable of handling large items of general freight . The airline took its first delivery of this new aircraft in September 2004 , with the eighth and final aircraft delivered on 22 June 2006 . The new freighters were powered by two General Electric ( GE ) CF6 @-@ 80C2 engines and signed a 14 @-@ year Maintenance Cost Per Hour ( <unk> ) programme with GE on 25 January 2005 . 
 In November 2007 , Air Hong Kong received an Award for Operational Excellence by the aircraft manufacturer Airbus for achieving an overall best performance on aircraft utilisation , operational reliability and average delay time . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 Air Hong Kong operates cargo flights to the following destinations as of 7 May 2010 : 
 Hong Kong 
 Hong Kong International Airport Main hub 
 People 's Republic of China 
 Beijing – Beijing Capital International Airport 
 Shanghai – Shanghai Pudong International Airport 
 Japan 
 Nagoya – Chubu Centrair International Airport 
 Osaka – Kansai International Airport 
 Tokyo – Narita International Airport 
 Malaysia 
 Penang – Penang International Airport 
 Philippines 
 Manila – Ninoy Aquino International Airport 
 Singapore 
 Singapore Changi Airport 
 South Korea 
 Seoul – Incheon International Airport 
 Taiwan , Republic of China 
 Taipei – Taipei Taoyuan International Airport 
 Thailand 
 Bangkok – Suvarnabhumi Airport 
 Vietnam 
 Ho Chi Minh City – Tan Son Nhat International Airport 
 = = = Terminated destinations = = = 
 Belgium – Brussels 
 India – Mumbai 
 Nepal – Kathmandu 
 United Arab Emirates – Dubai 
 United Kingdom – Manchester 
 = = Fleet = = 
 As of September 2015 the Air Hong Kong fleet consists of the following aircraft , with an average age of 15 @.@ 5 years : 
 The airline was the launch customer for the Airbus A300 @-@ 600F General Freighter , which was the new variant of the Airbus A300 @-@ 600F . 
 = = = Retired = = = 
 Boeing 707 @-@ 320C 
 Boeing 747 @-@ 100SF 
 Boeing 747 @-@ 200F 
 Boeing 727 @-@ 200F 
 = Pelagic thresher = 
 The pelagic thresher ( Alopias pelagicus ) is a species of thresher shark , family Alopiidae ; this group of sharks is characterized by the greatly elongated upper lobes of their caudal fins . The pelagic thresher occurs in the tropical and subtropical waters of the Indian and Pacific Oceans , usually far from shore but occasionally entering coastal habitats . It is often confused with the common thresher ( A. vulpinus ) , even in professional publications , but can be distinguished by the dark , rather than white , color over the bases of its pectoral fins . The smallest of the three thresher species , the pelagic thresher typically measures 3 m ( 10 ft ) long . 
 The diet of the pelagic thresher consists mainly of small midwater fishes , which are stunned with whip @-@ like strikes of their tails . Along with all other mackerel sharks , the pelagic thresher exhibits ovoviviparity and usually gives birth to litters of two . The developing embryos are oophagous , feeding on unfertilized eggs produced by the mother . The young are born unusually large , up to 43 % the length of the mother . Pelagic threshers are valued by commercial fisheries for their meat , skin , liver oil , and fins , and are also pursued by sport fishers . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) assessed this species as Vulnerable in 2007 . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The pelagic thresher was originally described by Japanese ichthyologist Hiroshi Nakamura on the basis of three large specimens , none of which was designated a type specimen . He illustrated one of the three specimens in his paper , " On the two species of the thresher shark from Formosan waters " , published in August 1935 . Nakamura also separately illustrated and described a fetus , that Leonard Compagno later concluded was probably of a common thresher . Several authors , including Gohar and Mazhar ( 1964 , Red Sea ) , Kato , Springer and Wagner ( 1967 , Eastern Pacific ) , <unk> and <unk> ( 1976 , New Caledonia ) , Johnson ( 1978 , Tahiti ) , and Faughnan ( 1980 , Hawaiian Islands ) have published illustrations of " common threshers " that were in fact pelagic threshers . 
 An allozyme analysis conducted by Blaise Eitner in 1995 showed that the closest relative of the pelagic thresher is the bigeye thresher ( A. superciliosus ) , with which it forms a clade . The specific epithet pelagicus is from the Greek <unk> , meaning " of the sea " . Another common name is the smalltooth thresher . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Due to confusion with the common thresher , the distribution of the pelagic thresher may be wider than is currently known . It ranges extensively in the Indo @-@ Pacific , with scattered records from South Africa , the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea ( off Somalia , between Oman and India , and off Pakistan ) , to China , southeastern Japan , northwestern Australia , New Caledonia , and Tahiti , to the Hawaiian Islands , the Gulf of California , and the Galapagos Islands . The North Pacific population shifts northward during warm El Nino years . Analysis of mitochondrial DNA has shown extensive gene flow within the eastern and western Pacific pelagic thresher populations , but little flow between them . 
 The pelagic thresher primarily inhabits the open ocean , occurring from the surface to a depth of at least 150 m ( 492 ft ) . However , it occasionally comes close to shore in regions with a narrow continental shelf , and has been observed near coral reef dropoffs or seamounts in the Red Sea and the Gulf of California , and off Indonesia and Micronesia . It has also been known to enter large lagoons in the Tuamotu Islands . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pelagic thresher is the smallest of the thresher sharks , averaging 3 m ( 10 ft ) in length and 69 @.@ 5 kg ( 153 @.@ 3 lb ) in weight , and usually not exceeding 3 @.@ 3 m ( 10 @.@ 8 ft ) and 88 @.@ 4 kg ( 194 @.@ 9 lb ) . Males and females attain known maximum lengths of 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 @.@ 5 ft ) and 3 @.@ 8 m ( 12 @.@ 5 ft ) , respectively . A record of 5 m ( 16 @.@ 4 ft ) is dubious and may have resulted from confusion with other thresher species . This species has a fusiform body ( wide in the middle and tapered at the ends ) and a very slender upper caudal fin lobe nearly as long as the rest of the shark . The pectoral fins are long and straight with broad , rounded tips . The first dorsal fin is placed halfway between the pectoral and pelvic fins , and is of comparable size to the pelvic fins . The second dorsal and anal fins are tiny . 
 The head is narrow with a short , conical snout and a distinctive " pinched " profile when viewed from below . The eyes are very large in juveniles and decrease in relative size with age . No furrows occur at the corners of the mouth . The teeth are very small , numbering 21 – 22 rows on each side with a symphysial ( central ) row in the upper jaw and 21 on each side without a symphysial row in the lower jaw . Five to 11 rows of posterior teeth are present . The teeth are smooth @-@ edged , with oblique cusps and lateral cusplets on the outside margins . The body is covered with very small , smooth dermal denticles with flat crowns and cusps with parallel ridges . The coloration is an intense dark blue above and white below ; the white does not extend to above the pectoral fins . The color rapidly fades to gray after death . The dark pigment above the pectoral fins , the rounded pectoral fin tips , and the absence of labial furrows separate this shark from the common thresher . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The pelagic thresher is an active , strong swimmer and has been known to leap clear of the water ( five times in a row on one documented occasion ) . Predators of the pelagic thresher include larger fishes ( including other sharks ) and toothed whales . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms Litobothrium <unk> , L. <unk> , and L. <unk> , which inhabit the shark 's spiral valve intestine , and copepods of the genus Echthrogaleus , which infest the skin . At <unk> Island in the Philippines , pelagic threshers have been observed regularly visiting cleaning stations occupied by cleaner wrasses ( Labroides dimidiatus and <unk> <unk> ) , during which they exhibit characteristic behaviors to facilitate the cleaning interaction . These visits occur more frequently early in the morning , and may be why these normally oceanic sharks are sometimes encountered in shallow water . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 Little information is available on the feeding ecology of the pelagic thresher . Its very slender tail and fine dentition suggest an exclusive diet of small , pelagic prey . Analysis of stomach contents reveal that pelagic threshers feed mainly on barracudinas , <unk> , and escolars , all inhabitants of the mesopelagic zone . Therefore , little competition occurs between the pelagic thresher and other large oceanic piscivores such as billfishes , tunas , and <unk> , which tend to feed near the surface . As in other threshers , pelagic threshers may swim in circles to drive schooling prey into a compact mass , before striking them sharply with the upper lobe of their tails to stun them . Because of this behavior , pelagic threshers are often hooked on longlines by their tails . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like the rest of the mackerel sharks , the pelagic thresher is ovoviviparous . It gives birth to two pups at a time ( rarely just one ) , one per uterus . With no defined breeding season , most adult females are pregnant throughout the year ; the gestation period is uncertain , but has been suggested to be less than one year as in the common thresher . The developing embryos are sustained by a yolk sac until they are 12 cm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) long , after which they are oophagous and feed on egg capsules produced by the mother . Each capsule measures about 55 mm ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) long and 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) across , and contains 20 – 30 ova . Early stage embryos have specialized teeth for opening the capsules , while later @-@ stage embryos have their teeth hidden and swallow the capsules whole , their teeth not becoming functional again until just after birth . No evidence of sibling cannibalism has been found as in the sand tiger shark ( Carcharias taurus ) . Young pelagic threshers are born unusually large , up to 1 @.@ 6 m ( 5 @.@ 2 ft ) long or 43 % the length of the mother , which likely reduces predation on the newborns . 
 The growth rate of pelagic threshers slows with age : 9 cm / year for ages 0 – 1 , 8 cm / year for ages 2 – 3 , 6 cm / year for ages 5 – 6 , 4 cm / year for ages 7 – 10 , 3 cm / year for ages 10 – 12 , and 2 cm / year for ages 13 and greater . Females reach maturity at 2 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 9 m ( 9 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 5 ft ) long and eight to nine years old , while males mature at 2 @.@ 7 – 2 @.@ 8 m ( 8 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 2 ft ) long and seven to eight years old . The oldest confirmed ages for females and males are 16 and 14 years respectively . Extrapolating the growth curves to the largest known individuals suggests that females may have a lifespan exceeding 28 years , and males 17 years . A single female produces about 40 young over her entire life . 
 = = = Thermoregulation = = = 
 Anatomical examination indicates that the pelagic thresher is unlikely to be warm @-@ bodied like the common thresher . The pelagic thresher lacks a rete mirabile , a blood vessel countercurrent exchange system that prevents metabolic heat from being dissipated into the water , inside its trunk . Furthermore , its aerobic red muscles , responsible for generating heat in the common thresher , are positioned in two lateral strips just beneath the skin rather than at the core of the body . A rete system is present around the pelagic thresher 's brain and eyes , albeit less developed than in the bigeye thresher , which may serve to buffer those organs against temperature changes . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 The pelagic thresher has never been implicated in an attack on humans ; it has small jaws and teeth for its size and tends to flee from divers . This shark is taken by commercial fisheries in the central Pacific and western Indian Oceans , as well as off California and Mexico . Abundant off northeastern Taiwan , it comprises over 12 % ( about 3 @,@ 100 fish , 220 metric tons ) of the annual Taiwanese shark landings . The meat is sold for human consumption , the skin is made into leather , and the fins are used for shark fin soup in Asia . The squalene oil in the liver of the pelagic thresher can comprise 10 % of its weight , and is used in the manufacture of cosmetics , health foods , and high @-@ grade machine oil . 
 Though rarely caught , pelagic threshers are also valued by sport fishers and are listed as game fish by the International Game Fish Association . The largest overall records are from New Zealand , while the light tackle records are from California . Pelagic threshers are frequently taken as bycatch on longlines and in driftnets meant for other species such as tuna , and also rarely in gillnets and <unk> nets . All three thresher shark species were assessed as Vulnerable by the IUCN in 2007 , as their low fecundity cannot sustain high levels of exploitation . 
 = Dental implant = 
 A dental implant ( also known as an <unk> implant or fixture ) is a surgical component that interfaces with the bone of the jaw or skull to support a dental prosthesis such as a crown , bridge , denture , facial prosthesis or to act as an orthodontic anchor . The basis for modern dental implants is a biologic process called osseointegration where materials , such as titanium , form an intimate bond to bone . The implant fixture is first placed , so that it is likely to osseointegrate , then a dental prosthetic is added . A variable amount of healing time is required for osseointegration before either the dental prosthetic ( a tooth , bridge or denture ) is attached to the implant or an abutment is placed which will hold a dental prosthetic . 
 Success or failure of implants depends on the health of the person receiving it , drugs which affect the chances of osseointegration and the health of the tissues in the mouth . The amount of stress that will be put on the implant and fixture during normal function is also evaluated . Planning the position and number of implants is key to the long @-@ term health of the prosthetic since biomechanical forces created during chewing can be significant . The position of implants is determined by the position and angle of adjacent teeth , lab simulations or by using computed tomography with CAD / CAM simulations and surgical guides called stents . The prerequisites to long @-@ term success of <unk> dental implants are healthy bone and gingiva . Since both can atrophy after tooth extraction , pre @-@ prosthetic procedures such as sinus lifts or gingival grafts are sometimes required to recreate ideal bone and gingiva . 
 The final prosthetic can be either fixed , where a person cannot remove the denture or teeth from their mouth , or removable , where they can remove the prosthetic . In each case an abutment is attached to the implant fixture . Where the prosthetic is fixed , the crown , bridge or denture is fixed to the abutment with either lag screws or dental cement . Where the prosthetic is removable , a corresponding adapter is placed in the prosthetic so that the two pieces can be secured together . 
 The risks and complications related to implant therapy are divided into those that occur during surgery ( such as excessive bleeding or nerve injury ) , those that occur in the first six months ( such as infection and failure to osseointegrate ) and those that occur long @-@ term ( such as peri @-@ implantitis and mechanical failures ) . In the presence of healthy tissues , a well integrated implant with appropriate biomechanical loads can have 5 @-@ year plus survival rates from 93 to 98 <unk> and 10 to 15 year lifespans for the prosthetic teeth . 
 = = Medical uses = = 
 The primary use of dental implants are to support dental prosthetics . Modern dental implants make use of osseointegration , the biologic process where bone fuses tightly to the surface of specific materials such as titanium and some ceramics . The integration of implant and bone can support physical loads for decades without failure . 
 For individual tooth replacement , an implant abutment is first secured to the implant with an abutment screw . A crown ( the dental prosthesis ) is then connected to the abutment with dental cement , a small screw , or fused with the abutment as one piece during fabrication . Dental implants , in the same way , can also be used to retain a multiple tooth dental prosthesis either in the form of a fixed bridge or removable dentures . 
 An implant supported bridge ( or fixed denture ) is a group of teeth secured to dental implants so the prosthetic cannot be removed by the user . Bridges typically connect to more than one implant and may also connect to teeth as anchor points . Typically the number of teeth will outnumber the anchor points with the teeth that are directly over the implants referred to as abutments and those between abutments referred to as <unk> . Implant supported bridges attach to implant abutments in the same way as a single tooth implant replacement . A fixed bridge may replace as few as two teeth ( also known as a fixed partial denture ) and may extend to replace an entire arch of teeth ( also known as a fixed full denture ) . In both cases , the prosthesis is said to be fixed because it cannot be removed by the denture wearer . 
 A removable implant supported denture ( also an implant supported <unk> ) is a type of dental prosthesis which is not permanently fixed in place . The dental prosthesis can be disconnected from the implant abutments with finger pressure by the wearer . To enable this , the abutment is shaped as a small connector ( a button , ball , bar or magnet ) which can be connected to analogous adapters in the underside of the dental prosthesis . Facial prosthetics , used to correct facial deformities ( e.g. from cancer treatment or injuries ) can utilise connections to implants placed in the facial bones . Depending on the situation the implant may be used to retain either a fixed or removable prosthetic that replaces part of the face . 
 In orthodontics , small diameter dental implants , referred to as Temporary Anchorage Devices ( or <unk> ) can assist tooth movement by creating anchor points from which forces can be generated . For teeth to move , a force must be applied to them in the direction of the desired movement . The force stimulates cells in the periodontal ligament to cause bone remodeling , removing bone in the direction of travel of the tooth and adding it to the space created . In order to generate a force on a tooth , an anchor point ( something that will not move ) is needed . Since implants do not have a periodontal ligament , and bone remodelling will not be stimulated when tension is applied , they are ideal anchor points in orthodontics . Typically , implants designed for orthodontic movement are small and do not fully osseointegrate , allowing easy removal following treatment . 
 = = Technique = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 = = = General considerations = = = 
 Planning for dental implants focuses on the general health condition of the patient , the local health condition of the mucous membranes and the jaws and the shape , size , and position of the bones of the jaws , adjacent and opposing teeth . There are few health conditions that absolutely preclude placing implants although there are certain conditions that can increase the risk of failure . Those with poor oral hygiene , heavy smokers and diabetics are all at greater risk for a variant of gum disease that affects implants called peri @-@ implantitis , increasing the chance of long @-@ term failures . Long @-@ term steroid use , osteoporosis and other diseases that affect the bones can increase the risk of early failure of implants . 
 = = = <unk> drugs = = = 
 The use of bone building drugs , like bisphosphonates and anti @-@ <unk> drugs require special consideration with implants , because they have been associated with a disorder called <unk> @-@ associated osteonecrosis of the jaw ( BRONJ ) . The drugs change bone turnover , which is thought to put people at risk for death of bone when having minor oral surgery . At routine doses ( for example , those used to treat routine osteoporosis ) the effects of the drugs linger for months or years but the risk appears to be very low . Because of this duality , uncertainty exists in the dental community about how to best manage the risk of BRONJ when placing implants . A 2009 position paper by the American Association of Oral and <unk> Surgeons , discussed that the risk of BRONJ from low dose oral therapy ( or slow release injectable ) as between 0 @.@ 01 and 0 @.@ 06 percent for any procedure done on the jaws ( implant , extraction , etc . ) . The risk is higher with intravenous therapy , procedures on the lower jaw , people with other medical issues , those on steroids , those on more potent bisphosphonates and people who have taken the drug for more than three years . The position paper recommends against placing implants in people who are taking high dose or high frequency intravenous therapy for cancer care . Otherwise , implants can generally be placed and the use of bisphosphonates does not appear to affect implant survival . 
 = = = Biomechanical considerations = = = 
 The long @-@ term success of implants is determined , in part , by the forces they have to support . As implants have no periodontal ligament , there is no sensation of pressure when biting so the forces created are higher . To offset this , the location of implants must distribute forces evenly across the prosthetics they support . Concentrated forces can result in fracture of the bridgework , implant components , or loss of bone adjacent the implant . The ultimate location of implants is based on both biologic ( bone type , vital structures , health ) and mechanical factors . <unk> placed in thicker , stronger bone like that found in the front part of the bottom jaw have lower failure rates than implants placed in lower density bone , such as the back part of the upper jaw . People who grind their teeth also increase the force on implants and increase the likelihood of failures . 
 The design of implants , has to account for a lifetime of real @-@ world use in a person 's mouth . Regulators and the dental implant industry have created a series of tests to determine the long @-@ term mechanical reliability of implants in a person 's mouth where the implant is struck repeatedly with increasing forces ( similar in magnitude to biting ) until it fails . 
 When a more exacting plan is needed beyond clinical judgment , the dentist will make an acrylic guide ( called a stent ) prior to surgery which guides optimal positioning of the implant . Increasingly , dentists opt to get a CT scan of the jaws and any existing dentures , then plan the surgery on CAD / CAM software . The stent can then be made using <unk> following computerized planning of a case from the CT scan . The use of CT scanning in complex cases also helps the surgeon identify and avoid vital structures such as the inferior alveolar nerve and the sinus . 
 = = = Main surgical procedures = = = 
 = = = = Placing the implant = = = = 
 Most implant systems have five basic steps for placement of each implant : 
 Soft tissue reflection : An incision is made over the crest of bone , splitting the thicker attached gingiva roughly in half so that the final implant will have a thick band of tissue around it . The edges of tissue , each referred to as a flap are pushed back to expose the bone . <unk> surgery is an alternate technique , where a small punch of tissue ( the diameter of the implant ) is removed for implant placement rather than raising flaps . 
 Drilling at high speed : After reflecting the soft tissue , and using a surgical guide or stent as necessary , pilot holes are placed with precision drills at highly regulated speed to prevent burning or pressure necrosis of the bone . 
 Drilling at low speed : The pilot hole is expanded by using progressively wider drills ( typically between three and seven successive drilling steps , depending on implant width and length ) . Care is taken not to damage the <unk> or bone cells by overheating . A cooling saline or water spray keeps the temperature low . 
 Placement of the implant : The implant screw is placed and can be self @-@ tapping , otherwise the prepared site is tapped with an implant analog . It is then screwed into place with a torque controlled wrench at a precise torque so as not to overload the surrounding bone ( overloaded bone can die , a condition called osteonecrosis , which may lead to failure of the implant to fully integrate or bond with the jawbone ) . 
 Tissue adaptation : The gingiva is adapted around the entire implant to provide a thick band of healthy tissue around the healing abutment . In contrast , an implant can be " buried " , where the top of the implant is sealed with a cover screw and the tissue is closed to completely cover it . A second procedure would then be required to uncover the implant at a later date . 
 = = = = Timing of implants after extraction of teeth = = = = 
 There are different approaches to placement dental implants after tooth extraction . The approaches are : 
 Immediate post @-@ extraction implant placement . 
 Delayed immediate post @-@ extraction implant placement ( two weeks to three months after extraction ) . 
 Late implantation ( three months or more after tooth extraction ) . 
 There are also various options for when to attach teeth to dental implants , classified into : 
 Immediate loading procedure . 
 Early loading ( one week to twelve weeks ) . 
 Delayed loading ( over three months ) 
 = = = = Healing time = = = = 
 For an implant to become permanently stable , the body must grow bone to the surface of the implant ( osseointegration ) . Based on this biologic process , it was thought that loading an implant during the osseointegration period would result in movement that would prevent osseointegration , and thus increase implant failure rates . As a result , three to six months of integrating time ( depending on various factors ) was allowed before placing the teeth on implants ( restoring them ) . 
 However , later research suggests that the initial stability of the implant in bone is a more important determinant of success of implant integration , rather than a certain period of healing time . As a result , the time allowed to heal is typically based on the density of bone the implant is placed in and the number of implants <unk> together , rather than a uniform amount of time . When implants can withstand high torque ( 35 <unk> ) and are <unk> to other implants , there are no meaningful differences in long @-@ term implant survival or bone loss between implants loaded immediately , at three months , or at six months . The corollary is that single implants , even in solid bone , require a period of no @-@ load to minimize the risk of initial failure . 
 = = = = One versus two @-@ stage surgery = = = = 
 After an implant is placed , the internal components are covered with either a healing abutment , or a cover screw . A healing abutment passes through the mucosa , and the surrounding mucosa is adapted around it . A cover screw is flush with the surface of the dental implant , and is designed to be completely covered by mucosa . After an integration period , a second surgery is required to reflect the mucosa and place a healing abutment . 
 In the early stages of implant development ( 1970 − 1990 ) , implant systems used a two @-@ stage approach , believing that it improved the odds of initial implant survival . Subsequent research suggests that no difference in implant survival existed between one @-@ stage and two @-@ stage surgeries , and the choice of whether or not to " bury " the implant in the first stage of surgery became a concern of soft tissue ( gingiva ) management 
 When tissue is deficient or mutilated by the loss of teeth , implants are placed and allowed to osseointegrate , then the gingiva is surgically moved around the healing abutments . The down @-@ side of a two @-@ stage technique is the need for additional surgery and compromise of circulation to the tissue due to repeated surgeries . The choice of one or two @-@ stages , now centers around how best to reconstruct the soft tissues around lost teeth . 
 = = = = Immediate placement = = = = 
 An increasingly common strategy to preserve bone and reduce treatment times includes the placement of a dental implant into a recent extraction site . On the one hand , it shortens treatment time and can improve esthetics because the soft tissue envelope is preserved . On the other hand , implants may have a slightly higher rate of initial failure . Conclusions on this topic are difficult to draw , however , because few studies have compared immediate and delayed implants in a scientifically rigorous manner . 
 = = = Additional surgical procedures = = = 
 For an implant to osseointegrate , it needs to be surrounded by a healthy quantity of bone . In order for it to survive long @-@ term , it needs to have a thick healthy soft tissue ( gingiva ) envelope around it . It is common for either the bone or soft tissue to be so deficient that the surgeon needs to reconstruct it either before or during implant placement . 
 = = = = Hard tissue ( bone ) reconstruction = = = = 
 Bone grafting is necessary when there is a lack of bone . While there are always new implant types , such as short implants , and techniques to allow compromise , a general treatment goal is to have a minimum of 10 mm in bone height , and 6 mm in width . Alternatively , bone defects are graded from A to D ( A = 10 + mm of bone , B = 7 – 9 mm , C = 4 – 6 mm and D = 0 – 3 mm ) where an implant 's likelihood of <unk> is related to the grade of bone . 
 To achieve an adequate width and height of bone , various bone grafting techniques have been developed . The most frequently used is called guided bone graft augmentation where a defect is filled with either natural ( harvested or <unk> ) bone or allograft ( donor bone or synthetic bone substitute ) , covered with a semi @-@ permeable membrane and allowed to heal . During the healing phase , natural bone replaces the graft forming a new bony base for the implant . 
 Three common procedures are : 
 The sinus lift 
 Lateral alveolar augmentation ( increase in the width of a site ) 
 Vertical alveolar augmentation ( increase in the height of a site ) 
 Other , more invasive procedures , also exist for larger bone defects including mobilization of the inferior alveolar nerve to allow placement of a fixture , <unk> bone grafting using the iliac crest or another large source of bone and <unk> bone graft where the blood supply to the bone is transplanted with the source bone and reconnected to the local blood supply . The final decision about which bone grafting technique that is best is based on an assessment of the degree of vertical and horizontal bone loss that exists , each of which is classified into mild ( 2 – 3 mm loss ) , moderate ( 4 – 6 mm loss ) or severe ( greater than 6 mm loss ) . 
 = = = = Soft tissue ( gingiva ) reconstruction = = = = 
 The gingiva surrounding a tooth has a 2 – 3 mm band of bright pink , very strong attached mucosa , then a darker , larger area of unattached mucosa that folds into the cheeks . When replacing a tooth with an implant , a band of strong , attached gingiva is needed to keep the implant healthy in the long @-@ term . This is especially important with implants because the blood supply is more precarious in the gingiva surrounding an implant , and is theoretically more susceptible to injury because of a longer attachment to the implant than on a tooth ( a longer biologic width ) . 
 When an adequate band of attached tissue is absent , it can be recreated with a soft tissue graft . There are four methods that can be used to transplant soft tissue . A roll of tissue adjacent to an implant ( referred to as a palatal roll ) can be moved towards the lip ( buccal ) , gingiva from the palate can be transplanted , deeper connective tissue from the palate can be <unk> or , when a larger piece of tissue is needed , a finger of tissue based on a blood vessel in the palate ( called a vascularized <unk> periosteal @-@ connective tissue ( VIP @-@ CT ) flap ) can be repositioned to the area . 
 Additionally , for an implant to look esthetic , a band of full , plump gingiva is needed to fill in the space on either side of implant . The most common soft tissue complication is called a black @-@ triangle , where the papilla ( the small triangular piece of tissue between two teeth ) shrinks back and leaves a triangular void between the implant and the adjacent teeth . Dentists can only expect 2 – 4 mm of papilla height over the underlying bone . A black triangle can be expected if the distance between where the teeth touch and bone is any greater . 
 = = Recovery = = 
 The prosthetic phase begins once the implant is well integrated ( or has a reasonable assurance that it will integrate ) and an abutment is in place to bring it through the mucosa . Even in the event of early loading ( less than 3 months ) , many practitioners will place temporary teeth until osseointegration is confirmed . The prosthetic phase of restoring an implant requires an equal amount of technical expertise as the surgical because of the biomechanical considerations , especially when multiple teeth are to be restored . The dentist will work to restore the vertical dimension of occlusion , the esthetics of the smile , and the structural integrity of the teeth to evenly distribute the forces of the implants . 
 Prosthetic procedures for single teeth , bridges and fixed dentures 
 An abutment is selected depending on the application . In many single crown and fixed partial denture scenarios ( bridgework ) , custom abutments are used . An impression of the top of the implant is made with the adjacent teeth and gingiva . A dental lab then simultaneously fabricates an abutment and crown . The abutment is seated on the implant , a screw passes through the abutment to secure it to an internal thread on the implant ( lag @-@ screw ) . There are variations on this , such as when the abutment and implant body are one piece or when a stock ( prefabricated ) abutment is used . Custom abutments can be made by hand , as a cast metal piece or custom milled from metal or zirconia , all of which have similar success rates . 
 The platform between the implant and the abutment can be flat ( buttress ) or conical fit . In conical fit abutments , the collar of the abutment sits inside the implant which allows a stronger junction between implant and abutment and a better seal against bacteria into the implant body . To improve the gingival seal around the abutment collar , a narrowed collar on the abutment is used , referred to as platform switching . The combination of conical fits and platform switching gives marginally better long term periodontal conditions compared to flat @-@ top abutments . 
 Regardless of the abutment material or technique , an impression of the abutment is then taken and a crown secured to the abutment with dental cement . Another variation on abutment / crown model is when the crown and abutment are one piece and the lag @-@ screw traverses both to secure the one @-@ piece structure to the internal thread on the implant . There does not appear to be any benefit , in terms of success , for cement versus screw @-@ retained prosthetics , although the latter is believed to be easier to maintain ( and change when the prosthetic fractures ) and the former offers high esthetic performance . 
 = = = Prosthetic procedures for removable dentures = = = 
 When a removable denture is worn , retainers to hold the denture in place can be either custom made or " off @-@ the @-@ shelf " ( stock ) abutments . When custom retainers are used , four or more implant fixtures are placed and an impression of the implants is taken and a dental lab creates a custom metal bar with attachments to hold the denture in place . Significant retention can be created with multiple attachments and the use of semi @-@ precision attachments ( such as a small diameter pin that pushes through the denture and into the bar ) which allows for little or no movement in the denture , but it remains removable . However , the same four implants angled in such a way to distribute occlusal forces may be able to safely hold a fixed denture in place with comparable costs and number of procedures giving the denture wearer a fixed solution . 
 Alternatively , stock abutments are used to retain dentures using a male @-@ adapter attached to the implant and a female adapter in the denture . Two common types of adapters are the ball @-@ and @-@ socket style retainer and the button @-@ style adapter . These types of stock abutments allow movement of the denture , but enough retention to improve the quality of life for denture wearers , compared to conventional dentures . Regardless of the type of adapter , the female portion of the adapter that is housed in the denture will require periodic replacement , however the number and adapter type does not seem to affect patient satisfaction with the prosthetic for various removable alternatives . 
 = = = Maintenance = = = 
 After placement , implants need to be cleaned ( similar to natural teeth ) with a Teflon instrument to remove any plaque . Because of the more precarious blood supply to the gingiva , care should be taken with dental floss . <unk> will lose bone at a rate similar to natural teeth in the mouth ( e.g. if someone suffers from periodontal disease , an implant can be affected by a similar disorder ) but will otherwise last . The porcelain on crowns should be expected to discolour , fracture or require repair approximately every ten years , although there is significant variation in the service life of dental crowns based on the position in the mouth , the forces being applied from opposing teeth and the restoration material . Where implants are used to retain a complete denture , depending on the type of attachment , connections need to be changed or refreshed every one to two years . A powered <unk> may also be useful for cleaning around implants . 
 = = Risks and complications = = 
 = = = During surgery = = = 
 Placement of dental implants is a surgical procedure and carries the normal risks of surgery including infection , excessive bleeding and necrosis of the flap of tissue around the implant . Nearby anatomic structures , such as the inferior alveolar nerve , the maxillary sinus and blood vessels , can also be injured when the <unk> is created or the implant placed . Even when the lining of the maxillary sinus is perforated by an implant , long term sinusitis is rare . An inability to place the implant in bone to provide stability of the implant ( referred to as primary stability of the implant ) increases the risk of failure to osseointegration . 
 = = = First six months = = = 
 = = = = Primary implant stability = = = = 
 Primary implant stability refers to the stability of a dental implant immediately after implantation . Its value is derived from a [ mechanical assessment ] of the titanium screw implant in the patient 's bone tissue . Sufficient initial stability may allow immediate loading with prosthetic reconstruction . 
 The relevance of primary implant stability decreases gradually with regrowth of bone tissue around the implant in the first weeks after surgery , leading to secondary stability . Secondary stability is different from the initial stabilization , because it results from the ongoing process of bone regrowth into the implant [ osseointegration ] . When this healing process is complete , the initial mechanical stability becomes biological stability . Primary stability is critical to implantation success until bone regrowth maximises mechanical and biological support of the implant . Regrowth usually occurs during the 3 – 4 weeks after implantation . Insufficient Primary stability , or high initial implant mobility , can cause failure . 
 = = = = Immediate post @-@ operative risks = = = = 
 Infection ( pre @-@ op antibiotics reduce the risk of implant failure by 33 percent but do not affect the risk of infection ) 
 Excessive bleeding 
 Flap breakdown ( less @-@ than 5 percent ) 
 = = = = Failure to integrate = = = = 
 An implant is tested between 8 and 24 weeks to determine if it is integrated . There is significant variation in the criteria used to determine implant success , the most commonly cited criteria at the implant level are the absence of pain , mobility , infection , gingival bleeding , radiographic lucency or peri @-@ implant bone loss greater than 1 @.@ 5 mm . 
 Dental implant success is related to operator skill , quality and quantity of the bone available at the site , and the patient 's oral hygiene , but the most important factor is primary implant stability . While there is significant variation in the rate that implants fail to integrate ( due to individual risk factors ) , the approximate values are 1 to 6 percent 
 Integration failure is rare , particularly if a dentist 's or oral surgeon 's instructions are followed closely by the patient . Immediate loading implants may have a higher rate of failure , potentially due to being loaded immediately after trauma or extraction , but the difference with proper care and maintenance is well within statistical variance for this type of procedure . More often , osseointegration failure occurs when a patient is either too unhealthy to receive the implant or engages in behavior that <unk> proper dental hygiene including smoking or drug use . 
 = = = Long term = = = 
 The long @-@ term complications that result from restoring teeth with implants relate , directly , to the risk factors of the patient and the technology . There are the risks associated with esthetics including a high smile line , poor gingival quality and missing papillae , difficulty in matching the form of natural teeth that may have unequal points of contact or uncommon shapes , bone that is missing , atrophied or otherwise shaped in an unsuitable manner , unrealistic expectations of the patient or poor oral hygiene . The risks can be related to biomechanical factors , where the geometry of the implants does not support the teeth in the same way the natural teeth did such as when there are cantilevered extensions , fewer implants than roots or teeth that are longer than the implants that support them ( a poor crown @-@ to @-@ root ratio ) . Similarly , grinding of the teeth , lack of bone or low diameter implants increase the biomechanical risk . Finally there are technological risks , where the implants themselves can fail due to fracture or a loss of retention to the teeth they are intended to support . 
 From these theoretical risks , derive the real world complications . Long @-@ term failures are due to either loss of bone around the tooth and / or gingiva due to peri @-@ implantitis or a mechanical failure of the implant . Because there is no dental enamel on an implant , it does not fail due to cavities like natural teeth . While large @-@ scale , long @-@ term studies are scarce , several systematic reviews estimate the long @-@ term ( five to ten years ) survival of dental implants at 93 – 98 percent depending on their clinical use . During initial development of implant retained teeth , all crowns were attached to the teeth with screws , but more recent advancements have allowed placement of crowns on the abutments with dental cement ( akin to placing a crown on a tooth ) . This has created the potential for cement , that escapes from under the crown during cementation to get caught in the gingiva and create a peri @-@ implantitis ( see picture below ) . While the complication can occur , there does not appear to be any additional peri @-@ implantitis in cement @-@ retained crowns compared to screw @-@ retained crowns overall . In compound implants ( two stage implants ) , between the actual implant and the superstructure ( abutment ) are gaps and cavities into which germs can penetrate from the oral cavity . Later these germs will return into the adjacent tissue and can cause <unk> . As prophylaxis these implant interior spaces should be sealed . 
 Criteria for the success of the implant supported dental prosthetic varies from study to study , but can be broadly classified into failures due to the implant , soft tissues or prosthetic components or a lack of satisfaction on the part of the patient . The most commonly cited criteria for success are function of at least five years in the absence of pain , mobility , radiographic lucency and peri @-@ implant bone loss of greater than 1 @.@ 5 mm on the implant , the lack of suppuration or bleeding in the soft tissues and occurrence of technical complications / prosthetic maintenance , adequate function , and esthetics in the prosthetic . In addition , the patient should ideally be free of pain , <unk> , able to chew and taste and be pleased with the esthetics . 
 The rates of complications vary by implant use and prosthetic type and are listed below : 
 = = = = Single crown implants ( 5 @-@ year ) = = = = 
 Implant survival : 96 @.@ 8 percent 
 Crown fracture : a ) metal @-@ ceramic : 95 @.@ 4 percent , all @-@ ceramic ; 95 @.@ 4 percent ( cumulative rate of ceramic or veneer fracture : 4 @.@ 5 percent ) 
 Peri @-@ implantitis : 9 @.@ 7 percent up to 56 percent 
 Implant fracture : 0 @.@ 14 percent 
 Screw or abutment loosening : 12 @.@ 7 percent 
 <unk> screw fracture : 0 @.@ 35 percent 
 = = = = Fixed complete dentures = = = = 
 Progressive vertical bone loss but still in function ( Peri @-@ implantitis ) : 8 @.@ 5 percent 
 Failure after the first year 5 percent at five years , 7 percent at ten years 
 Incidence of veneer fracture at : 
 5 @-@ year : 13 @.@ 5 to 30 @.@ 6 percent , 
 10 @-@ year : 51 @.@ 9 percent ( 32 @.@ 3 to 75 @.@ 5 percent with a confidence interval at 95 percent ) 
 15 @-@ year : 66 @.@ 6 percent ( 44 @.@ 3 to 86 @.@ 4 percent with a confidence interval at 95 percent ) 
 10 @-@ year incidence of framework fracture : 6 percent ( 2 @.@ 6 to 9 @.@ 3 percent with a confidence interval at 95 percent ) 
 10 @-@ year incidence of esthetic deficiency : 6 @.@ 1 percent ( 2 @.@ 4 to 9 @.@ 7 percent with a confidence interval at 95 percent ) 
 prosthetic screw loosening : 5 percent over five years to 15 percent over ten years 
 The most common complication being fracture or wear of the tooth structure , especially beyond ten years with fixed dental prostheses made of metal @-@ ceramic having significantly higher ten @-@ year survival compared those made of gold @-@ acrylic . 
 = = = = Removable dentures ( <unk> ) = = = = 
 <unk> of removable denture retention : 33 percent 
 Dentures needing to be relined or having a retentive clip fracture : 16 to 19 percent 
 = = History = = 
 There is archeological evidence that humans have attempted to replace missing teeth with root form implants for thousands of years . Remains from ancient China ( dating 4000 years ago ) have carved bamboo pegs , tapped into the bone , to replace lost teeth , and 2000 @-@ year @-@ old remains from ancient Egypt have similarly shaped pegs made of precious metals . Some Egyptian mummies were found to have transplanted human teeth , and in other instances , teeth made of ivory . 
 Wilson <unk> and his wife in 1931 , at a site in Honduras dating back to 600 AD , found the lower mandible of a young Mayan woman , with three missing incisors replaced by pieces of shell , shaped to resemble teeth . Bone growth around two of the implants , and the formation of calculus , indicates that they were functional as well as esthetic . The fragment is currently part of the Osteological Collection of the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology at Harvard University . 
 The early part of the 20th century saw a number of implants made of a variety of materials . One of the earliest successful implants was the Greenfield implant system of 1913 ( also known as the Greenfield crib or basket ) . Greenfield 's implant , an <unk> implant attached to a gold crown , showed evidence of osseointegration and lasted for a number of years . The first use of titanium as an implantable material was by Bothe , Beaton and Davenport in 1940 , who observed how close the bone grew to titanium screws , and the difficulty they had in extracting them . Bothe et al. were the first researchers to describe what would later be called osseointegration ( a name that would be marketed later on by Per @-@ Ingvar Brånemark ) . In 1951 , Gottlieb Leventhal implanted titanium rods in rabbits . Leventhal 's positive results led him to believe that titanium represented the ideal metal for surgery . 
 In the 1950s research was being conducted at Cambridge University in England on blood flow in living organisms . These workers devised a method of constructing a chamber of titanium which was then embedded into the soft tissue of the ears of rabbits . In 1952 the Swedish orthopaedic surgeon , Per @-@ Ingvar Brånemark , was interested in studying bone healing and regeneration . During his research time at Lund University he adopted the Cambridge designed " rabbit ear chamber " for use in the rabbit femur . Following the study , he attempted to retrieve these expensive chambers from the rabbits and found that he was unable to remove them . Brånemark observed that bone had grown into such close proximity with the titanium that it effectively adhered to the metal . Brånemark carried out further studies into this phenomenon , using both animal and human subjects , which all confirmed this unique property of titanium . Leonard <unk> , in the 1950s , was one of the first to insert titanium and other metal implants into the bones of the jaw . Artificial teeth were then attached to these pieces of metal . In 1965 Brånemark placed his first titanium dental implant into a human volunteer . He began working in the mouth as it was more accessible for continued observations and there was a high rate of missing teeth in the general population offered more subjects for widespread study . He termed the clinically observed adherence of bone with titanium as " osseointegration " . 
 Since then implants have evolved into three basic types : 
 Root form implants ; the most common type of implant indicated for all uses . Within the root form type of implant , there are roughly 18 variants , all made of titanium but with different shapes and surface textures . There is limited evidence showing that implants with relatively smooth surfaces are less prone to peri @-@ implantitis than implants with rougher surfaces and no evidence showing that any particular type of dental implant has superior long @-@ term success . 
 <unk> implant ; a long implant that can anchor to the cheek bone by passing through the maxillary sinus to retain a complete upper denture when bone is absent . While zygomatic implants offer a novel approach to severe bone loss in the upper jaw , it has not been shown to offer any advantage over bone grafting functionally although it may offer a less invasive option , depending on the size of the reconstruction required . 
 Small diameter implants are implants of low diameter with one piece construction ( implant and abutment ) that are sometimes used for denture retention or orthodontic anchorage . 
 A typical implant consists of a titanium screw ( resembling a tooth root ) with a roughened or smooth surface . The majority of dental implants are made out of commercially pure titanium , which is available in four grades depending upon the amount of carbon , nitrogen , oxygen and iron contained . Cold work hardened <unk> ( maximum impurity limits of N .05 percent , C .10 percent , H <unk> percent , Fe .50 percent , and O .40 percent ) is the most commonly used titanium for implants . Grade 5 titanium , Titanium 6AL @-@ 4V , ( signifying the titanium alloy containing 6 percent aluminium and 4 percent vanadium alloy ) is slightly harder than <unk> and used in the industry mostly for abutment screws and abutments . Most modern dental implants also have a textured surface ( through etching , anodic oxidation or various @-@ media blasting ) to increase the surface area and osseointegration potential of the implant . 
 If C.P. titanium or a titanium alloy has more than 85 % titanium content it will form a titanium <unk> titanium oxide surface layer or veneer that encloses the other metals preventing them from contacting the bone . 
 = Students Harness Aid for the Relief of the Elderly = 
 Students Harness Aid for Relief of Elderly ( formerly Schoolboys Harness Aid for Relief of Elderly ) or SHARE , is a charitable organisation based in Cork , Ireland , dedicated to providing housing and other support for the elderly poor . One newspaper summed up that : " SHARE has brought help and hope , homes and happiness to the lonely old people who have been forgotten by society " . 
 The organisation was founded in 1970 by Brother Jerome Kelly and students of Presentation Brothers College , Cork , to deal with the social issues of the time . As it gathered momentum , other schools in Cork joined , and today students from 18 secondary schools collaborate in organising every aspect of the charity . Since its founding , over 200 custom @-@ built homes have been provided by the organisation . 
 Work by the members of SHARE is year @-@ round , but its most active period is the Christmas Fast & Fundraising Campaign , when over 1800 students collect in Cork city centre . The charity 's sole collection period lasts only ten days , which has made it a recognisable part of the Cork Christmas season . It has received recognition from the media , important Irish political figures , and the people of Cork ; but it is the involvement of students from all of Cork city 's secondary schools has made SHARE " a truly unique and effective organisation " in Ireland today . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1969 , Brother Jerome Kelly returned home from missionary work and was made principal of Presentation Brothers College . He organised a series of workshops , in which the students of Presentation College were encouraged to think globally and act locally . The senior students were sent out to walk the lanes and side streets of Cork City and identify the major problems themselves . While the city centre 's main thoroughfares were bustling with " elegant buildings and fashionable shop windows " , there existed a different reality in the dreary alleys and decaying tenements . The students were " unanimous in their belief that the greatest single need was the plight of the elderly citizens … apparently forgotten by their own people " . 
 In 1970 , SHARE was founded when a group of 12 students erected a makeshift crib on St. Patrick 's Street and fasted for thirty hours to attract attention to the plight of the elderly . At first they aimed to help the elderly by renovating the " depressing attic rooms and tiny basement flats , " until the uncaring landlords increased the rent . The students obtained the support of the civic leaders at the time for their project , getting " free land in key areas of the city , " and were then " faced with challenge of fundraising and ensuring homes for the elderly were built . " Through their work , they had sufficient funds by 1975 to begin building the first SHARE Complex . 
 In 1976 , twelve houses were built and furnished at <unk> Barra on Sheare 's Street and accommodation for thirteen people was provided at Grenville Place . Over the following two years , eleven homes were provided at Sheare 's Street , seven houses at Sunday 's Well , and 13 houses at Fair Street . The nineteen houses at Shandon were formally opened by the Taoiseach Jack Lynch . 
 Following the securing of these new homes for the residents , the practice of regular visits was begun to deal with the problem of loneliness . The enthusiastic support of the people of Cork ensured the organisation ’ s rapid development throughout the city , and the support of the students ’ parents led to the establishment of " SHARE Mothers . " SHARE celebrated its 10th anniversary in 1980 , with the fifteen @-@ house complex at Abbey Street opened by President of Ireland Patrick Hillery . Complexes were also opened at Dyke Parade and <unk> , Great William O ’ Brien Street . In 1988 , President Hillery also opened a 32 house complex at Grattan Street . 
 " <unk> ' s efforts to provide a greater feeling of security and a more tangible sense of community led to the organisation adopting the " Sheltered Housing " concept with the opening of Dún <unk> in 1988 and Mt . St. Joseph ( a gift from the Presentation Brothers ) in 1993 . The opening of the Day Care Centre in 2001 carries this concept a step further . " 
 = = Organisation = = 
 Although originally made up solely of students of Presentation College , SHARE is currently organised by an elected Executive committee of 50 – 60 , composed of students from the 18 secondary schools in Cork city . These students are typically fifth year or senior cycle students . Pres still maintains a strong presence on the committee , with the chairman elected from the school , in recognition of its role in founding the organisation . 
 The organisation 's sole collection period each year is the " Christmas Fast & Fundraising Campaign " , which starts on 14 December and spans the 10 @-@ day run up to Christmas . During this time , the members of the Executive committee spend as much as ten hours collecting in the city centre each day , with the focal point of the collection at The Crib in Daunt 's Square . Additionally , there is a separate Fasting Committee , which spends 24 hours fasting outside the crib at a time . The campaign is therefore linked with the Christian message of the Gospel and the significance and relevance of the Christmas Crib . There are also cribs in the city ’ s main suburban shopping centres , in the Blackpool , <unk> Court , Douglas Court , Douglas Village , Mahon Point , Merchant ’ s Quay and Wilton shopping centres . 
 Overall , 1800 volunteer students also get involved in this collection , bearing the organisation ’ s " trademark yellow collection boxes and enthusiastic smiles " , regardless of the weather . SHARE always aims to have at least 100 collectors on the streets at any one time . While collection only occurs at Christmas , members of the SHARE Executive visit any resident of the housing schemes that desires visitation , on a regular basis . Although they are not obliged to continue to do this on a permanent basis ( as the executive is changed each school year ) , many develop a strong bond of friendship and keep in touch for years after . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 There are 167 SHARE housing units in total , located in clusters throughout Cork city : in Blackpool , Shandon Street , Sheare 's Street , Grattan Street , Abbey Street , Blarney Street and Sunday 's Well . These facilities are a mix of sheltered housing , apartments and small individual homes , each with " all the modern requirements " and fully furnished . Here the elderly enjoy " the freedom of their own comfortable space in a safe environment " , and are provided with a range of practical services ; including medical treatments , meals , laundry services and support networks as necessary . 
 Additionally , there is the Day Care Centre at Sheare 's Street , " a really homely centre for elderly people , with practical and fun activities . " Activities available include dance , arts and crafts , bingo , darts , quiz games , knitting , sewing , baking , card games , snooker and drama . Maintaining , managing and refurbishing these facilities requires continuous funding . As the Chairman of the 2007 Executive , Kevin Olden , announced : 
 = = Recognition and media coverage = = 
