 Since the opening of the first SHARE homes in 1976 , complexes have been opened by Taoiseach Jack Lynch , President Hillery , President Mary Robinson , then Minister for Health and Children Micheál Martin TD , and the various Lord Mayors of Cork . On the opening of the 100th SHARE house , President Hillery said : " SHARE 's achievements demonstrate a generosity and dedication on the part of young people which is an inspiration and challenge to us all " . In 2002 , the SHARE Day Care Centre was visited by President Mary McAleese . Later , in 2006 , President McAleese acknowledged the work " which changed bad lives into good . " 
 Each year since Br . Jerome ’ s death , the Br . Jerome Lecture has been held in his honour , on social issues and the involvement of SHARE in the community . Guest speakers in the past have included Micheál Martin , Pat Cox and Taoiseach Bertie Ahern . The Taoiseach described the SHARE project as " a model of active citizenship " , " character building " and " satisfying and empowering " : 
 " None of this would have happened without the pioneering spirit , activism and leadership skills of Brother Jerome . He was , truly , a man who was ahead of his time . I think it is particularly appropriate that the Day Care Centre is named after him . Loneliness is itself a form of poverty and the Brother Jerome Kelly Day Care Centre and the social activities which the students organise around it do so much to alleviate this . Together , they bring a lot of joy to residents and visitors , which is a very fitting memorial to his life and work . " 
 The work of SHARE has also received significant attention in both local , national and international media over the years . The British newspaper The Guardian described the project as " Imaginative , courageous and exciting " , while Dick Cross of The Irish Independent labelled it as : " One of the most imaginative and practical projects ever undertaken in this country " . Tom McSweeney of RTÉ said the " exciting venture by Cork 's youth has brought new life to the old city " , and similarly <unk> O <unk> of The Irish Times described it as " one of Ireland 's great success stories " . In 2005 , it was further acclaimed as a demonstration of " the magnificent generosity of the Cork people " . 
 In 2007 , the SHARE residents endorsed the organisation 's 38th Christmas Fast & Fundraising Campaign . During part of the collection , eight members of the Executive sang a version of " Winter Wonderland " in Daunt Square for Irish radio station <unk> . 
 = = List of recent chairmen = = 
 Marcus McCarthy ( 1986 @-@ 1987 ) 
 Peter Barrett ( 2003 @-@ 2004 ) 
 Stuart <unk> ( 2004 @-@ 2005 ) 
 Rob Murphy ( 2005 @-@ 2006 ) 
 Bill Olden ( 2006 @-@ 2007 ) 
 Kevin Olden ( 2007 @-@ 2008 ) 
 James Cusack ( 2008 @-@ 2009 ) 
 Darragh Ó <unk> ( 2009 @-@ 2010 ) 
 Robbie Kidney ( 2010 @-@ 2011 ) 
 Colm Keena ( 2011 @-@ 2012 ) 
 John Higgins ( 2012 @-@ 2013 ) 
 Michael Mc <unk> ( 2013 @-@ 2014 ) 
 Evan O 'Brien ( 2014 – 2015 ) 
 Tony Cusack ( 2015 @-@ Present ) 
 = Jumper ( 2008 film ) = 
 Jumper is a 2008 American science fiction @-@ action film loosely based on the 1992 science fiction novel of the same name written by Steven Gould . The film is directed by Doug Liman and stars Hayden Christensen , Jamie Bell , Rachel Bilson , Max Thieriot , AnnaSophia Robb , Diane Lane , Michael Rooker , and Samuel L. Jackson . The film follows a young man capable of teleporting as he is chased by a secret society intent on killing him . The script went through a rewrite prior to filming and the roles for the main characters were changed during production . Jumper was filmed in 20 cities in 14 countries between 2006 @-@ 07 . The film was released on February 14 , 2008 and a soundtrack on February 19 . The film held the first position in its opening weekend with $ 27 @.@ 3 million , but received generally unfavourable reviews from critics , mostly due to the many changes from Gould 's novel , rushed plot and anti @-@ climactic ending . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Ann Arbor , Michigan , 15 @-@ year @-@ old David Rice ( Max Thieriot ) gives his crush , Millie Harris ( AnnaSophia Robb ) , a snow globe . A bully , Mark Kobold ( Jesse James ) , throws it onto a frozen river . While trying to retrieve it , David falls through the ice and is pulled away by the current . He suddenly finds himself in the local library and discovers his ability to " jump " , ( teleporting ) from one place to another . Amazed with his new ability , he leaves his abusive father ( Michael Rooker ) and runs away from home . 
 Eight years later , an adult David ( Hayden Christensen ) lives lavishly on stolen money . One day , he is ambushed in his home by Roland Cox ( Samuel L. Jackson ) , a member of the Paladins , a group of religious extremists who have been tracking down and killing " Jumpers " . Their reasoning is that Jumpers ' alleged omnipresence is considered blasphemous . Roland tries to capture David with electric cables designed to nullify his ability , but David escapes . He returns to Ann Arbor , seeking his old crush Millie ( Rachel Bilson ) . When Mark ( Teddy Dunn ) attacks him , David teleports him into a bank vault and leaves him there . David then returns to Millie and invites her on a trip to Rome . Roland later discovers Mark in police custody and learns David 's identity . 
 In Rome , David and Millie grow closer , though he keeps his ability a secret . They visit the Colosseum , where David meets Griffin ( Jamie Bell ) , another Jumper . A group of Paladins appear , and Griffin casually kills them , then jumps away . David tries to leave with Millie , but he 's detained by Italian police and questioned about the deaths . David 's mother , Mary ( Diane Lane ) , who had left him when he was five , appears and helps him escape . She urges him to leave Rome with Millie , to protect her . Millie , upset and afraid when David tries to skirt around the issue , demands to know the truth . David declines and puts her on a plane home . 
 David runs into Griffin again , and follows him to his hideout in a cave . Griffin reveals that he has been trailing and killing Paladins for years and plans to kill Roland to avenge his parents . David sees Mary 's photo on the wall and realizes she is also a Paladin . Griffin tells David that the Paladins will target his loved ones to draw him out . David teleports home and finds his father lying bleeding . He gets his father to a hospital and returns to Griffin to ask for help . Realizing Roland is personally hunting David , Griffin agrees . 
 They go to pick Millie up at the airport , but she is no longer there . Griffin returns to his hideout to get weapons . David breaks into Millie 's apartment , angering her . Seeing Roland arriving , David decides to reveal the truth to her . He teleports her to Griffin 's hideout . Using a machine that keeps David 's " jump scar " open , the Paladins , including Roland , invade the hideout . David and Griffin subdue most of them . Roland is chased back through the jump scar , but he manages to snatch Millie with him . He sets up a trap in Millie 's apartment , expecting David to come back for her . 
 Obsessed with killing Roland , Griffin plans to bomb the apartment ; but David objects , wanting to save Millie . They fight and David traps Griffin with power lines in Chechnya . Ignoring Griffin 's warning , David jumps to Millie 's apartment and is quickly trapped by Roland 's cables . The cables " link " him to the apartment , making him unable to jump away alone . Mustering his strength , David teleports the apartment and everyone inside to a river . Once free of the cables , David teleports Millie to safety and dumps Roland in a cave in the Grand Canyon . He leaves Roland there , explaining that not all Jumpers are a threat to be destroyed . 
 David visits his mother and discovers his half @-@ sister , Sophie ( Kristen Stewart ) . Mary tells David that when he was five , he made his jump . She is a Paladin and had to either kill David or leave . After leaving her house , David meets with Millie outside , and they jump to an unknown location . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hayden Christensen as David Rice , a young man who discovers the ability to " jump " ( teleport ) . 
 Max Thieriot as 15 @-@ year @-@ old David 
 Ryan Grantham as 5 @-@ year @-@ old David 
 Rachel Bilson as Millie Harris , David 's childhood friend and crush . 
 AnnaSophia Robb as young Millie Harris 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Roland Cox , the leader of the Paladins group whose goal is to kill Jumpers . In the book , his name is Brian Cox , but it was changed in the film to prevent confusion with the English particle physicist or the Scottish character actor of the same name . 
 Jamie Bell as Griffin O 'Connor , a renegade Jumper who tracks down and eliminates the Paladins . During his search , he becomes friends with David . His whereabouts at the end of the movie are unknown . 
 Diane Lane as Mary Rice , David 's mother who separated from her son when he was five years old . 
 Teddy Dunn as Mark Kobold , David 's childhood bully . 
 Jesse James as young Mark 
 Michael Rooker as William Rice , David 's father . 
 Kristen Stewart as Sophie , David 's half @-@ sister . ( Cameo ) 
 Tom Hulce as Mr. Bowker 
 Barbara Garrick as Ellen 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Script and storyboards = = = 
 In November 2005 , New Regency Productions hired director Doug Liman to helm the film adaptation of the science fiction novel Jumper by Steven Gould . Screenwriter Jim Uhls was hired to rewrite an adapted screenplay by David S. Goyer . However , Liman desired another rewrite and Simon Kinberg assisted in completing the script . Liman said about using the novel for developing the script : " This is 100 % Steven Gould 's story , it 's just reinvented as a movie . " In an interview , Gould revealed that he approved of the deviations from the novel . Before filming was to begin , the studio announced plans to develop a trilogy based on the novel 's premise . 
 While other films tend to use only one storyboard artist , Jumper required six , who each worked on an individual action sequence . The artists were given specific instruction on the rules of the teleportation used in the film , to ensure accuracy in the storyboarding . One of them , Rob McCallum , reflected on the instructions : " I was just thinking , ' How would a guy that can teleport fight ? ' So you were really pushing yourself to try to think of inventive , cool , spectacular ways that you could use this jumping talent that these characters have . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 In April 2006 , actors Tom Sturridge , Teresa Palmer , and Jamie Bell were cast for Jumper with Sturridge in the lead role ( who won the role over Heath Ledger , Devon Sawa , Eminem , Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt , and Jared Padalecki ) . The following July , actor Samuel L. Jackson was cast as an NSA agent , with producer Simon Kinberg rewriting the original screenplay draft by Goyer . Principal photography was scheduled to take place in Tokyo , Rome , Toronto , and New York . Production was stopped in June 2006 after producer Tom Rothman told Liman " The lead is 18 . Wouldn 't the movie be better if he was 25 ? You have a huge movie here and adults won 't go and see an 18 @-@ year @-@ old . They 'll consider it a children 's movie . You could make a bigger movie than that . " Liman agreed on casting older actors for furthering the romantic aspect of the film . In August , actor Hayden Christensen replaced Sturridge in the lead role as David just two weeks before the beginning of shooting , as the studio " became concerned about not having a more prominent actor in their trio of young stars . " After Christensen was recast for the lead role , Liman replaced Palmer with Rachel Bilson . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In September 2006 , Jumper was filmed at various locations in Peterborough , Ontario and principal photography began in Toronto in October . In December 2006 , Liman negotiated with the Rome Film Commission for rare access to film for three days in the Colosseum . The scene in the Colosseum was originally written for the Pantheon , at which exterior shots were also filmed . The crew was required to keep equipment off the ground by using harnesses and had to rely on natural light for filming . Filming took place for 45 minutes in the morning and in the evening so as not to disturb the public touring the amphitheater throughout the day . In order to maximize the short period for filming , four steadicams were set up to ensure time was not wasted in reloading the camera . A visual effects supervisor explained how visual effects were needed for various aspects after filming : " There were three kinds of shots : there were shots where they were able to get most of what they needed in the <unk> [ sic ] itself ; and then there were shots on a set that needed extensions beyond the limits of the set ; and then there were shots where we needed to create the Coliseum basically from scratch . " After filming in Rome , scenes were filmed in Toronto during December 2006 to January 2007 and wrapped at the Canadian location on January 19 . On January 26 in Toronto , 56 @-@ year @-@ old David Ritchie , a set dresser , was fatally struck by frozen debris while dismantling an outdoor set in wintry conditions . Another worker was injured and was sent to a hospital with serious head and shoulder injuries . After Toronto , the cast and crew traveled to Tokyo to film scenes . One scene required over 30 shoots as the scene could only be filmed in between traffic light changes . As a result of director Liman insisting Christensen perform his own stunts , the actor injured his hand , split open his ear , and developed a <unk> pupil that required hospital care while filming various scenes . In February 2007 , the next filming site was set up at Gallup Park in Ann Arbor , Michigan . Sixty students from the nearby Huron High School were cast as extras for the film . Since additional filming was required of the area , twenty other students were used for a day of filming in September . Altogether , filming took place in 20 cities in 14 countries . 
 = = = Visual effects = = = 
 The New Zealand visual effects studio Weta Digital was initially selected to assist in creating a preview clip for the 2007 Comic @-@ Con Convention . The studio 's 100 employees later developed the visual effects for 300 of the 600 shots in the film . In total , there are more than 100 jumps in the film , and each jump was modified based on the distance and location the character ( s ) jumped . The jumps were developed using Nuke and Shake software ; many , including those to Big Ben and the Sphinx were created with Maya . Weta 's VFX supervisor Erik <unk> explained how the visual effects of the jumps were created : " The concept of what a jump looks like changed and evolved a little over the course of post production . There are shots in the film that use still array footage but not in the same way that we saw in The Matrix . The Matrix was largely about stopping time whereas this was about using slow shutter speeds on those still array cameras to end up with a streaky motion @-@ blurred image as the perspective was changing , which is a pretty interesting look . " Other visual effects studios that assisted with the film include Hydraulx , Digital Domain , and Pixel Magic . Lightwave 3D was also used for some of the movie 's scenes . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The film received generally negative reviews from critics . Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 16 % based on reviews from 156 critics , with an average score of 4 / 10 ; the consensus was " An erratic action pic with little coherence and lackluster special effects . " Metacritic gives the film an average score of 35 , based on 36 reviews . 
 Austin Chronicle 's Marc <unk> called the film " ... pretty slick , entertaining stuff , well @-@ crafted by Liman , edited into a tight , action @-@ packed bundle of <unk> . " Empire had a verdict of " [ Doug ] Liman ’ s least charismatic action movie and the least developed , but it still packs some cracking action into its brief running time and lays foundations on which a great franchise could be built . " Australian film reviewer David Stratton was far less kind , stating that " this film represents a new [ watershed ] in the history of the cinema because it 's got no plot , it 's got no characters , it 's got no action scene that makes any kind of sense " , and awarded it half a star out of five . 
 = = Box office = = 
 The film was released on February 14 , 2008 in the United States and Canada , in the hopes of pulling in business on Valentine 's Day . The film was targeted at an audience of both males and females below the age of 25 . Jumper grossed $ 27 @.@ 3 million on 4 @,@ 600 screens in 3 @,@ 428 theaters from Friday to Sunday , ranking first for the weekend at the box office . In its first weekend , the film set the record for the largest February release in Korea and had the first place position in 11 of the 30 markets it was released in . For the first two weekends of its release , the film maintained its number one position in international markets , while slipping to the second position in the United States to the release of Vantage Point . The film 's worldwide gross is $ 221 @,@ 231 @,@ 186 with $ 80 @,@ 172 @,@ 128 from the box office in the United States and Canada and $ 142 @,@ 059 @,@ 058 from other territories . It was the 28th highest @-@ grossing film worldwide for 2008 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The score for the film was released on February 19 , 2008 , after the film 's release in theaters . The tracks were all written by John Powell . The music was conducted by Brett <unk> and performed by the Sydney Symphony Orchestra . 
 = = Home media = = 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc in North America on June 10 , 2008 and internationally on June 16 . Special features include a commentary , deleted scenes , an animated graphic novel , featurettes , and a digital copy allowing consumers to watch the film on portable devices . 
 = = = Video game = = = 
 A video game titled Jumper : Griffin 's Story was made for the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 2 , and Wii consoles . The storyline focuses on the character Griffin as he attempts to avenge the death of his parents . Nicholas <unk> of the video game publisher Brash Entertainment stated , " From the very first script read , we knew this had to be made into a game . The teleportation elements make for some very compelling gameplay . " The game was released on February 12 , 2008 , two days before the film 's wide release . Game Rankings gave the Xbox 360 version of the game a 28 % positive rating , based on 12 reviews . The PlayStation 2 version received a 35 % positive rating while the Wii version had a 23 % positive rating . Daemon Hatfield of IGN reviewed the Xbox 360 version and gave it a negative review : " Low production values , monotonous gameplay , and lackluster visuals make this a story you can jump past . " 
 = = = Novel tie @-@ ins = = = 
 Steven Gould , the author of Jumper and Reflex also wrote Jumper : Griffin 's Story as a tie @-@ in for the film . The novel , released on August 21 , 2007 , focuses on the character Griffin which was created by screenwriter David S. Goyer specifically for the film . Because Griffin had not appeared in the two prior novels , Gould developed Jumper : Griffin 's Story as a backstory of the character 's early childhood before the film . When writing the novel , Gould had to work closely with a producer of the film to ensure that the story did not conflict with the film 's premise . 
 Oni Press released a graphic novel , Jumper : <unk> , that portrays several backstories related to the film . The novel was released on February 13 , 2008 , one day before the film 's wide release . A publisher for Oni Press commented on the tie @-@ in to the film , stating : " The world that was being built around these characters was so well @-@ realized and the mythology so interesting that other stories about this conflict would be plentiful and add to what the filmmakers were building . " The novel was written by Nunzio DeFilippis and Christina Weir and illustrated by Brian Hurtt . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Author Steven Gould second novel in the Jumper series , Reflex , was published in 2004 ( by 2014 , two more Gould novels in the series have been published ) . 
 Prior to the film 's 2008 release , Hayden Christensen reflected on the possibility of one or more sequels : " This has definitely been set up in a way that will allow for more films , and Doug has been careful to make sure that he 's created characters that will have room to grow . " Lucas Foster during production of the film stated in an interview : " The ideas got so large , that they really couldn 't fit into , you know , one or two movies , they needed to evolve over at least three movies . So we planned the story out over three movies and then we sliced it up in such a way as to leave room for the other two movies . " 
 In response to the film 's box office performance , director Doug Liman has spoken of his ideas for a sequel . Among them are that Jumpers can reach other planets and travel in time , as well as their capacity for espionage . He has also stated that Rachel Bilson 's character would learn how to jump ( hinted by David falling unconscious before the jump from the river to the library ) , just as in Gould 's sequel , Reflex . 
 = = Prequel = = 
 Jumper : Griffin 's Story follows the character Griffin as he deals with the death of his parents and the relentless pursuit of the Paladins through his adolescent and teenage years . 
 = Battle of Blenheim = 
 The Battle of Blenheim ( also the Battle of Blindheim and referred to in some countries as the Second Battle of Höchstädt ) , fought on 13 August 1704 , was a major battle of the War of the Spanish Succession . The overwhelming Allied victory ensured the safety of Vienna from the Franco @-@ Bavarian army , thus preventing the collapse of the Grand Alliance . 
 Louis XIV of France sought to knock Emperor Leopold out of the war by seizing Vienna , the Habsburg capital , and gain a favourable peace settlement . The dangers to Vienna were considerable : the Elector of Bavaria and Marshal Marsin 's forces in Bavaria threatened from the west , and Marshal Vendôme 's large army in northern Italy posed a serious danger with a potential offensive through the Brenner Pass . Vienna was also under pressure from Rákóczi 's Hungarian revolt from its eastern approaches . Realising the danger , the Duke of Marlborough resolved to alleviate the peril to Vienna by marching his forces south from Bedburg and help maintain Emperor Leopold within the Grand Alliance . 
 A combination of deception and brilliant administration – designed to conceal his true destination from friend and foe alike – enabled Marlborough to march 250 miles ( 400 kilometres ) unhindered from the Low Countries to the River Danube in five weeks . After securing Donauwörth on the Danube , Marlborough sought to engage the Elector 's and Marsin 's army before Marshal Tallard could bring reinforcements through the Black Forest . However , with the Franco @-@ Bavarian commanders reluctant to fight until their numbers were deemed sufficient , the Duke enacted a policy of plundering in Bavaria designed to force the issue . The tactic proved unsuccessful , but when Tallard arrived to bolster the Elector 's army , and Prince Eugene arrived with reinforcements for the Allies , the two armies finally met on the banks of the Danube in and around the small village of Blindheim . 
 Blenheim has gone down in history as one of the turning points of the War of the Spanish Succession . Bavaria was knocked out of the war , and Louis 's hopes for a quick victory came to an end . France suffered over 30 @,@ 000 casualties including the commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Marshal Tallard , who was taken captive to England . Before the 1704 campaign ended , the Allies had taken Landau , and the towns of Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle in preparation for the following year 's campaign into France itself . 
 = = Background = = 
 By 1704 , the War of the Spanish Succession was in its fourth year . The previous year had been one of success for France and her allies , most particularly on the Danube , where Marshal Villars and the Elector of Bavaria had created a direct threat to Vienna , the Habsburg capital . Vienna had been saved by dissension between the two commanders , leading to the brilliant Villars being replaced by the less dynamic Marshal Marsin . Nevertheless , by 1704 , the threat was still real : Rákóczi 's Hungarian revolt was already threatening the Empire 's eastern approaches , and Marshal Vendôme 's forces threatened an invasion from northern Italy . In the courts of Versailles and Madrid , Vienna 's fall was confidently anticipated , an event which would almost certainly have led to the collapse of the Grand Alliance . 
 To isolate the Danube from any Allied intervention , Marshal Villeroi 's 46 @,@ 000 troops were expected to pin the 70 @,@ 000 Dutch and English troops around Maastricht in the Low Countries , while General de <unk> protected Alsace against surprise with a further corps . The only forces immediately available for Vienna 's defence were Prince Louis of Baden 's force of 36 @,@ 000 stationed in the Lines of Stollhofen to watch Marshal Tallard at Strasbourg ; there was also a weak force of 10 @,@ 000 men under Field Marshal Count Limburg <unk> observing Ulm . 
 Both the Imperial Austrian Ambassador in London , Count Wratislaw , and the Duke of Marlborough realised the implications of the situation on the Danube . The Dutch , however , who clung to their troops for their country 's protection , were against any adventurous military operation as far south as the Danube and would never willingly permit any major weakening of the forces in the Spanish Netherlands . Marlborough , realising the only way to ignore Dutch wishes was by the use of secrecy and guile , set out to deceive his Dutch allies by pretending to simply move his troops to the Moselle – a plan approved of by The Hague – but once there , he would slip the Dutch leash and link up with Austrian forces in southern Germany . " My intentions " , wrote the Duke from The Hague on 29 April to his governmental confidant , Sidney Godolphin , " are to march with the English to Coblenz and declare that I intend to campaign on the Moselle . But when I come there , to write to the Dutch States that I think it absolutely necessary for the saving of the Empire to march with the troops under my command and to join with those that are in Germany ... in order to make measures with Prince Lewis of Baden for the speedy reduction of the Elector of Bavaria . " 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Protagonists march to the Danube = = = 
 A scarlet caterpillar , upon which all eyes were at once fixed , began to crawl steadfastly day by day across the map of Europe , dragging the whole war with it . – Winston Churchill . 
 Marlborough 's march started on 19 May from Bedburg , 20 miles ( 32 km ) north @-@ west of Cologne . The army ( assembled by the Duke 's brother , General Charles Churchill ) consisted of 66 squadrons , 31 battalions and 38 guns and mortars totalling 21 @,@ 000 men ( 16 @,@ 000 of whom were English troops ) . This force was to be augmented en route such that by the time Marlborough reached the Danube , it would number 40 @,@ 000 ( 47 battalions , 88 squadrons ) . Whilst Marlborough led his army , General Overkirk would maintain a defensive position in the Dutch Republic in case Villeroi mounted an attack . The Duke had assured the Dutch that if the French were to launch an offensive he would return in good time , but Marlborough calculated that as he marched south , the French commander would be drawn after him . In this assumption Marlborough proved correct : Villeroi shadowed the Duke with 30 @,@ 000 men in 60 squadrons and 42 battalions . 
 The military dangers in such an enterprise were numerous : Marlborough 's lines of communication along the Rhine would be hopelessly exposed to French interference , for Louis ' generals controlled the left bank of the river and its central reaches . Such a long march would almost certainly involve a high wastage of men and horses through exhaustion and disease . However , Marlborough was convinced of the urgency – " I am very sensible that I take a great deal upon me " , he had earlier written to Godolphin , " but should I act otherwise , the Empire would be undone ... " 
 Whilst Allied preparations had progressed , the French were striving to maintain and re @-@ supply Marshal Marsin . Marsin had been operating with the Elector of Bavaria against the Imperial commander , Prince Louis of Baden , and was somewhat isolated from France : his only lines of communication lay through the rocky passes of the Black Forest . However , on 14 May , with considerable skill Marshal Tallard managed to bring 10 @,@ 000 reinforcements and vast supplies and munitions through the difficult terrain , whilst outmanoeuvring Baron Thüngen , the Imperial general who sought to block his path . Tallard then returned with his own force to the Rhine , once again side @-@ stepping Thüngen 's efforts to intercept him . The whole operation was an outstanding military achievement . 
 On 26 May , Marlborough reached Coblenz , where the Moselle meets the Rhine . If he intended an attack along the Moselle the Duke must now turn west , but , instead , the following day the army crossed to the right bank of the Rhine , ( pausing to add 5 @,@ 000 waiting Hanoverians and Prussians ) . " There will be no campaign on the Moselle " , wrote Villeroi who had taken up a defensive position on the river , " the English have all gone up into Germany . " A second possible objective now occurred to the French – an Allied incursion into Alsace and an attack on the city of Strasbourg . Marlborough skillfully encouraged this apprehension by constructing bridges across the Rhine at Philippsburg , a ruse that not only encouraged Villeroi to come to Tallard 's aid in the defence of Alsace , but one that ensured the French plan to march on Vienna remained paralysed by uncertainty . 
 With Villeroi shadowing Marlborough 's every move , Marlborough 's gamble that the French would not move against the weakened Dutch position in the Netherlands paid off . In any case , Marlborough had promised to return to the Netherlands if a French attack developed there , transferring his troops down the Rhine on barges at a rate of 80 miles ( 130 kilometres ) a day . Encouraged by this promise ( whatever it was worth ) the States General agreed to release the Danish contingent of seven battalions and 22 squadrons as a reinforcement . Marlborough reached Ladenburg , in the plain of the Neckar and the Rhine , and there halted for three days to rest his cavalry and allow the guns and infantry to close up . On 6 June he arrived at <unk> , south of Heidelberg . The following day , the Allied army swung away from the Rhine towards the hills of the Swabian Jura and the Danube beyond . At last Marlborough 's destination was established without doubt . 
 = = = Strategy = = = 
 On 10 June , the Duke met for the first time the President of the Imperial War Council , Prince Eugene – accompanied by Count Wratislaw – at the village of <unk> , half @-@ way between the Danube and the Rhine . By 13 June , the Imperial Field Commander , Prince Louis of Baden , had joined them in <unk> . The three generals commanded a force of nearly 110 @,@ 000 men . At conference it was decided that Eugene would return with 28 @,@ 000 men to the Lines of Stollhofen on the Rhine to keep an eye on Villeroi and Tallard , and prevent them going to the aid of the Franco @-@ Bavarian army on the Danube . Meanwhile , Marlborough 's and Baden 's forces would combine , totalling 80 @,@ 000 men , for the march on the Danube to seek out the Elector and Marsin before they could be reinforced . 
 Knowing Marlborough 's destination , Tallard and Villeroi met at Landau in the Palatinate on 13 June to rapidly construct an action plan to save Bavaria , but the rigidity of the French command system was such that any variations from the original plan had to be sanctioned by Versailles . The Count of Mérode @-@ Westerloo , commander of the Flemish troops in Tallard 's army wrote – " One thing is certain : we delayed our march from Alsace for far too long and quite inexplicably . " Approval from Louis arrived on 27 June : Tallard was to reinforce Marsin and the Elector on the Danube via the Black Forest , with 40 battalions and 50 squadrons ; Villeroi was to pin down the Allies defending the Lines of Stollhofen , or , if the Allies should move all their forces to the Danube , he was to join with Marshal Tallard ; and General de <unk> with 8 @,@ 000 men , would protect Alsace . On 1 July Tallard 's army of 35 @,@ 000 re @-@ crossed the Rhine at Kehl and began its march . 
 Meanwhile , on 22 June , Marlborough 's forces linked up with Baden 's Imperial forces at <unk> . A distance of 250 miles ( 400 kilometres ) had been covered in five weeks . Thanks to a carefully planned time @-@ table , the effects of wear and tear had been kept to a minimum . Captain Parker described the march discipline – " As we marched through the country of our Allies , commissars were appointed to furnish us with all manner of necessaries for man and horse ... the soldiers had nothing to do but pitch their tents , boil kettles and lie down to rest . " In response to Marlborough 's manoeuvres , the Elector and Marsin , conscious of their numerical disadvantage with only 40 @,@ 000 men , moved their forces to the entrenched camp at Dillingen on the north bank of the Danube . Marlborough could not attack Dillingen because of a lack of siege guns – he was unable to bring any from the Low Countries , and Baden had failed to supply any despite assurances to the contrary . 
 The Allies , nevertheless , needed a base for provisions and a good river crossing . On 2 July , therefore , Marlborough stormed the key fortress of Schellenberg on the heights above the town of Donauwörth . Count Jean d 'Arco had been sent with 12 @,@ 000 men from the Franco @-@ Bavarian camp to hold the town and grassy hill , but after a ferocious and bloody battle , inflicting enormous casualties on both sides , Schellenberg finally succumbed , forcing Donauwörth to surrender shortly afterwards . The Elector , knowing his position at Dillingen was now not tenable , took up a position behind the strong fortifications of Augsburg . 
 Tallard 's march , meanwhile , presented a dilemma for Eugene . If the Allies were not to be outnumbered on the Danube , Eugene realised he must either try to cut Tallard off before he could get there , or , he must hasten to reinforce Marlborough . However , if he withdrew from the Rhine to the Danube , Villeroi might also make a move south to link up with the Elector and Marsin . Eugene compromised : leaving 12 @,@ 000 troops behind guarding the Lines of Stollhofen , he marched off with the rest of his army to forestall Tallard . 
 Lacking in numbers , Eugene could not seriously disrupt Tallard 's march ; nevertheless , the French Marshal 's progress was proving pitifully slow . Tallard 's force had suffered considerably more than Marlborough 's troops on their march – many of his cavalry horses were suffering from glanders , and the mountain passes were proving tough for the 2 @,@ 000 wagons of provisions . Local German peasants , angry at French plundering , compounded Tallard 's problems , leading Mérode @-@ Westerloo to bemoan – " the enraged peasantry killed several thousand of our men before the army was clear of the Black Forest . " Additionally , Tallard had insisted on besieging the little town of <unk> for six days ( 16 – 22 July ) , but abandoned the enterprise on discovering the approach of Eugene . 
 The Elector in Augsburg was informed on 14 July that Tallard was on his way through the Black Forest . This good news bolstered the Elector 's policy of inaction , further encouraging him to wait for the reinforcements . But this reticence to fight induced Marlborough to undertake a controversial policy of spoliation in Bavaria , burning buildings and crops throughout the rich lands south of the Danube . This had two aims : firstly to put pressure on the Elector to fight or come to terms before Tallard arrived with reinforcements ; and secondly , to ruin Bavaria as a base from which the French and Bavarian armies could attack Vienna , or pursue the Duke into Franconia if , at some stage , he had to withdraw northwards . But this destruction , coupled with a protracted siege of Rain ( 9 – 16 July ) , caused Prince Eugene to lament " ... since the Donauwörth action I cannot admire their performances " , and later to conclude " If he has to go home without having achieved his objective , he will certainly be ruined . " Nevertheless , strategically the Duke had been able to place his numerically stronger forces between the Franco @-@ Bavarian army and Vienna . 
 = = = Final positioning = = = 
 Marshal Tallard , with 34 @,@ 000 men , reached Ulm , joining with the Elector and Marsin in Augsburg on 5 August ( although Tallard was not impressed to find that the Elector had dispersed his army in response to Marlborough 's campaign of ravaging the region ) . Also on 5 August , Eugene reached Höchstädt , riding that same night to meet with Marlborough at Schrobenhausen . Marlborough knew it was necessary that another crossing point over the Danube would be required in case Donauwörth fell to the enemy . On 7 August , therefore , the first of Baden 's 15 @,@ 000 Imperial troops ( the remainder following two days later ) left Marlborough 's main force to besiege the heavily defended city of Ingolstadt , 20 miles ( 32 kilometres ) farther down the Danube . 
 With Eugene 's forces at Höchstädt on the north bank of the Danube , and Marlborough 's at Rain on the south bank , Tallard and the Elector debated their next move . Tallard preferred to bide his time , replenish supplies and allow Marlborough 's Danube campaign to flounder in the colder weeks of Autumn ; the Elector and Marsin , however , newly reinforced , were keen to push ahead . The French and Bavarian commanders eventually agreed on a plan and decided to attack Eugene 's smaller force . On 9 August , the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces began to cross to the north bank of the Danube . 
 On 10 August , Eugene sent an urgent dispatch reporting that he was falling back to Donauwörth – " The enemy have marched . It is almost certain that the whole army is crossing the Danube at Lauingen ... The plain of Dillingen is crowded with troops ... Everything , <unk> , consists in speed and that you put yourself forthwith in movement to join me tomorrow , without which I fear it will be too late . " By a series of brilliant marches Marlborough concentrated his forces on Donauwörth and , by noon 11 August , the link @-@ up was complete . 
 During 11 August , Tallard pushed forward from the river crossings at Dillingen ; by 12 August , the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces were encamped behind the small river Nebel near the village of Blenheim on the plain of Höchstädt . That same day Marlborough and Eugene carried out their own reconnaissance of the French position from the church spire at <unk> , and moved their combined forces to Münster – five miles ( 8 km ) from the French camp . A French reconnaissance under the Marquis de Silly went forward to probe the enemy , but were driven off by Allied troops who had deployed to cover the pioneers of the advancing army , labouring to bridge the numerous streams in the area and improve the passage leading westwards to Höchstädt . Marlborough quickly moved forward two brigades under the command of General Wilkes and Brigadier Rowe to secure the narrow strip of land between the Danube and the wooded <unk> hill , at the Schwenningen defile . 
 Tallard 's army numbered 56 @,@ 000 men and 90 guns ; the army of the Grand Alliance , 52 @,@ 000 men and 66 guns . Some Allied officers who were acquainted with the superior numbers of the enemy , and aware of their strong defensive position , ventured to remonstrate with Marlborough about the hazards of attacking ; but the Duke was resolute – " I know the danger , yet a battle is absolutely necessary , and I rely on the bravery and discipline of the troops , which will make amends for our disadvantages " . Marlborough and Eugene decided to risk everything , and agreed to attack on the following day . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = The battlefield = = = 
 The battlefield stretched for nearly 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) . The extreme right flank of the Franco @-@ Bavarian army was covered by the Danube ; to the extreme left flank lay the undulating pine @-@ covered hills of the Swabian Jura . A small stream , the Nebel , ( the ground either side of which was soft and marshy and only fordable intermittently ) , fronted the French line . The French right rested on the village of Blenheim near where the Nebel flows into the Danube ; the village itself was surrounded by hedges , fences , enclosed gardens , and meadows . Between Blenheim and the next village of Oberglauheim the fields of wheat had been cut to stubble and were now ideal to deploy troops . From Oberglauheim to the next hamlet of Lutzingen the terrain of ditches , thickets and brambles was potentially difficult ground for the attackers . 
 = = = Initial manoeuvres = = = 
 At 02 : 00 on 13 August , 40 squadrons were sent forward towards the enemy , followed at 03 : 00 , in eight columns , by the main Allied force pushing over the Kessel . At about 06 : 00 they reached Schwenningen , two miles ( 3 km ) from Blenheim . The English and German troops who had held Schwenningen through the night joined the march , making a ninth column on the left of the army . Marlborough and Eugene made their final plans . The Allied commanders agreed that Marlborough would command 36 @,@ 000 troops and attack Tallard 's force of 33 @,@ 000 on the left ( including capturing the village of Blenheim ) , whilst Eugene , commanding 16 @,@ 000 men would attack the Elector and Marsin 's combined forces of 23 @,@ 000 troops on the right wing ; if this attack was pressed hard the Elector and Marsin would have no troops to send to aid Tallard on their right . Lieutenant @-@ General John Cutts would attack Blenheim in concert with Eugene 's attack . With the French flanks busy , Marlborough could cross the Nebel and deliver the fatal blow to the French at their centre . However , Marlborough would have to wait until Eugene was in position before the general engagement could begin . 
 The last thing Tallard expected that morning was to be attacked by the Allies – deceived by intelligence gathered from prisoners taken by de Silly the previous day , and assured in their strong natural position , Tallard and his colleagues were convinced that Marlborough and Eugene were about to retreat north @-@ eastwards towards Nördlingen . Tallard wrote a report to this effect to King Louis that morning , but hardly had he sent the messenger when the Allied army began to appear opposite his camp . " I could see the enemy advancing ever closer in nine great columns " , wrote Mérode @-@ Westerloo , " ... filling the whole plain from the Danube to the woods on the horizon . " Signal guns were fired to bring in the foraging parties and <unk> as the French and Bavarian troops tried to draw into battle @-@ order to face the unexpected threat . 
 At about 08 : 00 the French artillery on their right wing opened fire , answered by Colonel Blood 's batteries . The guns were heard by Baden in his camp before Ingolstadt , " The Prince and the Duke are engaged today to the westward " , he wrote to the Emperor . " Heaven bless them . " An hour later Tallard , the Elector , and Marsin climbed Blenheim 's church tower to finalise their plans . It was settled that the Elector and Marsin would hold the front from the hills to Oberglauheim , whilst Tallard would defend the ground between Oberglauheim and the Danube . The French commanders were , however , divided as to how to utilise the Nebel : Tallard 's tactic – opposed by Marsin and the Elector who felt it better to close their infantry right up to the stream itself – was to lure the allies across before unleashing their cavalry upon them , causing panic and confusion ; whilst the enemy was struggling in the marshes , they would be caught in crossfire from Blenheim and Oberglauheim . The plan was sound if all its parts were implemented , but it allowed Marlborough to cross the Nebel without serious interference and fight the battle he had in mind . 
 = = = Deployment = = = 
 The Franco @-@ Bavarian commanders deployed their forces . In the village of Lutzingen , Count Maffei positioned five Bavarian battalions with a great battery of 16 guns at the village 's edge . In the woods to the left of Lutzingen , seven French battalions under the Marquis de Rozel moved into place . Between Lutzingen and Oberglauheim the Elector placed 27 squadrons of cavalry – Count d 'Arco commanded 14 Bavarian squadrons and Count <unk> had 13 more in support nearby . To their right stood Marsin 's 40 French squadrons and 12 battalions . The village of Oberglauheim was packed with 14 battalions commanded by the Marquis de Blainville ( including the effective Irish Brigade known as the ' Wild Geese ' ) . Six batteries of guns were ranged alongside the village . On the right of these French and Bavarian positions , between Oberglauheim and Blenheim , Tallard deployed 64 French and Walloon squadrons ( 16 drawn from Marsin ) supported by nine French battalions standing near the Höchstädt road . In the cornfield next to Blenheim stood three battalions from the Regiment de Roi . Nine battalions occupied the village itself , commanded by the Marquis de Clérambault . Four battalions stood to the rear and a further 11 were in reserve . These battalions were supported by <unk> 's 12 squadrons of dismounted dragoons . By 11 : 00 Tallard , the Elector , and Marsin were in place . Many of the Allied generals were hesitant to attack such a relatively strong position . The Earl of Orkney later confessed that , " had I been asked to give my opinion , I had been against it . " 
 Prince Eugene was expected to be in position by 11 : 00 , but due to the difficult terrain and enemy fire , progress was slow . Lord Cutts ' column – who by 10 : 00 had expelled the enemy from two water mills upon the Nebel – had already deployed by the river against Blenheim , enduring over the next three hours severe fire from a heavy six @-@ gun battery posted near the village . The rest of Marlborough 's army , waiting in their ranks on the forward slope , were also forced to bear the cannonade from the French artillery , suffering 2 @,@ 000 casualties before the attack could even start . Meanwhile , engineers repaired a stone bridge across the Nebel , and constructed five additional bridges or causeways across the marsh between Blenheim and Oberglauheim . Marlborough 's anxiety was finally allayed when , just past noon , Colonel Cadogan reported that Eugene 's Prussian and Danish infantry were in place – the order for the general advance was given . At 13 : 00 , Cutts was ordered to attack the village of Blenheim whilst Prince Eugene was requested to assault Lutzingen on the Allied right flank . 
 = = = Blenheim = = = 
 Cutts ordered Brigadier @-@ General Archibald Rowe 's brigade to attack . The English infantry rose from the edge of the Nebel , and silently marched towards Blenheim , a distance of some 150 yards ( 140 m ) . John Ferguson 's English brigade supported Rowe 's left , and moved in perfect order towards the barricades between the village and the river , defended by <unk> 's dragoons . As the range closed to within 30 yards ( 27 m ) , the French fired a deadly volley . Rowe had ordered that there should be no firing from his men until he struck his sword upon the palisades , but as he stepped forward to give the signal , he fell mortally wounded . The survivors of the leading companies closed up the gaps in their torn ranks and rushed forward . Small parties penetrated the defences , but repeated French volleys forced the English back towards the Nebel , sustaining heavy casualties . As the attack faltered , eight squadrons of elite Gens d 'Armes , commanded by the veteran Swiss officer , Beat @-@ Jacques von Zurlauben , fell upon the English troops , cutting at the exposed flank of Rowe 's own regiment . However , Wilkes ' Hessian brigade , lying nearby in the marshy grass at the water 's edge , stood firm and repulsed the Gens d 'Armes with steady fire , enabling the English and Hessians to re @-@ order and launch another attack . 
 Although the Allies were again repulsed , these persistent attacks on Blenheim eventually bore fruit , panicking Clérambault into making the worst French error of the day . Without consulting Tallard , Clérambault ordered his reserve battalions into the village , upsetting the balance of the French position and nullifying the French numerical superiority . " The men were so crowded in upon one another " , wrote Mérode @-@ Westerloo , " that they couldn 't even fire – let alone receive or carry out any orders . " Marlborough , spotting this error , now countermanded Cutts ' intention to launch a third attack , and ordered him simply to contain the enemy within Blenheim ; no more than 5 @,@ 000 Allied soldiers were able to pen in twice the number of French infantry and dragoons . 
 = = = Lutzingen = = = 
 ... Prince Eugene and the Imperial troops had been repulsed three times – driven right back to the woods – and had taken a real drubbing . – Mérode @-@ Westerloo . 
 On the Allied right , Eugene 's Prussian and Danish forces were desperately fighting the numerically superior forces of the Elector and Marsin . The Prince of Anhalt @-@ Dessau led forward four brigades across the Nebel to assault the well @-@ fortified position of Lutzingen . Here , the Nebel was less of an obstacle , but the great battery positioned on the edge of the village enjoyed a good field of fire across the open ground stretching to the hamlet of <unk> . As soon as the infantry crossed the stream , they were struck by Maffei 's infantry , and salvoes from the Bavarian guns positioned both in front of the village and in enfilade on the wood @-@ line to the right . Despite heavy casualties the Prussians attempted to storm the great battery , whilst the Danes , under Count Scholten , attempted to drive the French infantry out of the copses beyond the village . 
 With the infantry heavily engaged , Eugene 's cavalry picked its way across the Nebel . After an initial success , his first line of cavalry , under the Imperial General of Horse , Prince Maximilian of Hanover , were pressed by the second line of Marsin 's cavalry , and were forced back across the Nebel in confusion . Nevertheless , the exhausted French were unable to follow up their advantage , and the two cavalry forces tried to regroup and reorder their ranks . However , without cavalry support , and threatened with envelopment , the Prussian and Danish infantry were in turn forced to pull back across the Nebel . Panic gripped some of Eugene 's troops as they crossed the stream . Ten infantry colours were lost to the Bavarians , and hundreds of prisoners taken ; it was only through the leadership of Eugene and the Prussian Prince that the imperial infantry were prevented from abandoning the field . 
 After rallying his troops near <unk> – well beyond their starting point – Eugene prepared to launch a second attack , led by the second @-@ line squadrons under the Duke of Württemberg @-@ Teck . Yet again they were caught in the murderous cross @-@ fire from the artillery in Lutzingen and Oberglauheim , and were once again thrown back in disarray . The French and Bavarians , however , were almost as disordered as their opponents , and they too were in need of inspiration from their commander , the Elector , who was seen – " ... riding up and down , and inspiring his men with fresh courage . " Anhalt @-@ Dessau 's Danish and Prussian infantry attacked a second time but could not sustain the advance without proper support . Once again they fell back across the stream . 
 = = = Centre and Oberglauheim = = = 
 ... they began to pass [ the marshes and the Nebel ] as fast as the badness of the ground would permit them . – Churchill 's chaplain . 
 Whilst these events around Blenheim and Lutzingen were taking place , Marlborough was preparing to cross the Nebel . The centre , commanded by the Duke 's brother , General Charles Churchill , consisted of 18 battalions of infantry arranged in two lines : seven battalions in the front line to secure a foothold across the Nebel , and 11 battalions in the rear providing cover from the Allied side of the stream . Between the infantry were placed two lines , 72 squadrons of cavalry . The first line of foot was to pass the stream first and march as far to the other side as could be conveniently done . This line would then form and cover the passage of the horse , leaving gaps in the line of infantry large enough for the cavalry to pass through and take their position in front . 
 Marlborough ordered the formation forward . Once again Zurlauben 's Gens d 'Armes charged , looking to rout Lumley 's English cavalry who linked Cutts ' column facing Blenheim with Churchill 's infantry . As these elite French cavalry attacked , they were faced by five English squadrons under Colonel Francis Palmes . To the consternation of the French , the Gens d 'Armes were pushed back in terrible confusion , pursued well beyond the <unk> stream that flows through Blenheim . " What ? Is it possible ? " exclaimed the Elector , " the gentlemen of France fleeing ? " Palmes , however , attempted to follow up his success but was repulsed in some confusion by other French cavalry , and musketry fire from the edge of Blenheim . 
 Nevertheless , Tallard was alarmed by the repulse of the elite Gens d 'Armes and urgently rode across the field to ask Marsin for reinforcements ; but on the basis of being hard pressed by Eugene – whose second attack was in full flood – Marsin refused . As Tallard consulted with Marsin , more of his infantry was being taken into Blenheim by Clérambault . Fatally , Tallard , aware of the situation , did nothing to rectify this grave mistake , leaving him with just the nine battalions of infantry near the Höchstädt road to oppose the massed enemy ranks in the centre . Zurlauben tried several more times to disrupt the Allies forming on Tallard 's side of the stream ; his front @-@ line cavalry darting forward down the gentle slope towards the Nebel . But the attacks lacked co @-@ ordination , and the Allied infantry 's steady volleys disconcerted the French horsemen . During these skirmishes Zurlauben fell mortally wounded , and died two days later . The time was just after 15 : 00 . 
 The Danish cavalry , under the Duke of Württemberg @-@ <unk> ( not to be confused with the Duke of Württemberg who fought with Eugene ) , had made slow work of crossing the Nebel near <unk> ; harassed by Marsin 's infantry near the village , the Danes were driven back across the stream . Count Horn 's Dutch infantry managed to push the French back from the water 's edge , but it was apparent that before Marlborough could launch his main effort against Tallard , Oberglauheim would have to be secured . 
 Count Horn directed the Prince of Holstein @-@ Beck to take the village , but his two Dutch brigades were cut down by the French and Irish troops , capturing and badly wounding the Prince during the action . The battle was now in the balance . If Holstein @-@ Beck 's Dutch column were destroyed , the Allied army would be split in two : Eugene 's wing would be isolated from Marlborough 's , passing the initiative to the Franco @-@ Bavarian forces now engaged across the whole plain . Seeing the opportunity , Marsin ordered his cavalry to change from facing Eugene , and turn towards their right and the open flank of Churchill 's infantry drawn up in front of <unk> . Marlborough ( who had crossed the Nebel on a makeshift bridge to take personal control ) , ordered <unk> 's Hanoverian battalions to support the Dutch infantry . A Dutch cavalry brigade under <unk> was also called forward but soon came under pressure from Marsin 's more numerous squadrons . 
 Marlborough now requested Eugene to release Count Hendrick Fugger and his Imperial Cuirassier brigade to help repel the French cavalry thrust . Despite his own desperate struggle , the Imperial Prince at once complied , demonstrating the high degree of confidence and mutual co @-@ operation between the two generals . Although the Nebel stream lay between Fugger 's and Marsin 's squadrons , the French were forced to change front to meet this new threat , thus forestalling the chance for Marsin to strike at Marlborough 's infantry . Fugger 's cuirassiers charged and , striking at a favourable angle , threw back Marsin 's squadrons in disorder . With support from Colonel Blood 's batteries , the Hessian , Hanoverian and Dutch infantry – now commanded by Count <unk> – succeeded in pushing the French and Irish infantry back into Oberglauheim so that they could not again threaten Churchill 's flank as he moved against Tallard . The French commander in the village , the Marquis de Blainville , numbered amongst the heavy casualties . 
 = = = Breakthrough = = = 
 The [ French ] foot remained in the best order I ever saw , till they were cut to pieces almost in rank and file . – Lord Orkney . 
 By 16 : 00 , with the enemy troops besieged in Blenheim and <unk> , the Allied centre of 81 squadrons ( nine squadrons had been transferred from Cutts ' column ) , supported by 18 battalions was firmly planted amidst the French line of 64 squadrons and nine battalions of raw recruits . There was now a pause in the battle : Marlborough wanted to concert the attack upon the whole front , and Eugene , after his second repulse , needed time to reorganize . 
 Just after 17 : 00 all was ready along the Allied front . Marlborough 's two lines of cavalry had now moved to the front of the Duke 's line of battle , with the two supporting lines of infantry behind them . Mérode @-@ Westerloo attempted to extricate some French infantry crowded in Blenheim , but Clérambault ordered the troops back into the village . The French cavalry exerted themselves once more against the first line – Lumley 's English and Scots on the Allied left , and Hompesch 's Dutch and German squadrons on the Allied right . Tallard 's squadrons , lacking infantry support , were tired and ragged but managed to push the Allied first line back to their infantry support . With the battle still not won , Marlborough had to rebuke one of his cavalry officers who was attempting to leave the field – " Sir , you are under a mistake , the enemy lies that way ... " Now , at the Duke 's command , the second Allied line under Cuno <unk> von Bülow and Bothmer was ordered forward , and , driving through the centre , the Allies finally put Tallard 's tired horse to rout , not without cost . The Prussian Life Dragoons ' Colonel , Ludwig von Blumenthal , and his 2nd in command , Lt. Col. von <unk> , fell next to each other . But the charge succeeded and with their cavalry in headlong flight , the remaining nine French infantry battalions fought with desperate valour , trying to form square . But it was futile . The French battalions were overwhelmed by Colonel Blood 's close @-@ range artillery and platoon fire . Mérode @-@ Westerloo later wrote – " [ They ] died to a man where they stood , stationed right out in the open plain – supported by nobody . " 
 The majority of Tallard 's retreating troops headed for Höchstädt but most did not make the safety of the town , plunging instead into the Danube where upwards of 3 @,@ 000 French horsemen drowned ; others were cut down by the pursuing cavalry . The Marquis de <unk> attempted a counter @-@ attack , but he was easily brushed aside by the triumphant Allies . After a final rally behind his camp 's tents , shouting entreaties to stand and fight , Marshal Tallard was caught up in the rout and pushed towards <unk> . Surrounded by a squadron of Hessian troops , Tallard surrendered to Lieutenant @-@ Colonel de <unk> , the Prince of Hesse @-@ Kassel 's aide @-@ de @-@ camp , and was sent under escort to Marlborough . The Duke welcomed the French commander – " I am very sorry that such a cruel misfortune should have fallen upon a soldier for whom I have the highest regard . " With salutes and courtesies , the Marshal was escorted to Marlborough 's coach . 
 = = = Fall of Blenheim = = = 
 ... our men fought in and through the fire ... until many on both sides were burned to death . – Private Deane , 1st Regiment Foot Guards . 
 Meanwhile , the Allies had once again attacked the Bavarian stronghold at Lutzingen . Eugene , however , became exasperated with the performance of his Imperial cavalry whose third attack had failed : he had already shot two of his troopers to prevent a general flight . Then , declaring in disgust that he wished to " fight among brave men and not among cowards " , Eugene went into the attack with the Prussian and Danish infantry , as did the Dessauer , waving a regimental colour to inspire his troops . This time the Prussians were able to storm the great Bavarian battery , and overwhelm the guns ' crews . Beyond the village , Scholten 's Danes defeated the French infantry in a desperate hand @-@ to @-@ hand bayonet struggle . When they saw that the centre had broken , the Elector and Marsin decided the battle was lost and , like the remnants of Tallard 's army , fled the battlefield ( albeit in better order than Tallard 's men ) . Attempts to organise an Allied force to prevent Marsin 's withdrawal failed owing to the exhaustion of the cavalry , and the growing confusion in the field . 
 Marlborough now had to turn his attention from the fleeing enemy to direct Churchill to detach more infantry to storm Blenheim . Orkney 's infantry , Hamilton 's English brigade and St Paul 's Hanoverians moved across the trampled wheat to the cottages . Fierce hand @-@ to @-@ hand fighting gradually forced the French towards the village centre , in and around the walled churchyard which had been prepared for defence . Hay and Ross 's dismounted dragoons were also sent , but suffered under a counter @-@ charge delivered by the regiments of Artois and Provence under command of Colonel de la <unk> . Colonel Belville 's Hanoverians were fed into the battle to steady the resolve of the dragoons , and once more went to the attack . The Allied progress was slow and hard , and like the defenders , they suffered many casualties . 
 Many of the cottages were now burning , obscuring the field of fire and driving the defenders out of their positions . Hearing the din of battle in Blenheim , Tallard sent a message to Marlborough offering to order the garrison to withdraw from the field . " Inform Monsieur Tallard " , replied the Duke , " that , in the position in which he is now , he has no command . " Nevertheless , as dusk came the Allied commander was anxious for a quick conclusion . The French infantry fought tenaciously to hold on to their position in Blenheim , but their commander was nowhere to be found . Clérambault 's insistence on confining his huge force in the village was to seal his fate that day . Realising his tactical mistake had contributed to Tallard 's defeat in the centre , Clérambault deserted Blenheim and the 27 battalions defending the village , and reportedly drowned in the Danube while attempting to make his escape . 
 By now Blenheim was under assault from every side by three British generals : Cutts , Churchill , and Orkney . The French had repulsed every attack with heavy slaughter , but many had seen what had happened on the plain and what its consequences to them would be ; their army was routed and they were cut off . Orkney , attacking from the rear , now tried a different tactic – " ... it came into my head to beat parley " , he later wrote , " which they accepted of and immediately their Brigadier de <unk> capitulated with me to be prisoner at discretion and lay down their arms . " Threatened by Allied guns , other units followed their example . However , it was not until 21 : 00 that the Marquis de <unk> , who had taken charge in Clérambault 's absence , reluctantly accepted the inevitability of defeat , and some 10 @,@ 000 of France 's best infantry had laid down their arms . 
 During these events Marlborough was still in the saddle conducting the pursuit of the broken enemy . Pausing for a moment he scribbled on the back of an old tavern bill a note addressed to his wife , Sarah : " I have no time to say more but to beg you will give my duty to the Queen , and let her know her army has had a glorious victory . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 French losses were immense : over 30 @,@ 000 killed , wounded and missing . Moreover , the myth of French invincibility had been destroyed and Louis 's hopes of an early and victorious peace had been wrenched from his grasp . Mérode @-@ Westerloo summarised the case against Tallard 's army : " The French lost this battle for a wide variety of reasons . For one thing they had too good an opinion of their own ability ... Another point was their faulty field dispositions , and in addition there was rampant indiscipline and inexperience displayed ... It took all these faults to lose so celebrated a battle . " It was a hard @-@ fought contest , leading Prince Eugene to observe – " I have not a squadron or battalion which did not charge four times at least . " Nevertheless , although the war dragged on for years , the Battle of Blenheim was probably its most decisive victory ; Marlborough and Eugene , working <unk> together , had saved the Habsburg Empire and thereby preserved the Grand Alliance from collapse . Munich , Augsburg , Ingolstadt , Ulm and all remaining territory of Bavaria soon fell to the Allies . By the Treaty of <unk> , signed 7 November 1704 , Bavaria was placed under Austrian military rule , allowing the Habsburgs to utilise its resources for the rest of the conflict . 
 The remnants of the Elector of Bavaria 's and Marshal Marsin 's wing limped back to Strasbourg , losing another 7 @,@ 000 men through desertion . Despite being offered the chance to remain as ruler of Bavaria ( under strict terms of an alliance with Austria ) , the Elector left his country and family in order to continue the war against the Allies from the Spanish Netherlands where he still held the post of governor @-@ general . Their commander @-@ in @-@ chief that day , Marshal Tallard – who , unlike his subordinates , had not been ransomed or exchanged – was taken to England and imprisoned in Nottingham until his release in 1711 . 
 The 1704 campaign lasted considerably longer than usual as the Allies sought to wring out maximum advantage . Realising that France was too powerful to be forced to make peace by a single victory , however , Eugene , Marlborough and Baden met to plan their next moves . For the following year the Duke proposed a campaign along the valley of the River Moselle to carry the war deep into France . This required the capture of the major fortress of Landau which guarded the Rhine , and the towns of Trier and Trarbach on the Moselle itself . Trier was taken on 26 October and Landau fell on 23 November to the Margrave of Baden and Prince Eugene ; with the fall of Trarbach on 20 December , the campaign season for 1704 came to an end . 
 Marlborough returned to England on 14 December ( <unk> ) to the acclamation of Queen Anne and the country . In the first days of January the 110 cavalry standards and the 128 infantry colours that were taken during the battle were borne in procession to Westminster Hall . In February 1705 , Queen Anne , who had made Marlborough a Duke in 1702 , granted him the Park of Woodstock and promised a sum of £ 240 @,@ 000 to build a suitable house as a gift from a grateful crown in recognition of his victory – a victory which British historian Sir Edward Shepherd Creasy considered one of the pivotal battles in history , writing – " Had it not been for Blenheim , all Europe might at this day suffer under the effect of French conquests resembling those of Alexander in extent and those of the Romans in durability . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Joseph Addison 's poem The Campaign 
 John Philips 's poem Blenheim , a counter to Addison 's poem 
 Robert Southey 's anti @-@ war poem After Blenheim 
 Iain Gale 's novel Man of Honour 
 Bristol Blenheim , named after the battle 
 = War at the Warfield = 
 War at the Warfield is a concert video by Slayer which was released on July 29 , 2003 , through American Recordings . Recorded at Warfield Theatre in San Francisco , California , on December 7 , 2001 , it is the band 's second video album . The DVD 's contents were announced by MTV on July 25 , 2003 . It is the last release by Slayer with drummer Paul Bostaph ( before he came back in 2013 ) , who left due to a chronic elbow injury . Bostaph was subsequently replaced by the original Slayer drummer Dave Lombardo . War at the Warfield was well received by critics , debuting at number three on the Billboard DVD chart , and sold over 7 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . It was certified gold for selling over 50 @,@ 000 copies . It also won a 2003 Metal Edge Readers ' Choice Award for DVD of the Year . 
 = = Recording and release = = 
 The video was recorded at the Warfield Theatre in San Francisco on December 7 , 2001 , exactly 60 years after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , ) War at the Warfield was Slayer 's second DVD . Originally set for release on February 11 , 2003 , and later February 13 , 2003 , it was delayed several times , due to unspecified " production issues " . However , on May 20 , 2003 , it was announced that the release would be on June 17 , 2003 , only to be pushed back once again to July 27 . Before the DVD 's release , Tom Araya commented , " I don 't think it 's different than any other Slayer show , you got your kids doing the mosh stuff . They get crazy , they tear the place up . And then you get the one kid that 's tempted to jump off the balcony . Whether he does it or not is another story . When they do , of course they get hurt , but they always insist on staying so they can watch the rest of the show , then they go to the emergency room . " On July 25 , 2003 , four days before its release , MTV announced the DVD 's contents . 
 = = Bostaph 's departure = = 
 Bostaph gave the band prior knowledge of his willingness to leave before recording the DVD . " You gotta understand that the taping of that ; the Warfield show was two shows before my last show with the band . I haven 't watched it because you kinda go back with your scene ... for the fans , they see a show ; for me , I see my second to last show with the band , you know what I mean ? I have it but I needed to get some distance away from the situation and move on with my life . It 's like breaking up with a girlfriend . " 
 Bostaph eventually left the band before Christmas due to a chronic elbow injury , saying it would hinder his ability to play . After his departure , Bostaph joined the band Systematic . On December 21 , 2001 , it was announced that the original drummer , Dave Lombardo , would " temporarily reclaim his place behind the drums on the next leg " of Slayer 's God Hates Us All tour . Bostaph described his time with the band as " an unbelievable ride with Slayer , playing with these guys has been an incredible high point in my career " , and that he is " really grateful for the experience " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Released through Universal Music & Video Distribution , the DVD entered the Billboard DVD chart at number three , selling over 7 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . On June 2 , 2004 , the DVD was certified gold by the RIAA for more than 50 @,@ 000 shipments in the United States . William Ruhlmann of Allmusic commented that the DVD " serves as both a fan 's statement on Slayer and a good representation of the group 's music and performance style . " Jon Wiederhorn , an editor for MTV , said that " Slayer 's new War at the Warfield DVD isn 't one of those home @-@ video concert releases meant to distract fans during a lengthy gap between records — the group already has ten songs written for its next LP , which should be out by April . " 
 Andy Patrizio of IGN awarded the DVD seven out of ten , mentioning " the ferocity and intensity is still there , just a tad slower , " and summarising with the statement , " if you 're a Slayer fan , or into thrash in general , you 'll love this . If you 're not , this video isn 't going to change your opinion on the music . " Patrizio criticized the video 's direction , observing that " the camerawork is full of fast , MTV @-@ style cuts , which , combined with the flashing lights , is more headache @-@ inducing than the music . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Disciple " ( Jeff Hanneman , Kerry King ) 
 " War Ensemble " ( Tom Araya , Hanneman ) 
 " Stain of Mind " ( Hanneman , King ) 
 " New Faith " ( King ) 
 " Postmortem " ( Hanneman ) 
 " Raining Blood " ( Hanneman , King ) 
 " Hell Awaits " ( Hanneman , King ) 
 " Here Comes the Pain " ( King ) 
 " Die by the Sword " ( Hanneman ) 
 " Dittohead " ( King ) 
 " Bloodline " ( Araya , Hanneman , King ) 
 " God Send Death " ( Araya , Hanneman ) 
 " Dead Skin Mask " ( Araya , Hanneman ) 
 " Seasons in the Abyss " ( Araya , Hanneman ) 
 " Captor of Sin " ( Hanneman , King ) 
 " Mandatory Suicide " ( Araya , Hanneman , King ) 
 " Chemical Warfare " ( Hanneman , King ) 
 " South of Heaven " ( Araya , Hanneman ) 
 " Angel of Death " ( Hanneman ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 This list of credits can be verified by Allmusic and War at the Warfield 's album @-@ notes . 
 = Levi Mackin = 
 Levi Alan Mackin ( born 4 April 1986 ) is a semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Welsh Premier League club Rhyl . 
 Mackin started his career with Wrexham in their youth system , before making his first team debut on the last day of the 2003 – 04 season . He made 11 appearances the following season and he signed his first professional contract in 2005 . He established himself in the team in the 2005 – 06 season , having made 19 appearances . However , next season , appearances became rarer and in 2008 he was loaned to Conference Premier team Droylsden . After being recalled by Wrexham , he scored in their final game in the Football League before relegation to the Conference Premier . He joined York City on loan in 2009 and played for them in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium . After being released by Wrexham he signed for York permanently and played in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley . He was released by York in 2011 before having spells with Alfreton Town , Chester , Bangor City and Conwy Borough . 
 Born in England , Mackin has represented Wales at international level . He was on the substitutes ' bench twice for the under @-@ 17 team , before making an appearance in 2002 . He received call ups to the under @-@ 19 team but did not make any appearances . Having received his first call up for the under @-@ 21 team in 2005 , he made his first and only appearance against Northern Ireland in 2006 . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Wrexham = = = 
 Mackin was born in Chester , Cheshire and grew up in nearby Blacon . He played for Blacon Youth Club in their under @-@ 12 team and in the 1997 – 98 season was named League Player of the Year . He played for hometown club Chester City as a schoolboy before moving to Wrexham on the same basis at the age of 15 . He progressed through their youth system and he captained them in an FA Youth Cup game against Watford . He helped the youth team win a league championship , which resulted in him being given a squad number with the first team . He made his first team debut at the age of 18 after starting in a 1 – 1 draw at Wycombe Wanderers on 1 May 2004 , the final game of the 2003 – 04 season . His first appearance of the 2004 – 05 season came as a 50th minute substitute in a 2 – 2 draw with Hull City in the League Cup on 24 August 2004 , which Wrexham won 3 – 1 in a penalty shoot @-@ out . Mackin made his first league appearance of the season in a 5 – 1 defeat at Luton Town as a 63rd @-@ minute substitute on 6 November 2005 and his first start came on 11 December in a 3 – 0 defeat at Milton Keynes Dons ( MK Dons ) as a replacement for the suspended Darren Ferguson . He suffered from a sore thigh in January 2005 and he made his return to the team as an 88th @-@ minute substitute in a 0 – 0 draw with MK Dons on 26 February . He fouled Steve Jenkins inside the penalty area during stoppage time at Swindon Town on 19 March , which led to Sam Parkin scoring a penalty kick , the final goal in a 4 – 2 defeat for Wrexham . He finished the season with 11 appearances and signed his first professional contract after the end of the season on 11 July 2005 . 
 Mackin drew praise from manager Denis Smith after scoring against Hereford United in a pre @-@ season friendly in July 2005 , saying " We wouldn 't keep persevering with him if we didn 't think he was any good " . His first appearance of the 2005 – 06 season came as a 90th @-@ minute substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat at Notts County . He sustained a knee injury during a 1 – 0 victory over Darlington on 29 October 2005 , which resulted in him being substituted in the 31st minute . He spent nearly three months injured before rejoining the squad for training towards the end of January 2006 and he made his return to the team on 4 February after coming on as a 20th @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 0 victory over Wycombe . He finished the season with 19 appearances for Wrexham , having established himself as a regular member of the team . He entered negotiations over a new contract in June 2006 , which he signed in July . 
 His first appearance of the 2006 – 07 season was in a 0 – 0 draw with Peterborough United on 12 August 2006 , a game he entered as a 59th @-@ minute substitute . The next game he played in was a 4 – 1 victory at Championship team Sheffield Wednesday in the League Cup on 23 August 2006 . Mackin suffered a knee injury during a reserve team game in September 2006 and he made his return as a 90th @-@ minute substitute in a 4 – 1 defeat after extra time at Birmingham City of the Championship in the League Cup second round on 19 September . He picked up another knee injury in October 2006 and he made his return in a 2 – 1 defeat to MK Dons on 14 October . An injury to Mark Jones allowed Mackin back into the team for a 4 – 0 defeat to Boston United on 9 December 2006 . His 2006 – 07 season finished with 11 appearances as opportunities in the team were " frustratingly rare " and he was offered a new long @-@ term contract by Wrexham in May 2007 . 
 His first appearance of the 2007 – 08 season came as a 75th @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 0 defeat at Darlington on 11 August 2007 and following a 2 – 1 defeat at Bradford City on 25 August he said " I 'm pleased with my form at the moment because I 've been working hard to try and stay in the team and I 'm happy that things seem to be going well for me at the moment " . Mackin joined Conference Premier team Droylsden on a one @-@ month loan on 24 January 2008 , having made seven appearances for Wrexham up to that point during the season . He made his debut in a 1 – 0 victory over Kidderminster Harriers and on 31 January 2008 the loan was extended until the end of the season after earning " rave reviews " for his performances . His only goal for Droylsden came in the 70th minute against Torquay United on 1 April 2008 , which was their only goal in a 2 – 1 defeat . He made 15 appearances and scored one goal for Droylsden before returning to Wrexham after being recalled from the loan in April 2008 . The four appearances he made following his return were described as " battling " , and the last of these included his first goal for Wrexham in a 4 – 2 win at Lincoln City on 3 May , which was Wrexham 's final game in the Football League before their relegation to the Conference Premier . He later commented " I got a little touch on it and I 'm not sure if the defender got the final touch but it went straight in and I 'm very pleased with it ! " He finished the season with 11 appearances and one goal for Wrexham , with opportunities in the team again being rare . 
 A muscle strain forced Mackin to miss a pre @-@ season friendly against Shrewsbury Town in July 2008 and he returned to pre @-@ season training later that month . He was shown a red card after picking up two yellows in his first appearance of the 2008 – 09 season , which was Wrexham 's first game in the Conference Premier , as the team beat Stevenage Borough 5 – 0 on 9 August 2008 . On reflection , Mackin said " As for the second yellow I felt the ball was there to be won and I thought that 's what I did . Looking back now I know I should have stayed on my feet " . He was handed a one @-@ match suspension and he returned to the team in a 1 – 1 draw at Rushden & Diamonds on 17 August 2008 . Mackin scored his first goal of the season with a 25 yard " rocket " at Grays Athletic , which was Wrexham 's only goal in a 2 – 1 defeat on 20 September 2008 . Despite starting the season as a regular in the team , he found opportunities in the team hard to come by after the arrival of Dean Saunders as manager . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 He joined fellow Conference Premier team York City on loan until the end of the season on 22 January 2009 , after having made 20 appearances and scored one goal for Wrexham up to that point during the season . Following the move , Mackin said " I need a change of scenery . We have a large number of players at the Racecourse at present and it 's difficult to get into a side that 's doing well and getting the results " . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat at Eastbourne Borough on 24 January 2009 and he was described as looking " off the pace " . Mackin played for York in their 13 – 12 penalty shoot @-@ out victory at home to Kidderminster in the FA Trophy third round on 12 February 2009 , which had finished 1 – 1 after extra time . A tight thigh resulted in him missing a game against Oxford United in April 2009 and he made his return later that month in a 0 – 0 at Barrow . Following the close of the league season , Mackin was described as one of York 's most consistent performers throughout the season . He started in the 2009 FA Trophy Final at Wembley Stadium on 9 May 2009 , which York lost 2 – 0 to Stevenage , during which he was " hardly noticed " before receiving a yellow card for " <unk> down " Darren Murphy . He finished the loan spell with 21 appearances , and after returning to Wrexham he was released after spending around a decade with the club . 
 Mackin signed for York permanently on a one @-@ year contract on 22 May 2009 . After signing , manager Martin Foyle said " Levi was fantastic for us and came on in leaps and bounds . He was one of our most consistent players , but I know there 's more to come from him . " He appeared in the opening game of the 2009 – 10 season , a 2 – 1 defeat at Oxford on 8 August 2009 , and was a " strong presence in the City midfield in a very committed performance " . Mackin played against former club Wrexham in a 1 – 0 defeat on 18 August 2009 and following the game he said " We are nearly there . We 're all putting in the hard work and we 're not that far away from gelling into a good team . The signs are there " . A foot infection led to him missing a game at Gateshead on 25 August 2009 and he made his return in a 2 – 0 victory over Crawley Town as an 84th @-@ minute substitute on 5 September 2009 . His first start since 22 August 2009 came in a 2 – 2 draw with Cambridge United on 22 September to fill in for Alex Lawless . This was the first of five consecutive games to be started by Mackin before he had a six @-@ game spell of being on the substitutes ' bench . This came to an end when he started in the 1 – 0 victory at AFC Wimbledon on 21 November 2009 and his performance drew praise from Foyle . 
 He scored his first goal for York in a 2 – 1 defeat to Forest Green Rovers on 6 March 2010 , with his shot taking a deflection off David Brown . He picked up his 10th yellow card of the season in a 0 – 0 draw with Altrincham , which resulted in a two @-@ match suspension . He played in both legs of York 's play @-@ off semi @-@ final victory over Luton , which finished 2 – 0 on aggregate . He started in the 2010 Conference Premier play @-@ off Final at Wembley on 16 May 2010 , which York lost 3 – 1 to Oxford . He finished the season with 45 appearances and one goal for York and signed a new one @-@ year contract with the club in May 2010 . 
 Mackin made his first appearance of the 2010 – 11 season in the opening game , a 2 – 1 defeat to Kidderminster on 14 August 2010 , and was substituted in the 38th minute due to an injury and Foyle said " It looks a bad one and he might need a scan " . The scan revealed no knee ligament damage had occurred and it was estimated he would be injured for a month . He returned to training in November 2010 , having been out of the team injured for almost three months , with his first appearance coming as an 87th @-@ minute substitute in a 3 – 0 victory over League Two side Rotherham United in an FA Cup first round replay on 17 November . He scored at home for the first time for York with the 85th @-@ minute winner against Forest Green on 22 January 2011 , the goal being a drilled shot into the bottom corner . Mackin finished the season with 13 appearances and one goal before being released by York on 23 June 2011 after being told he could find another club . 
 = = = Alfreton Town = = = 
 Mackin signed for newly promoted Conference Premier club Alfreton Town on a one @-@ year contract on 2 July 2011 . His debut came after starting in a 1 – 1 draw with Darlington on 23 August 2011 and scored his first goal with the winner in a 1 – 0 victory away at former club York on 29 August after scoring a penalty . After struggling to break into the team he was released by Alfreton after his contract was cancelled by mutual consent on 4 January 2012 , having made 13 appearances and scored one goal for the club . 
 = = = Chester = = = 
 On the same day of his Alfreton release Mackin joined hometown club Chester , signing for the Northern Premier League Premier Division side on a contract until the end of the 2011 – 12 season . Chester had been interested in signing him during the summer but he had opted to remain in full @-@ time football with Alfreton . He scored on his debut with the final goal of a 4 – 0 victory over Rushall Olympic on 7 January 2011 , having entered the game as a 73rd @-@ minute substitute . He finished the season with one goal in six appearances having sustained a collar bone injury in his first start . 
 = = = Bangor City = = = 
 Mackin signed for Welsh Premier League side Bangor City on 17 January 2013 . He made his debut as an 83rd @-@ minute substitute in Bangor 's 2 – 0 victory away at Gap <unk> 's Quay on 26 January 2013 . His first goal came in a 3 – 3 home draw with Prestatyn Town on 9 February 2013 . Mackin finished the season with 10 appearances and one goal for Bangor . 
 = = = Conwy Borough = = = 
 He signed for Conwy Borough of the Cymru Alliance on 7 June 2013 and made his debut in a 2 – 0 win away to <unk> on 17 August . He was suspected to have sustained a toe injury during a 3 – 0 home win over <unk> on 17 September 2013 and this was the last of his eight appearances in the 2013 – 14 season . 
 = = = Rhyl = = = 
 Mackin signed for Welsh Premier League club Rhyl on 24 June 2014 . 
 = = International career = = 
 Despite being born in England , Mackin was involved in two matches with the Wales under @-@ 17 team , against Scotland and Norway in 2001 and 2002 respectively , although he did not play in either and remained on the substitutes ' bench . He was called up for a training camp and game against Bosnia and Herzegovina in the 2003 UEFA European Under @-@ 17 Football Championship first qualifying round , and made an appearance in this game as Wales won 2 – 1 to progress to the second qualifying round . He was called into the under @-@ 19 team for the Milk Cup in July 2004 and another call up came for the 2005 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship qualifier against the Faroe Islands in October . 
 Mackin was called into the under @-@ 21 squad for their game against England in September 2005 . His first and only appearance for the team came in a 1 – 0 defeat to Northern Ireland on 28 February 2006 , in which he was substituted for Rob Davies in the 56th minute . Mackin returned to the under @-@ 21 team after being named on the standby list for a game against Turkey in September . He was named on standby for a two @-@ legged 2009 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship qualification play @-@ off against England in October 2008 . He was named in the Semi @-@ Pro squad for a friendly against Poland in September 2009 , although he was forced to withdraw due to an injury . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Mackin plays as a central or defensive midfielder and has been described as " tough tackling " and a " reliable holding player " . He is " regularly in the right place to pick up loose balls and does not shirk away from tackles " . He is energetic and has been praised as a ball @-@ winner . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Mackin 's daughter was born in January 2011 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 23 April 2016 . 
 = Bell Boeing V @-@ 22 Osprey = 
 The Bell Boeing V @-@ 22 Osprey is an American multi @-@ mission , tiltrotor military aircraft with both vertical takeoff and landing ( VTOL ) , and short takeoff and landing ( STOL ) capabilities . It is designed to combine the functionality of a conventional helicopter with the long @-@ range , high @-@ speed cruise performance of a turboprop aircraft . 
 The V @-@ 22 originated from the United States Department of Defense Joint @-@ service Vertical take @-@ off / landing Experimental ( JVX ) aircraft program started in 1981 . The team of Bell Helicopter and Boeing Helicopters was awarded a development contract in 1983 for the tiltrotor aircraft . The Bell Boeing team jointly produce the aircraft . The V @-@ 22 first flew in 1989 , and began flight testing and design alterations ; the complexity and difficulties of being the first tiltrotor intended for military service in the world led to many years of development . 
 The United States Marine Corps began crew training for the Osprey in 2000 , and fielded it in 2007 ; it supplemented and then replaced their Boeing Vertol CH @-@ 46 Sea Knights . The Osprey 's other operator , the U.S. Air Force , fielded their version of the tiltrotor in 2009 . Since entering service with the U.S. Marine Corps and Air Force , the Osprey has been deployed in transportation and medevac operations over Iraq , Afghanistan , Libya and Kuwait . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The failure of the Iran hostage rescue mission in 1980 demonstrated to the United States military a need for " a new type of aircraft , that could not only take off and land vertically but also could carry combat troops , and do so at speed . " The U.S. Department of Defense began the Joint @-@ service Vertical take @-@ off / landing Experimental ( JVX ) aircraft program in 1981 , under U.S. Army leadership . 
 The defining mission of the Marine Corps has been to perform an amphibious landing , and they were particularly interested in the JVX program . They realized that a concentrated strike force was vulnerable to a single nuclear weapon , airborne solutions with good speed and range allowed for significant dispersal ; and their CH @-@ 46s were wearing out ; without replacement , the threat of a merger between the Marine Corps and the Army lingered , similar to President Truman 's proposal following World War II . The OSD and Navy administration were against the tiltrotor project , but congressional pressure eventually proved persuasive . 
 The U.S. Navy and Marine Corps were given the lead in 1983 . The JVX combined requirements from the U.S. Marine Corps , Air Force , Army and Navy . A request for proposals ( RFP ) was issued in December 1982 for preliminary design work . Interest was expressed by Aérospatiale , Bell Helicopter , Boeing Vertol , Grumman , Lockheed , and Westland . Contractors were encouraged to form teams . Bell partnered with Boeing Vertol to submit a proposal for an enlarged version of the Bell XV @-@ 15 prototype on 17 February 1983 . Being the only proposal received , a preliminary design contract was awarded on 26 April 1983 . 
 The JVX aircraft was designated V @-@ 22 Osprey on 15 January 1985 ; by that March , the first six prototypes were being produced , and Boeing Vertol was expanded to deal with the project workload . Work has been split evenly between Bell and Boeing . Bell Helicopter manufactures and integrates the wing , nacelles , rotors , drive system , tail surfaces , and aft ramp , as well as integrates the Rolls @-@ Royce engines and performs final assembly . Boeing Helicopters manufactures and integrates the fuselage , cockpit , avionics , and flight controls . The USMC variant of the Osprey received the MV @-@ 22 designation and the U.S. Air Force variant received CV @-@ 22 ; this was reversed from normal procedure to prevent Marine Corps Ospreys from having a conflicting designation with aircraft carriers ( CV ) . Full @-@ scale development of the V @-@ 22 tilt @-@ rotor aircraft began in 1986 . On 3 May 1986 , the Bell Boeing partnership was awarded a $ 1 @.@ 714 billion contract for V @-@ 22 aircraft by the U.S. Navy . At this point , all four U.S. military services had acquisition plans for V @-@ 22 versions . 
 The first V @-@ 22 was rolled out with significant media attention in May 1988 . The project suffered several blows . That year , the U.S. Army left the program , citing a need to focus its budget on more immediate aviation programs . In 1989 , the project survived two separate votes in the Senate that could have resulted in cancellation . Despite the Senate 's decision , the Department of Defense instructed the U.S. Navy not to spend more money on the V @-@ 22 . When the V @-@ 22 's projected development budget greatly increased in 1988 , Defense Secretary Dick Cheney tried to remove funding from 1989 to 1992 in an effort to cancel it . He was eventually overruled by Congress , which provided unrequested funding for the program . Multiple studies of alternatives found the V @-@ 22 provided more capability and combat effectiveness with similar operating costs . The Clinton Administration was supportive of the V @-@ 22 and helped it attain funding . 
 = = = Flight testing and design changes = = = 
 The first of six MV @-@ 22 prototypes first flew on 19 March 1989 in the helicopter mode , and on 14 September 1989 in fixed @-@ wing mode . The third and fourth prototypes successfully completed the Osprey 's first sea trials on USS Wasp in December 1990 . The fourth and fifth prototypes crashed in 1991 – 92 . From October 1992 – April 1993 , Bell and Boeing redesigned the V @-@ 22 to reduce empty weight , simplify manufacture , and reduce production costs . This redesigned version became the V @-@ 22B model . V @-@ 22 flights resumed in June 1993 after safety improvements were incorporated in the prototypes . Bell Boeing was awarded a contract for the engineering manufacturing development ( EMD ) phase in June 1994 . The prototypes also received changes to better match the B @-@ model configuration . Flight testing at the stage focused on expanding the flight envelope , measuring flight loads , and supporting the EMD redesign . This and further flight testing with the early V @-@ 22s continued into 1997 . 
 Flight testing of four full @-@ scale development V @-@ 22s began in early 1997 when the first pre @-@ production V @-@ 22 was delivered to the Naval Air Warfare Test Center , Naval Air Station Patuxent River , Maryland . The first EMD flight took place on 5 February 1997 . Testing fell behind schedule . The first of four low rate initial production aircraft , ordered on 28 April 1997 , was delivered on 27 May 1999 . Osprey number 10 completed the program 's second sea trials , this time from USS Saipan in January 1999 . During external load testing in April 1999 , Boeing used a V @-@ 22 to lift and transport the light @-@ weight M777 howitzer . 
 In 2000 , there were two further fatal crashes , killing a total of 19 marines , and the aircraft was again grounded while the cause of these crashes was investigated and various parts were redesigned . By 2012 , changes had been made to the V @-@ 22 's hardware , software , and procedures in response to hydraulic fires in the nacelles , vortex ring state control issues , and opposed landings . 
 The V @-@ 22 completed its final operational evaluation in June 2005 . The evaluation had included long range deployments , high altitude , desert and shipboard operations , and was deemed successful . The problems identified in various accidents had reportedly been addressed . 
 U.S. Naval Air Systems Command worked on software upgrades to increase the maximum speed from 250 knots ( 460 km / h ; 290 mph ) to 270 knots ( 500 km / h ; 310 mph ) , increase helicopter mode altitude limit from 10 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 000 m ) to 12 @,@ 000 feet ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) or 14 @,@ 000 feet ( 4 @,@ 300 m ) , and increase lift performance . Implementation of these upgrades began in September 2011 and proved largely effective . 
 In October 2015 , NAVAIR tested rolling landings and takeoffs on a carrier , preparing for Carrier onboard delivery . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The V @-@ 22 's development process has been long and controversial , partly due to its large cost increases , some of which are caused by the requirement to fold wing and rotors to fit aboard ships . The development budget was first planned for $ 2 @.@ 5 billion in 1986 , which increased to a projected $ 30 billion in 1988 . By 2008 , $ 27 billion had been spent on the program and another $ 27 @.@ 2 billion was required to complete planned production numbers . Between 2008 and 2011 , the estimated lifetime cost for maintaining the V @-@ 22 grew by 61 percent , mostly allocated to maintenance and support . 
 Its [ The V @-@ 22 's ] production costs are considerably greater than for helicopters with equivalent capability — specifically , about twice as great as for the CH @-@ 53E , which has a greater payload and an ability to carry heavy equipment the V @-@ 22 cannot ... an Osprey unit would cost around $ 60 million to produce , and $ 35 million for the helicopter equivalent . 
 In 2001 , Lieutenant Colonel Odin Lieberman , commander of the V @-@ 22 squadron at Marine Corps Air Station New River , was relieved of duty after allegations that he instructed his unit to falsify maintenance records to make the aircraft appear more reliable . A total of three USMC officers were later implicated as having played a role in the falsification scandal . 
 In October 2007 , Time Magazine ran an article condemning the V @-@ 22 as unsafe , overpriced , and completely inadequate ; the Marine Corps responded by arguing that parts of the article 's data were dated , obsolete , inaccurate , and reflected expectations too high for any new field of aircraft . In 2011 , it was reported by the controversial defense industry supported Lexington Institute that the average V @-@ 22 mishap rate per flight hour over the past 10 years was approximately half of the average accident rate for the USMC fleet ; the V @-@ 22 's accident rate was the lowest of any Marine rotorcraft . In 2011 Wired Magazine reported that the safety record was achieved by excluding ground incidents ; the USMC responded that MV @-@ 22 reporting were to the same standards as other aircraft in the Department of the Navy . 
 By 2012 , the USMC reported fleetwide readiness rate had risen to 68 percent ; however , the DOD 's Inspector General later found 167 of 200 reports had " improperly recorded " information . Captain Richard <unk> blamed these errors on incompetence and said that they were " not malicious " or deliberate . The required mission capable rate was 82 % , but the average was 53 % from June 2007 to May 2010 . In 2010 , Naval Air Systems Command aimed for an 85 % reliability rate by 2018 . From 2009 to 2014 , readiness rates rose 25 percent to the " high 80s , " while cost per flight hour had dropped 20 percent to $ 9 @,@ 520 through a rigorous maintenance improvement program that focused on diagnosing problems before failures occur . As of 2015 , although the V @-@ 22 requires higher maintenance and has lower availability ( 62 % ) than traditional helicopters , it also has a lower incidence rate . The average cost per flight hour is US $ 9 @,@ 156 , whereas the CH @-@ 53E cost about $ 20 @,@ 000 per flight hour in 2007 . V @-@ 22 ownership cost was $ 83 @,@ 000 per hour in 2013 . 
 While technically capable of <unk> if both engines fail in helicopter mode , a safe landing is difficult ; in 2005 , a director of the Pentagon 's testing office stated that in a loss of power while hovering below 1 @,@ 600 feet ( 490 m ) , emergency landings " ... are not likely to be survivable . " V @-@ 22 pilot Captain Justin " Moon " McKinney stated that : " We can turn it into a plane and glide it down , just like a C @-@ 130 . " A complete loss of power requires both engines to fail , as one engine can power both proprotors via interconnected drive shafts . Though vortex ring state ( VRS ) contributed to a deadly V @-@ 22 accident , flight testing found the aircraft to be less susceptible to the condition than conventional helicopters . A GAO report stated that the V @-@ 22 is " less forgiving than conventional helicopters " during this phenomenon . Several test flights to explore the V @-@ 22 's VRS characteristics were canceled . The USMC trains pilots in the recognition of and recovery from VRS , and has instituted operational envelope limits and instrumentation to help pilots avoid VRS conditions . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On 28 September 2005 , the Pentagon formally approved full @-@ rate production for the V @-@ 22 , with planned rate increase from 11 a year to between 24 and 48 a year by 2012 . Of the 458 total planned , 360 are for the U.S. Marine Corps , 50 for the Air Force , and 48 for the Navy at an average cost of $ 110 million per aircraft , including development costs . The V @-@ 22 had an incremental flyaway cost of $ 67 million per aircraft in 2008 , The U.S. Navy had hoped to shave about $ 10 million off that cost after a five @-@ year production contract in 2013 . The cost for each CV @-@ 22 was $ 73 million in the FY 2014 budget . 
 On 15 April 2010 , the Naval Air Systems Command awarded Bell Boeing a $ 42 @.@ 1 million contract to design an integrated processor in response to avionics obsolescence and add new network capabilities . By 2014 , Raytheon will provide an avionics upgrade that includes Situational awareness and Blue Force Tracking . In late 2009 , a contract for Block C upgrades upon the V @-@ 22 was awarded to Bell Boeing . In February 2012 , the Marine Corps received the first Block C Ospreys ; these aircraft feature a new radar , along with additional mission management and electronic warfare equipment . Marines investigate options in 2015 to upgrade all V @-@ 22s to C models in order to boost availability . 
 On 12 June 2013 , the U.S. DoD awarded a $ 4 @.@ 9 billion contract to Bell and Boeing for 99 V @-@ 22s in production Lots 17 and 18 , including 92 MV @-@ 22s for the Marine Corps . Work is expected to be completed in September 2019 . A provision gives NAVAIR the option to order 23 more Ospreys . The combined cost of the June 2013 contract and other associated contracts for the order totaled $ 6 @.@ 5 billion . 
 In 2013 , the U.S. was reportedly hoping to sell up to 100 V @-@ 22s internationally with up to 15 interested nations identified ; prospective customers included Israel , the United Arab Emirates , and Japan . In 2013 , Bell began to lay off workers on the V @-@ 22 production line following the implementation of defense cuts , which had reduced the US order to about half the originally planned number of aircraft . Production rate went from 40 in 2012 to 22 planned for 2015 . Manufacturing robots have replaced older automated machines for increased accuracy and efficiency in production . Large parts are held in place by suction cups and measured electronically . Raw materials arrive frozen . 
 In March 2014 , Air Force Special Operations Command ( AFSOC ) issued a Combat Mission Need Statement to develop armor to protect V @-@ 22 passengers . NAVAIR worked with a Florida @-@ based composite armor company and the Army Aviation Development Directorate to develop and deliver the Advanced Ballistic Stopping System ( <unk> ) by October 2014 . Costing $ 270 @,@ 000 , the <unk> consists of 66 plates fitting along interior bulkheads and deck , adding 800 lb ( 360 kg ) to the aircraft 's weight , affecting payload and unrefueled range . So it can be installed or removed when needed in hours and partially assembled in pieces for partial protection of specific areas . As of May 2015 , 16 kits had been delivered to the USAF . 
 In 2015 , Bell @-@ Boeing set up the V @-@ 22 Readiness Operations Center ( <unk> ) at Ridley Park , Pennsylvania to gather information from each aircraft to improve fleet performance in a similar manner as the F @-@ 35 's Autonomic Logistics Information System ( <unk> ) . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 The Osprey is the world 's first production tiltrotor aircraft , with one three @-@ bladed proprotor , turboprop engine , and transmission nacelle mounted on each wingtip . It is classified as a powered lift aircraft by the Federal Aviation Administration . For takeoff and landing , it typically operates as a helicopter with the nacelles vertical and rotors horizontal . Once airborne , the nacelles rotate forward 90 ° in as little as 12 seconds for horizontal flight , converting the V @-@ 22 to a more fuel @-@ efficient , higher speed turboprop aircraft . STOL rolling @-@ takeoff and landing capability is achieved by having the nacelles tilted forward up to 45 ° . Other orientations are possible . It has a ferry range of over 2 @,@ 100 nmi . Its operational range is 1 @,@ 100 nmi . 
 Composite materials make up 43 % of the airframe , and the proprotor blades also use composites . For storage , the V @-@ 22 's rotors fold in 90 seconds and its wing rotates to align , front @-@ to @-@ back , with the fuselage . Due to the requirement for folding rotors , their 38 @-@ foot diameter is 5 feet less than optimal for vertical takeoff , resulting in high disk loading . Most missions use fixed wing flight 75 % or more of the time , reducing wear and tear and operational costs . This fixed wing flight is higher than typical helicopter missions allowing longer range line @-@ of @-@ sight communications for improved command and control . 
 Heat from the V @-@ 22 's engines can potentially damage the flight decks of ships . Naval Air Systems Command ( NAVAIR ) devised a temporary fix of portable heat shields placed under the engines , and determined that a long @-@ term solution would require redesigning decks with heat resistant coating , passive thermal barriers , and ship structure changes . Similar changes are required for F @-@ 35B operations . In 2009 , DARPA requested solutions for installing robust flight deck cooling . A heat @-@ resistant anti @-@ skid material called <unk> has been tested on USS Wasp . 
 = = = Engines = = = 
 The V @-@ 22 's two Rolls @-@ Royce AE 1107C engines are connected by drive shafts to a common central gearbox so that one engine can power both proprotors if an engine failure occurs . 
 In September 2013 , Rolls @-@ Royce announced it had increased the AE @-@ 1107C engine 's power by 17 percent via the adoption of a new Block 3 turbine , an increase in fuel valve flow capacity , and accompanying software updates . The upgrade should increase the reliability in high @-@ altitude , high @-@ heat conditions and boost maximum payload limitations from 6 @,@ 000 ft to 8 @,@ 000 ft . A Block 4 upgrade is reportedly being examined , which may increase power by up to 26 percent , producing close to 10 @,@ 000 hp , and improve fuel consumption . 
 In August 2014 , the U.S. military issued a request for information ( RFI ) for a potential drop @-@ in replacement for the AE @-@ 1107C engines . Submissions must have a power rating of no less than 6 @,@ 100 shp ( 4 @,@ 548 @.@ 78 kW ) at 15 @,@ 000 rpm , operate at up to 25 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 600 m ) at up to 130 degrees Fahrenheit ( 54 @.@ 4 degrees Celsius ) , and fit into the existing nacelles on the wings with minimal structural or external modifications . In September 2014 , the US Navy was considering contracting for an alternative engine supplier in order to reduce costs . In the V @-@ 22 program , the Navy purchases engines separately from the aircraft themselves . The General Electric <unk> has been considered as a replacement , providing commonality with the CH @-@ <unk> King Stallion . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Either engine can power both proprotors through the wing driveshaft . However , the V @-@ 22 is generally not capable of hovering on one engine . If a proprotor gearbox fails that proprotor cannot be feathered , and both engines must be stopped before an emergency landing . The aircraft 's <unk> characteristics are poor partly because the rotors have low inertia . 
 The V @-@ 22 has a maximum rotor downwash speed above 80 knots , more than the 64 knots lower limit of a hurricane . The <unk> usually prevents usage of the starboard door in hover , instead the rear ramp is used for rappelling and hoisting . Boeing has stated the V @-@ 22 design loses 10 percent of its vertical lift over a <unk> design when operating in helicopter mode because of airflow resistance due to the wings , but that the tiltrotor design has better short takeoff and landing performance . A V @-@ 22 must maintain at least 25 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) of vertical separation between each other to avoid their rotor wake , which can cause turbulence and potentially lead to a loss of control . 
 = = = Avionics = = = 
 The V @-@ 22 is equipped with a glass cockpit , which incorporates four Multi @-@ function displays ( MFDs , compatible with night @-@ vision goggles ) and one shared Central Display Unit ( CDU ) , to display various images including : <unk> , imagery from the <unk> Forward Looking Infrared System primary flight instruments , navigation ( TACAN , VOR , ILS , GPS , INS ) , and system status . The flight director panel of the Cockpit Management System ( CMS ) allows for fully coupled ( autopilot ) functions that take the aircraft from forward flight into a 50 ft ( 15 m ) hover with no pilot interaction other than programming the system . The glass cockpit of the canceled CH @-@ <unk> was derived from the V @-@ 22 . The fuselage is not pressurized , and personnel must wear on @-@ board oxygen masks above 10 @,@ 000 feet . 
 The V @-@ 22 has triple @-@ redundant fly @-@ by @-@ wire flight control systems . The aircraft also has computerized damage control that automatically isolates damaged elements . With the nacelles pointing straight up in conversion mode at 90 ° the flight computers command the aircraft to fly like a helicopter , with cyclic forces being applied to a conventional <unk> at the rotor hub . With the nacelles in airplane mode ( 0 ° ) the flaperons , rudder , and elevator fly the aircraft like an airplane . This is a gradual transition and occurs over the rotation range of the nacelles . The lower the nacelles , the greater effect of the airplane @-@ mode control surfaces . The nacelles can rotate past vertical to 97 @.@ 5 ° for rearward flight . The V @-@ 22 can use the " 80 Jump " orientation with the nacelles at 80 ° for takeoff to quickly achieve high altitude and speed . Aspects of the V @-@ 22 's flight are automated and simplified by the control system such that the V @-@ 22 can hover ( in low wind ) with no hands on the controls . According to some who have flown the aircraft , former fixed @-@ wing pilots may be preferable because they ( unlike those with helicopter experience ) are not trained to constantly adjust the controls while hovering . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 The Osprey can be armed with one 7 @.@ 62 × 51mm NATO ( .308 in caliber ) M240 machine gun or .50 in caliber ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 machine gun on the loading ramp , that can be fired rearward when the ramp is lowered . A .50 in GAU @-@ 19 three @-@ barrel Gatling gun mounted below the V @-@ 22 's nose was studied for future upgrade . BAE Systems developed a belly @-@ mounted , remotely operated gun turret system for the V @-@ 22 , named the Interim Defense Weapon System ( IDWS ) . The IDWS is remotely operated by a gunner inside the aircraft , who acquires targets via a separate pod using color television and forward looking infrared imagery . The IDWS was installed on half of the first V @-@ 22s deployed to Afghanistan in 2009 , but found limited use due to its 800 lb ( 360 kg ) weight and restrictive rules of engagement . 
 There were 32 <unk> available to the Marine Corps in June 2012 . The system had not been fired in combat as V @-@ 22s were routinely escorted by helicopter gunships and close air support aircraft , allowing them to focus on their transport role ; squadrons also often flew without the belly gun , as the added weight reduced its cargo @-@ carrying capacity . The Osprey 's speed means it can outrun supporting conventional helicopters , requiring a self @-@ defense capability on long @-@ range missions and operate independently . The infrared gun camera has proven valuable for reconnaissance and surveillance . Other weapons are being studied to provide an all @-@ quadrant defensive weapon system including nose guns , door guns , and nonlethal countermeasures to work with the current ramp @-@ mounted machine gun and the IDWS . 
 In 2014 , the USMC revealed plans for new V @-@ 22 weapons " to increase all @-@ axis , stand @-@ off , and precision capabilities " , which may be potentially operated by additional crew members . Armament increases are for enhanced offensive capabilities to special purpose Marine rapid crisis response task forces , rather than as an attack platform . The V @-@ 22 could be adapted for various precision weapons , including the AGM @-@ 114 Hellfire , AGM @-@ 176 Griffin , Joint Air @-@ to @-@ Ground Missile , and GBU @-@ 53 / B SDB II . Fuselage @-@ based hardpoints would be used to clear the proprotors . In November 2014 , Bell and Boeing conducted self @-@ funded weapons tests using a V @-@ 22 equipped with a small pylon on the front port @-@ side fuselage and the AN / AAQ @-@ 27A EO camera replaced with an L @-@ 3 Wescam MX @-@ 15 sensor / laser designator . 26 unguided Hydra 70 rockets , two guided APKWS rockets , and two Griffin B missiles were fired over five flights . The USMC and USAF seek a traversable nose @-@ mounted weapon connected to a helmet @-@ mounted sight ; recoil would complicate integrating a desired forward @-@ facing gun . A weapons pylon on either side of the fuselage can carry 300 lb ( 140 kg ) of munitions . 
 = = = Refueling capability = = = 
 Boeing is developing a roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off aerial refueling kit , which would give the V @-@ 22 the ability to refuel other aircraft . Having an aerial refueling capability that can be based off Wasp @-@ class amphibious assault ships would increase the striking power of Marine F @-@ 35Bs , as they would not rely on refueling assets that could only be based on full @-@ sized Nimitz @-@ class aircraft carriers or from land bases . The roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off kit can also be applicable to intelligence , surveillance , and reconnaissance functions . Boeing funded a non @-@ functional demonstration on a VMX @-@ 22 aircraft ; a prototype kit was successfully tested with an F / A @-@ 18 on 5 September 2013 . 
 The high @-@ speed version of the hose / drogue refueling system is designed to be deployed at 185 kn ( 213 mph ; 343 km / h ) and function at up to 250 kn ( 290 mph ; 460 km / h ) . Onboard tanks and a roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off bladder can contain up to 12 @,@ 000 lb ( 5 @,@ 400 kg ) of fuel . The operator must open the ramp to extend the refueling hose , then raise the ramp once extended , with the top ramp door left open . The V @-@ 22 could refuel rotary @-@ wing aircraft , but it would require a separate drogue used specifically by helicopters and a partially converted nacelle . Bell and Boeing are hoping for funding for additional testing to include contact between the <unk> and receiver and eventually the passage of fuel . Since many Marine Corps ground vehicles can run on aviation fuel , a refueling V @-@ 22 could also service them . In late 2014 , it was stated that such tankers could be operational by 2017 . 
 While the Navy has not declared a firm interest to use the V @-@ 22 Aerial Refueling System ( VARS ) on its planned COD fleet , on 22 February 2016 Boeing confirmed that it expects to sign a development contract with the US Marine Corps ( USMC ) for the VARS system in the first quarter of 2016 . Boeing had conducted an internally financed proof of concept for the roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off capability , with the anticipated USMC contract providing funds to " <unk> the kit " . VARS would become operational in FY 2018 and would allow the Osprey to become the USMC 's recovery tanker ; when aircraft land on USMC amphibious ships , they sometimes need additional fuel while they wait for available deck space . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 = = = U.S. Marine Corps = = = 
 Since March 2000 , <unk> @-@ 204 has conducted Marine Corps crew training for the V @-@ 22 . On 3 June 2005 , Marine Corps helicopter squadron Marine Medium Helicopter 263 ( HMM @-@ 263 ) stood down to transition to the MV @-@ 22 . On 8 December 2005 , Lieutenant General James Amos , commander of II Marine Expeditionary Force , accepted delivery of the first fleet of MV @-@ 22s , delivered to HMM @-@ 263 . The unit reactivated on 3 March 2006 as the first MV @-@ 22 squadron , redesignated as VMM @-@ 263 . On 23 March 2007 , HMM @-@ 266 became Marine Medium <unk> Squadron 266 ( VMM @-@ 266 ) at Marine Corps Air Station New River , North Carolina . 
 The MV @-@ 22 reached initial operational capability ( IOC ) with the U.S. Marine Corps on 13 June 2007 . The Osprey has been replacing the CH @-@ 46 Sea Knight since 2007 ; the Sea Knight was retired in October 2014 . On 10 July 2007 , an MV @-@ 22 landed aboard the Royal Navy aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious , the first time a V @-@ 22 had landed on a non @-@ U.S. vessel . 
 On 13 April 2007 , the Marine Corps announced the first V @-@ 22 combat deployment at Al Asad Airbase , Iraq . On 17 September 2007 , 10 MV @-@ 22Bs of VMM @-@ 263 left for Iraq aboard USS Wasp . The decision to use a ship instead of self @-@ deploying was made because of concerns over icing during the North Atlantic portion of the trip , lack of available KC @-@ 130s for mid @-@ air refueling , and the Wasp 's availability . 
 On arrival , they were used in Iraq 's western Anbar province for cargo and troop movements , as well as riskier " aero @-@ scout " missions . General David Petraeus , the top U.S. military commander in Iraq , used one to visit troops around Iraq on Christmas Day 2007 ; as did then @-@ presidential candidate Barack Obama during his 2008 tour of Iraq . Obtaining spare parts proved problematic . By July 2008 , the V @-@ 22 had flown 3 @,@ 000 sorties totaling 5 @,@ 200 hours in Iraq . General George J. Trautman , III praised the V @-@ 22 's increased speed and range over legacy helicopters , stating that " it turned his battle space from the size of Texas into the size of Rhode Island . " Through 2009 , V @-@ 22s had been fired upon several times by man @-@ portable air @-@ defense systems , and small arms with none lost to enemy fire . 
 A Government Accountability Office study reported that by January 2009 , 12 MV @-@ 22s were operating in Iraq and they completed all assigned missions ; mission capable rates averaged 57 % to 68 % , and an overall full mission capable rate of 6 % . The report also stated that the aircraft had shown weakness in situational awareness , maintenance , shipboard operations and transport capability . The study concluded that " ... deployments confirmed that the V @-@ 22 ’ s enhanced speed and range enable personnel and internal cargo to be transported faster and farther than is possible with the legacy helicopters it is replacing . " 
 The MV @-@ 22 deployed to Afghanistan in November 2009 with VMM @-@ 261 , and saw its first offensive combat mission , Operation Cobra 's Anger , on 4 December 2009 . Ospreys assisted in inserting 1 @,@ 000 Marines and 150 Afghan troops into the Now Zad Valley of Helmand Province in southern Afghanistan to disrupt Taliban communication and supply lines . On 18 February 2011 , Marine Commandant General James Amos indicated MV @-@ 22s deployed to Afghanistan had surpassed 100 @,@ 000 flight hours and were noted as " the safest airplane , or close to the safest airplane ” in the Marine Corps inventory . 
 In January 2010 , the MV @-@ 22 was sent to Haiti as part of Operation Unified Response relief efforts after the earthquake there , the type 's first humanitarian mission . In March 2011 , two MV @-@ 22s from Kearsarge participated in a mission to rescue a downed USAF F @-@ 15E crew member during Operation Odyssey Dawn . On 2 May 2011 , following Operation Neptune 's Spear , the body of Osama bin Laden , founder of the al @-@ Qaeda terrorist group , was flown by a MV @-@ 22 to the aircraft carrier Carl Vinson in the Northern Arabian Sea , prior to his burial at sea . 
 In 2013 , several MV @-@ 22s received communications and seating modifications to support the Marine One presidential transport squadron due to the urgent need for CH @-@ <unk> in Afghanistan . On 11 August 2013 , two MV @-@ 22s from Marine Helicopter Squadron One ( HMX @-@ 1 ) made their debut ferrying Secret Service agents , White House staff , and press members from <unk> Cape Cod to Martha 's Vineyard during the President 's vacation . In May 2010 , Boeing announced plans to submit the V @-@ 22 for the VXX presidential transport replacement . 
 Several Japanese politicians and Okinawa residents opposed a V @-@ 22 deployment to Japan in July 2012 , mainly due to several high @-@ profile accidents . On 14 June 2013 , an MV @-@ 22 landed on the JDS Hyūga off the coast of California , the first time a V @-@ 22 had landed on a Japan Maritime Self @-@ Defense Force vessel . In January 2014 , a MV @-@ 22 landed aboard the French Mistral @-@ class amphibious assault ship Dixmude . A Marine MV @-@ 22 landed on the <unk> <unk> ( LPH @-@ <unk> ) on 26 March 2015 , marking the first landing of an Osprey on a Republic of Korea Navy amphibious ship . 
 From 2 to 5 August 2013 , two MV @-@ 22s completed the longest distance Osprey <unk> mission to date . Flying from Marine Corps Air Station <unk> in Okinawa alongside two KC @-@ 130J tanker aircraft , the Ospreys flew to Clark Air Base in the Philippines on 2 August , then to Darwin , Australia on 3 August , Townsville , Australia on 4 August , and finally rendezvoused with Bonhomme Richard on 5 August . 
 In 2013 , the USMC formed an intercontinental response force , the Special Purpose Marine Air @-@ Ground Task Force - Crisis Response - Africa ( <unk> @-@ CR @-@ AF ) , equipped with V @-@ 22s outfitted with specialized communications equipment . In 2013 , following Typhoon Haiyan , 12 MV @-@ 22s of the 3rd Marine Expeditionary Brigade were deployed to the Philippines for disaster relief operations . The V @-@ 22 's capabilities were described as " uniquely relevant " , being able to fly faster and with greater payload while moving essential supplies to remote sites throughout the island archipelago . 
 The V @-@ 22 deployment to Afghanistan was set to conclude in late 2013 with the drawdown of combat operations ; however VMM @-@ 261 was directed to extend operations for a new role , casualty evacuation , for which it was better suited than helicopters as its speed better enabled casualties to reach a hospital within the ' golden hour ' ; they were fitted with medical equipment such as heart @-@ monitors and basic triage supplies . 
 In 2014 , the <unk> @-@ CR @-@ AF supported the time @-@ critical effort against the Ebola virus epidemic in Liberia , flying 1 @,@ 200 people and 78 @,@ 000 lb ( 35 t ) of cargo in V @-@ 22s . 
 In November 2014 , three MV @-@ 22Bs were placed on alert at Al Jaber Air Base in Kuwait to be ready within 30 minutes to recover downed pilots during the Military intervention against ISIL . On 29 occasions between 1 November and 24 April 2015 , two Ospreys and a KC @-@ 130J aerial tanker assigned to this Tactical Recovery of Aircraft and Personnel ( <unk> ) mission spent 145 flight hours loitering , ready to perform rescue missions if required . The only pilot that was downed was a Jordanian , but he did not have a radio on him when he ejected and landed too close to ISIL forces . 
 = = = U.S. Air Force = = = 
 The Air Force 's first operational CV @-@ 22 was delivered to the 58th Special Operations Wing ( 58th SOW ) at Kirtland Air Force Base , New Mexico on 20 March 2006 . This and subsequent aircraft became part of the 58th SOW 's fleet of aircraft used for training pilots and crew members for special operations use . On 16 November 2006 , the Air Force officially accepted the CV @-@ 22 in a ceremony conducted at Hurlburt Field , Florida . The Air Force first used the V @-@ 22 on a non @-@ training mission to perform search and rescue from Kirtland Air Force Base on 4 October 2007 . 
 The U.S. Air Force 's first operational deployment of the Osprey sent four CV @-@ 22s to Mali in November 2008 in support of Exercise Flintlock . The CV @-@ 22s flew nonstop from Hurlburt Field , Florida with in @-@ flight refueling . AFSOC declared that the 8th Special Operations Squadron reached Initial Operational Capability on 16 March 2009 , with six CV @-@ 22s in service . 
 In June 2009 , CV @-@ 22s of the 8th Special Operations Squadron delivered 43 @,@ 000 pounds ( 20 @,@ 000 kg ) of humanitarian supplies to remote villages in Honduras that were not accessible by conventional vehicles . In November 2009 , the 8th SO Squadron and its six CV @-@ 22s returned from a three @-@ month deployment in Iraq . 
 In August 2012 , the USAF found that " CV @-@ 22 wake modeling is inadequate for a trailing aircraft to make accurate estimations of safe separation from the preceding aircraft . " 
 On 21 December 2013 , three CV @-@ 22s came under small arms fire while on a mission to evacuate American civilians in Bor , South Sudan during the 2013 South Sudanese political crisis . The three aircraft were damaged and four crew wounded ; the mission was aborted and the aircraft flew 500 mi ( 800 km ) to Entebbe , Uganda . South Sudanese officials stated that the attackers were rebels . The CV @-@ 22s , of the 8th Special Operations Squadron , had flown to Bor over three countries across 790 nmi ( 910 mi ; 1 @,@ 460 km ) . The formation was hit 119 times , causing flight control failures and hydraulic and fuel leaks on all three aircraft . Due to fuel leaks , multiple air @-@ to @-@ air refuelings were performed en route . Following the South Sudan incident , AFSOC developed optional armor floor panels for the V @-@ 22 . 
 On 3 July 2014 , V @-@ 22 aircraft carried Delta Force commandos to a campsite in eastern Syria where Islamic State militants had held American and other hostages . The commandos quickly eliminated the militants at the site , but found that the hostages had been moved elsewhere and returned home empty handed . 
 The Air Force is looking to configure the CV @-@ 22 to perform combat search and rescue in addition to its primary long @-@ range special operations transport mission . The Osprey would act as a complement to Air Force HH @-@ 60G Pave Hawk and planned HH @-@ <unk> rescue helicopters , being employed in scenarios were its ability to cover more ground quickly would be better suited to search and rescue than more nimble but slower helicopters . 
 = = = Potential operators = = = 
 = = = = U.S. Navy = = = = 
 The United States Navy could potentially employ the V @-@ 22 in search and rescue , transport and anti @-@ submarine warfare roles . The V @-@ 22 program included Navy 48 HV @-@ 22s , but none were ordered at first . One proposal was to replace the C @-@ 2 Greyhound with the V @-@ 22 for Carrier Onboard Delivery duties . One specific advantage of the V @-@ 22 in this role is the ability to deliver supplies and people between non @-@ carriers ships beyond helicopter range . An MV @-@ 22 landed and refueled onboard Nimitz as part of an evaluation for COD in October 2012 . Further cargo handling trials took place in 2013 on Harry S. Truman . 
 V @-@ 22 proponents said that it is capable of similar speed , payload capacity , and lift performance as the C @-@ 2 , and can also carry greater payloads over short ranges , up to 20 @,@ 000 lb , and can also carry suspended external loads . The C @-@ 2 can only land on carriers , requiring further distribution to smaller vessels via helicopters , while the Osprey has been certified for operating upon amphibious ships , aircraft carriers , and logistics ships . The V @-@ 22 could also take the roles of some helicopters , with a 600 lb hoist fitted to the ramp and a cabin configuration for 12 non @-@ ambulatory patients and five seats for medical attendants . Boeing designed a special frame for the V @-@ 22 to carry the Lockheed Martin F @-@ 35 's <unk> engine to ships . Bell and Boeing have pitched the V @-@ 22 to the Navy as a platform for various missions , such as communications , electronic warfare , or aerial refueling ; the Navy has a known gap in tactical aerial refueling , currently handled by Marine KC @-@ 130s , Air Force KC @-@ 10 <unk> , and KC @-@ 135 Stratotankers with hose @-@ and @-@ drogue delivery systems . 
 On 5 January 2015 , the Navy and Marines signed a memorandum of understanding ( MOU ) to buy the V @-@ 22 for the COD mission , and was confirmed in the Navy 's FY 2016 budget . Initially designated HV @-@ 22 , four aircraft would be initially bought each year from 2018 – 2020 . The Navy 's variant will incorporate an extended @-@ range fuel system , a high @-@ frequency radio for over @-@ the @-@ horizon communications , and a public address system to communicate with passengers . While the MV @-@ 22 has a range of 428 nmi ( 493 mi ; 793 km ) when carrying 24 Marines , the Navy has a requirement for an 1 @,@ 150 nmi ( 1 @,@ 320 mi ; 2 @,@ 130 km ) unrefueled range , which may lower passenger / payload capacity . In February 2016 , the Navy officially designated its V @-@ 22 COD variant as the CMV @-@ 22B . Although its primary mission is long @-@ range aerial logistics , other conceivable mission sets can include personnel recovery and special warfare . The Navy 's program of record originally called for 48 aircraft , but they later determined they only required 44 . Production of the CMV @-@ 22 will begin in FY 2018 and start deliveries in 2020 . The version will come equipped with extra fuel bladders to extend its range . 
 = = = = India = = = = 
 The Indian Aviation Research Centre ( ARC ) is interested in acquiring four V @-@ 22 Ospreys for the purposes of personnel evacuation in hostile conditions , logistic supplies , and deployment of the Special Frontier Force ( SFF ) on the border . India had seen the Osprey 's utility in relief operations of the April 2015 Nepal earthquake . The deal could be worth some $ 300 million . Elements of the Indian Navy have also looked at the V @-@ 22 rather than the E @-@ 2D for Airborne early warning and control to replace the short @-@ range Kamov Ka @-@ 31 . 
 = = = = Israel = = = = 
 Israel has shown interest in the V @-@ 22 . In 2009 , Israel reportedly favored the Sikorsky CH @-@ <unk> over the V @-@ 22 . In 2011 , Israel was interested in using the V @-@ 22 to support special operations and search & rescue missions . In 2013 , Israel was reportedly interested in a possible lease of six to eight aircraft for special operations missions ; the type is not to act as a replacement for existing rotorcraft . 
 On 22 April 2013 , an agreement was finalized to sell six V @-@ 22 to the Israel Air Force . Israeli aircraft were to be moved to the front of the production queue , jumping ahead of some USMC deliveries , and expected to arrive as early as 2015 . These aircraft are to be optimized for special operations and rescue missions . The initial order of six aircraft could cost up to $ 1 @.@ 13 billion , including additional equipment and support ; Israel is interested in doubling the purchase to 12 aircraft . In October 2014 , media reports indicated that Israel 's deferment or cancelling of its V @-@ 22 procurement due to budget restraints and changing policies . In December 2014 , the Letter of Agreement offering a $ 400 million discount and early delivery formally expired , the Defense Minister having decided to wait until elections in March 2015 to push for approval from a new cabinet . 
 = = = = Japan = = = = 
 In 2012 , former Defense Minister Satoshi Morimoto ordered an investigation of the costs of V @-@ 22 operations . The V @-@ 22 exceeds current Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces helicopters in terms of range , speed , and payload . The ministry anticipates deployments to the Nansei Islands and the Senkaku Islands , as well as in multinational cooperation with the U.S. Japan is considering plans to have V @-@ 22s in service in a maritime role by as early as 2015 . On 21 November 2014 , the Japanese Ministry of Defense officially decided to procure 17 V @-@ 22s , with deliveries planned from FY 2014 to FY 2019 . In January 2015 , Japan 's parliament approved a defense budget with funding for five V @-@ 22s . 
 = = = = South Korea = = = = 
 In February 2015 , the South Korean Army showed interest in the V @-@ 22 for delivering special forces to islands in the Yellow Sea near North Korean territory ; talks are to be held during 2015 on a possible Osprey buy . 
 = = = = United Arab Emirates = = = = 
 In May 2012 , it was reported that the United Arab Emirates was in the final negotiation stages to purchase several V @-@ 22s . The UAE intends to use the Osprey to support special forces . Both UAE and the Pentagon seek a $ 58 million unit cost . On 10 November 2015 , UAE selected an <unk> variant for search and rescue use and denies negotiations on the V @-@ 22 . 
 = = Variants = = 
 V @-@ 22A 
 Pre @-@ production full @-@ scale development aircraft used for flight testing . These are unofficially considered A @-@ variants after the 1993 redesign . 
 CV @-@ 22B 
 U.S. Air Force variant for the U.S. Special Operations Command ( USSOCOM ) . It conducts long @-@ range special operations missions , and is equipped with extra wing fuel tanks , an AN / APQ @-@ 186 terrain @-@ following radar , and other equipment such as the AN / ALQ @-@ 211 , and AN / AAQ @-@ 24 Nemesis Directional Infrared Counter Measures . The fuel capacity is increased by 588 gallons ( 2 @,@ 230 L ) with two inboard wing tanks ; three auxiliary tanks ( 200 or 430 gal ) can also be added in the cabin . The CV @-@ 22 replaced the MH @-@ 53 Pave Low . 
 MV @-@ 22B 
 U.S. Marine Corps variant . The Marine Corps is the lead service in the V @-@ 22 's development . The Marine Corps variant is an assault transport for troops , equipment and supplies , capable of operating from ships or expeditionary airfields ashore . It replaced the Marine Corps ' CH @-@ <unk> and CH @-@ <unk> fleets . 
 CMV @-@ 22B 
 U.S. Navy variant for the carrier onboard delivery ( COD ) role . Similar to the MV @-@ 22B but includes an extended @-@ range fuel system , a high @-@ frequency radio , and a public address system . 
 EV @-@ 22 
 Proposed airborne early warning and control variant . The Royal Navy studied this AEW variant as a replacement for its current fleet of carrier @-@ based Sea King ASaC.7 helicopters . 
 HV @-@ 22 
 The U.S. Navy considered an HV @-@ 22 to provide combat search and rescue , delivery and retrieval of special warfare teams along with fleet logistic support transport . It chose the MH @-@ <unk> for this role in 2001 . Naval Air Systems Command 's 2011 / 2012 V @-@ 22 Osprey Guidebook lists the HV @-@ 22 for the U.S. Navy with the USAF and USMC variants . 
 SV @-@ 22 
 Proposed anti @-@ submarine warfare variant . The U.S. Navy studied the SV @-@ 22 in the 1980s to replace S @-@ 3 and SH @-@ 2 aircraft . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Japan 
 Japan Self @-@ Defense Forces ( 5 on order ) 
 United States 
 United States Air <unk> Special Operations Squadron 
 8th Special Operations Squadron 
 20th Special Operations Squadron 
 71st Special Operations Squadron 
 <unk> Flight Test Squadron 
 United States Marine <unk> @-@ 1 : 
 VMX @-@ 22 
 VMM @-@ 161 
 VMM @-@ 162 
 VMM @-@ 165 
 VMM @-@ 166 
 <unk> @-@ 204 
 VMM @-@ 261 
 VMM @-@ 263 
 VMM @-@ 264 
 VMM @-@ 266 
 VMM @-@ 363 
 VMM @-@ 365 
 VMM @-@ 561 
 = = Notable accidents = = 
 The V @-@ 22 Osprey has had seven hull @-@ loss accidents with a total of 36 fatalities . During testing from 1991 to 2000 , there were four crashes resulting in 30 fatalities . Since becoming operational in 2007 , the V @-@ 22 has had three crashes resulting in six fatalities , and several minor incidents . The aircraft 's accident history has generated some controversy over its perceived safety issues . 
 = = Aircraft on display = = 
 The third of six V @-@ 22A prototypes is on display at the American Helicopter Museum & Education Center in West Chester , Pennsylvania . 
 CV @-@ 22B 99 @-@ 021 – National Museum of the United States Air Force at Wright @-@ Patterson AFB in Dayton , Ohio . 
 = = Specifications ( MV @-@ 22B ) = = 
 Data from Norton , Boeing , Bell guide , Naval Air Systems Command , and USAF CV @-@ 22 fact sheet 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : Four ( pilot , copilot and two flight engineers / crew chiefs ) 
 Capacity : 24 troops ( seated ) , 32 troops ( floor loaded ) , or 
 20 @,@ 000 lb ( 9 @,@ 070 kg ) of internal cargo , or up to 15 @,@ 000 lb ( 6 @,@ 800 kg ) of external cargo ( dual hook ) 
 1 × Growler light internally transportable ground vehicle 
 Length : 57 ft 4 in ( 17 @.@ 5 m ) 
 Rotor diameter : 38 ft 0 in ( 11 @.@ 6 m ) 
 Wingspan : 45 ft 10 in ( 14 m ) 
 Width with rotors : 84 ft 7 in ( 25 @.@ 8 m ) 
 Height : 22 ft 1 in / 6 @.@ 73 m ; overall with nacelles vertical ( 17 ft 11 in / 5 @.@ 5 m ; at top of tailfins ) 
 Disc area : 2 @,@ 268 ft ² ( 212 m ² ) 
 Wing area : 301 @.@ 4 ft ² ( 28 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 33 @,@ 140 lb ( 15 @,@ 032 kg ) 
 Loaded weight : 47 @,@ 500 lb ( 21 @,@ 500 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 60 @,@ 500 lb ( 27 @,@ 400 kg ) ( self @-@ deploy / long runway ) 
 Maximum rolling takeoff weight : 57 @,@ 000 lb ( STOL ) 
 Maximum vertical takeoff weight : 52 @,@ 600 lb 
 Powerplant : 2 × Rolls @-@ Royce Allison <unk> / AE 1107C @-@ Liberty turboshafts , 6 @,@ 150 hp ( 4 @,@ 590 kW ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 275 knots ( 509 km / h , 316 mph ) at sea level / 305 kn ( 565 km / h ; 351 mph ) at 15 @,@ 000 ft ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) 
 Cruise speed : 241 kn ( 277 mph , 446 km / h ) at sea level 
 Stall speed : 110 kn ( 126 mph , 204 km / h ) in airplane mode 
 Range : 879 nmi ( 1 @,@ 011 mi , 1 @,@ 627 km ) 
 Combat radius : 390 nmi ( 426 mi , 722 km ) 
 Ferry range : 1 @,@ 940 nmi ( 2 @,@ 230 mi , 3 @,@ 590 km ) with auxiliary internal fuel tanks 
 Service ceiling : 25 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 620 m ) 
 Rate of climb : 2 @,@ 320 – 4 @,@ 000 ft / min ( 11 @.@ 8 m / s ) 
 Glide ratio : 4 @.@ 5 : 1 
 Disc loading : 20 @.@ 9 lb / ft ² at 47 @,@ 500 lb GW ( 102 @.@ 23 kg / m ² ) 
 Power / mass : 0 @.@ 259 hp / lb ( 427 W / kg ) 
 Armament 
 1 × 7 @.@ 62 mm ( 0 @.@ 308 in ) M240 machine gun or 0 @.@ 50 in ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning machine gun on ramp , removable 
 1 × 7 @.@ 62 mm ( .308 in ) GAU @-@ 17 minigun , belly @-@ mounted , retractable , video remote control in the Remote Guardian System [ optional ] 
 = = Notable appearances in media = = 
 ( For V @-@ 22 appearances in fiction , and for fictional V @-@ 22 @-@ based aircraft , respectively . ) 
 = Clementine cake = 
 Clementine cake is a cake prepared with clementine fruit as a primary ingredient and other typical cake ingredients . Additional ingredients may be used , and some preparation variations exist . It may be prepared using whole or peeled clementines that have been manually @-@ seeded , or seedless fruit may be used . It may provide significant amounts of Vitamin D. It may be topped with a sweet glaze or sauce , powdered sugar , honey and clementines or candied clementines . Its origin may be roughly based upon an orange cake developed by the Sephardi Jews . In popular culture , the cake played a minor part in the plot of the 2013 film The Secret Life of Walter Mitty . 
 = = Preparation and variations = = 
 Clementine cake is prepared with the primary ingredients of clementine fruit , ground almonds or almond meal , flour , sugar , butter and eggs . Additional ingredients may be used , such as orange juice , orange <unk> , milk , white dessert wine , or Riesling wine , orange oil or tangerine oil ( or both ) , almond extract and vanilla extract . Some variations exist , such as being prepared without the use of flour . It may also be prepared as an upside @-@ down cake . 
 The cake may be prepared with clementines and / or clementine zest mixed in the batter , with them atop the cake , such as in slices , and in both ways . The seeds and membrane of the clementine may be removed as part of the preparation process , or seedless clementines may be used . Whole , sliced clementines including the peel , or peeled clementines may be used , and the clementines may be cooked before being used in the cake batter . The fruit may be chopped or blended using a food processor . <unk> clementine may be used atop the cake or as a garnish . The almonds used may be toasted or blanched . 
 Clementine cake may be finished with a sweet topping such as a sugar or chocolate glaze , a fudge or chocolate sauce , powdered sugar or honey . Clementine cake may be dense and moist , and its flavor may improve a day or more after preparation , because the ingredients intermingle and coalesce to enhance its flavor as it ages . After being cooked , the cake may be delicate and can fall if it is wiggled too much . After preparation , it may be frozen to preserve it . 
 = = History = = 
 Clementine cake 's origin may be roughly based upon an orange cake developed by the Sephardi Jews . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Clementine cake played a minor part in the plot of the 2013 film The Secret Life of Walter Mitty , and was pictured in the opening scene of the film and in a couple of additional scenes . 
 British celebrity chef Nigella Lawson has devised a recipe for clementine cake . 
 = Red Tail Reborn = 
 Red Tail Reborn is a 2007 historical documentary film by Adam White about the Commemorative Air Force 's Red Tail Project . The project involves the restoration , exhibition and maintenance of a World War II P @-@ 51 Mustang flown by the United States Air Force <unk> Fighter Group . The exhibition of this plane is considered to be a traveling and flying tribute to the Tuskegee Airmen . In addition to increasing awareness of the travails of the Tuskegee Airmen , this film served to highlight the Red Tail Project fundraising effort to rebuild the plane after a 2004 crash . 
 The film was initially broadcast and released on DVD in 2007 in the director 's home state of Ohio , winning local Emmy Award recognition . The following year , it was broadcast nationally for the first time on Public Broadcasting Services ( PBS ) stations . The film had a sequel called Flight of the Red Tail . 
 = = Story = = 
 Red Tail Reborn is described by AllMovie as " ... the story of the brave African @-@ American pilots who risked their lives in order to ensure that peace prevailed , and the people who have dedicated their lives to ensure that they are not forgotten . " It tells three stories in one : the story of the Tuskegee Airmen , the history of the Red Tail Mustangs they flew ( one of which is the subject of the restoration efforts ) and the story of the late Don Hinz who crashed the first restored Mustang in 2004 . 
 The film sheds light on the bravery and heroism of the Tuskegee Airmen in their service as bomber escorts for the Allied Forces in the European Theatre of World War II . It documents that the Tuskegee Airmen were the country 's first African American military aviators taking flight in World War II , despite contemporary stereotyping of African American men as lacking the essential intellectual and emotional qualities necessary to fly . The film even presents government documents deriding African American men as substandard and " cowards " . It describes segregation endured by the African American military officers , and it describes how these pilots distinguished themselves with their record . 
 It details the evolution of the Red Tail Project mission and the re @-@ dedication to this enthusiasm when the mission 's leader perished while flying a plane in homage to the Tuskegee Airmen . This includes an explanation of the provenance of the plane and the various restoration efforts that led up to the Red Tail Project . 
 = = History and production = = 
 Among those that Cleveland filmmaker White interviewed to make the film were 13 of the Tuskegee airmen . Several of the Tuskegee Airmen were from the northeast Ohio region . One of the veterans interviewed was Colonel Charles McGee , who had served in World War II , the Korean War and the Vietnam War and whom White said had more combat flight hours than any other American . The film was shot in Billings , Montana . The film was produced to help increase awareness and elicit financial support for The Red Tail Project . The film was produced by Cleveland @-@ based Hemlock Films , which is White 's production company . It was underwritten by the Parker Hannifin Corporation . 
 The film was inspired while White was filming The Restorers , after a P @-@ 51C Mustang landed for refueling and White met Doug <unk> , the pilot of the Red Tail Project 's Tuskegee Airmen plane . When White heard Don Hinz had been killed in a crash of that very same plane , he felt compelled to do a story focusing on it . Once he got involved in the project , a local PBS station committed to airing the final product , which was an early step in the successful development of the project . When researching the film he noticed a lack of resources about the Tuskegee Airmen and felt driven to fill the void . 
 = = Airings and DVD release = = 
 The film premiered at the MAPS Air Museum at the Akron @-@ Canton Regional Airport in Green , Ohio on Saturday February 10 , 2007 and debuted during a simulcast on Western Reserve Public Media , PBS network stations serving northeastern Ohio , the following day . The stations re @-@ aired the show four more times between February 13 and February 20 . The film debuted in western Ohio at Wright State University on March 22 , 2007 at which time a two @-@ disc DVD was made available . It was released to the general public in DVD format on March 23 , 2007 . The film , which was not rated , was available in 1 @.@ 33 : 1 aspect ratio and in Color , Dolby , DVD , NTSC , widescreen <unk> was produced in color format . The film began national PBS broadcasts in during Black History Month in February 2008 , reaching over 300 affiliates in its initial national airing , although specific dates and times varied from station to station . The PBS airings began on February 5 . PBS also aired the film later in 2008 during its November Veterans Day programming . 
 The DVD release includes a second disc with four hours of additional interviews , deleted scenes , and productions stills . A reviewer from Flight Journal , feels the DVD package will connect with an audience of actual and aspiring restorers of military combat aircraft , which sometimes referred to as warbirds . It notes that the narrator , Michael Dorn , is a warbird owner and pilot . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2008 , the film garnered three regional Emmy Awards from the Lower Great Lakes Region of the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences in the following categories : Best Informational / Instructional Program , Best Music Composition / Arrangement and Best Research . The film had been nominated for a total of six Emmys including the following additional categories : Best Lighting Location , Best <unk> – Program ( Non News ) , Best Writer – Program ( Non @-@ News ) . The 2004 film followed the success of The Restorers , which chronicled the restoration efforts for various warbird and vintage aircraft and which also won regional Emmy Award recognition . Whereas , The Restorers focuses on general aircraft restoration , the Red Tail Reborn expounds upon the restoration and rebuilding of a specific plane and the Red Tail Project . Although it was not released in theatres and its DVD sales where not among the top 100 in 2007 , the success of its national airing spawned a 2009 sequel entitled Flight of the Red Tail , which is also known as Red Tail Reborn 2 , that was available on DVD on November 27 . The sequel is a 12 @-@ minute documentary follow @-@ up . 
 = NASA = 
 The National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) is an independent agency of the executive branch of the United States federal government responsible for the civilian space program as well as aeronautics and aerospace research . 
 President Dwight D. Eisenhower established NASA in 1958 with a distinctly civilian ( rather than military ) orientation encouraging peaceful applications in space science . The National Aeronautics and Space Act was passed on July 29 , 1958 , <unk> NASA 's predecessor , the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ( NACA ) . The new agency became operational on October 1 , 1958 . 
 Since that time , most US space exploration efforts have been led by NASA , including the Apollo moon @-@ landing missions , the Skylab space station , and later the Space Shuttle . Currently , NASA is supporting the International Space Station and is overseeing the development of the Orion Multi @-@ Purpose Crew Vehicle , the Space Launch System and Commercial Crew vehicles . The agency is also responsible for the Launch Services Program ( <unk> ) which provides oversight of launch operations and countdown management for unmanned NASA launches . 
 NASA science is focused on better understanding Earth through the Earth Observing System , advancing <unk> through the efforts of the Science Mission Directorate 's <unk> Research Program , exploring bodies throughout the Solar System with advanced robotic spacecraft missions such as New Horizons , and researching astrophysics topics , such as the Big Bang , through the Great Observatories and associated programs . NASA shares data with various national and international organizations such as from the Greenhouse Gases Observing Satellite . 
 = = Creation = = 
 From 1946 , the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics ( NACA ) had been experimenting with rocket planes such as the supersonic Bell X @-@ 1 . In the early 1950s , there was challenge to launch an artificial satellite for the International Geophysical Year ( 1957 – 58 ) . An effort for this was the American Project Vanguard . After the Soviet launch of the world 's first artificial satellite ( Sputnik 1 ) on October 4 , 1957 , the attention of the United States turned toward its own fledgling space efforts . The US Congress , alarmed by the perceived threat to national security and technological leadership ( known as the " Sputnik crisis " ) , urged immediate and swift action ; President Dwight D. Eisenhower and his advisers counseled more deliberate measures . This led to an agreement that a new federal agency mainly based on NACA was needed to conduct all non @-@ military activity in space . The Advanced Research Projects Agency ( ARPA ) was created in February 1958 to develop space technology for military application . 
 On July 29 , 1958 , Eisenhower signed the National Aeronautics and Space Act , establishing NASA . When it began operations on October 1 , 1958 , NASA absorbed the 43 @-@ year @-@ old NACA intact ; its 8 @,@ 000 employees , an annual budget of US $ 100 million , three major research laboratories ( Langley Aeronautical Laboratory , Ames Aeronautical Laboratory , and Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory ) and two small test facilities . A NASA seal was approved by President Eisenhower in 1959 . Elements of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and the United States Naval Research Laboratory were incorporated into NASA . A significant contributor to NASA 's entry into the Space Race with the Soviet Union was the technology from the German rocket program led by Wernher von Braun , who was now working for the Army Ballistic Missile Agency ( ABMA ) , which in turn incorporated the technology of American scientist Robert Goddard 's earlier works . Earlier research efforts within the US Air Force and many of ARPA 's early space programs were also transferred to NASA . In December 1958 , NASA gained control of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory , a contractor facility operated by the California Institute of Technology . 
 = = Space flight programs = = 
 NASA has conducted many manned and unmanned spaceflight programs throughout its history . Unmanned programs launched the first American artificial satellites into Earth orbit for scientific and communications purposes , and sent scientific probes to explore the planets of the solar system , starting with Venus and Mars , and including " grand tours " of the outer planets . Manned programs sent the first Americans into low Earth orbit ( LEO ) , won the Space Race with the Soviet Union by landing twelve men on the Moon from 1969 to 1972 in the Apollo program , developed a semi @-@ reusable LEO Space Shuttle , and developed LEO space station capability by itself and with the cooperation of several other nations including post @-@ Soviet Russia . Some missions include both manned and unmanned aspects , such as the Galileo probe , which was deployed by astronauts in Earth orbit before being sent unmanned to Jupiter . 
 = = = Manned programs = = = 
 The experimental rocket @-@ powered aircraft programs started by NACA were extended by NASA as support for manned spaceflight . This was followed by a one @-@ man space capsule program , and in turn by a two @-@ man capsule program . Reacting to loss of national prestige and security fears caused by early leads in space exploration by the Soviet Union , in 1961 President John F. Kennedy proposed the ambitious goal " of landing a man on the Moon by the end of [ the 1960s ] , and returning him safely to the Earth . " This goal was met in 1969 by the Apollo program , and NASA planned even more ambitious activities leading to a manned mission to Mars . However , reduction of the perceived threat and changing political priorities almost immediately caused the termination of most of these plans . NASA turned its attention to an Apollo @-@ derived temporary space laboratory , and a semi @-@ reusable Earth orbital shuttle . In the 1990s , funding was approved for NASA to develop a permanent Earth orbital space station in cooperation with the international community , which now included the former rival , post @-@ Soviet Russia . To date , NASA has launched a total of 166 manned space missions on rockets , and thirteen X @-@ 15 rocket flights above the USAF definition of spaceflight altitude , 260 @,@ 000 feet ( 80 km ) . 
 = = = = X @-@ 15 rocket plane ( 1959 – 68 ) = = = = 
 The X @-@ 15 was an NACA experimental rocket @-@ powered hypersonic research aircraft , developed in conjunction with the US Air Force and Navy . The design featured a slender fuselage with fairings along the side containing fuel and early computerized control systems . Requests for proposal were issued on December 30 , 1954 for the airframe , and February 4 , 1955 for the rocket engine . The airframe contract was awarded to North American Aviation in November 1955 , and the <unk> engine contract was awarded to Reaction Motors in 1956 , and three planes were built . The X @-@ 15 was drop @-@ launched from the wing of one of two NASA Boeing B @-@ 52 Stratofortresses , <unk> tail number 52 @-@ 003 , and <unk> , tail number 52 @-@ 008 ( known as the Balls 8 ) . Release took place at an altitude of about 45 @,@ 000 feet ( 14 km ) and a speed of about 500 miles per hour ( 805 km / h ) . 
 Twelve pilots were selected for the program from the Air Force , Navy , and NACA ( later NASA ) . A total of 199 flights were made between 1959 and 1968 , resulting in the official world record for the highest speed ever reached by a manned powered aircraft ( current as of 2014 ) , and a maximum speed of Mach 6 @.@ 72 , 4 @,@ 519 miles per hour ( 7 @,@ 273 km / h ) . The altitude record for X @-@ 15 was 354 @,@ 200 feet ( 107 @.@ 96 km ) . Eight of the pilots were awarded Air Force astronaut wings for flying above 260 @,@ 000 feet ( 80 km ) , and two flights by Joseph A. Walker exceeded 100 kilometers ( 330 @,@ 000 ft ) , qualifying as spaceflight according to the International Aeronautical Federation . The X @-@ 15 program employed mechanical techniques used in the later manned spaceflight programs , including reaction control system jets for controlling the orientation of a spacecraft , space suits , and horizon definition for navigation . The reentry and landing data collected were valuable to NASA for designing the Space Shuttle . 
 = = = = Project Mercury ( 1959 – 63 ) = = = = 
 Shortly after the Space Race began , an early objective was to get a person into Earth orbit as soon as possible , therefore the simplest spacecraft that could be launched by existing rockets was favored . The US Air Force 's Man in Space Soonest program considered many manned spacecraft designs , ranging from rocket planes like the X @-@ 15 , to small ballistic space capsules . By 1958 , the space plane concepts were eliminated in favor of the ballistic capsule . 
 When NASA was created that same year , the Air Force program was transferred to it and renamed Project Mercury . The first seven astronauts were selected among candidates from the Navy , Air Force and Marine test pilot programs . On May 5 , 1961 , astronaut Alan Shepard became the first American in space aboard Freedom 7 , launched by a Redstone booster on a 15 @-@ minute ballistic ( suborbital ) flight . John Glenn became the first American to be launched into orbit by an Atlas launch vehicle on February 20 , 1962 aboard Friendship 7 . Glenn completed three orbits , after which three more orbital flights were made , culminating in L. Gordon Cooper 's 22 @-@ orbit flight Faith 7 , May 15 – 16 , 1963 . 
 The Soviet Union ( USSR ) competed with its own single @-@ pilot spacecraft , Vostok . They sent the first man in space , by launching cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin into a single Earth orbit aboard Vostok 1 in April 1961 , one month before Shepard 's flight . In August 1962 , they achieved an almost four @-@ day record flight with <unk> Nikolayev aboard Vostok 3 , and also conducted a concurrent Vostok 4 mission carrying Pavel Popovich . 
 = = = = Project Gemini ( 1961 – 66 ) = = = = 
 Based on studies to grow the Mercury spacecraft capabilities to long @-@ duration flights , developing space rendezvous techniques , and precision Earth landing , Project Gemini was started as a two @-@ man program in 1962 to overcome the Soviets ' lead and to support the Apollo manned lunar landing program , adding extravehicular activity ( EVA ) and rendezvous and docking to its objectives . The first manned Gemini flight , Gemini 3 , was flown by Gus Grissom and John Young on March 23 , 1965 . Nine missions followed in 1965 and 1966 , demonstrating an endurance mission of nearly fourteen days , rendezvous , docking , and practical EVA , and gathering medical data on the effects of weightlessness on humans . 
 Under the direction of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev , the USSR competed with Gemini by converting their Vostok spacecraft into a two- or three @-@ man Voskhod . They succeeded in launching two manned flights before Gemini 's first flight , achieving a three @-@ cosmonaut flight in 1963 and the first EVA in 1964 . After this , the program was canceled , and Gemini caught up while spacecraft designer Sergei Korolev developed the Soyuz spacecraft , their answer to Apollo . 
 = = = = Project Apollo ( 1961 – 72 ) = = = = 
 The U.S public 's perception of the Soviet lead in putting the first man in space , motivated President John F. Kennedy to ask the Congress on May 25 , 1961 to commit the federal government to a program to land a man on the Moon by the end of the 1960s , which effectively launched the Apollo program . 
 Apollo was one of the most expensive American scientific programs ever . It cost more than $ 20 billion in 1960s dollars or an estimated $ 206 billion in present @-@ day US dollars . ( In comparison , the Manhattan Project cost roughly $ 26 @.@ 3 billion , accounting for inflation . ) It used the Saturn rockets as launch vehicles , which were far bigger than the rockets built for previous projects . The spacecraft was also bigger ; it had two main parts , the combined command and service module ( CSM ) and the lunar landing module ( LM ) . The LM was to be left on the Moon and only the command module ( CM ) containing the three astronauts would eventually return to Earth . 
 The second manned mission , Apollo 8 , brought astronauts for the first time in a flight around the Moon in December 1968 . Shortly before , the Soviets had sent an unmanned spacecraft around the Moon . On the next two missions docking maneuvers that were needed for the Moon landing were practiced and then finally the Moon landing was made on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969 . 
 The first person to stand on the Moon was Neil Armstrong , who was followed by Buzz Aldrin , while Michael Collins orbited above . Five subsequent Apollo missions also landed astronauts on the Moon , the last in December 1972 . Throughout these six Apollo spaceflights , twelve men walked on the Moon . These missions returned a wealth of scientific data and 381 @.@ 7 kilograms ( 842 lb ) of lunar samples . Topics covered by experiments performed included soil mechanics , meteoroids , seismology , heat flow , lunar ranging , magnetic fields , and solar wind . The Moon landing marked the end of the space race ; and as a gesture , Armstrong mentioned mankind when he stepped down on the Moon . 
 Apollo set major milestones in human spaceflight . It stands alone in sending manned missions beyond low Earth orbit , and landing humans on another celestial body . Apollo 8 was the first manned spacecraft to orbit another celestial body , while Apollo 17 marked the last moonwalk and the last manned mission beyond low Earth orbit to date . The program spurred advances in many areas of technology peripheral to rocketry and manned spaceflight , including avionics , telecommunications , and computers . Apollo sparked interest in many fields of engineering and left many physical facilities and machines developed for the program as landmarks . Many objects and artifacts from the program are on display at various locations throughout the world , notably at the Smithsonian 's Air and Space Museums . 
 = = = = Skylab ( 1965 – 79 ) = = = = 
 Skylab was the United States ' first and only independently built space station . Conceived in 1965 as a workshop to be constructed in space from a spent Saturn IB upper stage , the 169 @,@ 950 lb ( 77 @,@ 088 kg ) station was constructed on Earth and launched on May 14 , 1973 atop the first two stages of a Saturn V , into a 235 @-@ nautical @-@ mile ( 435 km ) orbit inclined at 50 ° to the equator . Damaged during launch by the loss of its thermal protection and one electricity @-@ generating solar panel , it was repaired to functionality by its first crew . It was occupied for a total of 171 days by 3 successive crews in 1973 and 1974 . It included a laboratory for studying the effects of microgravity , and a solar observatory . NASA planned to have a Space Shuttle dock with it , and elevate Skylab to a higher safe altitude , but the Shuttle was not ready for flight before Skylab 's re @-@ entry on July 11 , 1979 . 
 To save cost , NASA used one of the Saturn V rockets originally earmarked for a canceled Apollo mission to launch the Skylab . Apollo spacecraft were used for transporting astronauts to and from the station . Three three @-@ man crews stayed aboard the station for periods of 28 , 59 , and 84 days . Skylab 's habitable volume was 11 @,@ 290 cubic feet ( 320 m3 ) , which was 30 @.@ 7 times bigger than that of the Apollo Command Module . 
 = = = = Apollo @-@ Soyuz Test Project ( 1972 – 75 ) = = = = 
 On May 24 , 1972 , US President Richard M. Nixon and Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin signed an agreement calling for a joint manned space mission , and declaring intent for all future international manned spacecraft to be capable of docking with each other . This authorized the Apollo @-@ Soyuz Test Project ( ASTP ) , involving the rendezvous and docking in Earth orbit of a surplus Apollo Command / Service Module with a Soyuz spacecraft . The mission took place in July 1975 . This was the last US manned space flight until the first orbital flight of the Space Shuttle in April 1981 . 
 The mission included both joint and separate scientific experiments , and provided useful engineering experience for future joint US – Russian space flights , such as the Shuttle – Mir Program and the International Space Station . 
 = = = = Space Shuttle program ( 1972 – 2011 ) = = = = 
 The Space Shuttle became the major focus of NASA in the late 1970s and the 1980s . Planned as a frequently <unk> and mostly reusable vehicle , four space shuttle orbiters were built by 1985 . The first to launch , Columbia , did so on April 12 , 1981 , the 20th anniversary of the first known human space flight . 
 Its major components were a spaceplane orbiter with an external fuel tank and two solid @-@ fuel launch rockets at its side . The external tank , which was bigger than the spacecraft itself , was the only major component that was not reused . The shuttle could orbit in altitudes of 185 – 643 km ( 115 – 400 miles ) and carry a maximum payload ( to low orbit ) of 24 @,@ 400 kg ( 54 @,@ 000 lb ) . Missions could last from 5 to 17 days and crews could be from 2 to 8 astronauts . 
 On 20 missions ( 1983 – 98 ) the Space Shuttle carried Spacelab , designed in cooperation with the European Space Agency ( ESA ) . Spacelab was not designed for independent orbital flight , but remained in the Shuttle 's cargo bay as the astronauts entered and left it through an airlock . Another famous series of missions were the launch and later successful repair of the Hubble Space Telescope in 1990 and 1993 , respectively . 
 In 1995 , Russian @-@ American interaction resumed with the Shuttle @-@ Mir missions ( 1995 – 1998 ) . Once more an American vehicle docked with a Russian craft , this time a full @-@ fledged space station . This cooperation has continued with Russia and the United States as two of the biggest partners in the largest space station built : the International Space Station ( ISS ) . The strength of their cooperation on this project was even more evident when NASA began relying on Russian launch vehicles to service the ISS during the two @-@ year grounding of the shuttle fleet following the 2003 Space Shuttle Columbia disaster . 
 The Shuttle fleet lost two orbiters and 14 astronauts in two disasters : Challenger in 1986 , and Columbia in 2003 . While the 1986 loss was mitigated by building the Space Shuttle Endeavour from replacement parts , NASA did not build another orbiter to replace the second loss . NASA 's Space Shuttle program had 135 missions when the program ended with the successful landing of the Space Shuttle Atlantis at the Kennedy Space Center on July 21 , 2011 . The program spanned 30 years with over 300 astronauts sent into space . 
 = = = = International Space Station ( 1993 – present ) = = = = 
 The International Space Station ( ISS ) combines NASA 's Space Station Freedom project with the Soviet / Russian Mir @-@ 2 station , the European Columbus station , and the Japanese Kibō laboratory module . NASA originally planned in the 1980s to develop Freedom alone , but US budget constraints led to the merger of these projects into a single multi @-@ national program in 1993 , managed by NASA , the Russian Federal Space Agency ( RKA ) , the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency ( JAXA ) , the European Space Agency ( ESA ) , and the Canadian Space Agency ( CSA ) . The station consists of pressurized modules , external trusses , solar arrays and other components , which have been launched by Russian Proton and Soyuz rockets , and the US Space Shuttles . It is currently being assembled in Low Earth Orbit . The on @-@ orbit assembly began in 1998 , the completion of the US Orbital Segment occurred in 2011 and the completion of the Russian Orbital Segment is expected by 2016 . The ownership and use of the space station is established in intergovernmental treaties and agreements which divide the station into two areas and allow Russia to retain full ownership of the Russian Orbital Segment ( with the exception of Zarya ) , with the US Orbital Segment allocated between the other international partners . 
 Long duration missions to the ISS are referred to as ISS Expeditions . Expedition crew members typically spend approximately six months on the ISS . The initial expedition crew size was three , temporarily decreased to two following the Columbia disaster . Since May 2009 , expedition crew size has been six crew members . Crew size is expected to be increased to seven , the number the ISS was designed for , once the Commercial Crew Program becomes operational . The ISS has been continuously occupied for the past 15 years and 266 days , having exceeded the previous record held by Mir ; and has been visited by astronauts and cosmonauts from 15 different nations . 
 The station can be seen from the Earth with the naked eye and , as of 2016 , is the largest artificial satellite in Earth orbit with a mass and volume greater than that of any previous space station . The Soyuz spacecraft delivers crew members , stays docked for their half @-@ year @-@ long missions and then returns them home . Several uncrewed cargo spacecraft service the ISS , they are the Russian Progress spacecraft which has done so since 2000 , the European Automated Transfer Vehicle ( ATV ) since 2008 , the Japanese H @-@ II Transfer Vehicle ( HTV ) since 2009 , the American Dragon spacecraft since 2012 , and the American Cygnus spacecraft since 2013 . The Space Shuttle , before its retirement , was also used for cargo transfer and would often switch out expedition crew members , although it did not have the capability to remain docked for the duration of their stay . Until another US manned spacecraft is ready , crew members will travel to and from the International Space Station exclusively aboard the Soyuz . The highest number of people occupying the ISS has been thirteen ; this occurred three times during the late Shuttle ISS assembly missions . 
 The ISS program is expected to continue until at least 2020 , and may be extended beyond 2028 . 
 = = = = = Commercial Resupply Services ( 2006 – present ) = = = = = 
 The development of the Commercial Resupply Services ( CRS ) vehicles began in 2006 with the purpose of creating American commercially operated uncrewed cargo vehicles to service the ISS . The development of these vehicles was under a fixed price milestone @-@ based program , meaning that each company that received a funded award had a list of milestones with a dollar value attached to them that they didn 't receive until after they had successful completed the milestone . Private companies were also required to have some " skin in the game " which refers raising an unspecified amount of private investment for their proposal . 
 On December 23 , 2008 , NASA awarded Commercial Resupply Services contracts to SpaceX and Orbital Sciences Corporation . SpaceX uses its Falcon 9 rocket and Dragon spacecraft . Orbital Sciences uses its Antares rocket and Cygnus spacecraft . The first Dragon resupply mission occurred in May 2012 . The first Cygnus resupply mission occurred in September 2013 . The CRS program now provides for all America 's ISS cargo needs ; with the exception of a few vehicle @-@ specific payloads that are delivered on the European ATV and the Japanese HTV . 
 = = = = = Commercial Crew Program ( 2010 – present ) = = = = = 
 The Commercial Crew Development ( <unk> ) program was initiated in 2010 with the purpose of creating American commercially operated crewed spacecraft capable of delivering at least four crew members to the ISS , staying docked for 180 days and then returning them back to Earth . It is hoped that these vehicles could also transport non @-@ NASA customers to private space stations such those planned by Bigelow Aerospace . Like COTS , <unk> is also a fixed price milestone @-@ based developmental program that requires some private investment . 
 In 2010 , NASA announced the winners of the first phase of the program , a total of $ 50 million was divided among five American companies to foster research and development into human spaceflight concepts and technologies in the private sector . In 2011 , the winners of the second phase of the program were announced , $ 270 million was divided among four companies . In 2012 , the winners of the third phase of the program were announced , NASA provided $ 1 @.@ 1 billion divided among three companies to further develop their crew transportation systems . In 2014 , the winners of the final round were announced . SpaceX 's Dragon V2 ( planned to be launched on a Falcon 9 v1.1 ) received a contract valued up to $ 2 @.@ 6 billion and Boeing 's CST @-@ 100 ( to be launched on an Atlas V ) received a contract valued up to $ 4 @.@ 2 billion . NASA expects these vehicles to begin transporting humans to the ISS in 2017 . 
 = = = = Beyond Low Earth Orbit program ( 2010 – present ) = = = = 
 For missions beyond low Earth orbit ( <unk> ) , NASA has been directed to develop the Space Launch System ( SLS ) , a Saturn @-@ V class rocket , and the two to six person , beyond low Earth orbit spacecraft , Orion . In February 2010 , President Barack Obama 's administration proposed eliminating public funds for the Constellation program and shifting greater responsibility of servicing the ISS to private companies . During a speech at the Kennedy Space Center on April 15 , 2010 , Obama proposed a new heavy @-@ lift vehicle ( <unk> ) to replace the formerly planned Ares V. In his speech , Obama called for a manned mission to an asteroid as soon as 2025 , and a manned mission to Mars orbit by the mid @-@ 2030s . The NASA Authorization Act of 2010 was passed by Congress and signed into law on October 11 , 2010 . The act officially canceled the Constellation program . 
 The Authorization Act required a newly designed <unk> be chosen within 90 days of its passing ; the launch vehicle was given the name " Space Launch System " . The new law also required the construction of a beyond low earth orbit spacecraft . The Orion spacecraft , which was being developed as part of the Constellation program , was chosen to fulfill this role . The Space Launch System is planned to launch both Orion and other necessary hardware for missions beyond low Earth orbit . The SLS is to be upgraded over time with more powerful versions . The initial capability of SLS is required to be able to lift 70 mt into LEO . It is then planned to be upgraded to 105 mt and then eventually to 130 mt . 
 Exploration Flight Test 1 ( <unk> @-@ 1 ) , an unmanned test flight of Orion 's crew module , was launched on December 5 , 2014 , atop a Delta IV Heavy rocket . Exploration Mission @-@ 1 ( EM @-@ 1 ) is the unmanned initial launch of SLS that would also send Orion on a circumlunar trajectory , which is planned for 2017 . The first manned flight of Orion and SLS , Exploration Mission 2 ( EM @-@ 2 ) is to launch between 2019 and 2021 ; it is a 10- to 14 @-@ day mission planned to place a crew of four into Lunar orbit . As of March 2012 , the destination for EM @-@ 3 and the intermediate focus for this new program is still in @-@ flux . 
 On June 5 , 2016 , NASA and DARPA announced that it planned to build new X @-@ planes with NASA 's plan setting to create a whole series of X planes over the next 10 years . One of the planes will reportedly be a supersonic vehicle that burns low @-@ carbon biofuels and generates quiet sonic booms . 
 = = = Unmanned programs = = = 
 More than 1 @,@ 000 unmanned missions have been designed to explore the Earth and the solar system . Besides exploration , communication satellites have also been launched by NASA . The missions have been launched directly from Earth or from orbiting space shuttles , which could either deploy the satellite itself , or with a rocket stage to take it farther . 
 The first US unmanned satellite was Explorer 1 , which started as an ABMA / JPL project during the early part of the Space Race . It was launched in January 1958 , two months after Sputnik . At the creation of NASA the Explorer project was transferred to this agency and still continues to this day . Its missions have been focusing on the Earth and the Sun , measuring magnetic fields and the solar wind , among other aspects . A more recent Earth mission , not related to the Explorer program , was the Hubble Space Telescope , which as mentioned above was brought into orbit in 1990 . 
 The inner Solar System has been made the goal of at least four unmanned programs . The first was Mariner in the 1960s and ' 70s , which made multiple visits to Venus and Mars and one to Mercury . Probes launched under the Mariner program were also the first to make a planetary flyby ( Mariner 2 ) , to take the first pictures from another planet ( Mariner 4 ) , the first planetary orbiter ( Mariner 9 ) , and the first to make a gravity assist maneuver ( Mariner 10 ) . This is a technique where the satellite takes advantage of the gravity and velocity of planets to reach its destination . 
 The first successful landing on Mars was made by Viking 1 in 1976 . Twenty years later a rover was landed on Mars by Mars Pathfinder . 
 Outside Mars , Jupiter was first visited by Pioneer 10 in 1973 . More than 20 years later Galileo sent a probe into the planet 's atmosphere , and became the first spacecraft to orbit the planet . Pioneer 11 became the first spacecraft to visit Saturn in 1979 , with Voyager 2 making the first ( and so far only ) visits to Uranus and Neptune in 1986 and 1989 , respectively . The first spacecraft to leave the solar system was Pioneer 10 in 1983 . For a time it was the most distant spacecraft , but it has since been surpassed by both Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 . 
 Pioneers 10 and 11 and both Voyager probes carry messages from the Earth to extraterrestrial life . Communication can be difficult with deep space travel . For instance , it took about 3 hours for a radio signal to reach the New Horizons spacecraft when it was more than halfway to Pluto . Contact with Pioneer 10 was lost in 2003 . Both Voyager probes continue to operate as they explore the outer boundary between the Solar System and interstellar space . 
 On November 26 , 2011 , NASA 's Mars Science Laboratory mission was successfully launched for Mars . Curiosity successfully landed on Mars on August 6 , 2012 , and subsequently began its search for evidence of past or present life on Mars . 
 = = = Recent and planned activities = = = 
 NASA 's ongoing investigations include in @-@ depth surveys of Mars ( Mars 2020 and InSight ) and Saturn and studies of the Earth and the Sun . Other active spacecraft missions are Juno for Jupiter , Cassini for Saturn , New Horizons ( for Jupiter , Pluto , and beyond ) , and Dawn for the asteroid belt . NASA continued to support in situ exploration beyond the asteroid belt , including Pioneer and Voyager traverses into the unexplored trans @-@ Pluto region , and Gas Giant orbiters Galileo ( 1989 – 2003 ) , Cassini ( 1997 – ) , and Juno ( 2011 – ) . 
 The New Horizons mission to Pluto was launched in 2006 and successfully performed a flyby of Pluto on July 14 , 2015 . The probe received a gravity assist from Jupiter in February 2007 , examining some of Jupiter 's inner moons and testing on @-@ board instruments during the flyby . On the horizon of NASA 's plans is the MAVEN spacecraft as part of the Mars Scout Program to study the atmosphere of Mars . 
 On December 4 , 2006 , NASA announced it was planning a permanent moon base . The goal was to start building the moon base by 2020 , and by 2024 , have a fully functional base that would allow for crew rotations and in @-@ situ resource utilization . However , in 2009 , the Augustine Committee found the program to be on a " unsustainable trajectory . " In 2010 , President Barack Obama halted existing plans , including the Moon base , and directed a generic focus on manned missions to asteroids and Mars , as well as extending support for the International Space Station . 
 Since 2011 , NASA 's strategic goals have been 
 Extend and sustain human activities across the solar system 
 Expand scientific understanding of the Earth and the universe 
 Create innovative new space technologies 
 Advance aeronautics research 
 Enable program and institutional capabilities to conduct NASA 's aeronautics and space activities 
 Share NASA with the public , educators , and students to provide opportunities to participate 
 In August 2011 , NASA accepted the donation of two space telescopes from the National Reconnaissance Office . Despite being stored unused , the instruments are superior to the Hubble Space Telescope . 
 In September 2011 , NASA announced the start of the Space Launch System program to develop a human @-@ rated heavy lift vehicle . The Space Launch System is intended to launch the Orion Multi @-@ Purpose Crew Vehicle and other elements towards the Moon , near @-@ Earth asteroids , and one day Mars . The Orion <unk> conducted an unmanned test launch on a Delta IV Heavy rocket in December 2014 . 
 The James Webb Space Telescope is currently scheduled to launch in late 2018 . 
 On August 6 , 2012 , NASA landed the rover Curiosity on Mars . On August 27 , 2012 , Curiosity transmitted the first pre @-@ recorded message from the surface of Mars back to Earth , made by Administrator Charlie Bolden : 
 = = Scientific research = = 
 NASA 's Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate conducts aeronautics research . 
 = = Staff and leadership = = 
 The agency 's leader , NASA 's administrator , reports to the President of the United States and serves as the President 's senior space science adviser . Though the agency is independent , the survival or discontinuation of projects can depend directly on the will of the President . The agency 's administration is located at NASA Headquarters in Washington , DC and provides overall guidance and direction . Except under exceptional circumstances , NASA civil service employees are required to be citizens of the United States . 
 The first administrator was Dr. T. Keith <unk> , appointed by President Dwight D. Eisenhower . During his term he brought together the disparate projects in American space development research . 
 The third administrator was James E. Webb ( served 1961 – 1968 ) , appointed by President John F. Kennedy . In order to implement the Apollo program to achieve Kennedy 's Moon landing goal by the end of the 1960s , Webb directed major management restructuring and facility expansion , establishing the Houston Manned Spacecraft ( Johnson ) Center and the Florida Launch Operations ( Kennedy ) Center . 
 In 2009 , President Barack Obama nominated Charles Bolden as NASA 's twelfth administrator . Administrator Bolden is one of three NASA administrators who were astronauts , along with Richard H. Truly ( served 1989 – 1992 ) and Frederick D. Gregory ( acting , 2005 ) . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 NASA 's facilities are research , construction and communication centers to help its missions . Some facilities serve more than one application for historic or administrative reasons . NASA also operates a short @-@ line railroad at the Kennedy Space Center and own special aircraft , for instance two Boeing 747 that transport Space Shuttle orbiter . 
 John F. Kennedy Space Center ( KSC ) , is one of the best @-@ known NASA facilities . It has been the launch site for every United States human space flight since 1968 . Although such flights are currently on pause , KSC continues to manage and operate unmanned rocket launch facilities for America 's civilian space program from three pads at the adjoining Cape Canaveral Air Force Station . 
 Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center ( JSC ) in Houston is home to the Christopher C. Kraft Jr . Mission Control Center , where all flight control is managed for manned space missions . JSC is the lead NASA center for activities regarding the International Space Station and also houses the NASA Astronaut Corps that selects , trains , and provides astronauts as crew members for US and international space missions . 
 Another major facility is Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville , Alabama at which the Saturn 5 rocket and Skylab were developed . The JPL worked together with ABMA , one of the agencies behind Explorer 1 , the first American space mission . 
 The ten NASA field centers are : 
 John F. Kennedy Space Center , Florida 
 Ames Research Center , Moffett Field , California 
 Armstrong Flight Research Center ( formerly Hugh L. Dryden Flight Research Facility ) , Edwards , California 
 Goddard Space Flight Center , Greenbelt , Maryland 
 Jet Propulsion Laboratory , near Pasadena , California 
 Lyndon B. Johnson Space Center , Houston , Texas 
 Langley Research Center , Hampton , Virginia 
 John H. Glenn Research Center , Cleveland , Ohio 
 George C. Marshall Space Flight Center , Huntsville , Alabama 
 John C. Stennis Space Center , Bay St. Louis , Mississippi 
 Numerous other facilities are operated by NASA , including the Wallops Flight Facility in Wallops Island , Virginia ; the Michoud Assembly Facility in New Orleans , Louisiana ; the White Sands Test Facility in Las Cruces , New Mexico ; and Deep Space Network stations in Barstow , California ; Madrid , Spain ; and Canberra , Australia . 
 = = Budget = = 
 NASA 's budget has generally been approximately 1 % of the federal budget from the early 1970s on , after briefly peaking at approximately 4 @.@ 41 % in 1966 during the Apollo program . Public perception of NASA 's budget has differed significantly from reality ; a 1997 poll indicated that most Americans responded that 20 % of the federal budget went to NASA . 
 The percentage of federal budget that NASA has been allocated has been steadily dropping since the Apollo program and in 2012 it was estimated at 0 @.@ 48 % of the federal budget . In a March 2012 meeting of the United States Senate Science Committee , Neil deGrasse Tyson testified that " Right now , NASA ’ s annual budget is half a penny on your tax dollar . For twice that — a penny on a dollar — we can transform the country from a sullen , dispirited nation , weary of economic struggle , to one where it has reclaimed its 20th century birthright to dream of tomorrow . " 
 For Fiscal Year 2015 , NASA received an appropriation of US $ 18 @.@ 01 billion from Congress — $ 549 million more than requested and approximately $ 350 million more than the 2014 NASA budget passed by Congress . 
 = = Environmental impact = = 
 The exhaust gases produced by rocket propulsion systems , both in Earth 's atmosphere and in space , can adversely effect the Earth 's environment . Some hypergolic rocket propellants , such as hydrazine , are highly toxic prior to combustion , but decompose into less toxic compounds after burning . Rockets using hydrocarbon fuels , such as kerosene , release carbon dioxide and soot in their exhaust . However , carbon dioxide emissions are insignificant compared to those from other sources ; on average , the United States consumed 802 @,@ 620 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 3 @.@ <unk> × 109 L ) gallons of liquid fuels per day in 2014 , while a single Falcon 9 rocket first stage burns around 25 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 95 @,@ 000 L ) of kerosene fuel per launch . Even if a Falcon 9 were launched every single day , it would only represent 0 @.@ 006 % of liquid fuel consumption ( and carbon dioxide emissions ) for that day . Additionally , the exhaust from <unk> and <unk> fueled engines , like the <unk> , is almost entirely water vapor . NASA addressed environmental concerns with its canceled Constellation program in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act in 2011 . In contrast , ion engines use harmless noble gases like xenon for propulsion . 
 On May 8 , 2003 , Environmental Protection Agency recognized NASA as the first federal agency to directly use landfill gas to produce energy at one of its facilities — the Goddard Space Flight Center , Greenbelt , Maryland . 
 An example of NASA 's environmental efforts is the NASA Sustainability Base . Additionally , the Exploration Sciences Building was awarded the LEED Gold rating in 2010 . 
 = = Observations = = 
 = = Spacecraft = = 
 = = Examples of missions by target = = 
 = = Plutonium = = 
 NASA has made use of technologies such as the Multi @-@ Mission <unk> Thermoelectric Generator ( <unk> ) , which is a type of <unk> Thermoelectric Generator used on space missions 
 = Riven = 
 Riven is a puzzle adventure video game and the sequel to Myst . Developed by Cyan Worlds , it was initially published by Red Orb Entertainment , a division of Brøderbund . Riven was distributed on five compact discs and released on October 31 , 1997 , in North America ; it was later released on a single DVD @-@ ROM , with improved audio and a fourteen @-@ minute " making @-@ of " video . In addition to the PC versions , Riven has been ported to several other platforms , including the PlayStation , Sega Saturn , and iOS @-@ based devices . 
 The story of Riven is set immediately after the events of Myst . Having been rescued from the efforts of his sons , the main non @-@ player protagonist Atrus enlists the help of the player character to free his wife from his power @-@ hungry father , Gehn . Unlike Myst , which took place on several worlds known as Ages linked together by special books , Riven takes place almost entirely on the Age of Riven , a world slowly falling apart due to Gehn 's destructive rule . 
 Development of Riven began soon after Myst became a success , and spanned more than three years . In an effort to create a visual style distinct from that of Myst , director Robyn Miller and his brother , producer Rand Miller recruited former Aladdin production designer Richard Vander Wende as a co @-@ director . Brøderbund employed a US $ 10 million advertising campaign to publicize the game 's release . 
 Riven was praised by professional reviewers , with the magazine Salon proclaiming that the game approaches the level of art . Critics positively noted the puzzles and immersive experience of the gameplay , though publications such as Edge felt that the nature of point @-@ and @-@ click gameplay limited the title heavily . The best @-@ selling game of 1997 , Riven sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies in one year . After the game 's release , Robyn Miller left Cyan to form his own development studio , ending the professional partnership of the two brothers . Rand stayed at Cyan and continued to work on Myst @-@ related products including The Myst Reader and the real @-@ time rendered game Uru : Ages Beyond Myst . The next entry in the Myst series , Myst III : Exile , was developed by Presto Studios and published by Ubisoft . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like its predecessor , Riven is a point and click adventure game played from a first @-@ person perspective . The player explores immersive environments depicted through a large series of computer generated stills using mouse clicks for movement or to manipulate objects within reach . By operating mechanical contraptions and deciphering codes and symbols discovered in the surroundings , the vaguely explained goal can eventually be reached . 
 To navigate the world , the player simply clicks in the direction they want to walk or turn . The mouse cursor changes in appearance , depending on its position on the screen and what it is hovering over , to show what effect clicking will have . For instance , if the player positions the cursor hand near the side of the screen , it may show a pointing finger , indicating that clicking will turn the view in that direction . The cursor also changes in context to show when players can drag or toggle switches , or when certain items can be picked up and carried . Such items can then be examined at any time , and either reveal clues to puzzles or provide information on the game 's setting and story . Like Myst , Riven has an optional method of navigation known as Zip Mode , which allows players to skip to areas already explored , but may cause them to miss important clues . 
 Riven has more complex and numerous puzzles than its forerunner and is set in a larger virtual world for players to explore . Whereas in Myst the objective of the game is to travel to different Ages to solve puzzles before returning to a " hub Age " , Riven 's gameplay takes place on the five islands of the Age of Riven . Much of it consists of solving puzzles to access new areas of the islands , though players are also able to explore without fulfilling objectives . The volcanic landscape depicted , with its steep cliffs and crater lakes , is <unk> with mechanical , Victorian @-@ style artifacts such as elevators , pipes , levers and roller coaster @-@ like transports . To solve the game , players must consider the purpose and physical principles of these artifacts as well as their role in the fictional culture . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Riven 's story continues where Myst and its companion novel , The Book of Atrus , left off . The player assumes the role of the Stranger , the protagonist of the first game and friend of Atrus ( Rand Miller ) . Atrus knows the ancient art of creating " linking books " , specially written books that serve as portals to other worlds known as " Ages " . Atrus needs the Stranger 's help to free his wife , Catherine ( Sheila Goold ; voice by Rengin Altay ) , who is held hostage in her home Age of Riven , which is slowly collapsing . Her captor is Gehn ( John Keston ) , Atrus ' manipulative father and self @-@ declared ruler of Riven . Thirty years earlier , Atrus and Catherine trapped Gehn on Riven by removing all of the linking books that led out of the Age ; the very last book to be removed , linking to the Age of Myst , was the one they held to escape Riven . In the belief that it would be destroyed , they let the book fall into the Star Fissure , a rift leading out of the damaged Age of Riven into a mysterious , space @-@ like void . Catherine was later tricked into returning to Riven by her sons , Sirrus and Achenar , whereupon she was taken hostage by Gehn . Eventually , the player discovered the unharmed Myst book , leading to the events in Myst . 
 At the beginning of Riven , Atrus equips the player with a trap book — a snare that functions as a one @-@ man prison , yet looks identical to a linking book — and his personal diary . This diary summarizes the history of events leading to the present situation ; Atrus cannot explain in depth as he is engaged in rewriting the descriptive book of Riven , in an attempt to slow its deterioration . The player must enter the Age with no way of leaving , as Atrus cannot risk sending a real linking book to Riven until Gehn is safely imprisoned lest he use it to escape Riven . <unk> the player to capture Gehn in the trap book , find Catherine , and then signal him , Atrus holds out the link book that will transport the player to Riven . 
 Once there , the player explores the islands of Riven , eventually discovering Catherine 's prison . The player also travels to Tay , the Age of the Moiety ( rebellious <unk> under the leadership of Catherine who are attempting to end Gehn 's tyrannical rule ) , and the " 233rd Age " , Gehn 's personal sanctuary , where the player meets Gehn himself . Gehn attempts to convince the player that his intentions to rebuild D 'ni were honorable and that he seeks atonement for his past transgressions . Because of the decay of Riven 's structure , the only way to clearly signal Atrus is to bring about a massive disturbance in the Age 's stability — accomplished by reopening the Star Fissure , which Gehn had closed . When it opens , Atrus immediately links to Riven to investigate and meets the player at the brink of the Fissure . Depending on the player 's actions , the ending to Riven varies . In the best ending , the player tricks Gehn into the prison book and releases Catherine . Atrus and Catherine thank the Stranger before linking back to the Age of Myst . The Stranger then falls into the Star Fissure to be taken on the path back to his world . The worst ending involves neither capturing Gehn nor releasing Catherine , which allows Gehn to kill Atrus ( and then the player ) and escape from his imprisonment . Other endings include capturing Gehn without saving Catherine , being trapped in the prison book , or even death . 
 = = Development = = 
 Cyan began work on Riven in 1993 , immediately after Myst 's release . Before development began , when even the name of the game was undecided , the brothers Robyn and Rand Miller said they wanted a " natural flow " from the first game to the sequel . As Myst proved to be a popular and commercial success , the two developers were able to expand their four @-@ person team to a much larger crew of designers , artists , programmers , and sound designers . Development spanned more than four years , and was a much larger undertaking than for the first game ; Riven had a budget of between US $ 5 and $ 10 million , more than ten times the cost of developing Myst . 
 The design for Riven stemmed from a desire to create something different and more dynamic than the romantic style of Myst . At an early point , the game 's world was to be called <unk> . The first stage of development was to create the puzzles , in an attempt to integrate them as smoothly as possible into the areas in the game . The Millers met their co @-@ designer , Richard Vander Wende , at a demonstration of Myst for the Digital World Expo in Los Angeles . Vander Wende had previously worked for ILM , and at Disney as a designer for the animated feature Aladdin . As the third member of Riven 's conceptual team , Vander Wende ended up contributing what Robyn Miller described as an " edgier " and complementary vision , that made the game dramatically different than its predecessor . 
 As in Myst , the topology of the islands was originally created as grayscale images , where brightness corresponded to elevation . In Softimage , these maps were turned into the terrain models seen in the game . The large island objects were broken apart to facilitate efficient rendering , which required them to be created using polygonal geometry . All other objects were modeled using B @-@ splines and <unk> . 
 Many of the textures were accumulated during a three @-@ day trip to Santa Fe , New Mexico . The artists took hundreds of photos of wood , adobe , sand , stucco and other materials , which were treated in Photoshop before being mapped onto the 3D geometry . Whereas many computer @-@ generated environments of the time ended up looking smooth , like plastic , the Millers and Vander Wende developed a more gritty and weathered design , with corroded and aged elements , to imply reality . The artists considered how objects would look and function if they were real , where and how they would be worn , and created corresponding details . While bump maps were occasionally used to simulate geometry , even small details such as screws were often individually modeled . 
 Rendering was executed in Mental Ray , using numerous custom @-@ made shaders to produce lifelike lighting , water and landscapes . In total Riven has over three hours of video and almost five thousand images ; rendering was a major bottleneck in production despite the use of 18 dedicated workstations . Some scenes consisted of tens of thousands of individual models and textures and more than a hundred virtual light sources . Loading a single island model could take two hours . Runtime animation effects were created by Mark DeForest , to add flying insects and simple water ripples . 
 Riven combined the pre @-@ rendered backgrounds with live action footage , in order to increase the player 's immersion level . Riven was the first game in which any of its designers had directed live actors , and Vander Wende was apprehensive about their use . Rand Miller had to reprise his role of Atrus from Myst , even though he hated acting . All the actors were filmed with a blue screen as a backdrop , which was removed in post @-@ production by chroma key , so that the actors would blend into the virtual environment . Real world stairs , doorways and studio lights had to be meticulously positioned on the live stage to match their CG equivalents . Some sequences were seamlessly cut together with morphing , to allow for partial variations due to the nonlinearity of the gameplay . 
 At the time of Riven 's development , publisher Brøderbund was facing falling revenues as development costs rose . Two years into the project , Cyan still had nothing they could show them . Brøderbund 's stock dropped from $ 60 a share to $ 22 in 1996 , because of a delay in the publishing of Riven . The plan had been to ship the game in time for the 1996 holiday season ; Riven was finally published on October 29 , 1997 . Even though Riven 's sales were expected to be higher than any other game that holiday season , Brøderbund launched a $ 10 million marketing campaign and developed a retail marketing partnership with Toshiba America . Anticipation for the game was high even among non @-@ gamers , helped by web @-@ based word of mouth and well @-@ placed media coverage . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Robyn Miller composed Riven 's music , which was later packaged and released by Virgin Records as Riven : The Soundtrack . Miller designed the liner notes and packaging , which included English translations of the language found in the game . Whereas the music to Myst was , at first , only available by mail @-@ order from Cyan , Virgin Records had bought the rights to release it initially , prompting Miller to make sure that it could stand alone in CD form . The compact disc was released on February 24 , 1998 , with 54 minutes of music . 
 Miller established three leitmotifs for the game 's three central characters , Atrus , Catherine , and Gehn . Gehn 's theme is only heard in its complete form near the end of the game , but portions of the melody can be heard throughout Riven , highlighting his control of the Age . Miller tried to let the environment dictate the resulting sound in order to make the music as immersive as possible . He blended live instrumentation with synthesizers : " By mixing and matching conventional instrumentation , you can create an odd , interesting mood , " Miller said . Ultimately , he wanted the music of Riven to reflect the game itself , which he described as having " a familiar @-@ yet @-@ strange feel to it . " 
 Miller described his biggest challenge in writing Riven 's music as reconciling the linear , pleasing construction of music with the nonlinearity of the gameplay . As players can freely explore all areas , Miller explained in an interview , " the music can 't say anything too specific . If it says something , if it builds in intensity and there starts to be a climax , and people are just standing in a room looking around , and they 're thinking ' What 's going on in here ? Is something about to jump out from behind me ? ' You can 't have the basic parts of music that you 'd like to have , you can 't have a basic structure . It 's all got to be just flowing , and continue to flow . " Allmusic critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine argued that the soundtrack is " appealingly atmospheric " , but " lacks definition " , and that the music loses impact when separated from the game . 
 = = Release = = 
 Being the first sequel of a game as successful as Myst , Riven was eagerly anticipated . The game sold more than 1 @.@ 5 million units within a year of its release , and was the best @-@ selling game of 1997 , despite having only been on the market for less than three months . By 2001 , over 4 @.@ 5 million units had been sold . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Riven was generally positively received by critics , with the PC version garnering an average critic score of 85 % at GameRankings . 
 Jeff <unk> of GameSpot gave the game high marks , explaining that it is " a leisurely paced , all @-@ encompassing , mentally challenging experience . If you enjoyed Myst , you 'll thoroughly enjoy Riven . " Computer Gaming World stated that the graphics were the best they had seen in any adventure game . Laura Miller of Salon declared that " Art [ ... ] is what Riven approaches , " and praised the gameplay as having " a graceful elegance that reminds [ her ] of a masterfully constructed novel . " The game 's sound and graphics were consistently praised . 
 Nevertheless , several publications found fault with aspects of Riven . Computer Gaming World felt that the gameplay was too similar to the original Myst , making Riven the " same game with a new title " ; the magazine also criticized the minimal character interaction . Gaming magazine Edge felt that although Riven was a good game , the solitary atmosphere and lack of mobility was steadily becoming outdated , as games like Super Mario 64 sacrificed graphical fidelity for an increase in freedom . They stated " the question is whether Cyan can incorporate its almost Tolkien @-@ esque world @-@ building skills into a more cutting @-@ edge game vehicle next time . " Even long @-@ time players of the Myst games , such as Heidi Fournier of Adventure Gamers , felt that a few puzzles were too difficult ; Computer and Video Games , meanwhile , believed that the story clues were too symbolic and scant , which made following the plot difficult . 
 Despite the success of the game , the Miller brothers eventually pursued other projects . Robyn Miller said : " I think it would be a detriment to always , for the rest of our lives , be creating Myst @-@ like projects . [ … ] We 're going to change , evolve and grow , just like any person does in any manner . " Robyn would leave Cyan to form a new development company called Land of Point ; Vander Wende would also leave to pursue other projects . The next video game entry in the Myst franchise would be 2001 's Myst III : Exile , which was not developed by Cyan nor published by Brøderbund . Presto Studios took over development ; Ubisoft acquired Brøderbund 's entertainment library from The Learning Company and published the Myst sequels . 
 = Siege of Castelnuovo = 
 The Siege of Castelnuovo was an engagement during the Ottoman @-@ Habsburg struggle for control of the Mediterranean , which took place in July 1539 in the walled town of Castelnuovo , present @-@ day Herceg Novi , Montenegro . Castelnuovo had been conquered by elements of various Spanish tercios the year before during the failed campaign of the Holy League against the Ottoman Empire in Eastern Mediterranean waters . The walled town was besieged by land and sea by a powerful Ottoman army under Hayreddin Barbarossa , who offered an honorable surrender to the defenders . These terms were rejected by the Spanish commanding officer Francisco de Sarmiento and his captains even though they knew that the Holy League 's fleet , defeated at the Battle of Preveza , could not relieve them . During the siege the Barbarossa 's army suffered heavy losses due to the stubborn resistance of Sarmiento 's men . However , Castelnuovo eventually fell into Ottoman hands and almost all the Spanish defenders , including Sarmiento , were killed . The loss of the town ended the Christian attempt to regain control of the Eastern Mediterranean . The courage displayed by the Old Tercio of Naples , however , was praised and admired throughout Europe and was the subject of numerous poems and songs . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1538 the main danger to Christianity in Europe was the expansion of the Ottoman Empire . The armies of the Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent had been stopped at Vienna in 1529 . In the Mediterranean , a Christian offensive attempted to eliminate the danger of the great Turkish fleet in 1535 , when a strong armada under Don Álvaro de Bazán and Andrea Doria captured the port of Tunis , expelling Ottoman admiral Hayreddin Barbarossa from the waters of the Western Mediterranean . The Ottoman admiral was then required to return to Constantinople , where he was appointed commander of a great fleet to conduct a campaign against the Republic of Venice 's possessions in the Aegean and Ionian Seas . Barbarossa captured the islands of Syros , Aegina , <unk> , Paros , Tinos , Karpathos , <unk> , Naxos , and besieged Corfu . The Italian cities of Otranto and <unk> and the fortress of Castro , in the province of Lecce , were also looted . 
 The Republic of Venice , frightened by the loss of their possessions and the ruin of their trade , conducted a vigorous campaign for the creation of a " Holy League " to recover the lost territories and expel the Ottomans from the sea . In February 1538 , Pope Paul III succeeded in creating a league which united the Papacy itself , the Republic of Venice , the Empire of Charles V , the Archduchy of Austria and the Knights of Malta . The Allied fleet for the campaign was supposed to consist of 200 galleys and another 100 auxiliary ships , and the army of about 50 @,@ 000 infantry and 4 @,@ 500 cavalry . But only 130 galleys and an army of around 15 @,@ 000 infantry , mostly Spaniards , were all that could be gathered . The command of the fleet was given nominally to the Genoese Andrea Doria , but Vicenzo Capello and Marco Grimaldi , commanding officers of the Papal and Venetian fleets respectively , had almost twice as many ships as Doria . The commander of the army was unquestionably Hernando Gonzaga , Viceroy of Sicily . 
 Differences among the commanders of the fleet diminished its effectiveness against an experienced opponent like Barbarossa . This was seen in the Battle of Preveza , fought in the Gulf of Arta . But the Holy League fleet provided support to the land forces that landed on the Dalmatian coast and captured the town of Castelnuovo . This small town was a strategic fortress between the Venetian possessions of Cattaro and Ragusa in the area known as Venetian Albania . Venice therefore claimed ownership of the city , but Charles V refused to cede it . This was the beginning of the end of the Holy League . 
 The town of Castelnuovo was garrisoned with approximately 4 @,@ 000 men . The main force was a tercio of Spanish veteran soldiers numbering about 3 @,@ 500 men under the experienced Maestro de Campo Francisco Sarmiento de Mendoza y Manuel . This tercio , named Tercio of Castelnuovo , was formed by 15 flags ( companies ) belonging to other tercios , among them the Old Tercio of Lombardy , dissolved the year before after a mutiny for lack of pay . The 15 captains in charge of the flags were Machín de Munguía , Álvaro de Mendoza , Pedro de Sotomayor , Juan Vizcaíno , Luis Cerón , Jaime de <unk> , Luis de Haro , Sancho de Frías , Olivera , Silva , <unk> , Alcocer , <unk> , <unk> and Lázaro de Coron . The garrison also included 150 light cavalry soldiers , a small contingent of Greek soldiers and knights under <unk> <unk> , and some artillery pieces managed by 15 gunners under captain Juan de <unk> . The chaplain of Andrea Doria , named <unk> , also remained in Castelnuovo along with 40 clerics and traders and was appointed bishop of the town . 
 The reason for the garrison 's large size was that Castelnuovo was projected to be the beachhead for a great offensive against the heart of the Ottoman Empire . However , the fate of the troops who were in the fortress depended entirely on the support of the fleet , and this had been defeated by Barbarossa at Preveza before the capture of Castelnuovo . Moreover , in a short time Venice withdrew from the Holy League after accepting a disadvantageous agreement with the Ottomans . Without Venetian ships , the Allied fleet had no chance to defeat the Ottoman fleet commanded by Barbarossa , who was by this time supported by another experienced officer , Turgut Reis . 
 = = Siege = = 
 = = = First maneuvers = = = 
 Sultan Suleiman the Magnificent ordered Barbarossa to reorganize and rearm his fleet during the winter months to have it ready for the battle in the spring of 1539 . 10 @,@ 000 infantry soldiers and 4 @,@ 000 Janissaries were embarked aboard the warships to reinforce the troops of the galleys . According to the orders received , Barbarossa 's army , numbering about 200 ships with 20 @,@ 000 fighting men aboard , would blockade <unk> by sea while the forces of the Ottoman governor of Bosnia , a Persian named Ulamen , would besiege the fortress by land in command of 30 @,@ 000 soldiers . Sarmiento , meanwhile , used the peaceful months prior to the siege to improve the defenses of the town , repairing walls and bastions and building new fortifications . In the event he could not do much due to a lack of available means , as there was no plan to fortify the town since it was supposed to function as a beachhead . Captain Alcocer was sent to Spain with instructions to call for help ; Pedro de Sotomayor was sent to Sicily and Captain <unk> to Brindisi , all in vain . Andrea Doria , who was in Otranto with 47 Imperial and 4 Maltese galleys , received news of Castelnuovo 's situation , but given the inferiority of his fleet he sent a message to Sarmiento recommending him to surrender . 
 In June Barbarossa sent 30 galleys to block the entrance of the Gulf of Cattaro . The vessels reached Castelnuovo on 12 June and disembarked a thousand soldiers with the aim of finding water and capturing Spanish soldiers or local civilians to gain information . Once the Spanish were warned of their enemy 's presence , Sarmiento dispatched three companies under Captain Machín de Munguía and the cavalry under Lázaro de <unk> to attack them before lunchtime . After a fierce fight the Ottoman landing party was forced to re @-@ embark , although it returned in the afternoon . Then it was beaten by Francisco de Sarmiento in person , who was waiting for a new attempt together with Captains Álvaro de Mendoza , Olivera and Juan Vizcaíno , and 600 soldiers . Three hundred Ottomans were killed during the battle , and another 30 captured . The remainder escaped to their ships . 
 On 18 July Barbarossa arrived with the main force and immediately began to land troops and artillery while waiting for the arrival of Ulamen , who came along with his army a few days later . The Ottoman pioneers spent five days digging trenches and building ramparts for 44 heavy siege guns carried aboard Barbarossa 's fleet or by Ulamen 's troops , and even smoothed the fields around Castelnuovo to facilitate maneuvers . Castelnuovo was also bombarded by sea , as ten pieces had been previously embarked aboard the galleys . The Spanish , meanwhile , undertook several sorties to obstruct the siege works . These raids inflicted many casualties , among them Agi , one of Barbarossa 's favorite captains . Another sortie by a Spanish force of 800 men surprised several units of Janissaries who were attempting to storm the walls of <unk> , killing most of them and leaving the field strewn with corpses . When Barbarossa was informed about the setback , he severely reprimanded his officers , as the losses of the Ottoman elite corps were difficult to replace . He gave orders forbidding skirmishes to avoid a repeat of the defeat . 
 = = = Great assault = = = 
 By 23 July , Barbarossa 's army was ready to begin a general assault and his artillery prepared to break down the walls of Castelnuovo . Enjoying a vast numerical superiority over the Spanish garrison , which was completely isolated and unable to receive support or supplies , Barbarossa offered an honorable surrender to the Spanish . Sarmiento and his men would be granted a safe passage to Italy , the soldiers retaining their weapons and flags . Barbarossa added to his offer the incentive of giving each soldier 20 ducats . His only demand to Sarmiento was the abandonment of his artillery and gunpowder . Two squad corporals of Captain Vizcaino 's company , Juan Alcaraz and Francisco de Tapia , managed to return to Naples and write their version of events many years later . They recorded the answer given to Barbarossa that " the Maestro de Campo consulted with all the captains , and the captains with his officers , and they decided that they preferred to die in service of God and His Majesty . " 
 The great assault on the city was launched shortly after , and lasted all day . It was costly in lives , as the Ottomans employed both infantry and artillery at the same time to assault and bombard Castelnuovo , resulting in heavy casualties among the Ottomans themselves due to both friendly fire and Spanish defending . During the night the Spanish improved their defenses and plugged the gaps opened in the walls . When the attack was resumed the next morning , Saint James Day , Bishop <unk> remained with the soldiers , encouraging them and confessing those who were mortally wounded along the attacked perimeter . About 6 @,@ 000 Ottoman soldiers were killed in the bloody assault , while the Spanish suffered only 50 killed ; although the number of men who died from their wounds was probably large . 
 Encouraged by the successful defense , several Spanish soldiers decided to conduct a surprise raid on the Ottoman camp with the approval of Sarmiento . Thus , one morning , 600 men took the unprepared besiegers by surprise . In some places the assault could not be stopped , and panic spread among the Ottomans . Many troops broke and ran , including some Janissaries who fled throughout their own camp breaking down the tents , including that of Barbarossa . The Admiral 's personal guard feared for the safety of its lord , and , ignoring his protests , took him to the galleys along with the standard of the Sultan . 
 During the following days most of the artillery concentrated its fire on a fort in the upper town . Barbarossa thought that it was the key point of Castelnuovo 's fortifications and proposed to capture it . The remaining cannons , meantime , continued firing at the fragile walls of the town . On 4 August , Barbarossa ordered an assault against the ruins of the fort , which was now completely shattered , with its casemates ruined . As a major point of the defense , Sarmiento had reinforced the garrison and removed the wounded in the preceding days . The assault began at dawn and the battle lasted all day . Captain Machín of Munguía distinguished himself in the fight , leading the defenders with great courage . By nightfall the remnants of the Spanish garrison retreated to the walls of the town with their wounded , leaving the ruined castle in Barbarossa 's hands . The day was very costly in lives . Of the Spanish officers defending the castle only Captains <unk> , Munguía , Haro , and a corporal surnamed <unk> survived . The remainder had been killed in the battle . Among the very few survivors that the Ottomans captured , they found three deserters . These were immediately brought to Barbarossa and encouraged the admiral to continue with the assaults , reporting that the Spanish had suffered heavy casualties , lacked gunpowder and shot , and were mostly injured and exhausted . 
 = = = Ottoman capture = = = 
 On 5 August a new attack was launched against the walls . Barbarossa , after the report of the Spanish deserters , was sure that he could soon capture <unk> . All the Janissaries took part in the action , and the cavalry was ordered to dismount to join the general assault . Despite the overwhelming numerical superiority of the Ottoman troops , the Spanish defense was successful , as no more than a tower of the wall fell to the besiegers that day . Sarmiento ordered his sappers to prepare a mine to destroy the tower , but the attempt failed when an unexpected burst of the gunpowder killed the soldiers who were working in the mine . At dawn on the following day a heavy downpour ruined the matchlocks of the <unk> , the few remaining pieces of artillery , and the last gunpowder . The fight was therefore sustained only with swords , pikes and knives , and the wounded Spanish soldiers were forced to take up arms and help defend the walls . Only the dying men remained in the hospital . Surprisingly , the few surviving Spanish managed to repel the assault . 
 The last and definitive attack took place the next morning . Francisco de Sarmiento , on horseback , was wounded in the face by three arrows , but he continued to encourage his men . Demolished by heavy gunfire , the ruins of the walls became indefensible . Sarmiento then ordered the 600 Spanish survivors to retreat . His idea consisted of defending a castle in the lower city where the civilian population of Castelnuovo had taken refuge . Although the withdrawal was made in perfect order and discipline , Sarmiento and his men found that the doors of the castle were walled at their arrival . Sarmiento was offered a rope to raise him to the walls , but refused and responded " Never God wants that I was saved and my companions were lost without me " . After that he joined Machín de Munguía , Juan Vizcaíno and Sancho Frias to lead the last stand . Surrounded by the Ottoman army , the last Spanish soldiers fought back to back until none were able to fight . At the end of day , Castelnuovo was in Ottoman hands . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Almost all of the Janissaries and 16 @,@ 000 from the other Ottoman units were killed in the assault . According to rumor , Turkish losses amounted to 37 @,@ 000 dead . Of the Spanish troops only 200 survived , most of them wounded . One of the prisoners was the <unk> Captain Machín de Munguía . Barbarossa , upon learning this , offered Munguía freedom and a place in his army . The admiral greatly admired him for his actions in the battle of Preveza , where the Spaniard had successfully defended a sinking Venetian carrack against several Ottoman warships . Munguía refused to accept and was therefore beheaded on the spur of the admiral 's galley . Half of the prisoners and all the clerics were also slaughtered to satisfy the Ottoman soldiers , who were angry at the great losses which they had suffered in capturing the city . The few survivors were taken as slaves to Constantinople . Twenty @-@ five of them managed to escape from prison six years later and sailed to the port of Messina . 
 Despite the failure of Sarmiento to retain the fortress , Castelnuovo 's defense was sung by numerous contemporaneous poets and praised all over Christian Europe . The Spanish soldiers who participated in the unequal engagement were compared with mythological and classical history heroes , being considered immortal due the magnitude of their feat . Only the enemies of Charles V , such as the Paduan humanist <unk> Speroni , rejoiced at the annihilation of the Tercio of Castelnuovo . 
 The siege of Castelnuovo ended the failed campaign of the Holy League against the power of the Ottoman Empire in the Eastern Mediterranean . Charles V began negotiations with Barbarossa to attract him to the imperial ranks but in vain , and turned all his efforts in a great expedition against Algiers to destroy the Ottoman sea power . This expedition , known as the Journey of Algiers , ended in a disaster as a storm scattered the fleet and the army had to be reembarked having suffered heavy losses . A truce between Charles V and Suleiman the Magnificent was signed in 1543 . Castelnuovo remained in Ottoman hands for almost 150 years . It was recovered in 1687 , during the Morean War , by the Venetian Captain @-@ General at sea Girolamo <unk> , who in alliance with Montenegrins under <unk> <unk> , won a great victory over the Turks near the town and put the fortress under Venetian rule . 
 = Hurricane Jose ( 1999 ) = 
 Hurricane Jose caused moderate damage in the Lesser Antilles in October 1999 . The fourteenth tropical cyclone , tenth named storm , and eighth hurricane of the annual season , Jose developed from a tropical wave several hundred miles east of the Windward Islands on October 17 . The depression intensified and was subsequently upgraded to Tropical Storm Jose on October 18 . The storm tracked northwestward and was upgraded to a hurricane the following day as it approached the northern Leeward Islands . Jose briefly peaked as a Category 2 hurricane with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) on October 20 . However , wind shear weakened the storm back to a Category 1 hurricane before it struck Antigua . Further deterioration occurred and Jose weakened to a tropical storm before landfall in Tortola on October 21 . While located north of Puerto Rico on October 22 , the storm turned northward , shortly before curving north @-@ northeastward . Wind shear decreased , allowing Jose to re @-@ intensify into a hurricane while passing east of Bermuda on October 24 . However , on the following day , wind shear increased again , while sea surface temperatures decreased , causing Jose to weaken and quickly transition into an extratropical cyclone . 
 The storm brought heavy rainfall to the Lesser Antilles , with some areas experiencing more than 18 inches ( 460 mm ) of precipitation . Despite 15 inches ( 380 mm ) of rain in Anguilla , minimal flooding occurred . However , wind gusts up to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) uprooted trees , making some roads impassable and damaging houses , crops , and shipping facilities . A combination of hurricane @-@ force winds and flooding in Antigua and Barbuda destroyed at least 500 homes and left 90 % of homes without electricity and another 50 % experienced disrupted telephone service . Jose also caused 12 injuries and one fatality . Tropical storm force winds in eastern Puerto Rico toppled power lines , trees , and streets signs . Overflow along portions of the Blanco River and landslides caused minor damage . In Saint Kitts and Nevis , mudslides and flooding from the storm caused 1 fatality and impacted several homes and buildings . Flooding and mudslides in Sint Maarten damaged houses and roads , especially in low @-@ lying areas . One death was reported in Sint Maarten . Overall , Jose caused 3 fatalities and damage amounted to near $ 5 million ( 1999 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged into the Atlantic Ocean from the west coast of Africa on October 8 . The system tracked westward and did not develop further until it was midway between Africa and the Lesser Antilles on October 15 . Dvorak satellite classifications began at 1200 UTC on October 17 , and six hours later , the system developed into Tropical Depression Fourteen while located about 700 miles ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) east of the Windward Islands . Initially , the depression had well @-@ defined upper @-@ level outflow , though the low @-@ level circulation was poorly defined . The depression continued to organize , with satellite imagery indicating banding features becoming more well @-@ defined , as a result of an upper @-@ level anticyclone and a westerly jet . It is estimated that the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Jose at 0600 UTC on October 18 . 
 Due to no " immediately identifiable hindrances to further strengthening " , intensity forecasts indicated Jose reaching hurricane status by late on October 19 . Later that day , three computer models predicted that the anticyclone over Jose would move west @-@ northwestward , causing the storm to potentially strengthen to a major hurricane . However , the National Hurricane Center questioned these forecasts , as the same computer models predicted a similar scenario for Tropical Depression Twelve earlier that month . After t @-@ numbers on the Dvorak scale reached 4 @.@ 0 and a reconnaissance aircraft flight reported winds of 84 mph ( 135 km / h ) , it was estimated that Jose became a hurricane at 1800 UTC on October 19 . Early on the following day , cloud tops reached temperatures as low as − 121 ° F ( − 85 ° C ) and the hurricane also developed an eye with a radius of about 34 miles ( 55 km ) . 
 At 0600 UTC on October 20 , Jose attained its minimum barometric pressure of 979 mbar ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Six hours later , the storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane and reached its maximum sustained winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . Although atmospheric conditions previously seemed favorable for further significant strengthening , water vapor imagery indicated that an upper @-@ trough was extending from the western Caribbean Sea to the eastern Bahamas ; this in turn induced wind shear on Jose . Jose weakened immediately after becoming a Category 2 hurricane and winds were 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) when the storm made landfall in Antigua at 1600 UTC on October 21 . The National Hurricane Center noted that weakening " may be temporary " and also predicted slow re @-@ intensification . However , Jose instead continued to weaken and was only a tropical storm when it made landfall in Tortola at 1105 UTC on October 21 . Under the influence of a large mid- to upper @-@ tropospheric trough , Jose curved northward early on October 22 , while located north of Puerto Rico . Later on October 22 , the storm began re @-@ developing deep convection , though it still maintained a sheared system appearance . 
 The storm fully recurved to the northeast on October 22 , while initially no significant change in intensity occurred . On the following day , the storm began to slowly restrengthen , although wind shear had further exposed the center . As a result , the National Hurricane Center no longer noted the possibility of Jose to re @-@ intensify into a hurricane . Jose began to significantly re @-@ organize on October 24 , with deep convection rapidly re @-@ developing around the low @-@ level circulation . Despite this , the National Hurricane Center noted that , " the deep convection is poorly organized enough that strengthening is unlikely before extratropical transition in 36 hours . " By 1200 UTC on October 24 , the storm once again attained hurricane intensity as it passed about 300 miles ( 480 km ) east of Bermuda . After becoming a hurricane , no further intensification was predicted , as sea surface temperatures would soon decrease . Jose rapidly accelerated and quickly weakened back to a tropical storm by early on October 25 . At 1200 UTC on that day , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while located south of Atlantic Canada . Six hours later , the extratropical remnants of Jose merged with a large mid @-@ latitude low . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The National Hurricane Center began posting tropical cyclone watches and warnings starting at 0900 UTC on October 18 , with a hurricane watch for Barbados . Three hours later , a tropical storm watch was put into effect in Trinidad and Tobago . Late on October 18 , a hurricane watch was also issued for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , St. Lucia , and Dominica , while a tropical storm watch and a warning was extended to include Barbados and Grenada , respectively . At 2100 UTC on October 18 , the tropical storm watch that was issued for Trinidad and Tobago was discontinued . Early on October 19 , the hurricane watch was extended to include Martinique , Guadeloupe , Antigua , Barbuda , Montserrat , St. Kitts , Nevis , and Anguilla , as well as St. Eustatius , Saba , St. Maarten , St. Martin , and St. Barthelemy shortly thereafter . A hurricane watch in effect for St. Vincent and the Grenadines was soon downgraded to a tropical storm watch ; simultaneously , the hurricane watch that was issued for Barbados was canceled . By 0900 UTC on October 19 , the hurricane watches in effect for Dominica , Martinique , and Guadeloupe were all upgraded to a hurricane warning . Additionally , the tropical storm watch in Grenada was discontinued . 
 At 1500 UTC on October 19 , the hurricane watch in Dominica , Montserrat , Antigua , Barbuda , Nevis , Saint Kitts , St. Eustatius , Saba , St. Maarten , and Anguilla , was upgraded to a hurricane warning . Simultaneously , a hurricane watch went into effect for the Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico , while a tropical storm warning was issued for St. Lucia . It was then that the tropical storm watch in St. Vincent and the Grenadines was discontinued . Later on October 19 , the hurricane watch previously issued for the Virgin Island and Puerto Rico was upgraded to a hurricane warning . In St. Lucia , the hurricane watch was canceled . At 1200 UTC on October 20 , a hurricane warning as put into effect for Desirade , St. Martin , and St. Barthelemy . Throughout the day , the hurricane warnings in Guadeloupe , Dominica , Antigua , and Desirade were discontinued . By 2100 UTC on October 21 , all watches and warnings in effect were discontinued . 
 Twenty @-@ four shelters were set up in Antigua and Barbuda , but only 516 people used the shelters . In Saint Kitts , many tourists were forced to ride out the storm after airports began canceling flights on October 19 and shutting down completely on October 20 . Deputy Prime Minister of Saint Kitts and Nevis Sam Condor warned residents to " prepare for the worst " . The Governor of the United States Virgin Islands , Charles Wesley Turnbull , issued a curfew effective at 6 p.m. AST on October 20 . It was reported on October 20 that 343 shelters would be opened in Puerto Rico , which were stocked with thousands of cots and sleeping bags . Additionally , the police department activated all 18 @,@ 000 of its officers . The Federal Emergency Management Agency assembled a seven @-@ member Mobilization Center Management Team , with ice and water being pre @-@ staged at Roosevelt Roads Naval Station . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Anguilla = = = 
 In Anguilla , tropical storm force winds and rainfall up to 6 inches ( 150 mm ) fell at the Agricultural Department in The Valley . At another location , wind gusts reached 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and precipitation amounts up to 15 inches ( 380 mm ) . As a result , Jose was the wettest tropical cyclone on record in Anguilla , only to be surpassed by Hurricane Lenny about a month later . It also contributed to the rainiest October in Anguilla on record . Winds on the island downed power and telephone lines , however , the electricity had been shut off as the storm was approaching . Additionally , trees uprooted by the winds caused roads to become impassable . Houses , crops , and shipping facilities were also damaged . Rough seas caused significant erosion at many of the famed beaches on the island . 
 = = = Antigua and Barbuda = = = 
 In Antigua and Barbuda , there was considerable flooding of major roads and 2 @,@ 000 people were severely affected and were evacuated . About 516 of the people were housed in emergency shelters . Across the island , the storm killed one person , injured 12 , left an elderly blind man missing , and destroyed 500 houses and a newly built church . In the village of Crab ´ s Hill , 64 of the 81 houses were ether seriously damaged or destroyed . The hurricane also disrupted 50 % of telephone service and 90 % of the homes were left without electricity . A wind gust of 102 mph ( 164 km / h ) was reported by the Antigua and Barbuda Meteorological Service on October 20 . 
 = = = Puerto Rico and United States Virgin Islands = = = 
 Some areas of Puerto Rico experienced tropical storm force winds , especially the eastern side of the island . The Emergency Management Agency in Luquillo reported sustained winds of 40 to 45 mph ( 64 to 72 km / h ) and gusts up to 55 mph ( 89 km / h ) . In San Juan , a sustained winds speed of 23 mph ( 37 km / h ) and a gust of 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) was recorded . A sustained wind speed of 28 mph ( 45 km / h ) and gust up to 37 mph ( 60 km / h ) was measured in Ceiba . Strong winds knocked down power lines , trees , and street signs in Culebra and Fajardo . Rainfall was between 3 and 4 inches ( 76 and 102 mm ) in eastern Puerto Rico , with a peak amount of 6 @.@ 54 inches ( 166 mm ) in Rio Blanco Lower . The Blanco River overflowed in Naguabo , while landslides were reported in Utuado , Carolina , and Villalba . Damage in Puerto Rico totaled to about $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 In the United States Virgin Islands , tropical storm force winds were measured on at least three islands . On Saint John , a sustained winds speed of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) and a gust as high as 68 mph ( 109 km / h ) was reported . Sustained winds of 44 mph ( 71 km / h ) and a gust up to 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) was recorded on Saint Thomas . Strong winds caused extensive power outages in Saint Croix , while trees and power lines were felled in Saint Thomas and Saint John . Overall , losses in the United States Virgin Islands reached $ 20 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Saint Martin = = = 
 On the French side of the island , Saint Martin , torrential rainfall was recorded . In Marigot , precipitation reached 19 @.@ 6 inches ( 500 mm ) in 48 hours between late on October 20 and October 22 . Sustained winds of the island were slightly less than 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) and gusts were under 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Storm surges in coastal areas was mostly between 2 @.@ 9 and 3 @.@ 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 88 and 1 @.@ 10 m ) above normal . In Sint Maarten , which is the Dutch portion of the island , sustained winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) and a gust to 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) were reported at the Princess Juliana International Airport , while a rainfall total of 13 @.@ 75 inches ( 349 mm ) was observed in Pointe Blanche . Flooding and mudslides caused by the heavy precipitation damaged roads and homes , especially in low @-@ lying areas . In addition to the flood damage , one fatality was reported in Sint Maarten . 
 = = = Rest of Caribbean = = = 
 In St. Kitts and Nevis , rainfall caused flooding , which washed out several main roads and resulted in landslides were reported . Several buildings and roads suffered damage and one person was reported have perished due to the storm 's ferocity . Dominica received no more than a little rain , only being persistent for one morning . On Saint Barthélemy , rainfall exceeded 15 inches ( 380 mm ) in a 48 ‑ hour period . During the overall 60 ‑ hour period , precipitation amounts reached 16 @.@ 5 inches ( 420 mm ) . At another location , <unk> , rainfall reached 17 @.@ 6 inches ( 450 mm ) in only 48 hours . In the capital city of Gustavia , a sustained winds speed of 62 mph ( 100 km / h ) and a gust up to 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) . Later , another wind gust of 93 mph ( 150 km / h ) was recorded before the anemometer failed . Along the shore , tides reached 3 @.@ 3 feet ( 1 @.@ 0 m ) above normal . In Montserrat , the storm brought winds up to 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . A small number of down trees caused power outages in one area , though it electricity was restored within an hour . Only a few landslides occurred , while volcanic mudflow poured down Soufrière Hills , but no damage occurred . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately following the storm , an Emergency Operation Centre was established in St. John 's by the Antigua & Barbuda Red Cross Society in St. John 's . In the first week after the storm , 35 Red Cross volunteers distributed 1 @,@ 500 tarpaulins , 210 blankets , 300 food parcels , and 30 hurricane lamps to residents in the effected communities of York 's , Villa , Greens Bay , Perry Bay , <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Crab 's Hill , <unk> , St. John 's , and <unk> a Red Cross office in St. Vincent de Paul also distributed rice and beans to 2 @,@ 000 people , while the National office of Disaster Services provided plastic sheeting and water bottles . The Government of Antigua and Barbuda dispatched teams to re @-@ open roads , clean up debris , and restore utilities . However , after Hurricane Lenny struck the Lesser Antilles about a month later , relief efforts slowed , as many more people were significantly affected , causing recovery to be costlier . 
 = Butterfly Fly Away = 
 " Butterfly Fly Away " is an acoustic pop duet performed by American actors and recording artists Miley Cyrus and Billy Ray Cyrus . The song was first heard in the 2009 film Hannah Montana : The Movie , in which both Cyruses star , and was subsequently released on the film 's soundtrack . An extended version is featured on Billy Ray 's eleventh studio album , Back to Tennessee . The song is a soft country ballad with lyrics that describe a child 's transition to adulthood . 
 The song received generally favorable reviews and , though not released as a single , achieved notable commercial outcomes in Australia , Canada , Ireland , the United Kingdom , and the United States . It reached its highest international peak in the Irish Singles Chart , at number forty @-@ six . The Cyruses performed the song live at several venues ; a performance in an English Apple Store was recorded and eventually released on an extended play . 
 = = Background = = 
 As with Miley and Ray Cyrus 's last duet , " Ready , Set , Don 't Go " ( 2007 ) , " Butterfly Fly Away " describes a child 's transition to adulthood . The song was written and produced by Glen Ballard and Alan Silvestri for the 2009 film Hannah Montana : The Movie . According to the film , when main character Miley Stewart ( played by Miley Cyrus ) was young , her father Robby Ray Stewart ( played by Billy Ray Cyrus ) , would often tell her that while a caterpillar may not be able to move much , it can still dream about the butterfly it will one day be . This comment became a recurring motif in the film and provided the basis for the lyrics to " Butterfly Fly Away " , which use a caterpillar 's metamorphosis as a metaphor for a child 's coming of age . In Hannah Montana : The Movie , the Cyruses perform the song as their characters in " a tender movie scene under a gazebo in the rain " . Billy Ray said filming the scene was " a pretty special moment . The song itself was written by Glen Ballard , a masterful songwriter who wrote ' Man in the Mirror ' for Michael Jackson . I knew it was a pretty special song [ ... ] and it certainly comes at a nice spot in the movie . " 
 The contemporary country duet is set in common time with a gentle tempo of 69 beats per minute . The song 's vocals range one octave , from C ♯ 3 to B4 . The song is written in a key of B major and features the chord progression , <unk> — B — C ♯ 7 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Reviewers gave the song moderately positive reviews . Warren <unk> of About.com found it " sentimental " while Scott Mervis of the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette called it " a sweet duet " . Allmusic reviewer Heather Phares said the song was " a treacly duet " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine , also of Allmusic , was more negative , calling it a " syrupy , icky " song on which Billy Ray never sounds quite right . Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly wrote , " [ Miley 's ] delicate duet with dad Billy Ray , ' Butterfly Fly Away , ' is quietly lovely . " Billboard reviewer Ken Tucker stated that it " is an airy and flowing song about family on which father and daughter 's voices blend nicely " . Michael Rechtshaffen of The Hollywood Reporter called " Butterfly Fly Away " a " tender Glen Ballard / Alan Silvestri ballad " . The song was included on the short list for Best Original Song at the 82nd Academy Awards , but did not achieve a nomination . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Butterfly Fly Away " debuted at number seventy @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 the week ending April 25 , 2009 . The following week , May 2 , 2009 , the song reached its peak on the Hot 100 at number fifty @-@ six . The song spent a total of three consecutive weeks on the chart . On the week ending April 25 , 2009 , " Butterfly Fly Away " debuted at number seventy @-@ six in the Canadian Hot 100 . The following week the song reached its peak at number @-@ fifty on the chart . The song charted for a longer amount of time in Canada than its home country , with four weeks on the chart . 
 The song encountered similar commercial outcomes in various nations . In the United Kingdom , the song debuted and peaked at number seventy @-@ eight for the week ending May 16 , 2009 . " Butterfly Fly Away " reached its highest international peak in the Irish Singles Chart . It debuted at number forty @-@ seven on the week ending May 7 , 2009 . The song ultimately peaked at number forty @-@ six on the chart . It also peaked at number fifty @-@ six in the Australian Singles Chart . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The Cyruses performed the song on Good Morning America on April 8 , 2009 , along with performances of " Full Circle " , " Hoedown Throwdown " and " The Climb " . They included the song in their set for the AOL Sessions , recorded on April 13 , 2009 . They also performed the song in London in an Apple Store , along with a duet version of Billy Ray 's " <unk> " and several of their own singles . The set , along with some songs by Cyrus 's father , was sold exclusively by the United Kingdom iTunes Store as an extended play titled iTunes Live from London . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Sweat ( Ciara song ) = 
 " Sweat " is a song recorded by American recording artist Ciara for her self @-@ titled fifth album Ciara ( 2013 ) , originally titled One Woman Army . Featuring guest vocals from rapper 2 Chainz , " Sweat " is Ciara 's debut release under Epic Records after publicly asking to leave previous label Jive Records . The label failed to support Ciara creatively and financially on previous albums , Fantasy Ride ( 2009 ) and Basic Instinct ( 2010 ) , contributing to poor performance of both albums . Ciara 's contract with Epic Records reunited the singer with her mentor L.A. Reid , who is credited as originally signing the singer to his LaFace Records label during the beginning of her career in 2004 , as well as having a hand in producing her debut album , Goodies ( 2004 ) . 
 Initially touted as the lead single from Ciara , " Sweat " received mixed reviews from music critics , with some describing the song as a heavy club song , while others referred to the song as boring . " Sweat " was likened to previous urban singles " Goodies " ( 2004 ) and " Like a Boy " ( 2006 ) . It was serviced to rhythmic radio stations on June 18 , 2012 ; however , its planned digital release for June 19 , 2012 was cancelled . Epic Records subsequently noted the song as a promotional single when it charted at number eighty @-@ six on the US Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The song was replaced by a ballad called " Sorry " as the lead single from Ciara but what when that underperformed too , both songs were scrapped from the album and replaced with an R & B midtempo song called " Body Party " , subsequently touted as the album 's new lead single . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Ciara 's previous two albums , Fantasy Ride ( 2009 ) and Basic Instinct ( 2010 ) , both underperformed commercially compared to the singer 's first two albums ; Ciara : The Evolution ( 2006 ) debuted at number one , while her debut album , Goodies ( 2004 ) , debuted at number three . Following a heavy period of legal issues and unauthorized leaking of songs from the Fantasy Ride recording sessions , Ciara recorded Basic Instinct in strict confidentiality . Ciara reflected on the album 's progress at the time , stating that she wasn 't interested in first week sales or performance . However , Gerrick Kennedy from the Los Angeles Times attributed Basic Instinct 's lack of success to multiple <unk> and the leaking of material from the album 's recording sessions . Eventually , Ciara broke her silence revealing that Jive Records had not financially supported her with Fantasy Ride and Basic Instinct . Ciara was left to pay for promotion herself , which included funding the music video and radio release of her last single " Gimmie Dat " . She publicly asked to be released from Jive on February 14 , 2011 . 
 On July 12 , 2011 , it was reported that she had reunited with L.A. Reid by signing with his record label Epic Records . Reid had previously signed Ciara to LaFace Records at the start of her career and was a factor in the commercial success of her debut album , Goodies ( 2004 ) . Billboard magazine went on to confirm her move to Epic in September 2011 . On May 30 , 2012 during promotional appearances for That 's My Boy , a film Ciara stars in , the singer announced she had a new single on the way called " Sweat " . Just five days later on June 4 , 2012 , " Sweat " premiered online , the bass @-@ heavy record features upcoming rapper 2 Chainz and was unveiled as the lead single from Ciara 's fifth album Ciara ( 2013 ) . The record was serviced to rhythmic radio stations on June 18 , 2012 and was scheduled for release as a digital download on June 19 , 2012 . However , the digital release did not happen as planned , and when charting Billboard listed the song as a promotional single . On August 13 , 2012 , Ciara revealed through a handwritten letter that a song called " Sorry " would be released as the album 's lead single . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 " Sweat " is an uptempo " bass @-@ heavy " club song which features rapper 2 Chainz . Serving as Ciara 's debut release with Epic Records , " Sweat " was described by MTV News as a throwback to " Ciara 's old roots , " particularly drawing comparisons to " Like a Boy . " It was written by Ciara , 2 Chainz , William Wesson , Patrizio <unk> , Christopher Trujillo , K. Townsend , and S. Randolph . The song was described as " bass @-@ heavy banger " by Rap @-@ Up . Becky Bain from Idolator , however , was disappointed with " Sweat , " describing the song as " not very exciting . " In her review , Bain said , " Ciara 's vocals go nowhere , the beat doesn 't pick up or drop off or twist or turn unexpectedly , and the repetitive lyrics are your generic sexy @-@ dancefloor bon mots . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Sweat " made its chart debut by entering the US Billboard Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart on June 23 , 2012 . The chart is an addendum to the main Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and consists of twenty @-@ five chart positions for songs that have not received enough airplay or single sales to appear in the top 100 of the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . A week later , " Sweat " moved up to number 93 on the main R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . In its third week , it went on peak at number eighty @-@ six . 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Leopard shark = 
 The leopard shark ( Triakis semifasciata ) is a species of houndshark , in the family Triakidae . It is found along the Pacific coast of North America , from the U.S. state of Oregon to Mazatlán in Mexico . Typically measuring 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) long , this slender @-@ bodied shark is immediately identifiable by the striking pattern of black saddle @-@ like markings and large spots over its back , from which it derives its common name . Large schools of leopard sharks are a common sight in bays and estuaries , swimming over sandy or muddy flats or rock @-@ strewn areas near kelp beds and reefs . They are most common near the coast , in water less than 4 m ( 13 ft ) deep . 
 Active @-@ swimming predators , groups of leopard sharks often follow the tide onto intertidal mudflats to forage for food , mainly clams , spoon worms , crabs , shrimp , bony fish , and fish eggs . Most leopard sharks tend to remain within a particular area rather than undertaking long movements elsewhere , which has led to genetic divergence between populations of sharks living in different regions . This species is aplacental viviparous , meaning that the young hatch inside the uterus and are nourished by yolk . From March to June , the female gives birth to as many as 37 young after a gestation period of 10 – 12 months . It is relatively slow @-@ growing and takes many years to mature . 
 Harmless to humans , the leopard shark is caught by commercial and recreational fisheries for food and the aquarium trade . This species is mostly fished in the waters off California where , after a period of population decline in the 1980s , new fishing regulations in the early 1990s reduced harvesting to sustainable levels . The International Union for Conservation of Nature has assessed this species as of Least Concern , while noting that local stocks may easily become overfished because of the shark 's slow growth and limited migratory habits . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The first scientific name applied to the leopard shark was Triakis californica , coined by British zoologist John Edward Gray in the 1851 List of the specimens of fish in the collection of the British Museum . However , Gray did not furnish the name with a proper description , rendering it a nomen nudum . In December 1854 , American ichthyologist William Orville Ayres gave a lecture describing the species as Mustelus felis , which included the first scientific description of the species . His lecture was reprinted first in The Pacific , a San Francisco newspaper , and then in the journal Proceedings of the California Academy of Natural Sciences . In April 1855 , French biologist Charles Frédéric Girard published another description of this species , naming it Triakis semifasciata . 
 Despite M. felis being the senior synonym , an error in recording the dates of publication resulted in the widespread use of T. semifasciata as the leopard shark 's scientific name . As a result of this long @-@ standing error , Triakis semifasciata came to be recognized as the valid name ( as a nomen <unk> ) and <unk> felis was invalidated ( as a nomen oblitum ) . The specific epithet semifasciata comes from the Latin words semi ( " half " ) and fasciatus ( " banded " ) , describing this shark 's dorsal pattern of saddle @-@ like markings . In older literature , this species may be referred to as " tiger shark " or " catshark " . 
 The genus Triakis contains two subgenera , Triakis and Cazon . The leopard shark is placed within the subgenus Triakis along with the banded houndshark ( T. ( Triakis ) scyllium ) . A 2006 phylogenetic analysis by J. Andrés López and colleagues , based on protein @-@ coding genes , revealed that Triakis and Cazon are in fact not closely related , and additionally that the leopard shark may be the most basal member of its family . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The leopard shark occurs in the cool to warm @-@ <unk> continental waters of the northeastern Pacific Ocean , from Coos Bay , Oregon to Mazatlán , Mexico , including the Gulf of California . It favors muddy or sandy flats within enclosed bays and estuaries , and may also be encountered near kelp beds and rocky reefs , or along the open coast . Numbers have been known to gather near discharges of warm effluent from power plants . Leopard sharks generally swim close to the bottom and are most abundant from the intertidal zone to a depth of 4 m ( 13 ft ) , though they may be found as deep as 91 m ( 299 ft ) . Many leopard sharks , particularly in the north , leave their coastal habitats in winter and return in early spring . A study in Tomales Bay in northern California determined that they depart when the water temperature drops below 10 – 12 ° C ( 50 – 54 ° F ) ; one tagged shark was found to have swum some 140 km ( 87 mi ) south . 
 While a few leopard sharks have been documented traveling hundreds of kilometers , most individuals tend to remain in a localized area for much of their lives . This low level of dispersal has led to genetic divergence across its range . Seven discrete gene pools have been identified along the Californian coast between Humboldt Bay and San Diego . Of these , the Humboldt Bay subpopulation is perhaps the most isolated , with the sharks there maturing at a larger size and producing fewer offspring than those from other areas . By contrast , the area around Los Angeles represents a genetic transitional zone between subpopulations whose boundaries are more diffuse . Off Baja California , the leopard sharks on the Pacific side are probably distinct from those in the northern Gulf of California . Although there is equivocal evidence for natal philopatry ( returning to one 's birthplace to breed ) in this species , proximity to established breeding grounds likely contributes to the structuring of these different subpopulations . 
 = = Description = = 
 The leopard shark has a moderately stout body , with a short , rounded snout . There are well @-@ developed , triangular flaps of skin in front of the nares . The eyes are large and oval , with a nictitating membrane ( a protective third eyelid ) . The line of the mouth is strongly curved . There are furrows at the corners of the mouth extending onto both jaws , with those on the lower jaw almost long enough to meet at the midline . The tooth rows number 41 – 55 in the upper jaw and 34 – 45 in the lower jaw ; each tooth has a slightly oblique , smooth @-@ edged cusp in the center and 1 – 2 small cusplets on either side . These teeth are arranged into a flat , " pavement " -like surface with overlapping ridges . 
 The large first dorsal fin is positioned about halfway between the pectoral and pelvic fins ; the second is almost as large as the first and much larger than the anal fin . The pectoral fins are wide and triangular . The lower lobe of the caudal fin is well @-@ developed in adults but less than half the length of the upper lobe , which has a strong ventral notch near the tip . The coloration is unique , consisting of prominent black " saddles " and large black spots running along the back , on a silvery to bronzy gray background . Adult sharks often have more spots and saddles with lighter centers compared to juveniles . The underside is whitish and plain . The average length of a leopard shark is 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 5 m ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 9 ft ) . Rarely males may grow to 1 @.@ 5 m ( 4 @.@ 9 ft ) and females 1 @.@ 8 m ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) , and there is a record of an exceptional female that measured 2 @.@ 1 m ( 6 @.@ 9 ft ) long . The heaviest known leopard shark weighed 18 @.@ 4 kg ( 41 lb ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 An active species that swims with a strong undulating motion , the leopard shark is commonly spotted cruising in or just beyond the surf zone . It is more active at night than during the day , and sometimes lies still on the bottom . In Tomales Bay and elsewhere , the leopard shark follows the tide onto mudflats to forage for food , retreating just fast enough to prevent being stranded or trapped as the water recedes . At Santa Catalina Island , resident sharks spend the day together in the shallows and at night disperse into deeper water , ranging up to 10 km ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) away . 
 From birth , leopard sharks form large schools generally segregated by age and sex , which may intermingle with grey or brown smoothhounds ( Mustelus californicus and M. <unk> ) or spiny dogfish ( Squalus acanthias ) . These schools are apparently nomadic , often appearing suddenly in an area for a few hours and then vanishing just as quickly . In captivity , larger sharks have been observed establishing their dominance over smaller individuals via light nips to the pectoral fins . During summer days , large aggregations of mature females assemble in shallow bays and estuaries , dispersing at night . As these females follow the warmest patches of water , allowing them to raise their internal body temperatures by up to 3 ° C ( 5 @.@ 4 ° F ) , they are speculated to be taking advantage of the heat to speed their growth and that of their gestating young . The membership of these aggregations is inconstant , with individual females periodically switching between different sites scattered over several kilometers . 
 Compared to the related grey and brown smoothhounds that share its range , the leopard shark has smaller and more numerous red blood cells , allowing it to process oxygen more efficiently . This may be an adaptation for foraging in deoxygenated estuary environments . Their eyes contain very few cone cells , likely due to the murky water they inhabit . Small leopard sharks fall prey to larger sharks such as the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) and the broadnose sevengill shark ( Notorynchus cepedianus ) . On one occasion , a sevengill shark was seen ambushing a leopard shark on a tidal mudflat in Humboldt Bay , striking with such momentum that the larger predator momentarily beached itself . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworms Phyllobothrium <unk> , Lacistorhynchus dollfusi and Paraorygmatobothrium barber , as well as the copepods Echthrogaleus <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The diet of the leopard shark consists of small benthic and littoral animals , most significantly crabs ( <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) , shrimp , bony fish ( including anchovies , herring , <unk> , croakers , <unk> , gobies , rockfish , sculpins , flatfish , and midshipmen ) , fish eggs , clams , and the <unk> fat innkeeper worm ( <unk> <unk> ) . This opportunistic hunter has also been known to eat ghost shrimp , polychaete worms , and the young of smoothhounds , shovelnose guitarfish ( <unk> productus ) , and bat rays ( Myliobatis californicus ) . <unk> ( Zostera ) and algae may be swallowed incidentally . 
 The leopard shark captures prey by expanding its buccal cavity to create a suction force , which is facilitated by its labial cartilages swinging forward to form the mouth into a tube . Simultaneously , the shark protrudes its jaws forward to grip the prey between its teeth . As with other sharks , the teeth of the leopard shark are periodically shed and replaced ; it takes 9 – 12 days for a replacement tooth to move into position . Leopard sharks have been caught with stomachs filled with clam siphons , which the sharks seize before the clams can retract and break off with a levering motion of their bodies . On occasion , the shark tears the entire clam body out of its shell this way . Other sharks examined have had stomachs containing whole innkeeper worms with no bite marks , suggesting that the sharks sucked them out of their burrows . Under a hollow bridge support in San Francisco Bay , a group of leopard sharks and spiny dogfish have been observed feeding on a dense school of anchovies by slowly swimming counterclockwise through the clockwise @-@ swimming school , and swallowing any anchovies that accidentally entered their open mouths . 
 In some places , this species feeds only on a few prey types and little else ( e.g. innkeeper worms and <unk> crabs in Tomales Bay , jack <unk> ( <unk> californiensis ) eggs and the crabs <unk> <unk> and Metacarcinus magister in Humboldt Bay ) . The predominant prey taken depends on location , time of year , and age . For example , in the Elkhorn Slough at Monterey Bay , <unk> crabs and innkeeper worms are mostly eaten in winter and spring , fish eggs from winter to early summer , bony fish in summer , and <unk> crabs and clams in fall . Young sharks feed mostly on crabs and transition to clam siphons , fish eggs , and innkeeper worms once they reach 70 – 80 cm ( 2 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 6 ft ) long . The largest sharks are the ones that consume the most fish . 
