 Ministry of the Environment 
 Nuclear Regulation Authority 
 Ministry of Defense 
 Self @-@ Defense Forces ( Ground / Maritime / Air ) 
 National Security Council 
 ※ As of October 7 , 2015 
 The Board of Audit ( <unk> ) is the only unique body of the Government ; in which , the Board is totally independent from the Diet and the Cabinet . It reviews government expenditures and submits an annual report to the Diet . Article 90 of the Constitution of Japan and the Board of Audit Act of 1947 gives this body substantial independence from both controls . 
 = = Legislative = = 
 The Legislative branch organ of Japan is the National Diet ( <unk> ) . It is a bicameral legislature , composing of a lower house , the House of Representatives , and an upper house , the House of Councillors . Empowered by the Constitution to be " the highest organ of State power " and the only " sole law @-@ making organ of the State " , its houses are both directly elected under a parallel voting system and is ensured by the Constitution to have no discrimination on the qualifications of each members ; whether be it based on " race , creed , sex , social status , family origin , education , property or income " . The National Diet , therefore , reflects the sovereignty of the people ; a principle of popular sovereignty whereby the supreme power lies within , in this case , the Japanese people . 
 The Diet responsibilities includes the making of laws , the approval of the annual national budget , the approval of the conclusion of treaties and the selection of the Prime Minister . In addition , it has the power to initiate draft constitutional amendments , which , if approved , are to be presented to the people for ratification in a referendum before being promulgated by the Emperor , in the name of the people . The Constitution also enables both houses to conduct investigations in relation to government , demand the presence and testimony of witnesses , and the production of records , as well as allowing either house of the Diet to demand the presence of the Prime Minister or the other Minister of State , in order to give answers or explanations whenever so required . The Diet is also able to impeach Court judges convicted of criminal or irregular conduct . The Constitution , however , does not specify the voting methods , the number of members of each house , and all other matters pertaining to the method of election of the each members , and are thus , allowed to be determined for by law . 
 Under the provisions of the Constitution and by law , all adults aged over 18 are eligible to vote , with a secret ballot and a universal suffrage , and those elected have certain protections from apprehension while the Diet is in session . Speeches , debates , and votes cast in the Diet also enjoy parliamentary privileges . Each house is responsible for disciplining its own members , and all deliberations are public unless two @-@ thirds or more of those members present passes a resolution agreeing it otherwise . The Diet also requires the presence of at least one @-@ third of the membership of either house in order to constitute a quorum . All decisions are decided by a majority of those present , unless otherwise stated by the Constitution , and in the case of a tie , the presiding officer has the right to decide the issue . A member cannot be expelled , however , unless a majority of two @-@ thirds or more of those members present passes a resolution therefor . 
 Under the Constitution , at least one session of the Diet must be convened each year . The Cabinet can also , at will , convoke extraordinary sessions of the Diet and is required to , when a quarter or more of the total members of either house demands it . During an election , only the House of Representatives is dissolved . The House of Councillors is however , not dissolved but only closed , and may , in times of national emergency , be convoked for an emergency session . The Emperor both <unk> the Diet and dissolves the House of Representatives , but only does so on the advice of the Cabinet . 
 For bills to become Law , they are to be first passed by both houses of the National Diet , signed by the Ministers of State , countersigned by the Prime Minister , and then finally promulgated by the Emperor ; however , without specifically giving the Emperor the power to oppose legislation . 
 = = = House of Representatives = = = 
 The House of Representatives of Japan ( <unk> ) is the Lower house , with the members of the house being elected once every four years , or when dissolved , for a four @-@ year term . As of December 24 , 2014 , it has 475 members . Of these , 180 members are elected from 11 multi @-@ member constituencies by a party @-@ list system of proportional representation , and 295 are elected from single @-@ member constituencies . 238 seats are required for majority . The House of Representatives is the more powerful house out of the two , it is able to override vetoes on bills imposed by the House of Councillors with a two @-@ thirds majority . It can , however , be dissolved by the Prime Minister at will . Members of the house must be of Japanese nationality ; those aged 18 years and older may vote , while those aged 25 years and older may run for office in the lower house . 
 The legislative powers of the House of Representatives is considered to be more powerful than that of the House of Councillors . While the House of Councillors has the ability to veto most decisions made by the House of Representatives , some however , can only be delayed . This includes the legislation of treaties , the budget , and the selection of the Prime Minister . The Prime Minister , and collectively his Cabinet , can in turn , however , dissolve the House of Representatives whenever intended . While the House of Representatives is considered to be officially dissolved upon the preparation of the document , the House is only formally dissolved by the dissolution ceremony . The dissolution ceremony of the House is as follows : 
 The document is rubber stamped by the Emperor , and wrapped in a purple silk cloth ; an indication of a document of state act , done on behalf of the people . 
 The document is passed on to the Chief Cabinet Secretary at the House of Representatives President 's reception room . 
 The document is taken to the Chamber for preparation by the General @-@ Secretary . 
 The General @-@ Secretary prepares the document for reading by the Speaker . 
 The Speaker of the House of Representatives promptly declares the dissolution of the House . 
 The House of Representatives is formally dissolved . 
 It is customary that , upon the dissolution of the House , members will shout the Three Cheers of Banzai ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = House of Councillors = = = 
 The House of Councillors of Japan ( <unk> ) is the Upper house , with half the members of the house being elected once every three years , for a six @-@ year term . As of December 24 , 2014 , it has 242 members . Of these , 73 are elected from the 47 prefectural districts , by single non @-@ transferable votes , and 48 are elected from a nationwide list by proportional representation with open lists . The House of Councillors cannot be dissolved by the Prime Minister . Members of the house must be of Japanese nationality ; those aged 18 years and older may vote , while those aged 30 years and older may run for office in the upper house . 
 As the House of Councillors can veto a decision made by the House of Representatives , the House of Councillors can cause the House of Representatives to reconsider its decision . The House of Representatives however , can still insist on its decision by overwriting the veto by the House of Councillors with a two @-@ thirds majority of its members present . Each year , and when required , the National Diet is convoked at the House of Councillors , on the advice of the Cabinet , for an extra or an ordinary session , by the Emperor . A short speech is , however , usually first made by the Speaker of the House of Representatives before the Emperor proceeds to convoke the Diet with his Speech from the throne . 
 = = Judicial = = 
 The Judicial branch of Japan consist of the Supreme Court , and four other lower courts ; the High Courts , District Courts , Family Courts and Summary Courts . Divided into four basic tiers , the Court 's independence from the executive and legislative branches are guaranteed by the Constitution , and is stated as : " no extraordinary tribunal shall be established , nor shall any organ or agency of the Executive be given final judicial power " ; a feature known as the Separation of Powers . Article 76 of the Constitution states that all the Court judges are independent in the exercise of their own conscience and that they are only bounded by the Constitution and the laws . Court judges are removable only by public impeachment , and can only be removed , without impeachment , when they are judicially declared mentally or physically incompetent to perform their duties . The Constitution also explicitly denies any power for executive organs or agencies to administer disciplinary actions against judges . However , a Supreme Court judge may be dismissed by a majority in a referendum ; of which , must occur during the first general election of the National Diet 's House of Representatives following the judge 's appointment , and also the first general election for every ten years lapse thereafter . Trials must be conducted , with judgment declared , publicly , unless the Court " unanimously determines publicity to be dangerous to public order or morals " ; with the exception for trials of political offenses , offenses involving the press , and cases wherein the rights of people as guaranteed by the Constitution , which cannot be deemed and conducted privately . Court judges are appointed by the Cabinet , in attestation of the Emperor , while the Chief Justice is appointed by the Emperor , after being nominated by the Cabinet ; which in practice , known to be under the recommendation of the former Chief Justice . 
 The Legal system in Japan has been historically influenced by Chinese law ; developing independently during the Edo period through texts such as <unk> <unk> . It has , however , changed during the Meiji Restoration , and is now largely based on the European civil law ; notably , the civil code based on the German model still remains in effect . A quasi @-@ jury system has recently came into use , and the legal system also includes a bill of rights since May 3 , 1947 . The collection of Six Codes makes up the main body of the Japanese statutory law . 
 All Statutory Laws in Japan are required to be rubber stamped by the Emperor with the Privy Seal of Japan ( <unk> ) , and no Law can take effect without the Cabinet 's signature , the Prime Minister 's countersignature and the Emperor 's promulgation . 
 = = = Supreme Court = = = 
 The Supreme Court of Japan ( <unk> ) is the court of last resort and has the power of Judicial review ; as defined by the Constitution to be " the court of last resort with power to determine the constitutionality of any law , order , regulation or official act " . The Supreme Court is also responsible for nominating judges to lower courts and determining judicial procedures . It also oversees the judicial system , overseeing activities of public prosecutors , and disciplining judges and other judicial personnel . 
 = = = High Courts = = = 
 The High Courts of Japan ( <unk> ) has the jurisdiction to hear appeals to judgments rendered by District Courts and Family Courts , excluding cases under the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court . Criminal appeals are directly handled by the High Courts , but Civil cases are first handled by District Courts . There are eight High Courts in Japan : the Tokyo , Osaka , Nagoya , Hiroshima , Fukuoka , Sendai , Sapporo , and Takamatsu High Courts . 
 = = = Penal system = = = 
 The Penal system of Japan ( <unk> ) is operated by the Ministry of Justice . It is part of the criminal justice system , and is intended to <unk> , reform , and rehabilitate offenders . The ministry 's Correctional Bureau administers the adult prison system , the juvenile correctional system , and three of the women 's guidance homes , while the Rehabilitation Bureau operates the probation and the parole systems . 
 = = Local Government = = 
 The Local Governments of Japan ( <unk> ) are unitary , in which local jurisdictions largely depend on the national government both administratively and financially . They are established as an act of devolution . Under the Constitution , all matters pertaining to the local self @-@ government is allowed to be determined for by law ; more specifically , the Local Autonomy Law . 
 The Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications intervenes significantly in local government , as do other ministries . This is done chiefly financially because many local government jobs need funding initiated by national ministries . This is dubbed as the " thirty @-@ percent autonomy " . 
 The result of this power is a high level of organizational and policy standardization among the different local jurisdictions allowing them to preserve the uniqueness of their prefecture , city , or town . Some of the more collectivist jurisdictions , such as Tokyo and Kyoto , have experimented with policies in such areas as social welfare that later were adopted by the national government . 
 = = = Local Authorities = = = 
 Japan is divided into forty @-@ seven administrative divisions , the prefectures are : one metropolitan district ( Tokyo ) , two urban prefectures ( Kyoto and Osaka ) , forty @-@ three rural prefectures , and one " district " , Hokkaidō . Large cities are subdivided into wards , and further split into towns , or precincts , or subprefectures and counties . 
 Cities are self @-@ governing units administered independently of the larger jurisdictions within which they are located . In order to attain city status , a jurisdiction must have at least 500 @,@ 000 inhabitants , 60 percent of whom are engaged in urban occupations . There are self @-@ governing towns outside the cities as well as precincts of urban wards . Like the cities , each has its own elected mayor and assembly . Villages are the smallest self @-@ governing entities in rural areas . They often consist of a number of rural hamlets containing several thousand people connected to one another through the formally imposed framework of village administration . Villages have mayors and councils elected to four @-@ year terms . 
 = = = Structure of Local Government = = = 
 Each jurisdiction has a chief executive , called a governor ( <unk> , chiji ) in prefectures and a mayor ( <unk> , <unk> ) in municipalities . Most jurisdictions also have a unicameral assembly ( <unk> , <unk> ) , although towns and villages may opt for direct governance by citizens in a general assembly ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Both the executive and assembly are elected by popular vote every four years . 
 Local governments follow a modified version of the separation of powers used in the national government . An assembly may pass a vote of no confidence in the executive , in which case the executive must either dissolve the assembly within ten days or automatically lose their office . Following the next election , however , the executive remains in office unless the new assembly again passes a no confidence resolution . 
 The primary methods of local lawmaking are local ordinance ( <unk> , <unk> ) and local regulations ( <unk> , <unk> ) . Ordinances , similar to statutes in the national system , are passed by the assembly and may impose limited criminal penalties for violations ( up to 2 years in prison and / or 1 million yen in fines ) . Regulations , similar to cabinet orders in the national system , are passed by the executive unilaterally , are superseded by any conflicting ordinances , and may only impose a fine of up to 50 @,@ 000 yen . 
 Local governments also generally have multiple committees such as school boards , public safety committees ( responsible for overseeing the police ) , personnel committees , election committees and auditing committees . These may be directly elected or chosen by the assembly , executive or both . 
 All prefectures are required to maintain departments of general affairs , finance , welfare , health , and labor . Departments of agriculture , fisheries , forestry , commerce , and industry are optional , depending on local needs . The Governor is responsible for all activities supported through local taxation or the national government . 
 = December 1960 nor 'easter = 
 The December 1960 nor 'easter was a significant early @-@ season winter storm that impacted the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England regions of the United States . Moderate to heavy snowfall fell from West Virginia to eastern Maine , amounting to 10 in ( 25 cm ) or more in parts of 13 states and peaking at 21 @.@ 4 in ( 54 @.@ 4 cm ) at Newark , New Jersey . The storm was accompanied by strong winds , gusting to over 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) in coastal New England , and left in its wake a dangerously cold air mass . The storm originated in a weak low pressure area which formed over the western Gulf of Mexico on December 10 . A secondary low developed over South Carolina on the next day , supported by the merger of two troughs aloft . Sliding southeast of New England , the new storm explosively deepened to become a full @-@ fledged nor 'easter , with a minimum central air pressure of 966 mbar . It began to weaken over the Canadian Maritimes . 
 Widespread blizzard conditions wrought havoc on transportation ; streets and highways throughout the hardest @-@ hit areas were clogged with stalled and abandoned vehicles , and multiple major airports were forced to close . Many schools and businesses were closed , some for days after the storm departed . The New York Stock Exchange opened an hour late on December 12 , marking its first delayed opening in over 25 years . Extensive drifting of snow left communities isolated and unable to receive deliveries of food and heating fuel . Overall , the storm and subsequent cold snap were blamed for at least 286 deaths across a wide area , but primarily in Pennsylvania , New Jersey , New York , and the New England states . The fatalities resulted from a multitude of tragedies , including automobile and maritime accidents , storm @-@ related fires , carbon monoxide poisoning , over @-@ exertion , and exposure to cold . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The nor 'easter occurred during a positive phase of the North Atlantic oscillation ( NAO ) , though negative NAO values are typically considered optimal for snowstorms in the northeastern United States . It was the first of three severe storms during the 1960 – 1961 winter season . 
 It originated in an area of low pressure that developed over the western Gulf of Mexico on December 10 , downstream from an upper @-@ level cyclone . The surface low tracked northward to Oklahoma before turning eastward as it gradually intensified . Simultaneously , a shortwave trough swung southeastward around the periphery of a large vortex over central and eastern Canada . As the upper low opened up into a negatively tilted trough and began to interact with the northern wave , a secondary surface cyclone developed along a frontal boundary over South Carolina late on December 11 . Almost immediately thereafter , the original low dissipated over West Virginia . Heading toward the northeast , the incipient storm emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , at 00 : 00 UTC on December 12 . 
 With strong upper @-@ level support — including extensive positive vorticity advection and dual divergent jet streak regions — the storm explosively intensified into a powerful nor 'easter . From 00 : 00 to 12 : 00 UTC on December 12 , the system deepened by 27 mbar while moving to a point south of Nantucket . By contrast , the widely accepted criterion for " <unk> " is a 24 @-@ mbar central pressure drop in 24 hours . Its core pressure ultimately fell to 966 mbar by 00 : 00 UTC the next day , while located off the coast of southwestern Nova Scotia . A rapidly tightening pressure gradient north of the cyclone generated strong winds throughout coastal New England . The storm started to slowly weaken as it moved over the Canadian Maritimes on December 13 and 14 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The initial low pressure system yielded minor snow accumulations in a wide swath of the Great Plains and Midwest . The nor 'easter itself dropped much more significant snowfall over the Mid @-@ Atlantic and New England , with 10 in ( 25 cm ) or greater amounts reported in 13 states from West Virginia to Maine . As much as 20 in ( 50 cm ) of snow fell in small areas of northern New Jersey and eastern Massachusetts . The greatest snowfall total associated with the storm was 21 @.@ 4 in ( 54 @.@ 4 cm ) at Newark , New Jersey , within a southwest – northeast oriented corridor of especially heavy snow . In some locations in New Jersey , the storm set new daily snowfall records . Other notable totals include 8 @.@ 5 in ( 22 cm ) at Washington , D.C. ; 14 @.@ 1 in ( 36 cm ) at Baltimore , Maryland ; 14 @.@ 6 in ( 37 cm ) at Philadelphia , Pennsylvania ; 17 in ( 44 cm ) at New York City ; 13 @.@ 4 in ( 34 cm ) at Hartford , Connecticut ; 13 in ( 33 cm ) at Boston , Massachusetts ; and 14 @.@ 9 in ( 38 cm ) at Portland , Maine . The storm was rated a " major " Category 3 on the Northeast Snowfall Impact Scale ( <unk> ) , and a " significant " Category 2 on the Regional Snowfall Index ( RSI ) , an updated counterpart to the <unk> . In parts of southern and eastern Virginia , the snow mixed with sleet and freezing rain , creating particularly treacherous road conditions . Seven deaths and numerous injuries resulted from traffic accidents in the state , primarily in the Richmond and Lynchburg areas . 
 The heavy snow combined with strong winds to create widespread and dangerous blizzard conditions , worsened by very cold temperatures left in the wake of a prior cold front . Wind gusts reached 94 mph ( 151 km / h ) on Block Island and 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) on Nantucket . As it pulled away , the large storm system reinforced the Arctic air mass over the eastern United States , with below @-@ normal temperatures persisting for several days ; in northwestern Pennsylvania , nighttime temperatures were as cold as − 28 ° F ( − 33 ° C ) . Both during after the storm , persistent gale @-@ force wind gusts produced extensive blowing and drifting of snow . Rough seas and high tides buffeted large sections of shoreline , inflicting damage to boats and coastal installations . A fishing vessel 42 ft ( 13 m ) in length capsized off the coast of Maryland , killing two men , and one fatality was attributed to a maritime incident in New York waters . The U.S. Coast Guard rescued six fishermen whose vessel had run aground at a jetty near the entrance to the Nantucket Harbor . 
 The storm prompted the closures of public and private schools , businesses , offices , and factories throughout the Northeast . In some areas — such as the city of Boston and parts of New Jersey — classes were canceled for the entire week following the snowstorm . In New York City , student attendance remained extremely low in the days after schools reopened . The New York Public Library was forced to close its main location and all of its 80 branches . Non @-@ essential government offices in Washington , D.C. were also closed because of the storm . Air and ground transportation came to a halt , with multiple major airports closed and rail service suspended . At La Guardia and Idlewild ( now John F. Kennedy International ) airports alone , over 100 flights were canceled . Railroads reported tens of millions of dollars in lost revenue and storm @-@ related expenses . 
 Snow drifts reaching 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) in height and abandoned vehicles rendered many roadways impassable . With some communities effectively isolated , supplies of food and heating fuel began to run short . The National Guard arrived in New York City to clear obstructions from streets and allow snow removal work to get underway . In total , 19 @,@ 000 workers were tasked with clearing snow in New York City , restoring " near normal " conditions after several days . The northbound Jersey Turnpike became choked with miles of stalled vehicles , and a large stretch of the Maine Turnpike was closed after " an <unk> number of motorists were marooned " . At the latter , dozens of state troopers and turnpike employees helped stranded drivers find shelter amid the dangerously cold conditions ; at a restaurant in <unk> , police ordered 180 motorists to remain inside until the highway could be cleared . In Boston , vehicles stranded in city streets blocked emergency responders from reaching fire situations ; such delays were likely responsible for several additional fatalities . A large fire in Mystic , Connecticut , claimed 10 buildings at the height of the storm , with damages estimated at over $ 1 million . 
 By December 15 , newspapers had attributed 286 deaths to the blizzard , including 54 in New York , 51 in New Jersey ( later confirmed as 52 ) , 26 in Pennsylvania , and 71 in the New England states . Fatalities related to the storm and associated cold snap were far @-@ reaching , involving 23 states . A wide variety of factors contributed to the high death toll , including over @-@ exertion , exposure to cold , transportation accidents , structural fires , and carbon monoxide poisoning . The storm caused some isolated power failures along its path . In north @-@ central Virginia , telephone and electricity lines were damaged . The blizzard cut electricity to all of Newtown , Connecticut , though it was mostly restored within hours . In Rhode Island , Block Island and some inland towns were without power . Short @-@ lived power outages affected southern New Hampshire . 
 Occurring at an important time for Christmas shopping , the storm had a significant economic impact . In the week after the blizzard , national sales fell as much as seven percent relative to the corresponding week in 1959 . The New York Stock Exchange opened an hour late on December 12 in its first delayed opening since 1934 . 
 = Typhoon Babe ( 1977 ) = 
 Typhoon Babe , also known as the <unk> Typhoon ( <unk> , <unk> Taifū ) , was regarded as " the worst typhoon to threaten Japan in 18 years . " Developing as a tropical depression on September 2 , Babe initially tracked west @-@ northwestward as it intensified . On September 5 , an abrupt shift in steering currents caused the system to turn north @-@ northwestward . Early on September 6 , the system intensified into a typhoon . Over the following two days , Babe quickly intensified , ultimately attaining its peak intensity early on September 8 with winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) and a barometric pressure of 905 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 72 inHg ) . Not long after reaching this strength , another shift in the steering patterns caused the typhoon to execute a prolonged counter @-@ clockwise arc , causing it to track through the Ryukyu Islands southwest of Japan , as it interacted with a low pressure originating from the Korean Peninsula . During this time , the system gradually weakened and eventually it made landfall near Shanghai , China on September 11 as a minimal typhoon before dissipating inland the following day . Coincidentally , Typhoon Babe and Atlantic Hurricane Babe existed at the same time from September 3 – 9 . 
 Passing through the Ryukyu Islands as a powerful typhoon , Babe caused considerable damage in the region . More than 1 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and nearly 7 @,@ 000 more were damaged or flooded . One person was killed on Amami Ōshima and 77 others were injured throughout the country . Total losses reached ¥ 6 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 23 million ) . Offshore , over 100 vessels were affected by the storm , including a Panamanian freighter where 13 people lost their lives . In China , more than 24 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and nine people were killed . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In late August 1977 , an area of disturbed weather was noted south of Pohnpei . By September 1 , a weak surface low accompanied by organized convection developed within the disturbance . Situated to the south of a Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough , conditions were favorable for further organization and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert for the system . Tracking steadily west @-@ northwestward in response to a well @-@ developed subtropical ridge extending from the International Dateline to China , the system was soon classified a tropical depression early on September 2 . Hours later , a weather reconnaissance mission into the depression revealed winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) , prompting the JTWC to designate the system as Tropical Storm Babe . Due to the cyclone 's proximity to the Philippines , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Miling . 
 Initially , forecasters anticipated Babe to maintain its westward course as it strengthened and threaten the Philippines ; however , its forward motion gradually slowed as it neared the region . On September 5 , an upper @-@ level trough formed over northeastern Asia and created a weakness in the subtropical ridge , allowing Babe to turn north @-@ northwestward . Over the following two days , the storm quickly strengthened as divergence increased ahead of the storm , with Babe attaining typhoon status early on September 6 Between <unk> UTC on September 5 and 2204 UTC on September 7 , the storm 's barometric pressure dropped from 988 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 18 inHg ) to 907 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 79 inHg ) , approximately 1 @.@ 3 mbar ( hPa ; 0 @.@ 04 inHg ) per hour . Early on September 8 , Babe attained its peak intensity with winds of 240 km / h ( 150 mph ) while situated approximately 465 km ( 290 mi ) southeast of Ishigaki Island . This ranked it as the first and only super typhoon of the 1977 season . At this time , the Japan Meteorological Agency estimated the storm to have had peak ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) and a minimum pressure of 905 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 72 inHg ) . 
 Until September 8 , Typhoon Babe was forecast to continue northwestward into Taiwan and later China ; however , another upper @-@ level trough moved into northeastern China and further weakened the ridge . This in turn allowed a new area of low pressure to develop over the Korean Peninsula and cause Babe to curve northeastward . While moving northeastward , Babe gradually weakened and began to undergo a Fujiwhara @-@ like interaction with the low near Korea as that system moved southwestward . Accelerating along a counter @-@ clockwise arc , Babe moved through the Ryukyu Islands as a weakening typhoon on September 9 before taking a steady westward course into China . As the system passed through the archipelago , a pressure of 907 @.@ 3 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 80 inHg ) was measured on Okinoerabujima . Babe eventually made landfall near Shanghai with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) before rapidly weakening over land . The system was last noted early on September 12 over Anhui Province . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Torrential rain fell across much of the Ryukyu Islands , Shikoku , and Kyushu . The highest total were observed in Kōchi Prefecture , with Funato in <unk> , Kōchi measuring 705 mm ( 27 @.@ 8 in ) . The small island of Okinoerabujima reportedly experienced winds in excess of 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) for two hours as the typhoon passed by . Nearly two @-@ thirds of the homes across the island were damaged or destroyed by the storm and 73 people were injured . Most of the injuries across the island were caused by collapsing buildings . One person was killed on Amami Ōshima and 77 others were injured across the Amami Islands . According to Japanese police , 1 @,@ 146 homes were destroyed , mainly by flooding and landslides , while 1 @,@ 097 more were damaged and another 5 @,@ 826 were flooded . At least 14 @,@ 927 people were left homeless . Losses across the country amounted to ¥ 6 @.@ 1 billion ( US $ 23 million ) . 
 About 420 km ( 260 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Okinawa , the Panamanian freighter May Cruiser became stranded and in danger of sinking on September 10 with its crew of 25 . The Japanese Maritime Safety Agency deployed five airplanes and four patrol boats to search for survivors . Additionally , ten Japanese fishing boats in the area assisted in search and rescue . By September 12 , rescuers found nine sailors and thirteen bodies , while three others remained missing . Elsewhere in the East China Sea , approximately 100 Japanese fishing vessels attempting to seek shelter from the storm were damaged . 
 In China , wind gusts reportedly reached 252 km / h ( 157 mph ) , resulting in extensive damage . Around 24 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed and nine people were killed . 
 = Someone Else ( Miley Cyrus song ) = 
 " Someone Else " is a song by American recording artist Miley Cyrus for her fourth studio album Bangerz ( 2013 ) . Cyrus collaborated with Mike Will Made It , MoZella , P @-@ Nasty , and Rock City during the songwriting process , while production was handled by Mike Will Made It and P @-@ Nasty . " Someone Else " is influenced by electronic dance music ( EDM ) , and additionally incorporates elements of synthpop ; its lyrics reference Cyrus ' evolving public image during production of the parent record . 
 Contemporary music critics were divided in their opinions of " Someone Else " , feeling that its generic production overshadowed its lyrical meaning and Cyrus ' vocal performance . Despite not having been released as a single , it peaked at number 93 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . Cyrus has also performed the track during her ongoing Bangerz Tour , where she was notably suspended mid @-@ air on a large hot dog . 
 = = Background = = 
 During an interview on The Ellen DeGeneres Show in October 2013 , host Ellen DeGeneres asked Cyrus if Bangerz was inspired by her relationship with Liam Hemsworth , to which she replied " the whole album is a story of that and I think it says that starting with ' Adore You ' and ending with ' Someone Else ' ..... I think I knew more intuitively where my life was going than I actually thought I did at the time . " Elysa Gardner of USA Today thought of " Someone Else " as a more " reflective " lyrical offering from its parent record , while Lipshutz interpreted the track to detail the departure of Cyrus ' " past baggage " and the introduction of " her new self " . Dan DeLuca from The Philadelphia Inquirer assumed that the song was designed to address her transition from her innocent Hannah Montana image and then @-@ recent breakup with fiance Liam Hemsworth ; from a production standpoint , he jokingly referenced Cyrus ' earlier single " We Can 't Stop " when mentioning that " [ Someone Else is ] her party and she can do what she wants " , in regards to the increasingly diverse genres she had begun experimenting with . Los Angeles Times ' Mikael Wood opined that it spoke of the " psychic damage " that comes with prosperity in the entertainment industry . Based on the line " if you 're looking for love know that love don 't live here anymore " from the refrain , David Drake and David Bry from Complex opined that Cyrus ' track was " thematically " similar to " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " by Rose Royce . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Someone Else " was written by Cyrus , Mike Will Made It , MoZella , P @-@ Nasty , and Rock City ; it was produced by Mike Will Made It , with co @-@ production by P @-@ Nasty , and engineered by Chris " Tek " O 'Ryan . Stephen Hybicki recorded the song , which was later mixed by Jaycen Joshua assistance from Ryan Kaul . Heather Phares from AllMusic noticed the frequent incorporation of " early @-@ 2010s trends " throughout Bangerz , and highlighted the electronic dance music ( EDM ) heard on " Someone Else " as an illustration of said production values . Nick Catucci of Entertainment Weekly also identified the song as an EDM track , while Billboard columnist Jason Lipshutz recognized further experimentation with synthpop musical styles . The track is one of five songs where Cyrus raps on Bangerz . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Someone Else " received generally mixed reviews from contemporary music critics . On behalf of AllMusic , Heather Phares opined that Cyrus " sounds more mature than ever before " and successfully paired her vocals with current musical trends . Katie Hasty from HitFix expressed a similar opinion , and suggested that Cyrus ' vocal delivery was " big and convincing " . When discussing Cyrus ' recently introduced rapping , Nick Catucci from Entertainment Weekly felt that the track saw Cyrus " [ call ] up her chops and [ throw ] into relief " in an unoriginal fashion " just how meek typical DJ bros like their hook girls . " Los Angeles Times ' Mikael Wood suggested that " Someone Else " was not as effective or " as arresting a statement " as Cyrus ' cover version of " Look What They 've Done To My Song " by Melanie <unk> ; he implied that " Someone Else " suffered from its " hollowed @-@ out beat " and production values . Sharing a similar sentiment , Evan Sawdey from PopMatters was disappointed by its " vanilla Euro club " sound , which he felt proved that Mike Will Made It offered more " misses " than " hits " for the record . 
 On behalf of Digital Spy , Catriona Wightman suggested that Cyrus was " writing lyrics based on real @-@ life experience " in a fashion similar to Taylor Swift ; she assumed that the lyrics " cried " and " lied " acknowledged the reportedly turbulent relationship she experienced with Hemsworth . Wightman also felt that the line " I thought you 'd catch me if I fall and fill me up when I 'm empty " signified a lack of support from Hemsworth . Writing for Thought Catalog , Cody <unk> summarized the track as a presentation of " implicit versus explicit redundancy " ; he highlighted the lines " ' Cause that 's what I 've seen in movies , come to find out it ’ s not like that at all " and " you see real life 's much different " for their perceived unnecessary repetition that failed to add " meaningful philosophies " to the recording . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Cyrus has performed " Someone Else " during her headlining Bangerz Tour ; it was among the final songs performed during the first showing in Vancouver on February 14 , 2014 . The track followed her performances of " 23 " by Mike Will Made It , in which she is featured artist , and her track " On My Own " . Dressed in an oversized fluffy yellow coat , Cyrus sang the track while sitting mid @-@ air on a hot dog . Writing for Idolator , Mike Williott felt that the extravagant theatrics made a " very memorable " segment out of a " usually forgettable " song . Nick Catucci from Entertainment Weekly praised the segment as the highlight of the concert , and further commented that Cyrus ' delivery made the track a " token EDM " performance . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Bangerz . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Nightbird Studios ( West Hollywood , California ) ; Conway Recording Studios ( Los Angeles , California ) ; Glenwood Studios , ( Burbank , California ) 
 Mixed at The Penua Project / Innersound Management at Larrabee Sound Studios ( North Hollywood , California ) 
 Personnel 
 Miley Cyrus – songwriter , lead vocals 
 Stephen Hybicki – recording 
 Jaycen Joshua – mixing 
 Ryan Kaul – assistant 
 Maureen McDonald – songwriter 
 Mike Will Made It – songwriter , producer 
 P @-@ Nasty – songwriter , producer 
 Chris " TEK " O 'Ryan – engineering 
 Theron Thomas – songwriter 
 Timothy Thomas – songwriter 
 = = Charts = = 
 " Someone Else " debuted at number 93 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 . The track also charted at numbers 97 and 172 on the Canadian Hot 100 and the UK Singles Chart , respectively . 
 = Fun Home = 
 Fun Home , subtitled A Family <unk> , is a 2006 graphic memoir by the American cartoonist Alison Bechdel , author of the comic strip Dykes to Watch Out For . It chronicles the author 's childhood and youth in rural Pennsylvania , United States , focusing on her complex relationship with her father . The book addresses themes of sexual orientation , gender roles , suicide , emotional abuse , dysfunctional family life , and the role of literature in understanding oneself and one 's family . Writing and illustrating Fun Home took seven years , in part because of Bechdel 's laborious artistic process , which includes photographing herself in poses for each human figure . 
 Fun Home has been both a popular and critical success , and spent two weeks on the New York Times Best Seller list . In The New York Times Sunday Book Review , Sean Wilsey called it " a pioneering work , pushing two genres ( comics and memoir ) in multiple new directions . " Several publications named Fun Home as one of the best books of 2006 ; it was also included in several lists of the best books of the 2000s . It was nominated for several awards , including the National Book Critics Circle Award and three Eisner Awards ( one of which it won ) . A French translation of Fun Home was serialized in the newspaper Libération ; the book was an official selection of the Angoulême International Comics Festival and has been the subject of an academic conference in France . Fun Home has been the subject of numerous academic publications in areas such as biography studies and cultural studies , as part of a larger turn towards serious academic investment in the study of comics / sequential art . 
 Fun Home also generated controversy : a public library in Missouri removed Fun Home from its shelves for five months after local residents objected to its contents , and the book 's use in universities in Utah and South Carolina has been challenged . 
 Bechdel later traced her maternal relationship in Are You My Mother ? : A Comic Drama . 
 In 2013 a musical adaptation of Fun Home at The Public Theater enjoyed multiple extensions to its run , with book and lyrics written by Obie Award @-@ winning playwright Lisa Kron , and score composed by Tony Award @-@ nominated Jeanine Tesori . The production , directed by Sam Gold , was called " the first mainstream musical about a young lesbian . " As a musical theatre piece , Fun Home was a finalist for the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for Drama , while winning the Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Musical , the New York Drama Critics ' Circle Award for Best Musical , and the Obie Award for Musical Theater . The Broadway production opened in April 2015 , and earned an even dozen nominations for the 69th Tony Awards , winning the Tony Award for Best Musical . 
 = = Plot and thematic summary = = 
 The narrative of Fun Home is non @-@ linear and recursive . Incidents are told and re @-@ told in the light of new information or themes . Bechdel describes the structure of Fun Home as a labyrinth , " going over the same material , but starting from the outside and spiraling in to the center of the story . " In an essay on memoirs and truth in the academic journal <unk> , Nancy K. Miller explains that as Bechdel revisits scenes and themes " she re @-@ creates memories in which the force of attachment generates the structure of the memoir itself . " Additionally , the memoir derives its structure from allusions to various works of literature , Greek myth and visual arts ; the events of Bechdel 's family life during her childhood and adolescence are presented through this allusive lens . Miller notes that the narratives of the referenced literary texts " provide clues , both true and false , to the mysteries of family relations . " 
 The memoir focuses on Bechdel 's family , and is centered on her relationship with her father , Bruce . Bruce Bechdel was a funeral director and high school English teacher in Beech Creek , where Alison and her siblings grew up . The book 's title comes from the family nickname for the funeral home , the family business in which Bruce Bechdel grew up and later worked ; the phrase also refers ironically to Bruce Bechdel 's tyrannical domestic rule . Bruce Bechdel 's two occupations are reflected in Fun Home 's focus on death and literature . 
 In the beginning of the book , the memoir exhibits Bruce Bechdel 's obsession with restoring the family 's Victorian home . His obsessive need to restore the house is connected to his emotional distance from his family , which he expressed in coldness and occasional bouts of abusive rage . This emotional distance , in turn , is connected with his being a closeted homosexual . Bruce Bechdel had homosexual relationships in the military and with his high school students ; some of those students were also family friends and babysitters . At the age of 44 , two weeks after his wife requested a divorce , he stepped into the path of an oncoming Sunbeam Bread truck and was killed . Although the evidence is equivocal , Alison Bechdel concludes that her father committed suicide . 
 The story also deals with Alison Bechdel 's own struggle with her sexual identity , reaching a catharsis in the realization that she is a lesbian and her coming out to her parents . The memoir frankly examines her sexual development , including transcripts from her childhood diary , anecdotes about masturbation , and tales of her first sexual experiences with her girlfriend , Joan . In addition to their common homosexuality , Alison and Bruce Bechdel share obsessive @-@ compulsive tendencies and artistic leanings , albeit with opposing aesthetic senses : " I was Spartan to my father 's Athenian . Modern to his Victorian . Butch to his <unk> . Utilitarian to his aesthete . " This opposition was a source of tension in their relationship , as both tried to express their dissatisfaction with their given gender roles : " Not only were we inverts , we were inversions of each other . While I was trying to compensate for something unmanly in him , he was attempting to express something feminine through me . It was a war of cross @-@ purposes , and so doomed to perpetual escalation . " However , shortly before Bruce Bechdel 's death , he and his daughter have a conversation in which Bruce confesses some of his sexual history ; this is presented as a partial resolution to the conflict between father and daughter . 
 At several points in the book , Bechdel questions whether her decision to come out as a lesbian was one of the triggers for her father 's suicide . This question is never answered definitively , but Bechdel closely examines the connection between her father 's closeted sexuality and her own open lesbianism , revealing her debt to her father in both positive and negative lights . 
 = = = Themes = = = 
 Fun Home has several themes recurring throughout the book . The biggest theme , arguably , is sexual orientation . Bechdel tells the readers of her journey of discovering her own sexuality through books . " My realization at nineteen that I was a lesbian came about in a manner consistent with my bookish upbringing . " Her exposure ( from reading literal definitions in dictionaries , reading interviews of others like her , etc . ) helped her come to terms with her sexuality , but in truth , the hints of it plagued her childhood : her desire " for the right to exchange [ her ] tank suit for a pair of shorts " in Cannes " or her desire for her brothers to call her Albert instead of Alison on one camping trip . However , Bechdel also reveals that she wasn 't alone in her choice of partners ; her father also exhibited some homosexual behaviors , but in a different way than Alison . " I 'd been upstaged , demoted from protagonist in my own drama to comic relief in my parents ' tragedy " quoted on page 58 when her mother reveals Bechdel 's father 's secret . Though both , father and daughter , had similar situations ( Bechdel was a lesbian while her father was gay or bisexual ) , the two handled their issues differently . Bechdel chose to accept the fact and not hide from the issue , taking a female partner and going to " gay union " meetings when she was a student at Oberlin College . Bechdel was open about her sexuality before she 'd even been in a same @-@ sex relationship ( of any sort ) . Her father , on the other hand , had had countless affairs with men but wasn 't open about it " . This may be due to homophobia ( his and / or others ' ) , or because he was married with a family . In any case , it is clear that he is afraid of coming out , as illustrated by " the fear in his eyes " when the conversation topic is dangerously close to homosexuality . 
 In addition to sexual orientation , the memoir touches on the theme of gender identity . Bechdel had viewed her father as " a big sissy " " while her father constantly tried to change his daughter into a more feminine person throughout her childhood . 
 The third , underlying theme of death is also portrayed . Unlike most young people , the Bechdel children have a tangible relationship with death because of the family mortuary business . Alison ponders whether Bechdel 's father 's death was an accident or suicide , and finds it more likely that he killed himself purposefully . Whether this was because of his own sexuality , Alison 's sexuality , or some other cause remains unclear . 
 = = = Allusions = = = 
 The allusive literary references used in Fun Home are not merely structural or stylistic : Bechdel writes , " I employ these allusions ... not only as descriptive devices , but because my parents are most real to me in fictional terms . And perhaps my cool aesthetic distance itself does more to convey the Arctic climate of our family than any particular literary comparison . " Bechdel , as the narrator , considers her relationship to her father through the myth of Daedalus and Icarus . As a child , she confused her family and their Gothic Revival home with the Addams Family seen in the cartoons of Charles Addams . Bruce Bechdel 's suicide is discussed with reference to Albert Camus ' novel A Happy Death and essay The Myth of Sisyphus . His careful construction of an aesthetic and intellectual world is compared to The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald , and the narrator suggests that Bruce Bechdel modeled elements of his life after Fitzgerald 's , as portrayed in the biography The Far Side of Paradise . His wife Helen is compared with the protagonists of the Henry James novels Washington Square and The Portrait of a Lady . Helen Bechdel was an amateur actress , and plays in which she acted are also used to illuminate aspects of her marriage . She met Bruce Bechdel when the two were appearing in a college production of The Taming of the Shrew , and Alison Bechdel intimates that this was " a harbinger of my parents ' later marriage " . Helen Bechdel 's role as Lady Bracknell in a local production of The Importance of Being Earnest is shown in some detail ; Bruce Bechdel is compared with Oscar Wilde . His homosexuality is also examined with allusion to Marcel Proust 's In Search of Lost Time . The father and daughter 's artistic and obsessive @-@ compulsive tendencies are discussed with reference to E. H. Shepard 's illustrations for The Wind in the Willows . Bruce and Alison Bechdel exchange hints about their sexualities by exchanging memoirs : the father gives the daughter Earthly Paradise , an autobiographical collection of the writings of Colette ; shortly afterwards , in what Alison Bechdel describes as " an eloquent unconscious gesture " , she leaves a library copy of Kate Millett 's memoir Flying for him . Finally , returning to the Daedalus myth , Alison Bechdel casts herself as Stephen Dedalus and her father as Leopold Bloom in James Joyce 's Ulysses , with parallel references to the myth of Telemachus and Odysseus . 
 The chapter headings , too , are all literary allusions . The first chapter , " Old Father , Old Artificer , " refers to line in Joyce 's A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man , and the second , " A Happy Death , " invokes the Camus novel . " That Old Catastrophe " is a line from Wallace Stevens 's " Sunday Morning , " and " In the Shadow of the Young Girls in Flower " is the literal translation of the title of one of the volumes of Marcel Proust 's In Search of Lost Time , which is usually given in English as Within a Budding Grove . 
 In addition to the literary allusions which are explicitly acknowledged in the text , Bechdel incorporates visual allusions to television programs and other items of pop culture into her artwork , often as images on a television in the background of a panel . These visual references include the film It 's a Wonderful Life , Bert and Ernie of Sesame Street , the Smiley Face , Yogi Bear , Batman , the Road Runner and Wile E. Coyote , the resignation of Richard Nixon and The Flying Nun . 
 = = Artwork = = 
 Fun Home is drawn in black line art with a gray @-@ green ink wash . Sean Wilsey wrote that Fun Home 's panels " combine the detail and technical proficiency of R. Crumb with a seriousness , emotional complexity and innovation completely its own . " Writing in the Gay & Lesbian Review Worldwide , Diane Ellen Hamer contrasted " Bechdel 's habit of drawing her characters very simply and yet distinctly " with " the attention to detail that she devotes to the background , those TV shows and posters on the wall , not to mention the intricacies of the funeral home as a recurring backdrop . " Bechdel told an interviewer for The Comics Journal that the richness of each panel of Fun Home was very deliberate : 
 It 's very important for me that people be able to read the images in the same kind of gradually unfolding way as they 're reading the text . I don 't like pictures that don 't have information in them . I want pictures that you have to read , that you have to decode , that take time , that you can get lost in . Otherwise what 's the point ? 
 Bechdel wrote and illustrated Fun Home over a seven @-@ year period . Her meticulous artistic process made the task of illustration slow . She began each page by creating a framework in Adobe Illustrator , on which she placed the text and drew rough figures . She used extensive photo reference and , for many panels , posed for each human figure herself , using a digital camera to record her poses . Bechdel also used photo reference for background elements . For example , to illustrate a panel depicting fireworks seen from a Greenwich Village rooftop on July 4 , 1976 , she used Google Images to find a photograph of the New York skyline taken from that particular building in that period . She also painstakingly copied by hand many family photographs , letters , local maps and excerpts from her own childhood journal , incorporating these images into her narrative . After using the reference material to draw a tight framework for the page , Bechdel copied the line art illustration onto plate finish Bristol board for the final inked page , which she then scanned into her computer . The gray @-@ green ink wash for each page was drawn on a separate page of watercolor paper , and combined with the inked image using Photoshop . Bechdel chose the greenish wash color for its flexibility , and because it had " a bleak , elegiac quality " which suited the subject matter . Bechdel attributes this detailed creative process to her " barely controlled obsessive @-@ compulsive disorder " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 Fun Home was first printed in hardcover by Houghton Mifflin ( Boston , New York ) on June 8 , 2006 . This edition appeared on the New York Times ' Hardcover Nonfiction bestseller list for two weeks , covering the period from June 18 to July 1 , 2006 . It continued to sell well , and by February 2007 there were 55 @,@ 000 copies in print . A trade paperback edition was published in the United Kingdom by Random House under the Jonathan Cape imprint on September 14 , 2006 ; Houghton Mifflin published a paperback edition under the Mariner Books imprint on June 5 , 2007 . 
 In the summer of 2006 , a French translation of Fun Home was serialized in the Paris newspaper Libération ( which had previously serialized Persepolis by Marjane Satrapi ) . This translation , by Corinne <unk> and Lili <unk> , was subsequently published by Éditions <unk> on October 26 , 2006 . In January 2007 , Fun Home was an official selection of the Angoulême International Comics Festival . In the same month , the Anglophone Studies department of the Université François Rabelais , Tours sponsored an academic conference on Bechdel 's work , with presentations in Paris and Tours . At this conference , papers were presented examining Fun Home from several perspectives : as containing " trajectories " filled with paradoxical tension ; as a text interacting with images as a paratext ; and as a search for meaning using drag as a metaphor . These papers and others on Bechdel and her work were later published in the peer @-@ reviewed journal <unk> ( Groupe de Recherches Anglo @-@ <unk> de Tours , or Tours Anglo @-@ American Research Group ) . 
 An Italian translation was published by Rizzoli in January 2007 . In Brazil , Conrad Editora published a Portuguese translation in 2007 . A German translation was published by <unk> & <unk> in January 2008 . The book has also been translated into Hungarian , Korean , and Polish , and a Chinese translation has been scheduled for publication . 
 In Spring 2012 , Bechdel and Professor Hillary Chute co @-@ taught a course at the University of Chicago titled " Lines of Transmission : Comics and Autobiography " . 
 = = = Reviews and awards = = = 
 Fun Home was positively reviewed in many publications . The Times of London described Fun Home as " a profound and important book ; " Salon.com called it " a beautiful , assured piece of work ; " and The New York Times ran two separate reviews and a feature on the memoir . In one New York Times review , Sean Wilsey called Fun Home " a pioneering work , pushing two genres ( comics and memoir ) in multiple new directions " and " a comic book for lovers of words " . Jill Soloway , writing in the Los Angeles Times , praised the work overall but commented that Bechdel 's reference @-@ heavy prose is at times " a little opaque " . Similarly , a reviewer in The Tyee felt that " the narrator 's insistence on linking her story to those of various Greek myths , American novels and classic plays " was " forced " and " heavy @-@ handed " . By contrast , the Seattle Times ' reviewer wrote positively of the book 's use of literary reference , calling it " staggeringly literate " . The Village Voice said that Fun Home " shows how powerfully — and economically — the medium can portray autobiographical narrative . With two @-@ part visual and verbal narration that isn 't simply synchronous , comics presents a distinctive narrative idiom in which a wealth of information may be expressed in a highly condensed fashion . " 
 Several publications listed Fun Home as one of the best books of 2006 , including The New York Times , Amazon.com , The Times of London , New York magazine and Publishers Weekly , which ranked it as the best comic book of 2006 . Salon.com named Fun Home the best nonfiction debut of 2006 , admitting that they were fudging the definition of " debut " and saying , " Fun Home shimmers with regret , compassion , annoyance , frustration , pity and love — usually all at the same time and never without a pervasive , deeply literary irony about the near @-@ impossible task of staying true to yourself , and to the people who made you who you are . " Entertainment Weekly called it the best nonfiction book of the year , and Time named Fun Home the best book of 2006 , describing it as " the unlikeliest literary success of 2006 " and " a masterpiece about two people who live in the same house but different worlds , and their mysterious debts to each other . " 
 Fun Home was a finalist for the 2006 National Book Critics Circle Award , in the memoir / autobiography category . In 2007 , Fun Home won the GLAAD Media Award for Outstanding Comic Book , the Stonewall Book Award for non @-@ fiction , the Publishing Triangle @-@ Judy <unk> Nonfiction Award , and the Lambda Literary Award in the " Lesbian Memoir and Biography " category . Fun Home was nominated for the 2007 Eisner Awards in two categories , Best Reality @-@ Based Work and Best Graphic Album , and Bechdel was nominated as Best Writer / Artist . Fun Home won the Eisner for Best Reality @-@ Based Work . In 2008 , Entertainment Weekly placed Fun Home at # 68 in its list of " New Classics " ( defined as " the 100 best books from 1983 to 2008 " ) . The Guardian included Fun Home in its series " 1000 novels everyone must read " , noting its " beautifully rendered " details . 
 In 2009 , Fun Home was listed as one of the best books of the previous decade by The Times of London , Entertainment Weekly and Salon.com , and as one of the best comic books of the decade by The Onion 's A.V. Club . 
 In 2010 , the Los Angeles Times literary blog " Jacket Copy " named Fun Home as one of " 20 classic works of gay literature " . 
 = = = Challenges and attempted banning = = = 
 In October 2006 , a resident of Marshall , Missouri attempted to have Fun Home and Craig Thompson 's Blankets , both graphic novels , removed from the city 's public library . Supporters of the books ' removal characterized them as " pornography " and expressed concern that they would be read by children . Marshall Public Library Director Amy Crump defended the books as having been well @-@ reviewed in " reputable , professional book review journals , " and characterized the removal attempt as a step towards " the slippery slope of censorship " . On October 11 , 2006 , the library 's board appointed a committee to create a materials selection policy , and removed Fun Home and Blankets from circulation until the new policy was approved . The committee " decided not to assign a prejudicial label or segregate [ the books ] by a prejudicial system " , and presented a materials selection policy to the board . On March 14 , 2007 , the Marshall Public Library Board of Trustees voted to return both Fun Home and Blankets to the library 's shelves . Bechdel described the attempted banning as " a great honor " , and described the incident as " part of the whole evolution of the graphic @-@ novel form . " 
 In 2008 , an instructor at the University of Utah placed Fun Home on the syllabus of a mid @-@ level English course , " Critical Introduction to English Literary Forms " . One student objected to the assignment , and was given an alternate reading in accordance with the university 's religious accommodation policy . The student subsequently contacted a local organization called " No More Pornography " , which started an online petition calling for the book to be removed from the syllabus . Vincent <unk> , the chair of the university 's English department , defended Fun Home and the instructor . The university said that it had no plans to remove the book . 
 In 2013 , Palmetto Family , a conservative South Carolina group affiliated with Focus on the Family and the Family Research Council , challenged the inclusion of Fun Home as a reading selection for incoming freshmen at the College of Charleston . Palmetto Family president Oran Smith called the book " pornographic " . Bechdel disputed this , saying that pornography is designed to cause sexual arousal , which is not the purpose of her book . College provost George <unk> and associate provost Lynne Ford defended the choice of Fun Home , pointing out that its themes of identity are especially appropriate for college freshmen . However , seven months later , the Republican @-@ led South Carolina House of Representatives Ways and Means Committee cut the college 's funding by $ 52 @,@ 000 , the cost of the summer reading program , to punish the college for selecting Fun Home . Rep. Garry Smith , who proposed the cuts , said that in choosing Fun Home the university was " promoting the gay and lesbian lifestyle " . Rep. Stephen Goldfinch , another supporter of the cuts , said , " This book trampled on freedom of conservatives . ... Teaching with this book , and the pictures , goes too far . " Bechdel called the funding cut " sad and absurd " and pointed out that Fun Home " is after all about the toll that this sort of small @-@ mindedness takes on people 's lives . " The full state House of Representatives subsequently voted to retain the cuts . College of Charleston students and faculty reacted with dismay and protests to the proposed cuts , and the college 's Student Government Association unanimously passed a resolution urging that the funding be restored . A coalition of ten free @-@ speech organizations wrote a letter to the South Carolina Senate Finance Committee , urging them to restore the funds and warning them that " [ p ] <unk> state educational institutions financially simply because members of the legislature disapprove of specific elements of the educational program is educationally unsound and constitutionally suspect " . The letter was co @-@ signed by the National Coalition Against Censorship , the ACLU of South Carolina , the American Association of University Professors , the Modern Language Association , the Association of College and Research Libraries , the American Booksellers Foundation for Free Expression , the Comic Book Legal Defense Fund , the Association of American Publishers , the National Council of Teachers of English and the American Library Association . After a nearly week @-@ long debate in which Fun Home and Bechdel were compared to slavery , Charles Manson and Adolf Hitler , the state Senate voted to restore the funding , but redirect the funds towards study of the United States Constitution and The Federalist Papers ; the university was also required to provide alternate books to students who object to an assignment due to a " religious , moral or cultural belief " . Governor Nikki Haley approved the budget measure penalizing the university . 
 In 2015 , the book was assigned as summer reading for the incoming class of 2019 at Duke University . Several students objected to the book on moral and / or religious grounds . 
 = = Musical adaptation = = 
 Fun Home has been adapted into a stage musical , with book by Lisa Kron and music by Jeanine Tesori . The play was first developed in a 2009 workshop at the Ojai Playwrights Conference , and subsequently workshopped in 2012 at the Sundance Theatre Lab and The Public Theater 's Public Lab . 
 The musical debuted Off @-@ Broadway at The Public Theater on September 30 , 2013 . The production was directed by Sam Gold , and starred Michael Cerveris as Bruce Bechdel and Judy Kuhn as Helen Bechdel . The role of Alison was played by three actors : Beth Malone played the adult Alison , reviewing and narrating her life , Alexandra Socha played " Medium Alison " ( Alison as a student at Oberlin , discovering her sexuality ) , and Sydney Lucas played Small Alison ( Alison as a child ) . Originally scheduled to run through November 3 , 2013 , the Public Theater run was extended multiple times and closed on January 12 , 2014 . It received largely positive reviews . The musical was a finalist for the 2014 Pulitzer Prize for Drama ; it also won the Lucille Lortel Award for Outstanding Musical , the New York Drama Critics ' Circle Award for Best Musical , and the Obie Award for Musical Theater . Alison Bechdel drew a one @-@ page comic about the musical adaptation for the newspaper Seven Days . 
 A Broadway production was announced and opened at Circle in the Square Theatre in April 2015 . The production won five awards at the 2015 Tony Awards , including Best Musical . 
 = Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ , BWV 116 = 
 Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ ( You Prince of Peace , Lord Jesus Christ ) , BWV 116 , is a church cantata written by Johann Sebastian Bach in 1724 in Leipzig for the 25th Sunday after Trinity . He led the first performance it on 26 November 1724 , concluding the liturgical year of 1724 . 
 The cantata is based upon Jakob Ebert 's hymn " Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ " . It matches the Sunday 's prescribed gospel reading , the Tribulation from the Gospel of Matthew , in a general way . The hymn 's first and last stanza are used unchanged in both text and tune : the former is set as a chorale fantasia , the latter as a four @-@ part closing chorale . An unknown librettist paraphrased the inner stanzas as alternating arias and recitatives . Bach scored the cantata for four vocal soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor , bass ) , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of natural horn , enforcing the soprano in the hymn tune , two oboes d 'amore , strings and basso continuo . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach wrote the cantata in 1724 for the 25th Sunday after Trinity as part of his second annual cycle of mostly chorale cantatas . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were from the First Epistle to the Thessalonians , the coming of the Lord ( 1 Thessalonians 4 : 13 – 18 ) , and from the Gospel of Matthew , the Tribulation ( Matthew 24 : 25 – 28 ) . The cantata text of an unknown author is based exclusively on Jakob Ebert 's hymn in seven stanzas ( 1601 ) . The librettist of Bach 's chorale cantata cycle is not known , but Bach scholar Christoph Wolff notes that " he must have worked closely with Bach " and names as " the most likely candidate " Andreas <unk> , a co @-@ rector of the Thomasschule . The first and last stanza in their original wording are movements 1 and 6 of the cantata , stanzas 2 to 4 were transformed to movements 2 to 4 of the cantata , and <unk> 5 and 6 were rephrased for movement 5 . The hymn is in a general way related to the gospel . 
 Bach led the first performance of the cantata on 26 November 1724 , which was that year the last Sunday of the liturgical year . The parts show that Bach performed it at least once more but not until after 1740 . 
 = = Scoring and structure = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in six movements . The text and tune of the hymn are kept in the outer choral movements , a chorale fantasia and a four @-@ part closing chorale , which frame a sequence of alternating arias and recitatives . Bach scored the work for four vocal soloists ( soprano , alto , tenor , bass ) , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of natural horn ( Co ) enforcing the soprano in the hymn tune , two oboes d 'amore ( Oa ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . The title page of the autograph score reads : " Dom : 25 post Trinit . / Du Friede Fürst Herr Jesu / Christ ect . / à / 4 Voc : / Tromba / 2 Hautb : d 'Amour / 2 Violini / viola / con / Continuo / di / Sign : / J.S.Bach " . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr , using the symbol for common time ( 4 / 4 ) . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening chorus , " Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ " ( You Prince of Peace , Lord Jesus Christ ) , is a chorale fantasia , the soprano singing the cantus firmus , supported by the horn . The composer of the tune is not known . It appeared in a hymnal by Bartholomäus <unk> in 1601 , and is similar to " Innsbruck , ich <unk> dich lassen " . 
 The melody is embedded in an orchestral concerto with ritornellos and interludes , dominated by the concertante solo violin . The treatment of the lower voices is varied within the movement . In lines 1 and 2 and the final 7 they are set in homophonic block chords . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann notes that the salutation " Du Friedefürst , Herr Jesu Christ , wahr ' Mensch und wahrer Gott " ( You prince of peace , Lord Jesus Christ , true man and true God ) thus receives weight . In lines 3 and 4 the lower voices begin in vivid imitation before the entrance of the cantus firmus . In lines 5 and 6 their faster movement contrasts to the melody . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 The alto aria , " Ach , <unk> ist die Not " ( Alas , the agony is unspeakable ) , is accompanied by an oboe d 'amore as an equal partner , expressing the soul 's terror imagining the judgement . Hofmann notes that " Bach has captured the expression of deep sadness in the music with all the tools of his trade : sighing figures , suspensions and augmented , diminished or chromatic melodic intervals : the harmony is full of dissonances . " 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 The recitative for tenor , " <unk> doch , o Jesu " ( Yet consider , o Jesus ) , begins as a secco recitative , but the idea " <unk> doch , o Jesu , daß du noch ein Fürst des <unk> <unk> ! " ( Yet consider , o Jesus , that you are still called a Prince of Peace ! ) , close to the theme of the cantata , is accompanied by a quote of the chorale tune in the continuo . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 Rare in Bach 's cantatas , three voices sing a trio . In the text " Ach , wir <unk> unsre <unk> " ( Ah , we recognize our guilt ) " , they illustrate the " wir " ( we ) , confessing and asking forgiveness together . The voices are accompanied only by the continuo . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The recitative for alto , " Ach , laß uns durch die <unk> <unk> " ( Ah , then through the harsh rod ) , is a prayer for lasting peace , accompanied by the strings and ending as an arioso . 
 = = = 6 = = = 
 The closing chorale , " <unk> auch unser Sinn und Herz " ( <unk> our minds and hearts as well ) , is a four @-@ part setting for the choir , horn , oboes and strings . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The listing is taken from the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly marked as large by red background , such as the large " Bach " <unk> of the 1950s ; instrumental groups playing period instruments in historically informed performances are highlighted green under the header Instr .. 
 = DeShawn Sims = 
 DeShawn Adrian Sims , Jr . ( born January 21 , 1988 ) is an American professional basketball player who plays for Maccabi Kiryat Gat of the Israeli Super League . He has previously played for <unk> and <unk> SC of the Lebanese Basketball League , as well as teams in Greece , Korea and Puerto Rico after a career with the Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team . In high school , he became Associated Press Class A Player of the Year , a Jordan Brand All @-@ American and a fourth team Parade All @-@ American . At Michigan he became a second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten Conference selection . He had signed a free @-@ agent contract with the Boston Celtics for whom he played in the Orlando Summer League in addition to playing for the Dallas Mavericks in the NBA Summer League . He became a 2011 D @-@ League All @-@ Star and NBA Development League Rookie of the Year . 
 During the 2008 @-@ 09 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season , Sims ranked among the leaders in the Big Ten Conference in rebounds per game , points per game and Field goal percentage . He led the 2008 – 09 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team in rebounding and scoring in victories over two top @-@ five ranked teams as a college junior , which enabled them to earn a place in the national rankings for the first time in nearly three years . In addition , while the team was on the proverbial bubble , he led the team in scoring in each of the last five games before the 2009 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , including the only other regular season victory of the season against a ranked opponent . At the conclusion of the 2008 – 09 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season he was named to the second team All @-@ Big Ten team by the media and the third team by the coaches . 
 Prior to the beginning of the 2009 @-@ 10 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season , Sims was one of two members ( along with Manny Harris ) of the 2009 – 10 Michigan Wolverines men 's basketball team named among the 50 preseason Wooden Award watch list nominees . At the conclusion of 2009 – 10 Big Ten Conference regular season he was recognized as a second @-@ team All @-@ Big Ten selection by both the coaches and the media . Sims concluded the season as the Big Ten Conference leader in offensive rebounds . 
 = = High school = = 
 Born in Detroit , Michigan , as the son of Lolita Pruitt and DeShawn Sims Sr. He claims to have 13 brothers and sisters . Sims starred at Detroit Pershing High School , where , as a freshman , he played the guard position . He became a starter as a sophomore and earned both Detroit News and Detroit Free Press All @-@ Detroit , honorable mention recognition . In his junior season , he was named Associated Press Class A All @-@ State . As a senior in the 2005 – 06 season , he earned Associated Press Class A Player of the Year honors . That season , he was a Jordan Brand All @-@ American , a fourth team Parade All @-@ American , and a unanimous Associated Press Class A All @-@ State selection . He led his team to the Detroit Public School League championship game where they lost to Redford High School , a team that was led by junior Manny Harris , who later became Sims ' teammate at Michigan . Over the course of his senior season , he averaged 25 @.@ 0 points , 12 @.@ 0 rebounds , 3 @.@ 0 blocks and 4 @.@ 0 assists . He placed third in the Hal Schram Mr. Basketball of Michigan voting , trailing David Kool and Tom Herzog . He played in various All @-@ star games and earned the MVP of the U.S. All @-@ Stars vs. Capital All @-@ Stars Game in Washington , D.C. In high school , Rivals.com ranked Sims as the # 6 high school power forward and # 31 overall high school basketball player in the United States . Scout.com ranked Sims as the # 9 high school small forward in the country . Sims is known by a nickname that has been published in the press as both <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = College = = 
 = = = Freshman and sophomore years = = = 
 At the University of Michigan , Sims started two games as a freshman and all 32 games as a sophomore . He debuted for the 2006 – 07 Michigan Wolverines in the season opener with 2 points and 2 rebounds in 6 minutes on November 10 against Central Connecticut and made his first start on December 28 against Army , scoring 13 points . His brother , Marcus Pruitt , who was a 6 ft 11 in ( 2 @.@ 11 m ) junior at Pershing , was fatally shot during Sims 's freshman year . The following year , during the 2007 @-@ 08 NCAA Division I men 's basketball season , his averages jumped from 3 @.@ 4 points per game to 12 @.@ 3 and from 2 @.@ 3 rebounds per game to 5 @.@ 4 . During that season , he led Michigan in rebounding and placed 14th in the Big Ten Conference , while placing 12th in the conference in scoring . This earned him an All @-@ Big Ten honorable mention . During his sophomore year , Sims opened the John Beilein era at Michigan by earning Big Ten Player of the Week honors for the week of November 12 , 2007 . 
 = = = Junior year = = = 
 As a junior , he became one of the leading scorers , shot blockers and rebounders in the Big Ten Conference . On November 20 , 2008 , the unranked Wolverines team upset the # 4 ranked UCLA Bruins men 's basketball team for its first win over a top @-@ five team in eleven years . On November 29 , 2008 against Savannah State , Sims posted game @-@ highs of 23 points and 12 rebounds , including an overtime buzzer beater as Michigan overcame a 20 @-@ point half time deficit . Sims , served as sixth man during November , led the team in scoring with 18 points and tied for the lead in rebounds . On December 3 , Sims entered the starting lineup during a game against Maryland in the ACC @-@ Big Ten Challenge . On December 6 , 2008 Michigan posted its second consecutive win over a top 5 opponent in a rematch against the # 4 ranked Duke Blue Devils men 's basketball team . Sims again , led the team in scoring with a career @-@ high 28 points and posted a team @-@ high with 12 rebounds . On December 22 , 2008 Sims became the first Wolverine to score 20 points and add 20 rebounds since Phil Hubbard had 22 points and 26 rebounds in a victory over University of Detroit in the 1977 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament . As a result of the major victories and continuing team success they reached the top 25 in the national rankings on December 22 for the first time since February 6 , 2006 . On February 26 , he was the high scorer again with a career @-@ high 29 points in game against the # 16 @-@ ranked Purdue Boilermakers men 's basketball team that Michigan won 87 – 78 , raising its record to 3 – 4 against ranked opponents on the season . At the conclusion of the 2008 – 09 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball regular season , he was named to the second team All @-@ Big Ten team by the media and the third team by the coaches . 
 Sims led the team in scoring in six of its last seven games including five consecutive games covering the last three regular season games and both 2009 Big Ten Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament games . Sims led the Wolverines in field goal percentage , rebounds and blocked shots . He finished second on the team in minute played , steals and points per game . Sims ended the season fifth in rebounds per game , fifth in points per game and eighth in field goal percentage , eleventh in block shots per game and fifteenth in steals per game in the Big Ten Conference . After , Harris was named team MVP , he requested that Sims be recognized as co @-@ MVP . Sims was recognized as co @-@ MVP . 
 = = = Senior year = = = 
 Harris and Sims were named among the 50 preseason Wooden Award watch list nominees . Sims became the second Wolverine to earn Big Ten Player of the Week during the 2009 – 10 Big Ten Conference men 's basketball season for his efforts during week nine ( January 4 – 10 ) . As the season progressed , Sims was called on to take decisive shots in a few close games : On January 26 , he attempted an alley oop with 0 @.@ 9 seconds remaining as Michigan trailed by one point against Michigan State , and on February 16 , he made a game @-@ tying three point shot against Iowa with 6 @.@ 1 seconds remaining to enable Michigan to emerge victorious in overtime . At the conclusion of the regular season , he was named a second @-@ team All @-@ conference selection by both the coaches and the media . He was also recognized as Michigan 's Big Ten Sportsmanship Awards honoree . He was recognized as an All @-@ District second @-@ team selection by the National Association of Basketball Coaches making him eligible for the State Farm Division I All ‐ America teams . 
 Sims led the conference in offensive rebounds and ranked fifth in scoring . He was also among the leaders in field goal percentage ( 14th ) and steals ( 15th ) . Sims was undrafted in the 2010 NBA Draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 After going undrafted in the June 24 , 2010 NBA Draft , Sims signed a free agent contract with the Boston Celtics . Sims played in four games for the Celtics in the Orlando Summer League and then four games for the Dallas Mavericks in the NBA Summer League . 
 In August 2010 he signed with Greek club PAOK BC . On November 2 , he left PAOK , after having played 3 games with the Greek team , in which he averaged 12 @.@ 3 PPG in 21 @.@ 7 minutes . Later that month , Sims signed with the Maine Red Claws of the NBA Development League , who are the D League affiliate of the Celtics . He earned a selection to the 2011 D @-@ League All @-@ Star game . In the game , he posted 20 points . Over the course of the season , he finished fourth in the league with a 20 @.@ 3 points per game as well as 7 @.@ 7 rebounds . Along the way he posted 13 double doubles and earned the 2011 NBA Development League Rookie of the Year Award . In April 2011 he signed with <unk> de <unk> in Puerto Rico . In July 2011 during the 2011 NBA lockout , he signed with Jeonju KCC <unk> in South Korea . On March 6 , Sims rejoined the Red Claws , replacing Dominic <unk> on the roster . Sims posted a 12 @-@ point and 15 @-@ rebound double double for the Red Claws on March 10 against the Canton Charge . He last appeared in a game for the Red Claws on March 16 against the Austin Toros . On March 21 , he was reported to have an ankle injury . 
 In July 2012 , Sims was named to the Phoenix Suns roster for the 2012 Las Vegas Summer League . In September 2012 , he signed with <unk> of the Lebanese Basketball League . He posted 22 @.@ 5 points and 8 @.@ 3 rebounds per game in Lebanon , while shooting 36 @.@ 4 % on his three @-@ point shots . Sims was expected to join the Boston Celtics ' 2013 Orlando Summer League team . However , he was not on the summer roster . 
 On September 30 , 2013 , Sims signed with the Boston Celtics . He was one of four <unk> training camp invites ( along with <unk> Bell @-@ Holter , <unk> Taylor and Chris Babb ) , vying for the final roster spot after accounting for the 14 guaranteed contracts . He was one of three small forwards invited to camp , along with Jeff Green , Gerald Wallace . On October 26 , 2013 , he was waived by the Celtics who waived all four <unk> invitees reducing their roster to 14 . After waiving the four players , Celtics president of basketball operations Danny Ainge said all four were welcome to join the team 's D @-@ League affiliate , Maine Red Claws , if they were willing to accept the low paying salary instead of higher paying offers overseas . Sims was the only one of the four who did not sign with the Red Claws by the end of the month . That year , he went on to sign with Hapoel Gilboa Galil of the Israeli Basketball Super League . In August 2014 , he signed with Jeonju KCC <unk> of the Korean Basketball League . 
 On March 6 , 2015 , Sims signed with <unk> SC of the Lebanese Basketball League . On March 1 , 2016 , Sims signed with Maccabi Kiryat Gat B.C. of the Israeli Basketball Premier League . 
 = Cyclone Daman = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Daman ( RSMC Nadi designation 04F , JTWC designation 05P ) was the strongest cyclone of the 2007 – 08 South Pacific cyclone season . Cyclone Daman was the fourth tropical depression and the first severe tropical cyclone to form st of longitude 180 ° during the 2007 – 08 South Pacific cyclone season . Due to the severity of the storm , the name Daman was retired and replaced with Denia . 
 On December 3 , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in Nadi , Fiji , upgraded a tropical disturbance , located to the west of the Solomon Islands , to Tropical Depression 04F . On December 5 , as the depression moved towards the west into the Fijian archipelago , both the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) and RSMC Nadi upgraded it to Cyclone Daman . On December 7 the cyclone reached its peak intensity with winds of 185 km / h , ( 115 mph 10 @-@ minute sustained ) which made Daman a Category 4 cyclone on the Australian Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale . Later that day Daman also reached its peak intensity by 1 @-@ minute means with winds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) which made it a Category 3 tropical cyclone on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . Early on December 8 , Cyclone Daman brushed by the Fijian island of Cikobia , causing damage to housing , crops and vegetation . Daman then weakened the next day into a tropical depression and dissipated on December 10 . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Late on December 2 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) started to monitor an area of disturbed weather that was located within the South Pacific convergence zone to the northwest of Apia , Samoa . Located beneath an anticyclone , the system maintained deep convection near its elongated but well @-@ defined circulation center . Early the next day , the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi , Fiji , ( RSMC Nadi ) , started to monitor the area of disturbed weather as Tropical Depression 04F . Over the next two days , the depression moved towards the west , conditions surrounding the depression barely changed and as a result the depression steadily intensified . Early on December 5 , the system had convective bands spiraling into and wrapping tightly around the low level circulation center . As a result of this , the JTWC started advisories on Tropical Cyclone 05P , with winds equivalent to a tropical storm . At 0200 UTC , RSMC Nadi reported that the tropical depression had intensified into a category one tropical cyclone on the Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale and named it as Daman . During that day Daman passed over Rotuma island while gradually intensifying further . 
 At 0600 UTC , on December 6 , the JTWC reported that Daman had intensified into a category one tropical cyclone on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane scale . Shortly after this , the cyclone made an abrupt turn and started to move towards the east instead of moving towards the south . Later that day at 1200 UTC , RSMC Nadi reported that Daman had intensified into a category three severe tropical cyclone as it was now sporting a cloud filled eye . The cyclone continued to intensify over the next 12 hours becoming a category four severe tropical cyclone at 0000 UTC on December 7 . At that time RSMC Nadi forecasted , that there was a possibility that Daman could become a category five severe tropical cyclone , with windspeeds of 215 km / h , ( 130 mph ) , within 12 hours . However six hours later as the general organization of the eye had weakened , RSMC Nadi reported that the cyclone had peaked as a category four severe tropical cyclone with ten @-@ minute winds of 195 km / h , ( 120 mph ) and a peak pressure of 925 hPa ( 27 @.@ 3 inHg ) . The JTWC also reported that Cyclone Daman had peaked with one @-@ minute winds of 195 km / h , ( 120 mph ) . In their post storm analysis , both RSMC Nadi and the JTWC revised their estimated peak windspeeds , with RSMC Nadi lowering their estimated windspeeds to 185 km / h , ( 115 mph ) , while the JTWC elevated their estimates to 205 km / h , ( 125 mph ) . As the Cyclone peaked in intensity , it started to accelerate towards the southeast and passed over or close to <unk> island , before becoming under the influence of a mid @-@ level ridge of high pressure . As it came under the influence of the mid @-@ level ridge of high pressure , Daman turned once more and started to move slowly towards the southeast , into an area of strengthening vertical windshear and cooler sea surface temperatures . As a result , Daman rapidly weakened during December 8 , before both the next day as the system moved through the Lau Islands , both the JTWC and RSMC Nadi reported that it had weakened into a tropical depression . The final advisories on the system were issued the next day as Daman merged with a frontal system . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Daman affected Fiji and its dependency of Rotuma between December 5 – 9 , where it caused about F $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 2007 ) ( $ 330 @,@ 000 US $ 2007 ) worth of damage . During December 5 , a gale warning was issued for Rotuma by the FMS , while the system was located about 90 km ( 55 mi ) to the northeast of the dependency . The system subsequently passed over the island later that day , where it caused no serious damage , but pushed the cruise ship MV <unk> on to a reef which suffered some damage to its rudders and propellers . 
 Early on December 5 , RSMC Nadi started to issue special weather bulletins on Cyclone Daman as a tropical cyclone gale warning had been issued for the Fijian dependency of Rotuma . Later that morning , as the Cyclone moved over Rotuma , RSMC Nadi issued a tropical cyclone alert for the rest of Fiji . During that afternoon , RSMC Nadi canceled the tropical cyclone gale warning for Rotuma and then upgraded the cyclone alerts for the northwest of Fiji to a tropical cyclone gale warning later that day . Early the next day , as the storm was intensifying , they upgraded the gale warnings for parts of northwest of Fiji to storm warnings while expanding the warnings to the western and central sides of Viti Levu and the western side of Vanua Levu . During that afternoon RSMC Nadi further revised the warnings as Cyclone Daman had become a severe tropical cyclone . 
 A hurricane warning was then declared at this time for the Yasawa Group , northern Viti Levu , Vanua Levu as well as smaller islands located nearby . Later that day , as Daman reached its peak , all areas of Fiji were under a gale warning . Early on December 7 RSMC Nadi canceled some of the warnings for Fiji , including the gale force warning for southwestern Viti Levu , and then later that day downgraded all the warnings that were still in effect for Fiji to gale force as Daman was weakening . 
 Cyclone Daman brought heavy rain which caused floods and landslides within Fiji 's northern division . This led to several international and domestic flights being canceled on December 7 . The Fijian island of Cikobia received a direct hit whilst Daman passed directly over Rotuma . The total cost to Fiji from Cyclone Daman was F $ 500 @,@ 000 ( 2007 ) ( $ 330 @,@ 000 US $ 2007 ) with no damage being reported in Tonga from the storm . 
 Daman did most of its damages on Cikobia island , which has a population of around 120 . Damage on Cikobia included extensive damages to houses , school buildings , crops , <unk> trees and foliage . Water pipes were damaged by fallen trees as a result of high winds from the storm . Despite initial fears of there being some fatalities on Cikobia , no loss of life was recorded due to the storm . This was because the islands 120 residents had evacuated to caves on Cikobia . The Fijian Dependency of Rotuma experienced a significant amount of rainfall from December 5 until December 7 , when Cyclone Daman was located near Rotuma . 
 Because there were no deaths and only 65 people had been directly affected by Cyclone Daman , the Fijian government , with the help of the Red Cross , decided not to request any International Aid or any external assistance . The Fijian Government , on January 15 , 2008 , allocated $ 530 @,@ 000 2008 <unk> for the relief and rehabilitation programme of Cikobia . By August 2008 , all work rebuilding Cikobia after Cyclone Daman had been completed . 
 Due to the impact of this system , the name Daman was subsequently retired , from the list of names for the region by the World Meteorological Organization . 
 = Troll Airfield = 
 Troll Airfield is an airstrip located 6 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) from the research station Troll in Princess Martha Coast in Queen Maud Land , Antarctica . Owned and operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute , it consists of a 3 @,@ 300 @-@ by @-@ 100 @-@ metre ( 10 @,@ 830 by 330 ft ) runway on glacial blue ice on the Antarctic ice sheet . The airport is located at 1 @,@ 232 metres ( 4 @,@ 042 ft ) above mean sea level and is 235 kilometres ( 146 mi ) from the coast . 
 The airfield opened in 2005 and serves as the centre of the Dronning Maud Land Air Network ( DROMLAN ) , a multinational cooperation to use Troll as an all @-@ year hub to provide intercontinental traffic to Antarctica and onwards to the various research stations using aircraft suitable for inter @-@ Antarctic operations . Intercontinental flights normally operate from Cape Town International Airport using Ilyushin 76 , C @-@ 130 Hercules , P @-@ 3 Orion and similar , long @-@ range aircraft . Feeding services to other research station is normally done either with Basler BT @-@ 67 aircraft , De Havilland DHC @-@ 6 / 300 Twin Otter aircraft and Dornier Do @-@ 228 aircraft and helicopters . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Troll Airfield is located 6 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) from Troll in Princess Martha Coast in Queen Maud Land , Antarctica . It is owned and operated by the Norwegian Polar Institute and consists of a 3 @,@ 300 @-@ by @-@ 100 @-@ metre ( 10 @,@ 830 by 330 ft ) runway on glacial blue ice . This allows it to be used by any aircraft serving the Antarctic . There is no Instrument landing System - ILS , instead visual flight rules - VFR apply . There are no buildings or structures at the runway , although some services are provided from the research station . Ground handling , including supply of Jet A @-@ 1 fuel , is provided by the crew at Troll . The crew also supply services such as a fire and rescue service , communications and overnighting at Troll for personnel who would be stuck because of bad weather . The airfield must follow the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty . This includes storing all fuel in barrels and large tanks placed on special mats which absorb liquids , to avoid spills . There is also equipment and plans to handle spills , should they occur . All waste is transported out of the Antarctic . 
 The airfield has a cold and dry climate , being located in a desert . The annual mean temperature is − 25 ° C ( − 13 ° F ) , with the summer temperature able to reach about 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) and the lowest during the winter at − 50 ° C ( − 58 ° F ) . Storms , which can occur throughout the year , can occasionally make outdoor activity impossible . Because it is located south of the Antarctic Circle , Troll has midnight sun in the summer and polar night during the winter . 
 = = Service = = 
 Dronning Maud Land Air Network Project ( DROMLAN ) is a coordinated project between eleven countries with bases in Queen Maud Land ( Norwegian : Dronning Maud Land ) to create a coordinated logistics service to reduce costs . The participating countries are Belgium , Finland , Germany , India , Japan , the Netherlands , Norway , Russia , South Africa , Sweden and United Kingdom . The services are operated using Russian Ilyushin 76 , Norwegian and Swedish C @-@ 130 Hercules and Norwegian P @-@ 3 Orion aircraft , also occasionally visited by other types of aircraft The flights operate from Cape Town International Airport , with a flight time of up to nine hours for a Hercules aircraft , and five and a half hours for an Il @-@ 76 . 
 Feeder services to other research stations are operated by two Basler BT @-@ 67 ( type converted DC @-@ 3 / C @-@ 47 ) , operated by the South African company Antarctic Logistics Centre International or other operators . Services are operated to Aboa ( Finnish ) , Dome F ( Japanese ) , Halley ( British ) , Kohnen ( German ) , Maitri ( Indian ) , Neumayer ( German ) , Novolazarevskaya ( Russian ) , Princess Elisabeth ( Belgian ) , SANAE IV ( South African ) , Showa ( Japanese ) , Tor ( Norwegian ) and Wasa ( Swedish ) . In the 2007 – 08 season , 720 people were transported to Antarctica via DROMLAN . The airport is not open for commercial or other private flights . 
 = = History = = 
 During the planning of Troll , which opened in 1990 , it was decided that the station was to be placed at such a location as to allow it to have an airstrip for year @-@ round operations . Jutulsessen was chosen as the location , in part because it provided a base nunatak for the research station and at the same time was close to blue ice for the runway . At the time , all cargo and passengers to Troll had to either be transported by ship , or flown in via the airport at the Russian base Novolazarevskaya or Henriksenskjera . 
 In the late 1990s , the Norwegian Polar Institute took an initiative to establish DROMLAN in cooperation with eleven other countries who operate research facilities in Queen Maud Land . On 5 January 2001 , a test flight with representatives from eight countries was made to Henriksenskjera . From there , a DHC @-@ 6 / 300 Twin Otter , Basler BT @-@ 67 and a helicopter was used to distribute the crew and supplies to the various bases . In addition to evaluating the airfield at Novolazarevskaya , an evaluation was performed at Troll in January 2002 . The hub model was used during the summer of 2001 and 2002 , operated by the South African company Antarctic Logistics Centre International . 
 To build a permanent airfield at Troll , the Norwegian Polar Institute bought a snow groomer and a tracked vehicle with a snow blower , flatbed and ice cutter . The works was organized with a land @-@ based Global Positioning System laser system . In the course of the 2002 season , 2 @,@ 500 meters ( 8 @,@ 200 ft ) of runway had been built . This included removing of surface rocks and filling any crevasses . The construction also included necessary ground facilities , such as a fire- and rescue service , communications , ground handling and overnight facilities at Troll for personnel who could be stranded because of bad weather . The construction involved the moving of 70 @,@ 000 cubic metres ( 2 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 cu ft ) of ice and snow . 
 Troll Airfield was opened on 11 February 2005 by Queen Sonja of Norway and the new research station the following day . At first , Antonov An @-@ 2 , DHC @-@ 6 / 300 Twin Otters , Dorniers 228 and smaller aircraft were used for the services . Later , two Basler BT @-@ 67 , operated by Antarctic Logistics Centre International , were taken into use . The cooperation has resulted in the availability of larger aircraft more suited for research , through coordinated search and rescue operations between the participating countries . On 19 January 2008 , the airfield was visited by Norwegian Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg . 
 = = = Airlines and destinations = = = 
 = Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary = 
 " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " is a song recorded by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna for her seventh studio album Unapologetic ( 2012 ) . It was written by Rihanna with the song 's producers Terius Nash and Carlos " Los " McKinney . An electro @-@ R & B , Electronica and new wave song , the two songs derive its musical structure from the genres of electronica and new wave . Lyrically , " Love Without Tragedy " is love @-@ oriented while in " Mother Mary " the singer makes a confession about a moment in her life which she regrets . 
 The song received positive reviews from music critics . Many reviewers praised the deep meaning of the song and her vocal performance . Additionally , it received comparison to the works by The Police and their lead singer Sting . Upon the release of Unapologetic , " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " debuted at number 95 on the French Singles Chart , 113 on the UK Singles Chart and 13 on the UK R & B Chart , due to strong digital download sales . " Mother Mary " serves as the introduction to Rihanna 's Diamonds World Tour ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " was written by Rihanna together with Terius Nash and Carlos McKinney , with the latter two producing the song . Kuk Harrell provided the vocal production of the song and also recorded Rihanna 's vocals with Marcos Tovar at R Studios in Los Angeles . All the music was recorded by Bart Schoudel at Sarm Studios in London and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles ; Blake Mares and Robert Cohen served as the song 's assistant engineers . " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " was mixed by Jayson Joshua at Larabee Studios in Burbank , California . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " represents two electronica and new wave integrated songs , which last for a duration of 6 : 58 . The experiments with electronica are done by using Moog synths and " vaporous keyboards " as part of the <unk> i @-@ D 's Nick Levine described the song as a " electro @-@ R & B epic " that was " influenced by Sting 's old band , The Police " Smokey Fontaine for The Huffington Post thought that Rihanna appeared to be channeling synth @-@ laden songs released by Madonna in the 1990s . Lyrically , it progresses from being a love song to a " full @-@ on confessional " , and references famous actress , Marilyn Monroe and actor , James Dean , respectively . Dan Nolan for Rolling Stone considered the song 's lyrics to be a cliché , as they combine " real terror and impossible resolve " . 
 In the first part , " Love Without Tragedy " , Rihanna as the narrator , sings about a moment in the life which she regrets in the lines " Who knew the course of this one drive / Injured us fatally / You took the best years of my life / I took the best years of your life " . " Love Without Tragedy " , blends 80s pop music and guitar with a " modern and fresh " reggae inspired melody . Rihanna is channeling the emotions caused by her assault from Chris Brown in which can be seen through the lines " Felt love struck me with a knife / I pray that love don 't strike twice " , and " Who knew the course of this one drive injured us fatally ? " 
 As " Love Without Tragedy " draws to a close , a " retro " breakdown plays and transitions into the second part of the song , " Mother Mary " . For " Mother Mary " , the heavy synths which are present on " Love Without Tragedy " are removed as she " cries " the line " I 'm prepared to die ... " in an introspective tone . She confesses " Mr. Jesus , I would love to be a Queen ... / but I 'm from the left side of an island " in what Fontaine described as a " perfect raise @-@ your @-@ smartphone @-@ candle moment " . Rihanna displays an " uplifting " vocal on " Mother Mary " as she confesses how Brown 's attack affected her . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Dan Martin for NME felt that " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " could possibly be the best song on Unapologetic , writing that it moves Rihanna into a " new sonic and emotional space " due to its confessional feel . Billboard named it " a deeply personal song sold by Rihanna 's uplifting vocal . " Chris <unk> for 4Music compared the song 's musicality to the work of English rock band The Police and Sting , describing its composition as " instantly likable and clever " . Younie concurred with Martin on the subject of Rihanna 's extreme <unk> , and wrote that it is very personal . Greg Kot for Chicago Tribune thought that " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " was Unapologetic 's " emotional centerpiece " . Stacy @-@ Ann Ellis of Vibe agreed , calling it " the most autobiographical seven minutes on Unapologetic . It ’ s almost too raw in its intimacy . " Ellis added : " It ’ s here we notice Rihanna ’ s life could be the basis of a Shakespearean play . During its intentionally abrupt tonal transition , the honesty becomes devastating . " Spin 's Caryn Ganz compared " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " to " Message in a Bottle " ( 1979 ) by The Police and wrote that on the song Rihanna sounds as both " a petulant teen and a world @-@ weary woman " . Dan Stern for MTV Buzzworthy felt that Rihanna was channeling Madonna the second part of the song , " Mother Mary " . 
 Andy Kellman of AllMusic selected the song as one of the album 's highlights , noting that it has " a wide theatrical scope akin to that of The @-@ Dream 's own ' Nikki , Pt . 2 / Abyss . ' " He further analysed : " Over a swelling and receding production with echoes of Kim Carnes ' ' Bette Davis Eyes , ' Rihanna mourns ( " Felt like love struck me in the night / I pray that love don 't strike twice " ) , then confesses ( " Mother Mary , I swear I wanna change " ) , then surrenders ( " I 'm prepared to die in the moment " ) . Perhaps no one should read anything into it . " Christina Lee of Idolator observed that the song " casts out the album ’ s most heartbreaking line — ' I ’ m prepared to die at the moment ' — but puts it in a context that doesn ’ t explain enough . " Esquire 's Miles Raymer thought that Police would have been a better band if they would have had Rihanna as their lead singer instead of Sting ; however , he described " Mother Mary " as something to skip . Alike Raymer , Bernard Perusse for The Montreal Gazette felt that only " Love Without Tragedy " was worth listening to and described it as demonstrating " a tiny bit of hope " on the album . In a review of the album , Jessica Hopper of Pitchfork Media wrote that " Rihanna sings a grim rhetorical : " What 's love without tragedy ? " However , according to her the real question that she and her songwriters is presenting on the record is " Who is Rihanna without Chris Brown ? " " Nathan <unk> for DJ Booth was critical of the tracks theme , writing that " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " , along with " Stay " and " No Love Allowed " , all discuss the topic of Rihanna being a non @-@ controversial person who is struggling to find love in a " mad world " . He further wrote that none of them are impressive . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording 
 Recorded at Sarm Studios , London , UK ; Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , CA . 
 Mixed at <unk> Studios , Burbank , CA . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Unapologetic , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 Upon the release of Unapologetic , " Love Without Tragedy / Mother Mary " charted in France and on two charts in the United Kingdom due to strong digital downloads . It debuted on the French Singles Chart at number 95 for the week dated December 1 , 2012 , and remained on the chart for one week . On December 2 , 2012 , it debuted at number 113 on the UK Singles Chart , and number 19 on the UK R & B Chart . 
 = Final Fantasy concerts = 
 Final Fantasy is a media franchise created by Hironobu Sakaguchi and owned by Square Enix that includes video games , motion pictures , and other merchandise . The original Final Fantasy video game , published in 1987 , is a role @-@ playing video game developed by Square , spawning a video game series that became the central focus of the franchise . The primary composer of music for the main series was Nobuo Uematsu , who single @-@ handedly composed the soundtracks for the first nine games , as well as directing the production of many of the soundtrack albums . Music for the spin @-@ off series and main series games beginning with Final Fantasy X was created by a variety of composers including Masashi Hamauzu , Naoshi Mizuta , Hitoshi Sakimoto , and Kumi Tanioka , as well as many others . 
 Music from the franchise has been performed numerous times in concert tours and other live performances such as the Orchestral Game Music Concerts , Symphonic Game Music Concerts , and the Play ! A Video Game Symphony and the Video Games Live concert tours , as well as forming the basis of specific Final Fantasy concerts and concert series . The first such concert was the 20020220 Music from Final Fantasy concert on February 20 , 2002 , which sparked a six @-@ concert tour in Japan entitled Tour de Japon : Music from Final Fantasy beginning in March 2004 . A North American concert series titled Dear Friends -Music From Final Fantasy- followed from 2004 – 2005 , and after its conclusion was followed with the More Friends : Music from Final Fantasy concert on May 16 , 2005 . Voices - Music from Final Fantasy was a concert held in Yokohama , Japan on February 18 , 2006 focusing on vocal pieces from the series . The longest running Final Fantasy concert series so far is the Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy concert tour , which began in 2007 and continues to date around the world . The latest officially licensed concert is Final Symphony , featuring music from Final Fantasy VI , VII and X. All of these concerts have played only music from the main Final Fantasy series , and do not include music from the multiple spin @-@ off series with the exception of Final Fantasy VII Advent Children , the 2005 computer animated film sequel to Final Fantasy VII . 
 = = 20020220 - Music from Final Fantasy = = 
 20020220 - Music from Final Fantasy was the first official concert devoted to music from across the Final Fantasy series . A previous concert , Final Fantasy Symphonic Suite , had been performed on May 20 , 1989 for a limited audience to create an orchestral version of the soundtracks of Final Fantasy I and II , which have only been released together . The music of 20020220 was arranged for orchestra from the original songs composed by Nobuo Uematsu primarily by Uematsu himself and Shiro Hamaguchi , with " To Zanarkand " and " Yuna 's Decision " arranged by Masashi Hamauzu , and was performed by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra on February 20 , 2002 at the Tokyo International Forum . The orchestra was conducted by <unk> Takemoto , and the concert was hosted by Masakazu Morita and Mayuko Aoki , the Japanese voice actors for Tidus and Yuna from Final Fantasy X. 
 The orchestra played 17 songs over a period of almost two hours . The setlist ranged covered songs from the very first Final Fantasy game through Final Fantasy X , the latest game to have been released . Their rendition of " Suteki da Ne " from Final Fantasy X was accompanied by Japanese folk singer Ritsuki Nakano , known as " RIKKI " , who sang the track in the original game . Similarly , " Melodies of Life " from Final Fantasy IX was performed by Emiko Shiratori , the original performer for the song in that game 's soundtrack . " At Zanarkand " and " Yuna 's Decision " , both from Final Fantasy X , were solo piano pieces performed by Aki Kuroda , while " Liberi Fatali " and " One @-@ Winged Angel " saw the orchestra combined with a small chorus . Kiyotsugu Amano performed guitar accompaniment for " Dear Friends " ( Final Fantasy V ) and " Vamo ' Alla Flamenco " ( Final Fantasy IX ) . 
 An album based on a live recording of the concert was released on May 9 , 2002 by DigiCube , and was subsequently re @-@ released on July 22 , 2004 by Square Enix . The album spans 25 tracks over two discs and covers a duration of 1 : 47 : 27 , and includes the initial tuning of the orchestra , the speeches given by the MC , and the songs themselves . The album was well received by critics and was termed an " amazing soundtrack " and " probably the best Final Fantasy arranged album ever made " by Robert <unk> of RPGFan . Liz Maas of RPGFan agreed ; although she found there to be a lack of actual innovation overall , she felt the music was " wonderful " and the album as a whole " rather enjoyable " . Patrick Dell of Soundtrack Central felt that the album was " wonderful " and " an impressive display " , although he greatly disliked the performance of the choir . Dave of Square Enix Music Online was not as impressed by the album , saying that many of the performances were " lacking cohesion and direction " , although he felt that overall it was " satisfactory " and " worth repeated listens " . Sophia of Square Enix Music Online , on the other hand , felt that it was a " fantastic album " and a " must have " . 
 = = Tour de Japon = = 
 Tour de Japon - Music from Final Fantasy ( or Tour de Japon ) was a concert tour featuring music from the Final Fantasy video game series that toured Japan from March 12 to April 16 , 2004 . The tour was built upon the success of the 20020220 Music from Final Fantasy concert , and featured seven concerts in six cities . The series of concerts featured music composed by Nobuo Uematsu and arranged by Shiro Hamaguchi . The orchestras were conducted by <unk> Takemoto , as the orchestra in 20020220 had been . Uematsu guest conducted the encores for each performance ; he used a borrowed baton that he had snapped and taped together . Tour de Japon featured fewer non @-@ orchestra performances than 20020220 ; " Opera " Maria & Draco " " featured the singing of Etsuyo Ota , Tomoaki Watanabe , and Tetsuya <unk> , while Manami Kiyota and Yuji Hasegawa performed songs from Final Fantasy Song Book : Mahoroba during the intermission . Different orchestras were used in each performance ; these were the New Japan Philharmonic Orchestra , Tokyo City Philharmonic Orchestra , Sapporo Symphony Orchestra , Nagoya Philharmonic , Kyushu Symphony , and Osaka <unk> Orchestra . One of the performances was recorded and released exclusively on DVD to Nobuo Uematsu Fan Club members . 
 = = Dear Friends - Music from Final Fantasy = = 
 Dear Friends - Music from Final Fantasy was a concert tour featuring music from the Final Fantasy video game series that toured the United States from 2004 to 2005 . The concert was the first Final Fantasy concert tour for North America and featured record sales and sold @-@ out concerts . The series of concerts featured music composed by Nobuo Uematsu from the later releases of the series . The name of the concert series , in addition to being the name a Final Fantasy V piece that is played at the concerts , was chosen by Uematsu to represent his appreciation for the support given to him by fans of his music and of the Final Fantasy series . 
 The series was originally conceived as a single concert to be held on May 10 , 2004 , performed by the Los Angeles Philharmonic Orchestra and conducted by Miguel Harth @-@ Bedoya . The concert was hosted by James Arnold Taylor , the English voice actor for Final Fantasy X 's Tidus , and featured large screens hanging above the orchestra playing scenes relevant to the music being performed . Like the concerts before it , Dear Friends featured several groups and instruments in addition to the orchestra , including a guitar for " Dear Friends " , <unk> for " Vamo ' Alla Flamenco " , and piano for " At Zanarkand " and " Cloud Smiles " , which at the time was not named and was only known to be featured in the upcoming Final Fantasy VII Advent Children . The encore piece , " One @-@ Winged Angel " , saw the orchestra joined by a full choir , the Los Angeles Master Chorale . 
 The concert was termed " a complete success " by IGN , who commented that they " walked away impressed with the performance , the presentation , and the timelessness of Uematsu 's compositions " . The response to the concert was greater than expected , with tickets selling out in three days . After " many fans pleaded for another chance to see the concert " , Dear Friends was expanded into a full concert tour the following year , conducted by Arnie Roth . Roth took on the role of conductor for the series after trying to get the show to be performed by his Chicago Pops orchestra , and hearing that other tour locations were hesitant about putting on the concert . He has said that he tried to add to the concerts his personal touch in the areas of " drama and timing " . Different orchestras were used in each performance , though the format and setlist remained the same . 
 = = More Friends : Music from Final Fantasy = = 
 More Friends was a single concert performed while the Dear Friends series was still touring . It was meant to loosely correspond with the one @-@ year anniversary of the first Dear Friends concert , also held in Los Angeles . The concert contained a selection of musical tracks from the games , composed by Nobuo Uematsu , arranged for orchestra by Shiro Hamaguchi , Tsuyoshi Sekito , and Michio Okamiya , and performed by an orchestra conducted by Arnie Roth on May 16 , 2005 at the Gibson Amphitheatre in Los Angeles , California . Much like the 20020220 concert , they were accompanied by several different groups . The Black Mages , a band led by Nobuo Uematsu that arranges Final Fantasy music into a rock music style , performed their songs " The Rocking Grounds " and " Maybe I 'm a Lion " , and joined with the orchestra to perform " One @-@ Winged Angel " , while RIKKI sang " Suteki da Ne " as she had in the original game . Emiko Shiratori performed both the Japanese and English versions of " Melodies of Life " in a single piece , opera singers Stephenie Woodling , Chad <unk> , and Todd Robinson sang the vocal components of " Opera " Maria & Draco " " , and the <unk> University Singers , a local choir , performed as part of " One @-@ Winged Angel " . 
 A recorded album was released on February 15 , 2006 by Square Enix with the catalog number SQEX @-@ <unk> . The album spans 13 tracks and covers a duration of 74 : 54 . The album was well received by critics such as Patrick Gann of RPGFan , who said that " the recording quality is great , almost every song is aimed to please , and rarely do Square Enix fail in this regard " . Sophia of Square Enix Music Online concurred , terming it " An album with a little bit of everything " and " a must @-@ have for any Final Fantasy fan " . 
 = = Voices - Music from Final Fantasy = = 
 Voices - Music from Final Fantasy was a concert held in Yokohama , Japan on February 18 , 2006 featuring vocal arrangements of Final Fantasy music . Based on compositions by Nobuo Uematsu , the music was performed by the Prima Vista Philharmonic Orchestra in the Pacifico Yokohama Conference and Convention Center , conducted by Arnie Roth , and sung by various performers . The 16 pieces and two encore songs were interspersed with announcements by Uematsu and Rieko Katayama , the MC . As in previous Final Fantasy concerts , many of the pieces were sung by the original performers from the game . Emiko Shiratori sang " Melodies of Life " , RIKKI performed " Suteki da ne " , Izumi Masuda reprised her role in " <unk> de la <unk> " , and Angela Aki sang " Kiss me Good @-@ bye " , to date the only song from Final Fantasy XII to be performed at a Final Fantasy concert . Angela Aki also sang " Eyes on Me " , originally sung by Faye Wong in Final Fantasy VIII . The Black Mages performed their song " Advent : One Winged Angel " along with the orchestra . Other local singers and choirs joined the orchestra for the remaining pieces , with Etsuyo Ota , Tomoaki Watanabe , and Tetsuya <unk> performing " Opera " Maria and Draco " " as they had in the Tour de Japon two years prior . A DVD of the performance was released on June 21 , 2006 , containing a recording of the full concert as well as interviews with Nobuo Uematsu , Arnie Roth , and the vocalists . 
 = = Distant Worlds = = 
 = = = Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy = = = 
 Distant Worlds : Music From Final Fantasy is a concert tour featuring music from the Final Fantasy series that began touring on December 4 , 2007 in Stockholm , Sweden and continues to date . Unlike previous tours , it is a worldwide tour . Produced by <unk> Music Productions and supported by Thomas Böcker in a consultative capacity ( from 2007 to 2011 ) , the series of concerts features music conducted by Arnie Roth and composed by Nobuo Uematsu . Launched in conjunction with the twentieth anniversary of Final Fantasy , the two @-@ hour @-@ long concerts include music from every single game of the series . Like the Dear Friends concerts , giant video screens display video and art stills in order to accompany the music being played . During the tour , additional songs have been added to the setlist . These include " Ronfaure " from Final Fantasy XI , added on April 11 , 2009 , " Man With A Machine Gun " from Final Fantasy VIII , added on June 18 , 2009 , " Main Theme of FFVII " , added October 8 , 2009 , and " Dancing Mad " from Final Fantasy VI and " J @-@ E @-@ N @-@ O @-@ V @-@ A " from Final Fantasy VII , added December 12 , 2009 . 
 After the Distant Worlds II concert in Stockholm , the additional pieces performed were added to the setlist , and for every concert afterward different songs out of that rotation have been chosen for each performance . " Kiss Me Goodbye " from Final Fantasy XII was played at the June 18 , 2010 Detroit show , though it was not officially added to the general setlist . It was played again at the April 1 , 2011 concert in New York City , which featured an expanded setlist over two concerts . In April 2011 Square Enix announced that the concert series was expected to run for at least three more years . Uematsu has said that he prefers for the tour to add arrangements of older pieces from the series , as he feels that they are what fans are more interested in ; he and Roth intend to continue to add more arrangements to the setlist . He was hesitant for pieces from Final Fantasy XIII and XIV to be added , as he did not feel that they had been around long enough to build a strong following like the older songs . 
 Released on December 4 , 2007 to coincide with the first concert of the tour , the Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy album features the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra and contains most songs performed at that concert . It was recorded in August 2007 at the Stockholm Concert Hall . The CD is sold at all of the concert venues and online at the official website . The album received mixed reviews from critics , with Patrick Gann of RPGFan saying that " The recording quality is decent , the performance is standard , and it 's all the classic Final Fantasy you 've come to love " , but expressing disappointment that the album contained only one new arrangement , with the other songs composed of arrangements originally made for other concerts . Andre of Square Enix Music Online , however , despite also wishing for more original arrangements , felt that the quality was superb and that the album as a whole was " one of life and energy . " Chris of Square Enix Music Online also praised the album , finding similar features and flaws . 
 = = = Distant Worlds II : More Music from Final Fantasy = = = 
 Distant Worlds II : More Music From Final Fantasy was a concert in the Distant Worlds series featuring music from Final Fantasy that was performed on June 12 , 2010 in Stockholm , Sweden , just as the first Distant Worlds concert was . Arnie Roth returned to the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra with a completely new program presenting more pieces from Final Fantasy . Simultaneously with the concert , a new CD with the same repertoire was released under the name Distant Worlds II : Music From Final Fantasy . The recording was done by the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra under the direction of Arnie Roth in January 2010 . The name Distant Worlds II only refers to the Stockholm concert ; the series itself has continued under the original Distant Worlds name with the new arrangements added to its permanent rotation . 
 = = = Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy Returning Home = = = 
 Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy Returning Home was a concert in the Distant Worlds series conducted by Arnie Roth featuring music composed by Nobuo Uematsu and Masashi Hamauzu from the Final Fantasy series . The concert was performed on November 6 and 7 , 2010 in Tokyo , Japan , by the Kanagawa Philharmonic Orchestra with guest performances from vocalists Frances Maya and Susan Calloway , among others . The concert premiered several arrangements from Final Fantasy XIII and XIV , which were then added to the general rotation . The entire 2010 Japan concert was recorded live for a DVD and 2 @-@ CD set which was later released on January 19 , 2011 . 
 = = = Tour locations = = = 
 = = = A New World = = = 
 Beginning in 2014 , Square Enix began touring a new series , A New World , which featured cut @-@ down versions of the arrangements for Distant Worlds , edited by Arnie Roth , and played in smaller venues . The concerts , marketed as more " intimate " versions of the Distant Worlds concerts , feature more solo and duet performances to correspond with their smaller chamber orchestras . Like the main concert series , A New World is an international series , with over 30 performances in America , Australia , Britain , Canada , France , Germany , and Malaysia . An album of music from the concert was made available as a digital album to purchase on Bandcamp on August 22 , 2014 . 
 = = Final Symphony = = 
 Final Symphony is an official concert tour featuring music from Final Fantasy VI , VII , and X. The world premiere took place May 11 , 2013 in Wuppertal , Germany where it was performed twice by the Wuppertal Symphony Orchestra at the venue Historische Stadthalle Wuppertal . A performance by the London Symphony Orchestra took place May 30 , 2013 in London at the Barbican Centre . It marked the first live performance of video game music by the London Symphony Orchestra , making a historical moment for the Final Fantasy franchise and video game music in general . At Final Symphony in Wuppertal and London , Nobuo Uematsu and Masashi Hamauzu were in attendance . At the performances by the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra , both composers talked about their work on the series on stage of the Tokyo Bunka Kaikan concert venue . Final Symphony Tokyo was the first video game music concert ever to be greeted with standing ovations in Japan . Additional performances took place in Denmark , Sweden and in Finland . The tour continues to date . 
 The pieces were arranged by Masashi Hamauzu , one of the composers for Final Fantasy X , along with Jonne Valtonen and Roger Wanamo , and the arranged works are based on compositions by him and Nobuo Uematsu , who acts as a consultant for the concerts . Thomas Böcker is producing the concerts , as he had done for numerous other video game music concerts in Germany , Sweden and Japan ( Symphonic Game Music Concert series ) . Eckehard Stier conducts , who is experienced in the field of video game music due to his work on the CD album Drammatica by Yoko Shimomura and the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in Tokyo . The concert featured pianist Benyamin Nuss in 2013 ( Wuppertal and London ) , Mischa Cheung in 2014 ( Tampere ) , with Katharina Treutler being the main pianist of the concert series , performing at the events in Tokyo , Aarhus and Stockholm in 2014 . 
 On October 10 , 2014 , the Royal Stockholm Philharmonic Orchestra released a video of its critically acclaimed performance of the Final Fantasy VI Symphonic Poem from Final Symphony Stockholm online ( available to watch for free and on demand ) . On December 13 , 2014 , it was announced that an album of the music from the concert is to be released in early 2015 , with the album recorded , mixed and mastered at London 's Abbey Road Studios . The music is to be recorded by the London Symphony Orchestra , and Nobuo Uematsu will supervise the production . Before the album 's release part of it will be broadcast by the UK radio station Classic FM . 
 = = Other concerts = = 
 In addition to concerts specifically devoted to the Final Fantasy series , music from the games has been performed at many other concerts and concert series . Music from the series was played in the first four concerts of the Tokyo Philharmonic Orchestra 's Orchestral Game Music Concerts series from 1991 to 1994 , and each concert has been released on an album . Outside Japan , Final Fantasy music was played for the first time at the Symphonic Game Music Concert series , a series of annual German video game music concerts starting in August 2003 . It has also been played live by the Australian Eminence Symphony Orchestra since October 2003 , an independent symphony orchestra specializing in classical music from video games and in the Video Games Live concert tour from 2005 to date as well as the Play ! A Video Game Symphony world tour from 2006 onwards , for which Nobuo Uematsu composed the opening fanfare that accompanies each performance . The music made up one fourth of the Symphonic Fantasies concerts in September 2009 and in 2012 which were produced by the creators of the Symphonic Game Music Concert series and conducted by Arnie Roth ; music from the Chrono series , the Kingdom Hearts series , and the Mana series made up the rest of the concert . 
 = Gopala Gopala ( 2015 film ) = 
 Gopala Gopala is a 2015 Indian Telugu @-@ language satirical drama film directed by Kishore Kumar Pardasany . The film was jointly produced by Daggubati Suresh Babu and Sharrath Marar under the Suresh Productions and North Star Entertainments Pvt. Ltd. banners . It features Daggubati Venkatesh and Pawan Kalyan in the lead roles and Shriya Saran , Mithun Chakraborty and Posani Krishna Murali in key supporting roles . Anoop Rubens composed the music while <unk> Vincent was the film 's cinematographer . 
 The film is a remake of the 2012 Hindi film OMG – Oh My God ! which was itself based on the Gujarati stage play Kanji <unk> Kanji and on the 2001 film The Man Who Sued God . It follows the story of an atheist , Gopala Rao , who sues God after losing his shop in an earthquake . Religious organisations revolt against him and Krishna visits him as his human guide . 
 The film was made with a budget of ₹ 120 million . Production began on 9 June 2014 . It was predominantly shot in and around Hyderabad , with a few sections filmed in Vishakhapatnam and Varanasi . The film was released worldwide on 10 January 2015 as a Sankranthi release . It received positive reviews from critics and grossed ₹ 660 million , with a distributor share of ₹ 411 million . 
 = = Plot = = 
 <unk> Gopala Rao is an atheist who owns a shop selling Hindu idols alongside his wife Meenakshi and son Moksha as well as his assistant <unk> . He obstructs a holy ritual involving his family , conducted by <unk> Maharaj , a fake <unk> . A sudden earthquake destroys his shop . 
 Rao approaches his insurance company who deny him assistance , claiming that an earthquake is an act of God . Rao decides to sue God but cannot find a lawyer willing to take the case on . He eventually engages Akbar Bhai , a disabled lawyer , who helps him file the case . Legal notices are sent to the insurance company as well as to <unk> the priest and others from his group , as representatives of God . The court accepts the case , but Rao finds himself trapped among armed fundamentalists , with a creditor Ramji occupying the house and his wife having left him . 
 Rao is rescued by Gopala Govinda Hari , a consultant , who is revealed to the audience to be the deity Krishna in disguise . Gopala buys Rao 's house from Ramji but allows Rao to stay with him . The lawsuit caused a public outcry , so on Gopala 's advice , Rao gives an interview to the media about his views , which turns viral ; public opinion swings in his favour . Hundreds of people whose insurance claims were rejected due to an Act of God clause turn up at Akbar 's house and join the fight . Rao agrees to fight on behalf of all of them . 
 In the next court session , defending lawyer Shankar Narayana points out that Rao has no document that can prove the disaster was an Act of God . The judge orders Rao to present a written proof that will support his claim . Gopala gives Rao the Bhagavad Gita , Bible and Quran in which to find the answers . Rao subsequently points out a passage saying that " This world is a creation of God , and it is his will to allow it to grow or destroy " , which strengthens his case . As he nears the end of his argument , he is stabbed by a staunch follower of Leeladhara . 
 Rao is rushed to the hospital where he slips into a coma due to heavy blood loss . Leeladhara then plans to make Rao a messenger of God and elevate him to a divine figure across the country after killing him . The lawsuit 's verdict goes in Rao 's favour and religious organisations are ordered by the court to pay the compensation to all the plaintiffs . After a month , Rao is rescued by Gopala , who later reveals his identity . Rao starts to believe in the existence of God . Meanwhile , Leeladhara , <unk> Matha , and <unk> open a temple dedicated to Rao and accumulate millions in donations . Rao learns that his death is planned for Vijayadasami which coincides with the death of Sai Baba of Shirdi . He escapes with Gopala but is attacked by the priests ' henchmen . Gopala manages to show them Narasimha in place of Rao , scaring them off . 
 Rao arrives to find his statues erected at the place where his shop once stood . He wades through the stunned crowd and breaks the statue , then admonishes the crowd about trusting in godmen . He advises them to search for God inside themselves rather than worshipping statues . Rao prevents the crowd from attacking the priests , asking for them to be allowed to leave unharmed but also insisting that they stop believing in them . After the completion of Ramlila , Rao goes back to Gopala to thank him , only to find him gone . 
 Rao 's family arrive and they are reunited . He sees Gopala 's key chain on the floor . When he is about to take it back , he hears Gopala 's voice telling him to get rid of it . He throws it away , seeing it disappear into the sky with a flash as Gopala " signs off " , promising him they will meet again . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In early April 2013 , the Paruchuri Brothers informed the media that they were in the final stages of acquiring the remake rights of Umesh Shukla 's OMG – Oh My God ! ( 2012 ) and that work on the script would begin afterwards . It was also said that Ravi Teja would play the role of Krishna in this film , originally played by Akshay Kumar , and that the official confirmation of the film would come within a week . OMG – Oh My God ! itself was an adaptation of the Gujarati play Kanji <unk> Kanji . Daggubati Suresh Babu acquired the remake rights in mid November 2013 and Daggubati Venkatesh was confirmed to be a part of the film 's principal cast . Kishore Kumar Pardasany was selected to direct the film . 
 After much speculation , Suresh Babu confirmed to the media in mid @-@ February 2014 that Pawan Kalyan would play the role of Krishna and Sharrath Marar would be co @-@ producing the film with North Star Entertainment . After considering the titles Deva <unk> <unk> and Gopala Gopala , the latter was finalised just before its formal launch on 9 June 2014 at Hyderabad . Anoop Rubens was confirmed to replace Sohail Sen as the music director . <unk> Vincent was selected to handle the cinematography , despite reports stating that P. C. Sreeram would be doing the job . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Venkatesh and Rajendra Prasad were initially reported to repeat their roles as Akshay Kumar and <unk> Rawal from the original . Venkatesh was later confirmed as playing Paresh Rawal and Vikram was approached for the role of Krishna . Pawan Kalyan was engaged for the same part later on . Venkatesh personally researched and purchased his outfits . , incorporating a number of differently @-@ coloured short kurtas into his costume . He ended up with more than 40 changes onscreen . 
 Kalyan underwent a special diet and exercise to lose weight for the role in the film . Kishore Kumar said that Kalyan would be seen for 25 minutes , as in the original , but this was later extended to 45 minutes . Kalyan was slightly overweight before signing the film and followed a crash diet comprising milk and fruit , avoiding carbohydrates and oily foods . Reports stated that he would use a <unk> <unk> Aquila Pro in the film . Later his team met Akshay Warde , who had designed a special <unk> motorcycle for Akshay Kumar in the original . Warde completed designing a new motorcycle within a month , albeit without a support team like he had had when making the original film . 
 After considering Nayantara , Anjali , and Radhika Apte for the female lead , Shriya Saran was finalised for the role in early May 2014 after Nayantara walked out of the project citing scheduling and payment issues . She called her role a " beautifully etched " and an " inspiring " one . Saran added that the relationship between her and Venkatesh in the film would encapsulate the central debate of the existence of God . Mithun <unk> was signed to repeat his role from the original in early June 2014 , thereby making his Telugu debut . Posani Krishna Murali , <unk> , Raghu Babu , and Vennela Kishore were selected to play other important roles in the film . Madhu Shalini was selected to play the role of a journalist . It was originally unclear whose role she was remaking from the original when she was engaged on the film . Diksha <unk> was selected to play the role that Poonam <unk> performed in the original . <unk> Ambrose made a cameo appearance . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 In early May 2014 , the film 's co @-@ producer Sharrath Marar , in an interview with IANS , said that the regular shooting was planned to begin on 19 May 2014 after Pawan Kalyan was relieved from his political duties , also saying that the makers were aiming for a September 2014 release . However , it emerged that the film would be officially launched on 2 June 2014 and shooting would be done in a specially erected set in Hyderabad . Principal photography eventually commenced a week later on 9 June 2014 at Ramanaidu Studios at Nanakramguda in Hyderabad . Venkatesh joined the shoot in the same day . Pawan Kalyan allotted 25 days for the shooting of his scenes in the film . 
 The film 's second schedule started on 18 July 2014 at Hyderabad after a brief break while Venkatesh was promoting his film Drushyam . Pawan Kalyan was reported as joining the shoot on 23 July 2014 and a special sequence in which he would be seen driving his personal motorcycle was planned to be shot . His part in the film 's dialogue was expected to be completed . However , Kalyan joined the sets two days in advance and scenes featuring him and Venkatesh were shot . The film 's shoot continued in the outskirts of Hyderabad where scenes with Venkatesh . Kalyan and Shriya Saran were shot . The film 's shoot continued in late August 2014 at Nanakramguda . The exteriors of Osmania University 's College for Women in Koti , Hyderabad were used to shoot a court scene . Producer Daggubati Suresh Babu said that the college had a look which suited the scene . 
 Filming went ahead in Ramoji Film City . Kalyan shot his introductory song in late September 2014 . The filming was almost complete and in the middle of October 2014 , the film 's climax was shot in the outskirts of Hyderabad . An additional song with Venkatesh and Kalyan was also planned . At the end of October 2014 , earthquake scenes were shot with Venkatesh and others at Ramoji Film City . Filming then continued in Nanakramguda . By then , three @-@ quarters of the film 's shoot was complete and Kalyan was reported as having completed shooting for his part during the subsequent weeks . Shooting for two songs and graphics work remained to be completed . By mid @-@ November 2014 , the film 's shoot neared completion . 
 Venkatesh and Shriya joined the film 's sets in Vishakhapatnam where a song and a few more scenes were shot . On completion , the production team revealed that the schedule was shot in the city to boost morale at Ramanaidu Studios and also demonstrate to the Bengali and Oriya film industries that shoots could be carried out smoothly even after the destruction of the city by Cyclone Hudhud . The film continued to be shot near Varanasi in early December 2014 , with Venkatesh and other actors taking part . A song with Venkatesh and Kalyan was shot in the outskirts of Hyderabad around the end of December . The final schedule began the next day and Kalyan 's crucial scenes were planned . 
 = = Themes and influences = = 
 The film is an official remake of the 2012 Hindi film OMG – Oh My God ! directed by Umesh Shukla which tells the story of an atheist who sues God for causing an earthquake in which he loses his shop . The film focuses mostly on exploiting people 's faith in the name of business and money @-@ making . Daggubati Venkatesh said in an interview to The Hindu that this film would focus on the tensions between Indian rituals and spirituality . In the film , the deity involved , Krishna , teaches the atheist protagonist to use the principles of the Bhagavad Gita , Bible and Quran to win his case . A song introducing the atheist 's character , his family and his views on rituals was added in which was not a part of the original . 
 Several new scenes were included in the Telugu version , including two songs . The film also deals with the issue of fake godmen . Daggubati Venkatesh said in an interview with Suresh Kavirayani of the Deccan Chronicle , " We all know about these people . Media also publishes stories about them all the time . We wanted to create some awareness among the people , so we touched on the theme of fake godmen . But there are genuine people too , who give wonderful messages and enlighten people with their preaching " . The lyrics of the song <unk> <unk> question the superstitions people believe in . 
 Dialogues written for and uttered by Kalyan 's character in the film were linked to the politics of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh . Comments such as " Nenu time ki <unk> <unk> <unk> , Nenu <unk> time <unk> " ( " I don 't come on time ; time starts when I come " ) and " <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( " The unskilled will rule if the skilled stay at home " ) appeared to refer to the change in government and Kalyan 's own entry into politics . 
 = = Music = = 
 Anoop Rubens was signed in on to compose the film 's soundtrack and score in June 2014 . Before the official launch of the film , Rubens completed composing a song and was said by the makers to complete composing all the songs in a week 's time from the launch . The soundtrack consisted of 4 songs whose lyrics were penned by Chandrabose , Sirivennela Sitaramasastri and Anantha Sreeram . Lahari Music acquired the soundtrack 's marketing rights in mid August 2014 . The soundtrack was released on 4 January 2015 , and achieved high chart rankings . 
 = = Release = = 
 The film was planned for release in either September or October 2014 , but a January 2015 Sankranthi release was announced in July 2014 . Gemini TV acquired the film 's television broadcast rights in early December 2014 . Suresh Babu sold the rights for an amount of ₹ 200 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 0 million ) as a three film package including Drushyam and <unk> <unk> , both co @-@ produced by him . The release date was confirmed as 9 January 2015 . United States theatrical rights were acquired by BlueSky Cinemas Inc . The Central Board of Film Certification passed the film with a clean ' U ' certificate and the release date was postponed to 10 January 2015 . Because of the demand for the film 's tickets , 20 more theatres were added to the original list . 
 The film was released in 1400 screens ( 1200 theatres ) worldwide ; 1100 theatres in India , out of which 850 theatres were in the AP / Nizam region , more than 100 theatres in United States and 50 theatres in the rest of the world . A charity performance was held at Shiva Parvathi theatre in <unk> , Hyderabad on 10 January 2015 at 2 : 30 AM . Photos featuring fans celebrating the film 's release were widely circulated on Twitter . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film 's poster was unveiled on 28 November 2014 , designed by Anil and Bhanu of AB Core Design . It began trending on social networking sites within few hours and became a worldwide trending topic . Anoop Rubens received acclaim for his background score in the poster . Another poster featuring Kalyan and Venkatesh on a motorcycle was unveiled on 16 December 2014 . The theatrical trailer was unveiled on 4 December 2014 at the audio launch event . It began trending instantly on YouTube and within two days , it reached the first position in India 's Top Trending videos on YouTube displacing <unk> <unk> ... from first place with a view count of nearly 0 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = Legal Issues = = = 
 Vishwa Hindu Parishad and <unk> Ganesh Utsav <unk> submitted an appeal to the regional director of Central Board of Film Certification on 31 December 2014 claiming that the film had objectionable scenes which hurt the religious sentiments of Hindu people . In a statement to IANS , they said that they had sought action before the release of the movie as any protest later would be futile . In an interview with <unk> <unk> of The New Indian Express , Venkatesh said " It ’ s natural for certain people to react and they are free to express their views but once they see the film they won ’ t look at it that way . In case , there are any unfortunate incidents , we will convince them and it ’ ll be fine . Because whatever the scriptures tell , that ’ s what I tell in the film " . 
 <unk> Rao filed a similar case against the film at <unk> police station on 10 January 2015 . Telangana lawyers lodged a complaint with the law minister A. <unk> Reddy on 16 January 2015 and requested him to take immediate steps to delete objectionable scenes from the film . The division bench comprising Chief Justice Kalyan Jyoti Sengupta and Justice P. V. Sanjay Kumar of the Hyderabad High Court pointed out that it could not grant any order without making the producer and director of the film a party to the case . <unk> Rao then was permitted to file a fresh petition seeking a ban on the screening of the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film received positive reviews from critics as well as audience according to International Business Times India . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu wrote " To a large extent , Gopala Gopala stays true to the essence of OMG – Oh My God ! and it ’ s heart @-@ warming to see a Telugu film backed by big stars taking up the idea of spirituality versus superstitious beliefs " . Veena N. of Oneindia Entertainment rated the film 4 out of 5 and stated " Even though its a remake movie , Gopala Gopala is a must watch as it is a hilarious entertainer . Watch it for Power Star and Venkatesh " . Karthik Keramalu of IBN Live rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 and wrote " Like the recently @-@ released Hindi film PK , Gopala Gopala too challenges blind faith . Watching the two actors light up the screen , who , for many years have starred in successful remakes , is a nostalgic tribute . Pawan Kalyan with a charming smile confesses that dharma supports <unk> ; however , in no manner , does it mean to curb the will to criticize religion and its beliefs " . 
 Hemanth Kumar of The Times of India rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 and wrote " Gopala Gopala begins as a story about an atheist , who seems to offend a lot of people around him , and in the end , the film drives home the point that when you help others , it is as good as worshiping God himself . And in doing so , the film churns out plenty of thought provoking questions which force you to look for answers within yourself and this is perhaps the film 's biggest achievement . The entire film turns out to be quite a gratifying experience if you play close attention to the dialogues and conversations between the lead characters , played by Venkatesh and Pawan Kalyan " . Suresh Kavirayani of the Deccan Chronicle rated the film 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 and wrote " In the second half , the film drags a bit , especially the <unk> ’ scenes . The climax is also a bit boring . But , if you haven ’ t seen the original Paresh Rawal and Akshay Kumar starrer OMG — Oh My God ! , then you must watch Gopala Gopala . Pawan Kalyan fans will love the film and it ’ s a treat for them with two big stars sharing screen space " . Behindwoods rated the film 2 @.@ 75 out of 5 and wrote " Even if you were exposed to the story , Gopala Gopala is fresh and entertaining . When Telugu cinema is criticized for prioritizing the cinematic liberty over the linear flow of the story , Gopala Gopala is to the point and crisp except for certain portions in the second half . Apart from the richness of the film and the effective work of the technical departments , Gopala Gopala impresses completely with the dialogues and the performances . " 
 In contrast , IndiaGlitz rated the film 2 @.@ 75 out of 5 and wrote " Kishore <unk> is not a revelation ; this one is a faithful remake that has a few highs and some sharp lines . For all the apparent difference , it plays to the gallery " . IANS rated the film 2 @.@ 5 out of 5 and wrote " It would 've been nice if the core plot was retained and changes were made to the film and its characters . But you can 't watch Gopala Gopala with such expectations because it successfully reproduces scenes and characters from the original as though remaking is misunderstood as copying frame @-@ to @-@ frame . One way it 's commendable that the makers didn 't try to make many changes since the remake features popular stars such as Daggubati and Pawan , who usually play to the gallery . But all this has been done at the cost of creativity and that 's what makes the remake less exciting , if not boring . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 The film earned a share of around ₹ 91 @.@ 9 million on the opening day and emerged as the fourth highest opener of all time in the AP / Nizam areas . It stood in the fourth spot in the list of top ten opening day shares at the AP / Nizam box office behind Attarintiki Daredi ( 2013 ) , Aagadu ( 2014 ) and Baadshah ( 2013 ) . The film collected $ 0 @.@ 6 million in two days at USA box office and was expected to cross the $ 1 million mark soon . The film collected a share of ₹ 40 million on its second day , taking its two @-@ day AP / Nizam box office total to ₹ 135 million . With the inclusion of takings from Karnataka , Rest of India and overseas markets , the two @-@ day worldwide box office collection was valued at ₹ 195 million . The film 's trade witnessed a huge drop on its third day by collecting nearly ₹ 20 million at AP / Nizam Box office . But it topped the weekend box office followed by <unk> and Raghuvaran B. Tech . 
 It also stood in the top spot at Chennai box office followed by PK and <unk> . The film also took good openings in the United States where it collected ₹ 43 @.@ 7 million in the weekend of 9 – 11 January 2015 . The film collected ₹ 170 million in the first five days at AP / Nizam box office and ₹ 265 million at the worldwide box office . With this , it surpassed the opening weekend figures of Aagadu at AP / Nizam box office , but failed to surpass its worldwide three @-@ day collections . The film collected a worldwide share of ₹ 298 @.@ 5 million in six days surpassing the first week collections of Naayak ( 2013 ) and Ramayya Vasthavayya ( 2013 ) . The six @-@ day AP / Nizam area share was ₹ 230 @.@ 8 million with which it surpassed the first week AP / Nizam share of Businessman ( 2012 ) . According to The Times of India , the film collected huge shares and headed towards record collections overseas , expected to cross ₹ 300 million mark . 
 The film collected ₹ 261 @.@ 5 million at AP / Nizam box office and nearly ₹ 330 million at the worldwide box office in seven days and surpassed the first week collection of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu ( 2013 ) at AP / Nizam box office and Baadshah , Gabbar Singh ( 2012 ) at the worldwide box office . The film collected a gross of ₹ 590 million and a share of ₹ 379 million in nine days at the worldwide box office thus surpassing the lifetime collections of Pokiri ( 2006 ) and took the 18th spot in the list of all @-@ time top 25 Telugu films with highest worldwide share . The film also created a new record in <unk> in East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh by collecting ₹ 2 @.@ 08 million in nine days , breaking the record set by Magadheera ( 2009 ) in its lifetime run . The film witnessed a drop in its collections at AP / Nizam box office and earned around ₹ 310 million share in ten days . However the film crossed ₹ 400 million mark at the worldwide box office overtaking the totals of Businessman and Robo , the Telugu dubbed version of Enthiran ( 2010 ) . Due to stiff competition from I , <unk> and Temper , the film collected a gross of ₹ 880 million and a distributor share of ₹ 411 million at the worldwide box office during its lifetime run . The film passed the ₹ 500 million gross mark and collected ₹ 335 million in its lifetime at the AP / Nizam box office alone . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 = My War = 
 My War is the second studio album by American band Black Flag . It polarized fans on its release in 1984 on SST Records over the LP 's B @-@ side , on which the band slowed down to a heavy , Black Sabbath @-@ esque trudge , despite the reputation the band had earned as leaders in fast hardcore punk on its first album , Damaged ( 1981 ) . 
 After a period of legal troubles which prohibited the band from using its own name on recordings , Black Flag returned to the studio with a new approach to its music that incorporated a greater variety of styles , resulting in a sound orthodox punks found difficult to accept . The line @-@ up had shrunk from five members to three : vocalist Henry Rollins , drummer Bill Stevenson , and co @-@ founding guitarist Greg Ginn . Ginn doubled on bass guitar under the name " Dale Nixon " for the recording as he had pushed out co @-@ founding bassist Chuck Dukowski shortly before recording ; the album includes two tracks Dukowski wrote . 
 The six tracks on the A @-@ side of the LP are generally high @-@ paced , thrashy hardcore , featuring guitar solos unusual in punk . On the B @-@ side are three tracks in a sludge metal style , each breaching six @-@ minutes with ponderously slow tempos and unrelenting dark lyrics of self @-@ hatred . The band members had grown their hair long when they toured the album in 1984 , further alienating their hardcore skinhead fanbase . My War had a major influence on sludge metal and grunge . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1978 Black Flag guitarist and cofounder Greg Ginn converted his ham radio business Solid State <unk> to SST Records to release the band 's first EP Nervous Breakdown . Soon SST was releasing recordings by other bands as well , beginning with Minutemen 's Paranoid Time in 1980 . 
 Black Flag recorded its first album Damaged in 1981 at Unicorn Studios and arranged a deal with the studio 's record label Unicorn Records , which had distribution with MCA Records . MCA label president Al Bergamo halted the release after hearing the record , calling it " anti @-@ parent " — though SST hand Joe Carducci asserts this was a pretense for MCA to sever relations with the financially troubled Unicorn . The band obtained and distributed the already @-@ pressed 20 @,@ 000 copies of Damaged and adorned it with a label displaying Bergamo 's " anti @-@ parent " quote . Legal troubles erupted when SST claimed unpaid royalties from Unicorn and Unicorn successfully counter @-@ sued , resulting in five days in jail for Ginn and <unk> bassist Chuck Dukowski and an injunction prohibiting the band from releasing material under its own name . The double album Everything Went Black — a compilation of earlier , unreleased material — appeared from SST in 1982 without the band 's name on it . Unicorn 's bankruptcy in 1983 freed the band from the injunction . 
 Following the release of Damaged , Black Flag absorbed a wider range of influences , such as the doom metal of Saint Vitus ( who released via SST ) and the more experimental hardcore of Flipper , Void , and Fang . The band revisited early influences such as Black Sabbath , the MC5 , and the Stooges for new approaches to songwriting other than relying on the high speed that had become the Black Flag hallmark . In an interview in 1983 with Mark Arm the band declared its admiration for heavy metal band Dio ; when asked , " Dio ? What 's that ? " Ginn responded , " It 's Italian for God . " Ginn jealously guarded the new material , fearing other bands would capitalize on the new approach . 
 The band toured extensively in North American and Europe to often hostile , violent hardcore punk crowds . The disciplined group rehearsed obsessively , but there was little friendship between members : vocalist Henry Rollins was introverted and Ginn cold and demanding . Dukowski felt that Rollins ' vocal approach was better suited than that of the band 's earlier three singers to the new material he was writing such as " I Love You " and " My War " . Dukowski , who also wrote poetry and fiction , encouraged Rollins to write as well , and Rollins found inspiration in <unk> 's bleak lyrical style . 
 The band recorded a set of ten demo tracks at Total Access studios in 1982 for a planned follow @-@ up to Damaged on which Chuck Biscuits replaced Damaged drummer Robo . The rest of the lineup consisted of Ginn and former vocalist Dez Cadena on guitars , Rollins on vocals , and Dukowski on bass . The band explored new sounds on these tracks , which tended to feature a riff @-@ heavy heavy @-@ metal edge and noisy , energetic free guitar soloing from Ginn . The album never materialized , and the heavily bootlegged demos have never been officially released ; re @-@ recordings of several of the tracks from the session were to feature on My War and other later albums . The line @-@ up did not last long — frustrated with the band 's legal troubles , Biscuits left in December 1982 , replaced by Bill Stevenson , and in 1983 Cadena left to form <unk> . Ginn had been frustrated with Dukowski 's sense of rhythm , and in Germany during a European tour in 1983 gave Dukowski an ultimatum to quit , or Ginn himself would leave . Dukowski left the band , but stayed on to co @-@ run SST . 
 With Unicorn 's demise in 1983 Black Flag was able to release the material they had written since 1981 . Eager to get back in the studio but still without a bassist , Ginn took on bass duties under the pseudonym " Dale Nixon " and practiced the new material with Stevenson up to eight hours a day , teaching the drummer to slow down and let the rhythm " ooze out " at a pace Stevenson was unused to ; the band called this approach the " socialist groove " , as all beats were equally spaced . With Spot as producer and $ 200 @,@ 000 in debt , Ginn , Rollins , and Stevenson headed to the studio to record My War . 
 = = Music = = 
 The dark music on My War lacks the humor and fist @-@ pumping anthems that lightened up Damaged — no longer the snotty @-@ nosed punk approach of the Keith Morris era , the band now focused on gloom , depression , defeatism , and aggression . The sides on the original LP divide the tracks into stylistic halves . The first half features five tracks of high @-@ powered hardcore punk and closes with a noisy freak @-@ out , " The Swinging Man " . Dukowski penned the opening title track . Ginn 's " Can 't Decide " follows , a gloomy ode to frustration : " I conceal my feelings / So I don 't have to explain / What I can 't explain anyway " . " Beat My Head Against the Wall " rails at conformity and the band 's experience with a major label : " Swimming in the mainstream / Is such a lame , lame dream " . Dukowski 's " I Love You " parodies pop ballads with lyrics of violence and dysfunction in a relationship gone wrong . Ginn and Rollins share credit on the metallic " Forever Time " and the noisy " Swinging Man " . 
 Three tracks that each clock at over six minutes make up the second half . Each is in a plodding Black Sabbath @-@ esque sludge metal style with ponderous lyrics of unrelenting self @-@ hate . On " Three Nights " Rollins compares himself to feces stuck to his shoe : " And I 've been grinding that stink into the dirt / For a long time now " . Against a slow , heavy , start @-@ and @-@ stop bass riff and a constant drum thudding , Rollins closes " Scream " with a bellow after delivering the Ginn @-@ penned lines : " I may be a big baby / But I 'll scream in your ear / ' Til I find out / Just what it is I am doing here " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Black Flag toured the My War material from March 1984 , with the Nig @-@ Heist and Meat Puppets as opening acts . It had been a year since the band had toured , and Rollins , Ginn , and Stevenson had grown out their hair ; punks associated long hair was with the hippies they loathed and found it dissonant with Rollins ' accepted image as a hardcore skinhead . My War polarized Black Flag fans ; it alienated those who wanted the band to stay true to its simple hardcore roots and who were put off by the length of the songs , the riff @-@ heaviness , and the solos — elements widely thought of as un @-@ punk . Tim Yo disparaged the album in <unk> , saying " it sounds like Black Flag doing an imitation of Iron Maiden imitating Black Flag on a bad day " , and called the B @-@ side " sheer torture " . Howard Hampton at the Boston Phoenix called My War " unbearably boring ... resorting to standard [ heavy metal ] machinations " . 
 My War was the first of four Black Flag releases in 1984 , a year that also saw Family Man , Slip It In , and Live ' 84 appear from SST . It is considered to have helped usher in post @-@ hardcore along with such releases as Hüsker Dü 's Zen Arcade and Minutemen 's Double Nickels on the Dime the same year . 
 The muffled sound of the album 's production has attracted criticism ; Stevie Chick disparaged the lack of character in Ginn 's bass @-@ playing on " My War " when compared to the 1982 demo of the same song with Dukowski on bass . Michael Azerrad praised the strength of the material while denigrating the " frustrating lack of ensemble feel " as the album was recorded without a full lineup . Critic Clay Jarvis commended the album , emphasizing the risks taken on it and its influence , calling it " more a test than an album " , and saying , " independent music is stronger because Black Flag formulated it " . John Dougan at AllMusic called the A @-@ side of the album " quite good " , but described the B @-@ side as " self @-@ indulgence masquerading as inspiration and about as much fun as wading through a tar pit " . Robert Christgau considered the B @-@ side a " waste " . 
 The album had a large influence on the hardcore @-@ meets @-@ Sabbath sounds of the Melvins , Mudhoney , and Nirvana . Mark Arm of Mudhoney related he was moved to tears at a Black Flag concert in 1983 when he was first exposed to " Nothing Left Inside " , and the experience inspired him to seek out bands like Black Sabbath . The first punk concert Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain attended was a Black Flag show during the My War tour , and he listed My War on his list of top fifty albums . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Black Flag = = = 
 Henry Rollins – vocals 
 Greg Ginn – guitar , bass ( as " Dale Nixon " ) , producer 
 Bill Stevenson – drums , producer 
 = = = Technical personnel = = = 
 Spot – producer , engineer , mixer 
 Raymond Pettibon – artwork 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Other sources = = = = 
 = Sonic X = 
 Sonic X ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Sonikku Ekkusu ) is a Japanese anime television series created by TMS Entertainment and based on the Sonic the Hedgehog video game series published by Sega . Sonic X initially ran for fifty @-@ two episodes , which were broadcast on TV Tokyo from April 6 , 2003 , to March 28 , 2004 ; a further twenty @-@ six were aired in non @-@ Japanese regions such as the United States , Europe , and the Middle East from 2005 to 2006 . The show 's American localization and broadcasting were handled by 4Kids Entertainment — which heavily edited the content and created new music — until 2012 , when Saban Brands obtained the rights to the series , and later in 2015 by Discotek Media . It is the fourth cartoon of Sonic the Hedgehog following Sonic Underground and preceding Sonic Boom . 
 The plot follows a group of anthropomorphic animals originating from the games — such as Sonic the Hedgehog , Tails , Amy Rose , and Cream the Rabbit — and a human boy named Chris Thorndyke , whom the animals meet after teleporting from their home planet to Earth . While on Earth , they repeatedly scuffle with antagonist Doctor Eggman and his robots over control of the powerful Chaos Emeralds , while also adjusting to their status as celebrities . The final story arc sees the friends return with Chris to their world , where they enter outer space with a newfound plant @-@ like creature named Cosmo and fight an army of creatures called the Metarex . 
 Sonic X received mixed reviews from critics . Generally , writers criticized its American localization and some of the characters , while being more generous toward its story and aesthetics . The series was very popular in the United States , though less so in its native Japan . The show 's merchandise included an edutainment video game for the <unk> , a trading card game , a comic book series featuring an original storyline , and various toys and other items . The phrase " gotta go fast " , the title of the show 's North American theme song , survived as a Sonic catchphrase for over a decade after the show 's initial release . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Series 1 ( Season 1 and 2 ) = = = 
 Sonic the Hedgehog attempts to destroy the base of Doctor Eggman and retrieve seven Chaos Emeralds . One of Eggman 's robots inadvertently shoots a machine containing the Emeralds , which activates the " Chaos Control " technique . This teleports Sonic , Eggman , and some of Sonic 's other anthropomorphic friends — Tails , Amy Rose , Cream the Rabbit ( with Cheese the Chao ) , Big the Cat ( with his frog Froggy ) , Rouge the Bat , Knuckles the Echidna , and the Chaotix ( a detective crew comprising Espio the Chameleon , Vector the Crocodile , and Charmy Bee ) — to Earth , the parallel @-@ universe version of their world . Sonic is chased by police , escapes into a mansion 's swimming pool , and is rescued by a twelve @-@ year @-@ old boy named Chris Thorndyke , who lives there with his movie @-@ star mother Lindsey , corporate executive father Nelson , scientist grandfather Chuck , maid and chef Ella , and butler Tanaka . Chris tries to hide the animals from his family until Cream accidentally reveals them , but they all build up a good rapport with Chris ' family and with Chris ' friends Danny , Francis , and Helen . 
 The animals still want to return home , so they repeatedly scuffle for the Emeralds with Eggman , his robot assistants — the hyperactive , attention @-@ seeking <unk> and the bumbling <unk> and <unk> — and his larger , armed robots . Eggman plans to take over the world , catching the attention of the unnamed nation 's President , so Knuckles , Rouge , and federal agent Topaz work to stop him . The other animals soon join the crusade and , when Eggman is defeated , they are all hailed as heroes . 
 However , the unfazed Eggman awakens a creature named Chaos from a huge gem called the Master Emerald . The animals fight a losing battle to retrieve the Emeralds until Chaos absorbs all seven and becomes giant , but an echidna girl named Tikal , who entombed herself and Chaos in the Master Emerald millennia ago , emerges to help placate him . After Sonic uses the Chaos Emeralds to become Super Sonic , he defeats Chaos , who returns to the Master Emerald with Tikal . 
 Shortly afterwards , Eggman finds his grandfather Gerald Robotnik 's diary and Gerald 's old project Shadow in a military base . After being released by Eggman , Shadow breaks into a museum to steal an Emerald , which gets Sonic arrested . Amy rescues him , but Shadow , Eggman , and the duplicitous Rouge escape to the space colony ARK , where Eggman threatens to use a weapon called the Eclipse Cannon to destroy Earth if Earth does not submit to his rule ; he blows up half of the Moon to prove his power . Eggman collects the Emeralds to power the Cannon , but this triggers a program Gerald set up decades ago , which will destroy Earth in less than half an hour . Everyone works together to shut it down except Shadow , who is unsympathetic until Chris convinces him . Shadow and Sonic power up using the Emeralds and reroute the ARK away from Earth , seemingly killing Shadow . 
 Eggman rebuilds the Moon , seemingly out of remorse , but its position shifts , creating a solar eclipse , so he manufactures and sells " Sunshine Balls " to replicate sunlight . Sonic sees through his greedy motivations , and Eggman is arrested for fraud . <unk> activates a robot named Emerl , who quickly allies with the animals , and Eggman escapes prison . Emerl wins an Emerald in a martial arts tournament involving numerous hero and villain characters , but he goes berserk and begins to wreck the city , so Cream and Cheese have to destroy him . 
 Later , two government physicists show up at Chris ' mansion to announce that the animals ' world and Earth were once a single world split in two by a cataclysmic event , but are rejoining , which will stop time irreversibly , and the only way to stop it is to send the animals back home . Tails and Chuck begin to build a gate to teleport the animals back to their own world with Chaos Control , but Chris does not want them to leave . When it is finished and all of the animals but Sonic have left , Chris suddenly shuts the machine down and whisks Sonic into the woods to hide . Sonic is understanding , and Chris ' parents find him and promise to spend more time with him . With Chris ' approval , Sonic returns to his own planet , stopping the merging of the worlds . However , Chris vows that one day , he will see Sonic again . 
 = = = Series 2 ( Season 3 ) = = = 
 Six months later , a race of villainous robots known as the Metarex attempt to steal the Emeralds from Sonic , but he scatters them across the galaxy . Meanwhile , on Earth , where six years have passed and Chris is now eighteen , Chris builds another device to return to the animals ' world ; he is twelve again when he arrives . A sick plant @-@ like girl named Cosmo lands on their planet and they nurse her back to health , so she joins them , and they all board Tails ' new spaceship , the Blue Typhoon . On the Typhoon , they scour the galaxy for the Emeralds and " Planet Eggs " ( objects that allow life to flourish on planets , which the Metarex have stolen to depopulate the galaxy ) and fight the Metarex at every turn . Eggman joins the Metarex shortly after . Along the way , Tails and Cosmo slowly fall in love with each other . Later , Rouge finds Shadow alive in a capsule on Eggman 's ship and releases him . At one point , he saves Chris from the Metarex before disappearing , but he reappears and tries to kill Cosmo , much to Tails ' anger . The Metarex 's leader , Dark Oak , appears and reveals that the Metarex and Cosmo are of the same species and that they secretly implanted a tracking device in her brain while extinguishing the rest of their kind ; she has been an unwitting spy ever since . Chris , Knuckles , and Tails notice that removing the device will likely destroy her sight and hearing forever . Knuckles pushes for it to be removed anyway , but Tails refuses , so the surgery is called off and the battle against the Metarex continues . 
 The heroes find the Chaotix and Shadow , and everyone heads to the center of the universe , where the Metarex are ominously controlling a planet that is made of water and contains a Planet Egg . After Sonic almost drowns in it , the planet begins turning into a giant seed ; the Metarex reveal that , because they have lost the battle , they will destroy the galaxy with this planet . Cosmo sees a vision from her mother <unk> , telling her that she must sacrifice herself to save the rest . She fuses with the giant seed and instructs Tails to use the Blue Typhoon 's cannon to fire Super Sonic and Super Shadow at her and the seed and destroy them . He does , in tears the whole time , and annihilates the Metarex . Back on the animals ' world , Sonic and Shadow reappear and solemnly inform Tails that they could not revive Cosmo and only found a seed of hers ; Cream and Amy try to cheer him up . With a change of heart , Eggman builds a device for Chris to return home but promptly reverts to his old ways after Chris leaves . The series ends with Cosmo 's seed sprouting and Chris returning home . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Creation and development = = = 
 The show was created by TMS Entertainment ( also subsidiary of SEGA Holdings Co . , Ltd . ) . It was the first anime series based on the Sonic universe . It was primarily influenced by other anime rather than work from the West , and was created for a Japanese audience . Yuji Naka , then the head of Sonic Team , filled in as executive producer , and Yuji <unk> created all of the original characters . Most of the series consists of original content featuring new as well as established characters , but the second season is mostly based on the plots of Sonic Adventure and Sonic Adventure 2 . While traditionally animated , it includes non @-@ outlined CGI elements for things such as Sonic 's homing attack . 
 Two trailers for the series were produced . The first was developed before Cheese had been given a name in Sonic Advance 2 ( 2002 ) ; it referred to Cheese simply as " Chao " . It was made up largely of footage that would later appear in the series ' intro , but also of unused scenes featuring unique anthropomorphic animals . Sega showed off the second , which was narrated in Japanese , at its booth at the World Hobby Fair video gaming event in February 2003 . It consisted mostly of scenes from the first few episodes , followed by introductions to the main characters . However , it also showed a still frame of a silver anthropomorphic hedgehog ( not identified as Silver the Hedgehog ) who never appeared in the series ; years later in April 2015 , Sonic Team 's current producer Takashi Iizuka responded to fan question via Facebook , revealing it being simply Super Sonic in its early contour . 
 Several of the Japanese performers had voiced their characters in the games , but they were also given ample information about their characters ' roles in the anime . Chris ' voice actress Sanae Kobayashi was not sure she would be able to effectively communicate Chris ' growth as a person owing to Sonic 's presence , but found that a worthwhile goal . Chikao Ōtsuka , who voiced Eggman , found him a difficult character to play due to the tension in his voice and Ōtsuka 's desire to have children who watched the show recognize the character as a villain but not hate him . 
 Sonic Team head Takashi Iizuka believed that Sonic X and its merchandise , along with the game Sonic Heroes , had helped expose the Sonic franchise to a new generation of potential gamers in 2003 , and he dubbed it a " Sonic Year " as a result . More boldly , Naka hoped that Sonic X alone would cause the popularity of the Sonic series to skyrocket , as that of the Pokémon series did after its anime adaptation was first released . 
 = = = Broadcast and localization = = = 
 4Kids Entertainment handled the show 's American localization . The episodes were heavily edited for content and length ; 4Kids has been described by Destructoid as being " infamous " among anime fans for this type of overzealous editing . 4Kids removed alcohol consumption and coarse language , instances of breaking the fourth wall , and numerous romantic scenes . Unlike some other series that 4Kids translated around the early- to mid @-@ 2000s , such as Kirby : Right Back at Ya ! , Sonic X suffered no full episodes being cut . Producer Michael <unk> personally disliked realistic violence in children 's programs , but had not intended to make massive changes himself . Instead , he was bound by Fox Broadcasting Company 's strict guidelines , which forbid content such as smoking and strong violence . In 2006 , near the end of the show 's American production , <unk> stated in an interview that he had never played a Sonic game , read the comics , or watched any of the previous Sonic animated series . 
 4Kids found new voice actors rather than using those from the games , with auditions beginning in early 2003 . They invited Mike Pollock to audition for Eggman , having known him from his work on Ultimate Muscle and Kirby : Right Back at Ya ! , and chose him for his yelling and pitch @-@ wavering talents ; Pollock also voiced Ella . 4Kids allowed Pollock to make minor alterations to the dialogue when lines " [ didn 't ] work for some reason " . He recalled being given only short samples of Eggman 's voice from the games — he was not told specifically which game — and brief descriptions of his characters ' roles . Beginning with Shadow the Hedgehog , the cast of Sonic X would assume their respective voice roles in all Sonic games released between 2005 and 2010 , at which point all the roles were recast with the exception of Mike Pollock as Eggman . 
 Sonic X aired in Japan on TV Tokyo 's 8 : 30 am time slot from April 6 , 2003 , to March 28 , 2004 . It consisted of three seasons , each of them 26 half @-@ hour episodes long . The series suffered from poor ratings in Japan , so the third season was never aired on TV or released on DVD there , but was available through rental streaming services . 4Kids licensed the series in North America from the beginning ; ShoPro Entertainment was also made a license holder in November 2003 . It aired in North America on the Fox Box block of Fox channels . The series was also localized for other countries in Europe , Asia , and the Middle East . In June 2012 , the bankrupt 4Kids sold its Sonic X license to Saban Brands 's <unk> Media Ventures . In 2015 , Discotek Media took over the series ' rights . 
 The series was released on DVD ; in Japan , only seasons one and two were released , and their 52 episodes spanned 13 discs . 4Kids released the " Project Shadow " DVD in North America , covering the first arc that focused on Shadow ( episodes 33 – 38 ) , on November 15 , 2005 to tie in with the release of the game Shadow the Hedgehog . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Japanese version of Sonic X was scored by Yoshihiro Ike . Its opening theme was " Sonic Drive " , performed by Hironobu Kageyama and Hideaki <unk> . The series included three ending themes : " Mi @-@ ra @-@ i " ( <unk> ・ <unk> ・ <unk> , Future ) by Run & Gun for episodes 1 – 13 , " Hikari Michi " ( <unk> , Shining Road ) by Aya Hiroshige for 14 – 39 and again for 53 – 78 , and " T.O.P " by Uru for 40 – 52 . 4Kids hired several of their in @-@ house musicians to write a background score for the North American release " for both artistic and commercial reasons " . The North American opening and closing theme , titled " Gotta Go Fast " , was performed by Norman J. <unk> and Russell Velazquez . A soundtrack titled Sonic X ~ Original Sound Tracks ~ was released in Japan on March 8 , 2004 ; it consisted of 40 tracks of original music from the first two seasons . 
 = = Other media = = 
 Sonic X was extensively merchandised in various forms of media and other products . Two Game Boy Advance Videos of episodes from the first season of Sonic X were released in May 2004 . In October 2004 , ShoPro licensed four manufacturers to create Sonic X merchandise ; they variously produced items such as bedding , beach towels , backpacks , stationery , and pajamas . Six Sonic X novels were published between 2005 and 2007 : Aqua Planet , Dr. Eggman Goes to War , Battle at Ice Palace , and Desperately Seeking Sonic by Charlotte Fullerton , Meteor Shower Messenger by Paul Ruditis , and Spaceship Blue Typhoon by Diana G. Gallagher . 
 = = = Comic series = = = 
 Archie Comics , publisher of the main Sonic the Hedgehog comics , started a Sonic X series in 2005 . It was originally set to run for only four issues , but was extended to 40 issues due to high demand . The last issue was released in December 2008 , and led into the first arc of the Sonic Universe series . The comics were written by Ian Flynn , who also authors the main comic series . Some issues were published in <unk> Magazine in the United Kingdom and Italy . 
 While the comics are set during the Sonic X timeline , their plot is original . Eggman imprisons humans inside robots and tries to use them to kill the animals , but the animals destroy the robots . Eggman uses malicious Chao to destroy Station Square , but Tikal and Chaos arrive from the past , return the Chao to normal , and bring them back to the past . Soon , Sonic finds a machine in the desert and thinks nothing of it , but after fighting with Eggman in Paris and a bizarre world created by the doctor , Eggman reveals the desert machine was his and it begins to wreck Station Square . Sonic defeats it , but he is accused of working with Eggman , so he and Eggman are both locked up . Nelson bails Sonic out of jail , and he saves Cream and Chris from some ghosts . 
 Eggman enacts more malicious schemes based on holidays like Christmas , Valentine 's Day , and St. Patrick 's Day , Afterwards , he temporarily fires <unk> and <unk> and creates replacements , <unk> and <unk> , who kidnap Sonic and give him to an organization called <unk> Sonic escapes with ease , but <unk> repeatedly tries to ruin his reputation . Meanwhile , the animals take on Eggman in his various schemes — including becoming a wrestler and creating a circus — to keep the Emeralds from him . In the final issue , a crossover with the continuity of the main comic series , that continuity 's Metal Sonic appears and allies with Eggman to defeat Sonic , but that continuity 's version of Shadow steps in and warps himself and Metal Sonic to another dimension , leading into the events of the first issue of Sonic Universe . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 In 2003 , McDonald 's packaged five different single @-@ button dedicated console games , mostly based on various sports , with Happy Meals to promote Sonic X : two featuring Sonic and one each for Tails , Knuckles , and Shadow . Another Happy Meal game based on Big the Cat fishing arrived the following year . 
 <unk> Enterprises released a Sonic X educational math game for its <unk> handheld game console ; it was released in 2005 in North America and 2007 in Europe . The game stars Sonic and Chris , who must rescue Tails , Amy , and Knuckles from Eggman . It is a fast @-@ paced platform / action game in which Sonic runs and jumps through levels and destroys Eggman 's robots along the way . Periodically , Sonic must answer math questions to continue . The game features three levels , each with its own math concepts : the city Station Square ( sequencing , counting in increments ) ; Angel Island , the home of the Master Emerald ( addition ) ; and Eggman 's base ( subtraction ) . There are also math @-@ based minigames unrelated to the levels to supplement these skills . 
 = = = Trading card game = = = 
 Score Entertainment created a Sonic X collectible card game for two players , released in 2005 . Players battle for Chaos Emeralds ; whoever gets three first wins . Each turn , both players lay out five cards face @-@ down and flip over one at a time ; whichever card has a lower number value is eliminated . Eliminating the other player 's cards and combining the special abilities of one 's own cards allows one to score rings ; whichever player has the most rings at the end of the turn wins an Emerald . As the game does not emphasize collecting rare cards , a few booster packs are enough to build a competent deck . <unk> gave a positive review , praising its ease of learning , low cost , and inherent strategy , but also noting that it feels more like a generic card game with Sonic characters than like a wholly Sonic @-@ based product . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Conrad Zimmerman of Destructoid cited its " horrible localization " as a main reason for negativity . Tim Jones of THEM Anime gave the show two stars out of five and criticized the English voice acting : " It 's really annoying how all the recent Sonic games use these untalented actors / actresses in their dubs , because they make the original English voices sound like award @-@ winning performers . " Other comments on the show 's aesthetics were mostly positive . Staff of GamesRadar admitted , " At least the song fits . Can 't imagine Sonic listening to Underground 's wailing Meat Loaf light rock , but he 'd definitely jam to Sonic X. " Jones praised the rock music from Sonic Adventure 1 and 2 , as well as the " pretty piano music " and " catchy " Japanese intro and outro themes . He also found the backgrounds " nice to look at " but did not like the use of CGI for Sonic 's homing attack . 
 The human characters and , to a lesser extent , the animal ones were also criticized . Jones decried Chris as " a dull , boring , uninspired character " and also described Tanaka and Ella as " bland " stereotypes of Japanese and African @-@ Americans , respectively . Jones also criticized the presence of Amy and Big , but took particular issue to the show 's portrayal of Sonic , which he summarized as : " ' I 'm gonna run around downtown until something exciting happens and use a stinking Ring to defeat my enemies ' " . GamesRadar bemoaned both the " piss @-@ poor Adventure characters " and the original human ones . In contrast , writer Gaz Plant of NintendoLife opined that " one of the key successes " of the series was its incorporation of numerous characters from the games , including lesser @-@ used ones like Big and the Chaotix . Fans were divided on the merit of the <unk> . 
 The show was well received for faithfully following the format of the games . Famitsu offered a uniformly positive review before the first episode broadcast in 2003 , commending the skillful transition of the games ' speed and style to animation , and expected the series to continue to grow more interesting . Plant stated that " where Sonic X truly succeeded was in its retelling of iconic stories " . Independent of the characters involved , GamesRadar appreciated the idea of following " Sonic 's core concept . " The original storylines were also well received . Amidst his criticism of most of the show , Jones praised the first episode in general , especially its humor . Plant acclaimed the character development that built on the stories of the original games , especially Sonic 's and Amy 's relationship and the Chaotix 's newfound viability as comedy devices . Concurrently , he found the show " surprisingly touching " , particularly in its " emotional " final climax , and favorably compared the space exploration of season three to Star Trek . Famitsu 's first preview called the story profound ( <unk> , <unk> ) . 
 Common Sense Media gave it three stars out of five and , while not commenting further on its quality , stated that it was appropriate for grade @-@ school children but that some violent scenes were inadvisable for younger viewers . A second Famitsu review from later in 2003 called the anime an outstanding success and encouraged readers to tune in . 
 = = = Popularity and cultural impact = = = 
 The show was quite popular in the United States and France , consistently reaching the number @-@ one position in its timeslot in both countries . By 2007 , it was TMS ' best @-@ selling anime in the non @-@ Japanese market , despite that the third season never aired in Japan , and it inspired TMS to focus on properties that would sell well outside Japan . In April 2009 , a six @-@ year @-@ old Norwegian boy named Christer pressed his parents to send a letter to King Harald V of Norway to approve his name being changed to " Sonic X " . They allowed Christer to write it himself but did not send it until he badgered them further , and the king responded that he could not approve the change because Christer was not eighteen years old . Extending over a decade past the show 's initial release , the phrase " gotta go fast " has been used in the titles of video game periodical articles to represent the Sonic series and other fast @-@ paced video games . 
 = Jungle cat = 
 The jungle cat ( Felis chaus ) , also called reed cat or swamp cat , is a medium @-@ sized cat found in China , the Indian subcontinent , the Middle East and central and southeastern Asia . A member of the genus Felis , that consists of small cats , the jungle cat was first described by naturalist Johann Anton Güldenstädt in 1776 ; however , naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber , who gave the cat its present binomial name , is generally considered to be the binomial authority . 10 subspecies are recognised . The jungle cat is a large , long @-@ legged cat ; it stands nearly 36 centimetres ( 14 in ) at shoulder and weighs 2 – 16 kilograms ( 4 @.@ 4 – 35 @.@ 3 lb ) . The coat , sandy , reddish brown or grey , is uniformly coloured and lacks spots ; melanistic and albino individuals are also known . <unk> occur biannually . 
 Typically diurnal , the jungle cat hunts throughout the day . Solitary in nature , jungle cats do not interact appreciably except in the mating season . The only prominent interaction is the mother @-@ kitten bond . Territories are maintained by urine spraying and scent marking . The cat is primarily a carnivore , and prefers small mammals ( gerbils , hares and rodents ) and birds . It hunts by stalking its prey , followed by a sprint or a leap ; the sharp ears help in pinpointing the location of prey . Both sexes become sexually mature by the time they are a year old ; females enter oestrus from January to March . Mating behaviour is similar to that in the domestic cat ; the male pursues the female in oestrus , seizes her by the nape of her neck and mounts her . Gestation lasts nearly two months . Births take place between December and June , though this might vary geographically . Kittens begin to catch their own prey at around six months and leave the mother after eight or nine months . 
 The jungle cat is a habitat generalist ; it inhabits places with adequate water and dense vegetation , such as swamps , wetlands and riparian areas . Unlike its name , the jungle cat shuns rainforests and woodlands . The jungle cat is classified as Least Concern by the IUCN . Major threats to the survival of the jungle cat include the destruction of wetlands , trapping and poisoning . The status of the cat in the wild needs further study , though numbers are feared to be on the decline . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The jungle cat is a member of the genus Felis , which consists of small cats , within the family Felidae . Baltic German naturalist Johann Anton Güldenstädt was the first to identify a jungle cat when he travelled in the southern frontier of the Russian empire during 1768 – 1775 at the behest of Catherine II of Russia . He described the animal in a 1776 publication by the name " chaus " . However , German zoologist Paul Matschie in 1912 and American zoologist Joel Asaph Allen in 1920 challenged the validity of nomenclature of the jungle cat , arguing that the name Felis <unk> <unk> nigro <unk> was improper ( not being a <unk> ) and that " chaus " was used as a common name rather than as part of the scientific name in the publication . Mammal Species of the World identifies German naturalist Johann Christian Daniel von Schreber as the binomial authority , who formally used the species name chaus in his 1777 publication Die <unk> in Abbildungen nach der Natur mit Beschreibungen . 
 A 2006 study gave the phylogenetic relationships of the jungle cat as follows : 
 Depending on the taxonomic treatment around 9 to 10 subspecies are recognised on the basis of distribution and pelage variation . Large scale phylogenetic studies have not been made to establish their status . The most widely recognized subspecies are : 
 Results of an mtDNA analysis of 55 jungle cats from various biogeographic zones in India indicate a high genetic variation and a relatively low differentiation between populations . It appears that the central Indian F. c. kutas population separates the Thar F. c. <unk> populations from the rest and also the south Indian F. c. kelaarti populations from the north Indian F. c. affinis ones . The central Indian populations are genetically closer to the southern than to the northern populations . 
 = = = Taxonomic history = = = 
 In the 1820s , German explorer Eduard Rüppell collected a female jungle cat near Lake <unk> in the Nile Delta . English naturalist Thomas Hardwicke ’ s collection of illustrations of Indian wildlife comprises the first drawing of an Indian jungle cat , named the " allied cat " ( Felis affinis ) by British zoologist John Edward Gray in 1830 . Two years later , German naturalist Johann Friedrich von Brandt proposed a new species under the name Felis <unk> , recognising the distinctness of the Egyptian jungle cat . The same year , a stuffed cat was presented at a meeting of the Asiatic Society of Bengal that had been caught in the jungles of Midnapore ( West Bengal , India ) . J. T. Pearson , who donated the specimen , proposed the name Felis kutas for the specimen , noting that it differed in colouration from Felis chaus . French zoologist Isidore Geoffroy Saint @-@ Hilaire described a jungle cat from the area of Dehra Dun in northern India in 1844 under the name Felis <unk> in memory of the French explorer Victor <unk> . 
 In 1836 , British naturalist Brian Houghton Hodgson proclaimed the red @-@ eared cat commonly found in Nepal to be a lynx and therefore named it <unk> <unk> ; Ceylonese naturalist Edward Frederick <unk> described the first jungle cat skin from Sri Lanka in 1852 and stressed upon its close resemblance to Hodgson 's red cat . William Thomas Blanford pointed out the lynx @-@ like appearance of cat skins and skulls from the plains around <unk> County and Kashgar when he described Felis <unk> in 1876 . 
 Russian naturalist Nikolai Severtzov proposed the generic name <unk> in 1858 followed by the suggestion of <unk> <unk> by Austrian zoologist Leopold Fitzinger for the " swamp lynx " in 1869 . In 1898 , the British zoologist William Edward de Winton proposed to subordinate the specimens from the Caucasus , Persia and Turkestan to Felis chaus <unk> , and regrouped the lighter built specimens from the Indian subcontinent to F. c. affinis . He renamed the Egyptian jungle cat as F. c. nilotica because Felis <unk> was already applied to a different cat . A skin collected near Jericho in 1864 led him to describe a new subspecies , F. c. <unk> , as this skin was smaller than other Egyptian jungle cat skins . A few years later , the German zoologist Alfred Nehring also described a jungle cat skin collected in Palestine , which he named Lynx <unk> . 
 The British zoologist Reginald Innes Pocock reviewed the nomenclature of felids in 1917 and classified the jungle cat group as part of the genus Felis . In the 1930s , Pocock reviewed the jungle cat skins and skulls from British India and adjacent countries . Based mainly on differences in fur length and colour he subordinated the specimens from Turkestan to Balochistan to Felis chaus chaus , the Himalayan ones to F. c. affinis , the ones from Cutch to Bengal under F. c. kutas , and the <unk> ones from Burma under F. c. <unk> . He newly described six larger skins from Sind as F. c. <unk> , and skins with shorter coats from Sri Lanka and southern India as F. c. kelaarti . 
 = = Description = = 
 The jungle cat is a large , long @-@ legged cat ; it is , in fact , the largest of the extant Felis species . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 59 and 76 centimetres ( 23 and 30 in ) . This cat stands nearly 36 centimetres ( 14 in ) at shoulder and weighs 2 – 16 kilograms ( 4 @.@ 4 – 35 @.@ 3 lb ) . A study showed that body size showed a decrease from west ( Israel ) to east ( India ) ; this was attributed to greater competition from small cats in the east ; body size shows a similar decrease from the northern latitudes toward the tropics . Sexually dimorphic , females tend to be smaller and lighter than males .. The face is long and narrow , with a white muzzle . The large , pointed ears , 4 @.@ 5 – 8 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) in length and reddish brown on the back , are set close together ; a small tuft of black hairs , nearly 15 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 59 in ) long , emerges from the tip of both ears . The eyes have yellow irides and elliptical pupils ; white lines can be seen around the eye . Dark lines run from the corner of the eyes down the sides of the nose and a dark patch marks the nose . The skull is fairly broad in the region of the zygomatic arch ; hence the head of this cat appears relatively rounder . 
 The coat , sandy , reddish brown or grey , is uniformly coloured and lacks spots ; melanistic and albino individuals have been reported from the Indian subcontinent . White cats observed in the coastline tracts of the southern Western Ghats lacked the red eyes typical of true albinos . A 2014 suggested that their colouration could be attributed to inbreeding . Kittens are striped and spotted , and adults may retain some of the markings . Dark @-@ tipped hairs cover the body , giving the cat a speckled appearance . The belly is generally lighter than the rest of the body and the throat is pale . The fur is denser on the back compared to the underparts . Two moults can be observed in a year ; the coat is rougher and lighter in summer than in winter . The insides of the forelegs show four to five rings ; faint markings may be seen on the outside . The black @-@ tipped tail , 21 – 36 centimetres ( 8 @.@ 3 – 14 @.@ 2 in ) long , is marked by two to three dark rings on the last third of the length . The <unk> measure about 5 by 6 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in × 2 @.@ 4 in ) ; the cat can cover 29 to 32 centimetres ( 11 to 13 in ) in one step . There is a distinct spinal crest . Because of its long legs , short tail and tuft on the ears , the jungle cat resembles a small lynx . The caracal and the African wildcat have a plain coat as the jungle cat 's . The jungle cat is larger and <unk> in comparison to domestic cats . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Typically diurnal ( active mainly during the day ) , the jungle cat hunts throughout the day ; activity tends to decrease during the hot noon hours . It rests in burrows , grass thickets and scrubs . The cat often sunbathes on winter days . Jungle cats have been estimated to walk 3 – 6 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 – 3 @.@ 7 mi ) at night , although this likely varies depending on the availability of prey . The behaviour of the jungle cat has not been extensively studied . Solitary in nature , jungle cats do not interact appreciably except in the mating season . The only prominent interaction is the mother @-@ kitten bond . Territories are maintained by urine spraying and scent marking ; some males have been observed rubbing their cheeks on objects to mark them . 
 Bears , crocodiles , golden jackals , leopards and snakes are the main predators of the jungle cat . The golden jackal , particularly , can be a major competitor to the cat . When it encounters a threat , the jungle cat will vocalise before engaging in attack , producing sounds like small roars – a behavior uncommon for the other members of Felis . The meow of the jungle cat is also somewhat lower than that of a typical domestic cat . The jungle cat can host parasites such as Haemaphysalis and <unk> species . 
 = = = Diet and hunting = = = 
 Primarily a carnivore , the jungle cat prefers small mammals ( gerbils , hares and rodents ) and birds ; fishes , frogs , insects and reptiles ( small snakes ) are hunted as well . Its prey typically weigh less than 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) , mammals as large as young gazelles may also be hunted . The cat may be omnivorous as it may eat fruits , especially in winter . In a study done in the Sariska Tiger Reserve ( Rajasthan , India ) , rodents were found to comprise as high as 95 % of the diet . 
 The jungle cat hunts by stalking its prey , followed by a sprint or a leap ; the sharp ears help in pinpointing the location of prey . Different techniques may be used to secure prey . The cat has been observed searching for musk rats in their holes . Like the caracal , the jungle cat can perform one or two high leaps into the air to grab birds ; the jungle cat is an efficient climber as well . The jungle cat has been clocked at 32 km / h ( 20 mph ) . Efficient swimmers , jungle cats can swim up to 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) in water and plunge into water to catch fishes . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Both sexes become sexually mature by the time they are a year old . Females enter oestrus ( typically five days long ) from January to March . In males , spermatogenesis occurs mainly in February and March . In southern Turkmenistan , mating occurs from January to early February . The mating season is marked by noisy fights among males for dominance . Mating behaviour is similar to that in the domestic cat ; the male pursues the female in oestrus , seizes her by the nape of her neck and mounts her . Vocalisations and flehmen are prominent during courtship . After a successful copulation , the female gives out a loud cry and reacts with aversion towards her partner . The pair then separate . 
 Gestation lasts nearly two months . Births take place between December and June , though this might vary geographically . Before parturition , the mother prepares a den of grass in an abandoned animal burrow , hollow tree or reed bed . Females can give birth to litters of one to five kittens ; typically two to three kittens are born . Females may raise two litters in a year . Kittens weigh between 43 and 55 grams ( 1 @.@ 5 and 1 @.@ 9 oz ) at birth , tending to be much smaller in the wild than in captivity . Initially blind and helpless , they open their eyes at ten to thirteen days of age and are fully weaned by around three months . Males usually do not participate in the raising of kittens ; however , in captivity , males appear to be very protective of their offspring . Kittens begin to catch their own prey at around six months and leave the mother after eight or nine months . The lifespan of the jungle cat under captivity is 15 to 20 years ; this is possibly higher than that in the wild . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 A habitat generalist , the jungle cat inhabits places with adequate water and dense vegetation , such as swamps , wetlands and riparian areas . Reeds and tall grasses being typical of its habitat , it is often known as the " reed cat " or the " swamp cat " . Unlike its name , the jungle cat shuns rainforests and woodlands ; it also keeps away from open areas . In Indochina , the jungle cat occurs mainly in deciduous forests rich in dipterocarp trees . Jungle cats are common in agricultural lands , such as fields of bean and sugarcane , across their range . They have often been sighted near human settlements . They can thrive even in areas of sparse vegetation . The jungle cat does not adapt well to cold climates , and is rare in areas where snowfall is common ; it generally occurs up to an altitude of 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) , though it may occur at as high as 2 @,@ 400 metres ( 7 @,@ 900 ft ) in the Himalayas . 
 The jungle cat is largely oriental in its distribution ; it is found in China , the Indian subcontinent , the Middle East and central and southeastern Asia . They are the commonest small cats in India . Believed to be absent from south of the Isthmus of Kra in the Malayan peninsula , the possibility of their occurrence was reported from a highly fragmented forest in the Malaysian state of Selangor in 2010 . 
 Although never truly domesticated , a small number of jungle cats have been found among the cat mummies of Ancient Egypt ( dating to 3700 BC ) , the vast majority of which are domestic cats , suggesting that they may have been used to help control rodent populations . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The jungle cat is classified as " least concern " by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) ; it is listed under CITES Appendix II . Hunting is prohibited in Bangladesh , China , India , Israel , Myanmar , Pakistan , Tajikistan , Thailand and Turkey , but does not receive legal protection outside protected areas in Bhutan , Georgia , Laos , Lebanon , Nepal , Sri Lanka and Vietnam . Major threats to the survival of the jungle cat include the destruction of wetlands , trapping and poisoning . According to the IUCN , the conservation status of the jungle cat is unclear and needs further research . 
 Since the 1960s , populations of the Caucasian jungle cat living along the Caspian Sea and in the Caucasus range states have been rapidly declining . Only small populations persist today . There has been no record in the Astrakhan Nature Reserve in the Volga Delta since the 1980s . Jungle cats are rare in the Middle East . In Jordan , they are highly affected by the expansion of agricultural areas around the river beds of Yarmouk and Jordan rivers , where they are hunted and poisoned by farmers for attacking poultry . They are considered rare and threatened in Afghanistan as well . India exported jungle cat skins in large numbers , till this was banned in 1979 ; some illegal trade , however , continues in the country , as well as in Egypt and Afghanistan . 
 In the 1970s , southeast Asian jungle cats still used to be the most common wild cats near villages in certain parts of northern Thailand and occurred in many protected areas of the country . However , since the early 1990s , jungle cats are rarely encountered and have suffered drastic declines due to hunting and habitat destruction . Today , their official status in the country is critically endangered . In Cambodia , Laos and Vietnam , jungle cats have been subject to extensive hunting . Skins are occasionally recorded in border markets , and live individuals , possibly taken from Myanmar or Cambodia , occasionally turn up in the Khao <unk> and Chiang Mai zoos of Thailand . 
 = Here Comes Your Man = 
 " Here Comes Your Man " is a song by the American alternative rock band Pixies , written and sung by the band 's frontman Black Francis . Produced by Gil Norton , it was released as the second single from the group 's second album Doolittle in June 1989 . 
 Written by Black Francis as a teenager , " Here Comes Your Man " was recorded for the band 's 1987 demo tape , but not included on either Come On Pilgrim or Surfer Rosa , as the songwriter was reluctant about releasing the song . Critics saw " Here Comes Your Man " as the Pixies ' breakthrough song ; Jon Dolan of Spin magazine commented that it was " the most accessible song ever by an underground @-@ type band . " The song reached number three on the U.S. Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Black Francis recalled that he wrote " Here Comes Your Man " around the time he was age 14 or 15 . Years later after the Pixies were formed , producer Paul Kolderie noted the group didn 't want to record " Here Comes Your Man " for its demo " The Purple Tape " . The group referred to it as " the Tom Petty song " , according to Kolderie . Producer Gary Smith said , " There was some reluctance to do ' Here Comes Your Man ' because it was too pop , there was something too straight about it . " When 4AD label head Ivo Watts @-@ Russell handpicked the track listing for the group 's debut release Come on Pilgrim , he intentionally left out " Here Comes Your Man " . Watts @-@ Russell stated that he liked the song , but " it felt just too obviously commercial and I didn 't know what we were doing with [ the band ] " . Watts @-@ Russell also felt it was too reminiscent of Mink DeVille 's " Spanish Stroll " . For a post @-@ Surfer Rosa single , 4AD rejected another recording of the song ; they later chose " Gigantic " , with " River Euphrates " on the B @-@ side . 
 Francis reflected in 2004 that during the recording of the group 's second album Doolittle he felt embarrassed by " Here Comes Your Man " , but since producer Gil Norton really liked the song , the songwriter " threw him a bone " . Norton recorded the band performing the song 's backing track when Black Francis was not available . The song featured a different arrangement from previous recordings of the track , and Black Francis added another verse to it . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Here Comes Your Man " opens with the Hendrix chord , favored by Pixies guitarist Joey Santiago and used on " Tame " . The acoustic guitar plays a D – G – A chord progression , while Santiago plays a guitar riff which is the result of him double @-@ tracking a 12 @-@ string Rickenbacker and a Telecaster . 
 In an interview with NME , Francis commented on the meaning of the song : 
 The word " boxcar " was apparently a starting point for the song 's lyrics , and Francis has suggested that this was in part inspired by the song " Carnival of Sorts ( Box Car ) " by R.E.M. : " I probably liked the word ' boxcar ' because I heard it on the R.E.M. song , from their first record . " 
 = = Video and imagery = = 
 A music video , co @-@ directed by Neil Pollock and Jonathan <unk> , to promote the single shows the band playing its instruments through a distorted fish @-@ eye lens , the camera variously panning horizontally across the performance space and vertically over the individual band members . Keeping in the spirit of the mimed performance , Francis and Deal open and shut their mouths in time with their prerecorded vocals , yet make no attempt to articulate their lips in synch with the words that they are supposed to be singing . Instead , they simply keep their mouths wide open with blank expressions for the duration of each verse . Francis stated that " Water on the brain " was the theme of the clip . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Here Comes Your Man " was released as a single in June 1989 , and the song 's music video received some airplay on MTV . The cover image , chosen by Francis , comes from a photograph cover designer Simon Larbalestier took of a bulldog terrier for a gallery showing . The Pixies rarely played " Here Comes Your Man " at concerts or at promotional events . Music writer Ben Sisario described this stance as " vintage college @-@ rock ' <unk> hit , the pop song , should be avoided as inauthentic , while the aggro , <unk> song represents legitimacy . " Ivo Watts @-@ Russell stated if Black Francis had been possibly persuaded to release the version of the song recorded during the session for the " Gigantic " single — which he described as " totally streamlined and ready for radio " — that " maybe if a major label company was able to convince people to take a more commercial route , maybe Pixies would have sold a whole bunch more records than they did . But those steps were just not required back in 1989 " . The song reached number three on the U.S. Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart . 
 Joey Santiago later recalled : " The tour manager asked , ' Hey , Arsenio Hall wants you to come on the show . ' We said , ' Well , what do they want to hear ? ' He said , ' Here Comes Your Man . ' No way . We told them we would love to go on , only if we did the song ' Tame ' . And they said , ' No , thank you . ' " 
 = = Use in other media = = 
 The song makes an appearance in indie rom @-@ com ( 500 ) Days of Summer , where it is sung by the main character Tom Hansen in a karaoke bar , and The Simpsons episode " Hardly Kirk @-@ ing " as well as Say It Isn 't So and Daddy 's Home . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Black Francis . 
 " Here Comes Your Man " – 3 : 00 
 " Wave of Mutilation " ( UK Surf version ) – 3 : 00 
 " Into the White " – 4 : 42 
 " Bailey 's Walk " – 2 : 23 
 = South Park Blocks = 
 The South Park Blocks form a city park in downtown Portland , Oregon . The Oregonian has called it Portland 's " extended family room " , as Pioneer Courthouse Square is known as Portland 's " living room " . 
 Twelve blocks in length , it is intersected by the Portland Streetcar and forms the Portland Cultural District and the greenspace at the center of Portland State University . The New York Times stated the blocks are " literally at the heart of the city 's cultural life . " Every block contains public art , such as Shemanski Fountain ( 1926 ) , designed by Carl L. Linde , with drinking wells , including special drinking wells for dogs . Other art includes Paul <unk> 's In the Shadow of the Elm ( built into the pavement ) , and three large blocks of granite titled Peace Chant ( 1984 ) . Two large statues are in the block : a $ 40 @,@ 000 , 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) bronze equestrian statue called Theodore Roosevelt , Rough Rider , designed by Alexander Phimister Proctor , commissioned by Roosevelt 's personal friend and <unk> Henry Waldo Coe and added in 1922 , and one of Abraham Lincoln , " facing north , slump @-@ shouldered and pensive " , added in 1928 , commissioned by Coe in 1926 , sculpted by George Fife Waters . The park also contains approximately 337 elm , oak , and maple trees valued at $ 3 @.@ 4 million , as well as roses . A plaque from the Lang Syne Society was placed in the South Park Blocks at Jefferson Street in 1991 , commemorating the Great Plank Road . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Continuous Park Blocks = = = 
 Portland was platted in 1845 , then Daniel H. Lownsdale purchased land south and west of the original platting . He drew up a plat in 1848 that included 11 narrow blocks , 100 × 200 feet , instead of the standard 200 × 200 feet . He then brought on Stephen Coffin and William W. Chapman as partners , and dedicated the South Park Blocks and midtown park blocks in 1852 . This made them the first official greenspace in Portland . While they were dedicated to the city , they weren 't owned by the city until September 22 , 1870 , when Mayor Bernard Goldsmith and Chapman agreed on selling the South Park Blocks and the two Plaza Blocks ( Chapman and Lownsdale Squares ) to the city for $ 6 @,@ 250 . Most of the purchase price was for the Plaza Blocks , since the park blocks were at the edge of the developed city . 
 Ownership of the continuous park blocks was not without dispute , however . After Lownsdale died without a will , and then his wife Nancy died , his estate challenged that his plat didn 't require the central section to be dedicated to public use since Nancy had not signed over legal title to the land . The courts agreed in 1865 . Benjamin Stark reneged on the donation of two north central park blocks to the city , instead offering to sell them for $ 138 @,@ 000 . Captain John H. Couch deeded his section , which became the North Park Blocks to the city on January 25 , 1865 , only ten days after receiving the federal patent for the land . Six of the South Park Blocks were lost to private parties in the 1870s , and elected city officials were unwilling to spend the asking price of $ 6 @,@ 000 per block to purchase them so soon after the city had bought the land for Washington Park . Only a year later , a proposal to acquire the six blocks for $ 92 @,@ 000 was brought by the city council , showing the increase in prices in that year . 
 A 1907 tax bond issue was brought to the voters . It would have been a $ 2 million bond , likely including money to buy back the blocks . The measure failed , and some time later , the street name changed from " West Park " to Southwest 9th " . Two missing blocks have been recaptured since then : O 'Bryant Square was purchased in 1973 , and Director Park opened in 2009 . 
 = = Residential park blocks = = 
 By the late 1870s , the Park Blocks near the current location of Portland State University were fronted by formal Italianate mansions . 
 By the 1920s , the central park blocks were home to the 12 @-@ story Stevens Building and the 9 @-@ story Woodlark Building , as well as six or more hotels . Edward H. Bennett proposed making the Park Blocks continuous in 1912 , part of his " Greater Portland Plan " . Otherwise , the next spark was the conversion of one central park block into O 'Bryant Square in 1972 . The next block to be reclaimed was Director Park , dedicated as a park in 2009 , inspired by a 1995 plan to turn the block into a 12 @-@ story parking lot . 
 In 1933 , the area surrounding Skidmore Fountain was " tawdry " and nearly neglected , and there was an effort to move the fountain to the South Park Blocks . This did not happen . 
 After a 1990 Dutch elm disease outbreak in Portland , including one diseased tree at Park and Market in the South Park Blocks , the elm trees have been immunized with <unk> . Portland 's first outbreak of Dutch elm disease occurred in 1976 at Overlook Park , and the peak infections were in 2003 . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 On May 5 , 1918 , the dedication of the Vista House at Crown Point began with a parade of cars from the South Park Blocks , on the newly completed Historic Columbia River Highway . 
 The Portland Rose Festival began and was centered in the South Park Blocks in 1936 , but were outgrowing the blocks by the 1950s . Residents sued to prohibit the Rose Festival from using the parks and lost . By 2007 , the festival centered around Tom McCall Waterfront Park . 
 The first Earth Day , on April 22 , 1970 , was celebrated with a fair on the blocks . In 1975 , the Portland city council held Portland 's first gay pride fair along the park . It was moved to Tom McCall Waterfront Park the following year . The Seattle to Portland Bicycle Classic , known as STP , concluded in the South Park Blocks from 1979 to 1998 , then moved to Cathedral Park . In 1997 – 1999 , Tony n ' Tina 's Wedding , an interactive theatre , took place using the park as the stage ; the wedding was held at the First Unitarian Church and later at the Oregon History Center , and the reception was held at the Portland Art Museum , being a " little street theater " on the park blocks . 
 After the September 11 attacks , the Park Blocks filled with a candlelight vigil and a memorial concert by the Oregon Symphony , which was free in the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall and was also broadcast into the blocks . 
 The South Park Blocks , especially near Portland State University , have been home to protests and marches . A workers ' rights protest on May 1 , 2000 , organized by the May Day Coalition , gathered 300 – 400 people . Police chief Mark Kroeker said 19 people , some " dressed like anarchists and ( carrying ) gas masks " were arrested , and Portland Police used bean bag rounds , with fears of repeating the 1999 WTO riots in Seattle unless sufficient force was shown early . The police declared emergency at 3 : 45 pm after a lit newspaper box was thrown at officers , then the police corralled the marchers into a smaller space with mounted officers and ordered them to disperse . A protest march against the police action was held on May 4 , 2000 , stating that the show of force was excessive and contrary to the city 's community policing ethos . 23 complaints of excessive police force led to a large citywide hearing on June 28 , 2000 . The 2009 May Day rally , supporting immigration reform , attracted 1500 people . 
 In 2006 , approximately 1 @,@ 200 protesters , primarily Latino high @-@ school age students joined by Jobs with Justice , took part in the 2006 United States immigration reform protests . In 2007 , 15 @,@ 000 protesters of all ages began a rally and march as part of the March 17 , 2007 anti @-@ war protest , including local activists affiliated with the radical Students for a Democratic Society . After a fringe group broke off from the protest and burned a US soldier in effigy , Michelle Malkin stated that " Portland hates America . " The Drudge Report , Lars Larson , and conservative blogs also commented on the effigy , and protest organizers with the American Friends Service Committee stated " We had a massive , peaceful demonstration against the killing and destruction going on every day in Iraq , a positive experience for thousands of people from different walks of life , and apparently the right @-@ wing fringe is going to pick up that little portion . " 
 On December 3 , 2011 , Occupy Portland established camp in the South Park Blocks . 
 Other events have included <unk> , an art festival that attracted 200 @,@ 000 people on Labor Day weekends in the Park Blocks from 1982 until at least 2003 and based on an art show that began in July 1949 , a 1983 protest against U.S. nuclear missiles placed in Europe ( 3 @,@ 000 protesters ) , an Oregon Public Employees Union strike in 1987 , a rally with presidential candidate Michael Dukakis in 1988 , Shakespeare in the Parks in 1989 , a 1990 rally to pay tribute to <unk> <unk> , killed in Portland by white power skinheads in 1988 , which had 1 @,@ 500 people with 150 police officers defending against skinheads , and the <unk> Festival of African Arts held from 1990 to at least 2004 . Lara Flynn Boyle filmed scenes from The Temp in the South Park Blocks in 1992 , and The Hunted was filmed partially in the South Park Blocks in 2003 , including a crash scene by Benicio del Toro . 
 In celebration of Harley @-@ Davidson 's 100th anniversary in 2003 , an event called Rose City Thunder was held in the South Park blocks , to send riders off for the " Harley @-@ Davidson 100th Anniversary Ride Home " . Two appeals seeking a venue change were held prior to the event , but the city council rejected them , with City Commissioner Jim <unk> stating " We don 't discriminate against groups , period . That 's the rules and that 's what we abide by . " Featuring live music , beer gardens , and thousands of people , it led to questions about why the residential Park Blocks were used , rather than a venue such as Tom McCall Waterfront Park . An editorial in The Oregonian stated the celebration was " more potbelly than pot smoking " , but held the loud exhausts , public address systems , and rows of portable toilets weren 't appreciated in a neighborhood setting . Organizers estimated 15 @,@ 000 visitors , plus 2 @,@ 000 motorcycles attended . 
 In 2006 , because of the implosion of the cooling tower at Trojan Nuclear Power Plant , a group got together in the South Park Blocks and brought down a 25 @-@ foot model tower to celebrate the implosion . 
 More events included a pro @-@ choice march , rally , and workshops in 1989 with 2700 to 7500 attendees , a Tiananmen Square anniversary memorial ceremony in 1990 , the " Earth Fair " ( celebrating Earth Day , held in at least 1990 and 1991 ; 1990 saw 15 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 visitors in the rain ) , a 1991 Fourth of July parade to honor returnees from Operation Desert Storm ( called the Defenders of Liberty Welcome Home Parade ) , the <unk> in the Park homeless meal ( held from 1991 until 1996 , when it was moved to O 'Bryant Square ) , a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ strong rally for Rodney King on May 2 , 1992 , the Oregon <unk> , a 1993 celebration of the Oregon Trail ( including an authentic encampment with teepees and wagons ) , Portland 's first Critical Mass , held on September 24 , 1993 with 100 cyclists in the South Park Blocks , the Portland Arts Festival ( part of the Portland Rose Festival ) held in 1998 through at least 2006 , a gun control rally in 2000 , the 2 @,@ 000 people ( which included the Million Mom March ) for the Amala Peace Walk in 2000 , welcoming the Dalai Lama , an AIDS Walk in September 2000 , the " PDX AIDS Day Promise Vigil " at Shemanski Fountain to mark World AIDS Day in 2006 , a campaign rally and speech by Al Gore in October 2000 , the Twilight <unk> from 2002 to 2006 ( attracting 10 @,@ 000 spectators , moved in 2007 to the North Park Blocks due to construction ) , a protest by about 150 people against the use of deadly force by Portland Police in a racially motivated traffic stop , a march of grandmothers and mothers on Mother 's Day 2004 titled " Mothers Acting Up " , a reading of Pablo Neruda 's poetry on the 100th anniversary of his birth ( July 2004 ) , a protest with 150 people to " mourn for the loss of our country " in November 2004 when John Kerry lost the 2004 presidential election , a celebration of the Oregon State Quarter 's launch in 2005 , a parade titled " Procession for the Future " for " climate stabilization and ecological well @-@ being " , " worker dignity " , " think outside the ( water ) bottle " , " just security and global justice " , as well as costumed George W. Bush , Dick Cheney , and Condoleezza Rice " dressed as <unk> " held on March 4 , 2008 . 
 Many protests and marches have been held in response to the 2003 invasion of Iraq . There were several anti @-@ war rallies in 2001 through 2003 , including 20 @,@ 000 at a January 18 , 2003 rally , and 20 @,@ 000 – 45 @,@ 000 for the March 15 , 2003 rally . Groups broke off from the protest to block roads and the Morrison Bridge ; these splinter groups were broken up by the police . John Lewis spoke at the rally . 
 Approximately 15 @,@ 000 people protested the fourth anniversary of the war ( March 2007 ) . For the fifth anniversary , the Iraq Body Count Exhibit placed red and white flags in the South Park Blocks , signifying who had died between the Americans and Iraqis . There was a large fifth @-@ anniversary protest and parade against the Iraq war ( " thousands of protesters " , March 2008 ) , and a high school student protest against the war was held in March 2008 , with 400 protesters . 
 Other events have been held , including the Park Block Revels ( held from 1972 to at least 1992 ) , the Oregon Historical Society 's Holiday Cheer and Authors Party , the Portland Poetry Festival ( held from 1972 to at least 1992 ) , Shakespeare @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Park by the Portland Actors Ensemble , the Meier & Frank Holiday Parade ( held from 1988 on ) , the Downtown Community Association 's Ice Cream Social ( held from 1990 to at least 1992 ) , <unk> , a party by the Caribbean Cultural Association , held from 1996 until at least 2003 , and <unk> , " an event focused on refugee experiences and alternatives to war " , held by Oregon Physicians for Social Responsibility in at least September 2002 and 2003 . In 2008 , a local resident was known for wheeling her piano down an elevator and 1 @.@ 5 blocks to the Park Blocks , setting it up and playing " Chopin under the trees . " The Bicycle Transportation Alliance hosted a breakfast to support Bike to Work Month in May 2009 . 
 = = = Portland State strike and riot = = = 
 In May 1970 , there was a Vietnam War protest held in the park blocks , held in response to the invasion of Cambodia and the Kent State Shootings . Strikers barricaded streets surrounding the university and Park Blocks , causing them to become car @-@ free , as they are now . Due in part to the Kent State Shootings on May 4 , and 134 faculty members who had formally joined the strike , Portland State University was forced to close from May 6 to 11 . By May 6 , the protesters formed an underground newspaper , called the <unk> , and had four demands : " U.S. out of S.E. Asia now ; troops , cops off campus ; free Bobby Seale ; detoxify nerve gas . " Posters with a logo were printed in the PSU Smith Center cafeteria , but protesters were evicted from the area by May 7 after a " wild , all @-@ night party " . On May 11 , police officers charged protesters and forcibly removed a symbolic hospital tent ( a geodesic dome ) placed on the blocks . 28 protesters were injured and taken to area hospitals , and four police officers were injured . Lawsuits following the protest led to Portland Police agreeing to never use force against non @-@ violent protesters in the future . 
 = = = Pedestrian access and renewal = = = 
 The southern end of the South Park Blocks were closed to cars in 1973 , removing traffic from the blocks and the center of the university . 
 The area was the focus of a Portland Development Commission urban renewal based on a 1982 master plan , becoming an urban renewal district in 1985 , and expiring in July 2008 . The park blocks underwent serious renovations in 1987 , adding plazas , large flower beds , lighting and irrigation , and newly paved sidewalks . Several apartment complexes specifically aimed at the middle class were built , including the University Park Apartments ( 125 units , $ 10 @.@ 5 million , quickly sold and converted to condos ) , South Park Square Apartments ( 184 units , $ 16 million , completed May 1988 ) , and Tom <unk> 's Gallery Park Apartments ( 31 units , $ 3 million ) . In 1987 , the New Theater Building of the Portland Center for the Performing Arts was completed immediately next door to the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall . The South Park Blocks Association , a commercial and institutional association , was started at that time , to attract residents and consumers to the area and to address security concerns . 
 = = = Crime = = = 
 A report in 1990 said the blocks were being " held hostage " by the homeless , mainly " aggressive <unk> , stumbling drunks , violent drug users and the unpredictable mentally ill . " Reports in the mid @-@ 1990s said " Downtown Portland had become a drug supermarket " , with " marijuana and LSD ... being dealt openly in the South Park Blocks , " and that the South Park Blocks , especially near the Lincoln statue , were home to " The Park People " , who littered , used drugs , and damaged property . Youth reported they had moved to the South Park Blocks because they had been kicked out of Pioneer Courthouse Square and O 'Bryant Square . A child molester known as " Krusty the Troll " who preyed on homeless teens in the South Park Blocks , was charged with 79 counts of sex crimes in 1996 . There was a major police sweep of the Park Blocks in 1996 for ordinances such as sitting on the Abraham Lincoln statue , marijuana possession , littering , and loud radios . 
 Downtown crime was down 30 % from 1996 to 2003 , and down 7 % from 2004 to 2005 . Due to crime , Mayor Tom Potter declared a 9 pm curfew in 2005 , stating walking is allowed , but " no one will be allowed to loiter , harass visitors or use the park as their personal camp . " The Oregonian stated the curfew was due to a " verbally aggressive " in the area , after the group was displaced from the Burnside Bridge by the Big Pipe Project . The curfew was still in effect in February 2006 , when it was spread to other downtown parks , citing the reduction in drug dealing that was occurring in the South Park Blocks . 
 In 2006 , students from the Art Institute of Portland used stencils to advertise a concert for the Oregon Food Bank . The students believed they were using spray chalk , but after completion , they learned they were actually using spray paint . The students were told that even temporary markings count as graffiti , and the students offered to remove the paint and apologize to businesses affected . Criminal charges were not filed . 
 = = Notable places = = 
 Portland State University 
 Peter Stott Center 
 Branford Price Millar Library 
 Lincoln Hall 
 Ladd Carriage House 
 Ladd Tower 
 Oregon Historical Society 
 Portland Art Museum 
 Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall 
 Arlington Club 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Terence O 'Donnell – author 
 = = Current events = = 
 A portion of the park typically hosts the summer commencement ceremony for Portland State University students . In 2008 , 550 students participated in the ceremony , and it was held rain or shine . PSU also hosts an annual Party in the Park every fall after the school year begins . 
 = = = Portland Farmers Market = = = 
 The primary Portland Farmers Market location , held in the South Park Blocks every Saturday from March to December attracts up to 14 @,@ 000 people per weekend to the local food booths . It was originally held at Broadway and Naito beginning in 1992 , but moved to the Park Blocks in 1998 . A smaller market is held at the north end of the blocks on Wednesdays , and was held in Pioneer Courthouse Square until 1998 . 
 The Saturday South Park Blocks location has been very popular , and has been credited with helping " make the city a national food destination " . Beginning in March 2009 , dogs were banned from the market , due to " some unfortunate incidents with dogs – tripping people , urinating on food , snatching muffins out of kids ' hands " . Other satellite locations still allow pets . The Saturday location was doubled in size for the 2010 season . 
 = Sutorius eximius = 
 Sutorius eximius , commonly known as the lilac @-@ brown bolete , is a species of fungus in the family Boletaceae . This bolete produces fruit bodies that are dark purple to chocolate brown in color with a smooth cap , a finely scaly stipe , and a reddish @-@ brown spore print . The tiny pores on the cap underside are chocolate to violet brown . It is widely distributed , having been recorded on North America , South America , and Asia , where it grows in a mycorrhizal relationship with both coniferous and deciduous trees . 
 Originally described in 1874 as a species of Boletus , the fungus has also been classified in the genus Leccinum because of the scabers on the stipe , or in Tylopilus because of the color of the spore print . Molecular genetic analysis revealed that the lilac @-@ brown bolete was separate from both of these genera , and merited placement in a new genus . Sutorius was created to contain this bolete and the closely related Australian species S. australiensis . 
 Although the lilac @-@ brown bolete was once considered edible , caution is typically recommended in modern field guides when considering this bolete for the table after several poisonings were reported in northeastern North America . Symptoms include severe gastrointestinal distress with vomiting , diarrhea , and nausea that generally lasts less than 24 hours . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was originally described as Boletus robustus by American mycologist Charles Christopher Frost in 1874 , from specimens collected in Vermont . He noted that the cap was " chocolate color , fleshy , and so succulent that it is difficult to dry and preserve " . The name assigned by Frost , however , is an illegitimate homonym of a name previously used for a different species by Miles Joseph Berkeley in 1851 . Charles Horton Peck published the new name Boletus eximius for the same species in 1887 . William Alphonso Murrill transferred the species to Ceriomyces in 1909 , but this genus is no longer recognized , having largely been subsumed into Boletus . 
 Various authorities have treated the taxon as either a Boletus , Leccinum , or Tylopilus , depending on which morphological characteristics they deemed most significant . Rolf Singer initially considered the species most appropriately placed in Tylopilus on account of the reddish @-@ brown spore print , a taxonomic opinion shared by Alexander H. Smith and Harry Thiers , who wrote " Concerning whether or not the species should be placed in Leccinum , we can only say that the color of the stipe ornamentation is merely a reflection of the color of the stipe generally and that it does not change color in a characteristic pattern as it ages . For this reason we exclude it from Leccinum and agree with Singer that it is a Tylopilus . " Later however , Singer thought the somewhat scabrous ornamentation of the stipe justified a placement in Leccinum . René Pomerleau had previously ( 1959 ) placed the species in Leccinum , but this transfer was invalid , as no basionym was specified . 
 Roy E. Halling designated a lectotype specimen in 1983 from Frost 's original collections . Early molecular evidence suggested that the lilac @-@ brown bolete was genetically distinct from the genera in which it had formerly been placed . In 2012 , Halling and colleagues published molecular evidence indicating that the species did not belong in either Tylopilus or Leccinum as it does not share a recent common ancestor with either of those genera . Recognizing its genetic and morphological distinctiveness , they created the genus Sutorius , with S. eximius as the type species . As of 2015 , the only other species in Sutorius is S. australiensis , found in Australia . 
 The generic name Sutorius is derived for the Latin word for " cobbler " ( <unk> ) , referring to Charles Frost 's profession . The epithet eximius means " distinguished " or " excellent in size and beauty " . Although Frost 's reason for using this name is not known with certainty , Peter Roberts and Shelley Evans speculate " Perhaps it was the violet @-@ brown colors , which are quite attractive in a formal , nineteenth @-@ century manner . " S. eximius is commonly known as the " lilac @-@ brown bolete " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fruit bodies have caps that are initially convex , later becoming broadly convex to more or less flat , with a diameter of 5 – 12 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) . The cap surface is dry to slightly sticky , with a texture ranging from smooth to somewhat felt @-@ like . Its color is purple @-@ brown to grayish @-@ brown to reddish @-@ brown ; young specimens are often covered with a fine whitish bloom ( a delicate , powdery coating ) . The flesh is whitish , and slowly stains gray @-@ brown when it is cut or injured . It has no distinctive odor , and a mild to slightly bitter taste . On the cap underside , the pore surface is dark chocolate brown to purple brown , and stains dark brown where bruised . The nearly circular pores number up to 3 per millimeter , and the tubes are 0 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 9 in ) deep . The solid stipe measures 4 @.@ 5 – 9 cm ( 1 @.@ 8 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . Its color is similar to that of the cap , and it has a scurfy surface from a dense coating of purplish to purple @-@ brown scabers . 
 The lilac @-@ brown bolete produces a pinkish to reddish @-@ brown to amber @-@ brown spore print . The smooth , translucent spores are narrowly spindle shaped and measure 11 – 17 by 3 @.@ 5 – 5 µm . Collections made in Costa Rica have shorter spores ( 10 @.@ 5 – 13 @.@ 3 µm ) and smaller fruitbodies than eastern North American material ; <unk> material also has smaller spores , measuring 9 @.@ 7 – 12 µm . These differences are attributed to clinal variation . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club shaped , four @-@ spored , and measure 23 – 30 by 7 – 8 µm . The cystidia on the pore edges ( cheilocystidia ) are narrowly spindle @-@ shaped ( fusoid ) , measuring 20 – 30 by 7 – 8 µm . Cystidia on the pore surface ( pleurocystidia ) are thin @-@ walled , fusoid to swollen ( ventricose ) , with dimensions of 27 – 42 by 8 – 12 µm . There are no clamp connections in the hyphae of Sutorius eximius . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The Australian congener Sutorius australiensis produces somewhat smaller and darker fruitbodies than S. eximius . The violet @-@ grey bolete , Tylopilus plumbeoviolaceus , is found in eastern North America and Korea . This species is somewhat similar in appearance , but can be distinguished by its smoother stipe , less brownish colors , and bitter taste . The Asian and North American black velvet bolete , T. alboater , has a black to grayish @-@ brown cap and grows in deciduous woods . T. violatinctus , found in eastern North America , has whitish pores , a smooth stipe , and a somewhat paler cap than S. eximius . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Fruit bodies of Sutorius eximius grow in the soil singly or scattered among leaf litter . A mycorrhizal species , the bolete has been recorded growing in association with plants from various genera , including Dicymbe , Dipterocarpus , Fagus , Hopea , Quercus , Shorea , and Tsuga . The species has been recorded from North America , Costa Rica , and Indonesia . In Costa Rica , where it usually associates with the endemic oaks Quercus <unk> and Q. <unk> , the lilac @-@ brown bolete can be locally abundant in the Cordillera Central and the Cordillera de Talamanca . Additional locations with collections that have not been confirmed by DNA analysis include Guyana , Japan , China . Although S. eximius has been reported from Thailand , molecular analysis of Thai collections suggests that they represent a distinct , as @-@ yet unnamed species . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Until relatively recently , Sutorius eximius was typically considered an edible mushroom , and listed as so in several North American field guides . This continued a trend initiated by earlier authors such as Charles McIlvaine and Louis Krieger , who both wrote favorably of the bolete 's <unk> properties . A series of poisonings reported from the New England region and eastern Canada have cast doubt on the edibility of this fungus . According to Greg Marley , author Roger Phillips was the first to include a toxicity warning in his 1991 book Mushrooms of North America . Despite its revised status in North America , the lilac @-@ brown bolete remains one of the most common fungi used as food by locals in the Hengduan Mountains region of southwestern China . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 <unk> are novel bisphenol pigment compounds isolated from the fruit bodies of Sutorius eximius . <unk> A and B were identified in 2012 , while <unk> C was reported a year later . Other compounds reported to occur in the fruit bodies include <unk> and caffeic acid . 
 = The Electric Prunes = 
 The Electric Prunes are an American psychedelic rock band , formed in Los Angeles , California , in 1965 . Much of the band 's music was , as music historian Richie Unterberger described it , possessed of " an eerie and sometimes anguished ambiance " , and , early on , mainly consisted of material by songwriters Annette Tucker and Nancie Mantz , though the group also penned their own songs . Combining elements of psychedelia and electronic rock , the band 's sound was marked by innovative recording techniques with fuzz @-@ toned guitars and oscillating sound effects . In addition , guitarist Ken Williams ' and singer James Lowe 's concept of " free @-@ form garage music " provided the band with a richer sonic palette and exploratory lyrical structure than many of their contemporaries . 
 The band was signed to Reprise Records in 1966 and released their first single , " Ain 't It Hard " , in the latter part of the year . Their first album , The Electric Prunes , included the band 's two nationally charting songs , " I Had Too Much to Dream ( Last Night ) " and " Get Me to the World on Time " . With the appearance of their second album , Underground , the band was more free to create their own material . However , the original group disbanded by 1968 when they proved unable to record the innovative and complex arrangements by David Axelrod on the albums Mass in F Minor and Release of an Oath . Both albums were released under the band 's name , the rights to which were owned by their record producer David Hassinger , but were largely performed by other musicians . Several of the original band members reconvened and recorded again after 2001 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 The band originated from a surf rock @-@ influenced garage rock group , the Sanctions , in 1965 . The Sanctions , which included James Lowe ( vocals , guitar ) , Mark Tulin ( bass guitar ) , Ken Williams ( lead guitar ) , and Michael " Quint " Weakley ( drums ) , recorded 12 cover songs on an acetate disc on March 27 , 1965 , in a home studio owned by Russ Bottomley . For their next set of recordings on September 29 , 1965 , the group , then known as Jim and the Lords , was joined by keyboardist , Dick Hargrave , who left shortly after to pursue a career in graphic arts . The songs went unreleased until Heartbeat Productions distributed the 2000 album , Then Came The Electric Prunes , which was commended for its good sound quality , considering the circumstances in which it was recorded . Back to a quartet , the band , while rehearsing in a garage , met a real estate agent named Barbara Harris . Harris had connections in the music industry , and introduced the group to Dave Hassinger to record demos at Sky Hill Studios . Hassinger , who had been working as the resident sound engineer at RCA Studios , recently completed development for The Rolling Stones ' album , Aftermath , and expressed a desire to produce a record . He suggested to the group that they change their name , and they considered a list of alternatives . According to Lowe , the name Electric Prunes started off as a joke , but he eventually convinced other band members , saying , " It 's the one thing everyone will remember . It 's not attractive , and there 's nothing sexy about it , but people won 't forget it . " As a result of the recordings , a single , featuring a cover of the Gypsy Trips ' folk rock tune , " Ain 't It Hard " , and the Lowe @-@ penned song , " Little Olive " , was released in early 1966 , but failed to chart . 
 = = = Early success = = = 
 Despite the commercial failure of " Ain 't It Hard " , Reprise Records was encouraged by the group 's effort , and signed the band to a recording contract that left them under Hassinger 's authority . Weakley departed the band after the single , and was replaced by Preston Ritter , and rhythm guitarist James " Weasel " Spagnola was recruited to make The Electric Prunes a quintet . Although the band was composing their own material , Hassinger called upon songwriters Annette Tucker and Nancie Mantz to write the majority of the group 's songs . The new line @-@ up recorded six demos at American Recording Studio and Leon Russell 's studio . These mainly comprised cover songs and Tucker @-@ Mantz compositions . According to Lowe , while at Russell 's recording studio , " Dave cued up a tape and didn 't hit ' record , ' and the playback in the studio was way up : ear @-@ shattering vibrating jet guitar . Ken had been shaking his Bigsby wiggle stick with some fuzztone and tremolo at the end of the tape . Forward it was cool . Backward it was amazing . I ran into the control room and said , ' What was that ? ' They didn 't have the monitors on so they hadn 't heard it . I made Dave cut if off and save it for later . " The fluttering buzz sound was utilized for the opening to the Tucker @-@ Mantz song , " I Had Too Much To Dream ( Last Night ) " , which also included a heavily @-@ textured psychedelic guitar motif . The song was chosen to be released as The Electric Prunes ' second single in November 1966 . It peaked at number 11 on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached number 49 on the UK Singles Chart . The success of the single prompted immediate touring , and earned the group a promotional contract with musical equipment makers Vox . Williams recorded an advert , demonstrating the use of Vox 's wah @-@ wah pedal in early 1967 , and the band was featured in magazines such as Vox Teen Beat . 
 The band 's follow @-@ up single , " Get Me to the World on Time " , which put distorted sound effects to a psychedelic @-@ tinged Bo Diddley beat , was released in May 1967 . The song managed to chart at number 27 in the US and number 42 in the UK , and was the most electronically experimental composition by the group thus far . When it came time for The Electric Prunes to record songs for their first album , they were limited musically due to the predominate presence of Tucker and Mantz 's ( also Jill Jones ) songwriting partnership , which composed the majority of the album 's material . The group 's debut album , The Electric Prunes possessed exotically @-@ combined effects , and violin @-@ like guitar riffs , mixed with a diverse , and somewhat uneven , selection of pop songs , with only " Train For Tomorrow " and " Luvin ' " being penned by the band . Tracks such as the soft rock tune , " Onie " and " <unk> Trolley " suggest inconsistency in an attempt to produce a commercially viable sound . Reflecting on the album , Tulin said , " Consequently there are definitely songs that I believe do not belong on the album and were , in fact , a waste of our time and energy . There were several other ideas we were working on , but [ we ] realized there was no use pursuing them because they too would have been ' too weird . ' " 
 In July 1967 , the band released their fourth single , one of the more unusual compositions to come from the pen of the Tucker @-@ Mantz songwriting duo , " Dr. Do @-@ Good " . The song , which featured Williams playing a prototype steel guitar , and childlike to maddening vocals , was described by music historian Richie Unterberger as " sounding more like a horror movie theme run amok than a radio @-@ ready hit " , and consequently the single bubbled under the Hot 100 at number 128 . The Electric Prunes reconvened at American Recording Studios to record their second album , Underground , though Hassinger was not as involved in the band 's activities , which allowed much more creative freedom to the group to write their own material . For the album , the band wrote seven of the twelve tracks , and expanded upon the experimentation of the first album , with inventive guitar reverb and oscillation , in a unified effort . However , in the middle of the recording sessions the line @-@ up went through changes when Ritter departed for musical differences , and was replaced by original drummer Weakley , who appeared on five tracks . Spagnola left near the conclusion of recording to address medical concerns , and Mike Gannon was recruited to finish the album . Gannon was included on just two songs as well as the non @-@ album track , " Everybody Knows You 're Not In Love " . In August 1967 , Underground was released , but , without a hit @-@ ready single , did not fare as well on the Billboard 200 , where it peaked at number 172 . After a U.S. tour in the latter half of 1967 , the new line @-@ up embarked on a European tour and this led to appearances at high @-@ profile venues such as The Roundhouse , The Speakeasy Club and Middle Earth . On the final leg of the tour , The Electric Prunes ' performance was recorded in Stockholm by the Swedish Broadcasting Corporation . The recordings were issued in 1997 on the live album , Stockholm ' 67 . 
 = = = The Axelrod period = = = 
 At the suggestion of manager Lenny Poncher and Hassinger , The Electric Prunes agreed to record a concept album that integrated Gregorian music into psychedelic pop , with the belief it would launch them into commercial success . Poncher recruited David Axelrod , a formally neo @-@ classically trained musician , to compose all of the material for the project . The result , Mass in F Minor , was a complex arrangement of religious @-@ based rock , which was sung entirely in Latin . Although the band did record the songs " Kyrie Eleison " , " Gloria " , and " Credo " , the intricate orchestration proved to be too difficult and time @-@ consuming for the group . As a consequence , Hassinger enlisted the Canadian group , The Collectors , among other session musicians , in completing the album , although Lowe , Tulin , and Weakley did contribute to every track . Mass in F Minor was released in January 1968 and reached number 135 on the Billboard 200 . An eerie version of the opening track , " Kyrie Eleison " , became somewhat of an underground favorite when it appeared in the soundtrack for the counterculture film , Easy Rider . The Electric Prunes performed with the new songs in concert just once , at the Santa Monica Civic Auditorium , which Tulin described : " From the outset the performance was a disaster . We missed the intro on the first song and it never got any better . Amp speakers blew , charts fell off music stands and everyone was , in general , in a complete state of confusion . Ended up each song turned into one long jam . I think we were , at times , all in the same key . I made my way over to the four celli and four French horns and told them to ' jam in E. ' Somehow we would hit a break and James would manage a vocal " . As a result of financial and musical issues , Weakley and Lowe left the group in early 1968 . Tulin and Williams finished a tour with a line @-@ up that also included Kenny Loggins and Jeremy Stuart , but by mid @-@ 1968 they too departed the group . 
 Nonetheless , Hassinger still owned the rights to The Electric Prunes 's name , and was encouraged by the success of Mass in F Minor , which prompted him to assemble a new line @-@ up . He was steered toward the Colorado group , Climax , by Rich Fifield . Fifield had worked in fellow Colorado band , <unk> ( previously the surf rock band The Astronauts ) , which was managed by Poncher , and produced an album with Axelrod . The new Electric Prunes line @-@ up included Climax members Richard Whetstone ( vocals , guitar ) , John Herron ( organ ) , and Mark Kincaid ( guitar ) with Brett Wade ( bass guitar ) , who was recommended by The Collectors . With the group restructured , Axelrod , again , composed all the material for their next album , in the same vein as the previous effort , and centered it around the Jewish prayer , Kol <unk> . The album , titled Release of an Oath , utilized several session musicians including Howard Roberts , Carol Kaye , and Earl Palmer , and saw Whetstone as the only band member to contribute to the recordings . Although the album was considered more cohesive and progressive than its predecessor , it failed to chart upon its release in November 1968 . Afterwards , Axelrod returned to his past position at Capitol Records , and The Electric Prunes toured as a supporting act for bands such as Steppenwolf , Canned Heat , and New Buffalo Springfield . 
 = = = The " New Improved " Electric Prunes = = = 
 The band 's final album , Just Good Old Rock and Roll , was released in June 1969 with the cover describing the group as The " New Improved " Electric Prunes . Herron left the group before they completed recording of the album , though he was still credited as the keyboardist . He was replaced by Ron Morgan , who had been the guitarist of Three Dog Night , and an essential session musician for the first three albums released by The West Coast Pop Art Experimental Band . With the exception of " Finders Keepers , Losers Weepers " , which was co @-@ written by Jimmy Holiday , all the songs on Just Good Old Rock and Roll were composed solely by the band . In addition , Wade composed " Flowing Smoothly " , the B @-@ side to the non @-@ album single , " Hey , Mr. President " . The album was much more straightforward than past works , consisting of funk @-@ influenced hard rock , though " So Many People to Tell " and " Silver Passion Mine " also exhibit a late @-@ psychedelic sound . As Whetstone explains , " We were fairly naive in terms of guidance ; we had none , so we were experimenting with a lot of musical styles . If you listen to the album , you 'll hear a lot of diversity , feel and tempo changes ... That was our learning curve . " In early 1970 , Whetstone and Wade departed the band and moved to Canada where they formed Stallion <unk> . Morgan and Kincaid constructed another line @-@ up of The Electric Prunes that included Michael Kearns , Clay <unk> , Huey <unk> , and Galen Pugh ; however by mid @-@ 1970 the band dissolved . 
 = = = Revival and reformation = = = 
 Although the band broke up in 1970 , their material continued to be circulated through reissues and compilation albums . Following the inclusion of " I Had Too Much to Dream ( Last Night ) " as the first track on the seminal Nuggets : Original Artyfacts from the First Psychedelic Era , 1965 – 1968 in 1972 , a slow return of interest in the band 's music began . On the 1998 release of the album , " Get Me to the World on Time " was included as well . In Europe , the band 's albums were re @-@ released , with 1986 seeing the reissue of Underground , Release of an Oath , and , essentially The Electric Prunes 's first greatest hits album , Long Days Flight . This was the first album to include their first single , " Ain 't It Hard " , the non @-@ LP track " You Never Had It Better " , and the first to be released on the compact disc format in 1989 . By 1997 , all of the group 's albums were available via compact disc . Following the release of the 1997 live album , Stockholm ' 67 , on Heartbeat Records , the original line @-@ up of Tulin , Lowe , Williams , and Weakley ( now known as Fortune ) reconvened , in 1999 , to record new material for the first time in 31 years . After the success of the 2001 compilation album , Lost Dreams , the band began to perform live again along with new members . 
 On October 31 , 2001 , the band released the album , Artifact , which included several guest musicians , most notably former Moby Grape guitarist , Peter Lewis . Deemed the " one we never got to make " , the album was a cohesive take on the band 's psychedelic sound . In August 2002 , the group toured Europe for the first time since 1968 , with concerts in the UK and Greece , and , in 2003 , a DVD looking into the UK portion of their European tour , called Rewired , was released . Additional albums were released over the years , including the concept album , California , in 2004 , and their most experimental album since The Electric Prunes 's reformation , Feedback , in 2006 . On February 26 , 2011 , Tulin died aged 62 from a heart attack while volunteering at the University of Southern California Catalina Hyperbaric Chamber . After Tulin 's death , the band went on hiatus , but returned to touring in 2013 . On May 22 , 2014 , the band released <unk> , which featured new material inspired by the group 's tour in Tokyo , Japan . The album includes the last recordings with Tulin , and the two live tracks , " Smokestack Lightning " and " Bullet Thru the Backseat " . 
 Preston Ritter died in 2015 , aged 65 . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = = Current members = = = 
 James Lowe – lead vocals , harmonica , percussion , theremin , guitar , autoharp ( 1965 – 1968 , 1999 – present ) 
 Steve Kara – lead guitar , backing vocals ( 2003 – present ) 
 Jay Dean – rhythm guitar , backing vocals ( 2004 – present ) 
 Walter Garces – drums ( 2006 – present ) 
 Rocco – bass , backing vocals ( 2013 – present ) 
 = = = Former members = = = 
 Mark Tulin ( 1965 – 1968 , 1999 – 2011 ; died 2011 ) - bass , keyboards 
 Ken Williams ( 1965 – 1968 , 1999 – 2003 , 2006 ) - lead guitar 
 Michael " Quint " Weakley ( 1965 – 1966 , 1967 , 2001 ) - drums , percussion 
 Steve <unk> ( 1965 ) 
 Dick Hargraves ( 1965 ) - keyboards 
 Preston Ritter ( 1966 – 1967 ; died 2015 ) - drums , percussion 
 James Spagnola ( 1966 – 1967 ) - rhythm guitar , backing and lead vocals 
 Joe Dooley ( 1967 – 1968 , 2001 – 2005 ) - drums 
 Mike Gannon ( 1967 – 1968 ) - rhythm guitar 
 John Herron ( 1968 – 1970 ) - keyboards 
 Mark Kincaid ( 1968 – 1970 ) - guitar , backing vocals 
 Brett Wade ( 1968 – 1970 ) - bass , backing vocals , flute 
 Dick Whetstone ( 1968 – 1970 ) - drums , lead vocals , guitar 
 Kenny Loggins ( 1968 ) 
 <unk> Stuart ( 1968 ) 
 Ron Morgan ( 1969 – 1970 ) - guitar 
 Cameron Lowe ( 2001 – 2003 ) - keyboards 
 Mark Moulin ( 2001 – 2003 ) - lead guitar 
 Glen Bostic ( 2007 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 The Electric Prunes ( 1967 ) 
 Underground ( 1967 ) 
 Mass in F Minor ( 1968 ) 
 Release of an Oath ( 1968 ) 
 Just Good Old Rock and Roll ( 1969 ) 
 Artifact ( 2002 ) 
 California ( 2004 ) 
 Feedback ( 2006 ) 
 <unk> ( 2014 ) 
 = = = Live albums = = = 
 Stockholm ' 67 ( Heartbeat <unk> ) , 1997 
 Return to Stockholm Live at Debaser 2004 ( <unk> 8 @-@ <unk> @-@ 13 ) , 2012 
 = = = U.S. singles = = = 
 " Ain 't It Hard " / " Little Olive " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1966 
 " I Had Too Much to Dream ( Last Night ) " / " Luvin " ( Reprise <unk> ) 1966 ( US # 11 , UK # 49 ) 
 " Get Me to the World on Time " / " Are You Lovin ' Me More ( But Enjoying it Less ) " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1966 , ( US # 27 , UK # 42 ) 
 " Vox Wah @-@ Wah Ad " ( Thomas 08 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 ) , 1967 
 " Dr. Do @-@ Good " / " Hideaway " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1967 ( US # 128 ) 
 " The Great Banana Hoax " / " Wind @-@ up Toys " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1967 
 " Everybody Knows You 're Not in Love " / " You Never Had it Better " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1968 
 " I Had Too Much to Dream ( Last Night ) " / " Get Me to the World on Time " ( Reprise <unk> – Double A @-@ side ) , 1968 
 " Shadow " ( Reprise PRO 287 ) , 1968 , one @-@ sided single 
 " Sanctus " / " Credo " ( Reprise PRO 277 ) , 1968 
 " Help Us ( Our Father , Our King ) " / " The Adoration " ( Reprise PRO 305 ) , 1968 
 " Hey ! Mr. President " / " Flowing Smoothly " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1969 
 " Sell " / " Violent Rose " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1969 
 " Love Grows " / " Finders , Keepers , Losers , Weepers " ( Reprise <unk> ) , 1969 
 " Hollywood Halloween " ( Birdman Records <unk> ) , 2001 , Peter Lewis ( Moby Grape ) backed by The Electric Prunes ) 
 " Get Me to the World on Time " ( Live ) ( Birdman Records <unk> ) , 2002 ( recorded at <unk> III in June 2001 ) 
 " Left in Blue " ( original by Azure Halo ) 
 = = = European singles = = = 
 " I Had Too Much to Dream ( Last Night ) " / " Luvin " ( Reprise RS <unk> ) , 1966 , UK 
 " Get Me to the World on Time " / " Are You Lovin Me More ( But Enjoying It Less ) " ( Reprise RS 20564 ) , 1967 , UK 
 " The Great Banana Hoax " / " Wind @-@ Up Toys " ( Reprise RS <unk> ) , 1967 , UK 
 " Long Days Flight " / " The King In His Counting House " ( Reprise RS <unk> ) , 1967 , UK 
 " I Had Too Much To Dream ( Last Night ) " / " Luvin ' " / " Little Olive " / " Ain 't It Hard " ( Reprise <unk> <unk> ) , 1967 , France 
 " Everybody Knows You 're Not In Love " / " You Never Had It Better " ( Reprise RS <unk> ) , 1968 , UK 
 " Long Day 's Flight " / " Dr. Do @-@ Good " / " The Great Banana Hoax " / " Captain Glory " ( Reprise <unk> <unk> ) , 1968 , France 
 " Everybody Knows You 're Not In Love " / " You Never Had It Better " ( Reprise RV <unk> ) , 1968 , France 
 " Hey Mr President " / " Flowing Smoothly " ( Reprise RV <unk> ) , 1969 , France 
 " I Had Too Much To Dream ( Last Night ) " / ( " Lies " by the Knickerbockers ) ( Elektra K <unk> ) , 1973 ( from the Nuggets compilation ) , UK 
 " I Had Too Much To Dream ( Last Night ) " / " Luvin " ( Radar ADA 16 – picture sleeve reissue ) , 1979 , UK 
 = = = Compilation albums = = = 
 Long Day 's Flight ( Edsel Records / Demon Records ) , 1986 , UK 
 The Singles ( Gone Beat ) , 1995 , Israel 
 Lost Dreams ( Birdman Records / Heartbeat Records ) , 2000 , US 
 The Sanctions / Jim and the Lords - Then Came the Electric Prunes ( Heartbeat Productions ) , 2000 , UK ( pre @-@ Electric Prunes recordings ) 
 Too Much To Dream - Original Group Recordings : Reprise 1966 @-@ 1967 ( Rhino Records / Reprise Records ) , 2007 , UK & Europe 
 The Original Albums Series , 5 @-@ CD box set , released 2012 
 = = = Various = = = 
 Easy Rider , 1969 ( includes " Kyrie Eleison " ) 
