 Nuggets : Original Artyfacts from the First Psychedelic Era , 1965 – 1968 ( includes " I Had Too Much To Dream ( Last Night ) " ) , 1972 , Elektra , reissued 1976 Sire 
 Pebbles , Volume 2 , 1979 ( includes " Vox Wah @-@ Wah Radio Ad " ) , <unk> Records , reissued 1992 on CD by AIP Records 
 Rarities , 1981 ( 4 songs from a 1967 concert in Stockholm plus the Vox ad , split with Count Five ) , Great Live Concerts label 
 = = = DVDs = = = 
 Rewired ( Snapper Music ) , 2002 , UK 
 = Treasurer 's House = 
 The Treasurer 's House is a National Trust @-@ owned property in Martock , in the English county of Somerset . It has been designated as a grade I listed building . Apart from the Bishop 's Palace , Wells it is the oldest house in the county . 
 The original 13th @-@ century buildings have been added to several times , including a 15th @-@ century great hall which has an arch @-@ braced @-@ collar truss roof . Several of the rooms have wall paintings which have been uncovered and restored since the National Trust were given the building in 1970 . The house belonged to the Bishop of Bath and Wells and at one time was used to store the Great Seal of the Realm when John Langton was the chancellor of England . 
 = = History = = 
 The Treasurer 's House is a medieval priest 's house built from Hamstone during the 13th century . The solar block , which was built around 1250 survives as the oldest part of the building , making it the second oldest inhabited house in Somerset . It is mentioned as the parsonage attached to the village Church of All Saints . In 1227 it was acquired by Hugh of Wells the treasurer of Wells Cathedral who became the rector and patron of the church . The great hall was added in 1293 . In 1297 John Langton , who was a chancellor of England and Bishop of Chichester , received the Great Seal of the Realm which was stored at the " court at Martock " . The kitchen was added in the 15th century . 
 The Bishop of Bath owned the building , which was known as Martock Priory , until 1849 when it was transferred to the Ecclesiastical Commissioners . It was then privately owned and a small wing added . In 1943 it was bought by Harold St George Gray , the librarian @-@ curator of the Museum for the Somerset Archaeological and Natural History Society to preserve it . His wife bequeathed it to the National Trust in 1970 . 
 In 1987 it was designated as a Grade I listed building . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The building has undergone various extensions and alterations since it was built . The building has a T shaped plan with the west projecting wing being a hall added in the late 13th century . The great hall has a 15th @-@ century four bay open arch @-@ braced collar @-@ truss timber roof . The roof was covered with slate from local quarries until it was thatched in the mid 19th century . The current clay tiles were used in the early 20th century . 
 The kitchen block was added in the late 15th century or early 16th century and has no direct connection with the rest of the house . The Solar Block is the oldest part of the building dating from around 1250 . It has a plate tracery window with a Trefoil <unk> surrounded by wall paintings . The solar separated from the hall by a screens passage . 
 The walls of one of the private chambers on the upper floor were covered with 16th century limewash which was removed in 1995 , to expose a 13th @-@ century wall painting with a depiction of Jesus on the cross and two other figures . The crucifixion scene with rosettes and vine leaf decoration was uncovered in the 1990s . 
 = Hurricane Francelia = 
 Hurricane Francelia brought significant flooding to Central America , especially Belize and Guatemala . The sixth named storm and fourth hurricane of the 1969 Atlantic hurricane season , Francelia developed from a tropical wave in the southeastern Caribbean Sea on August 29 . It moved west @-@ northwestward and strengthened into a tropical storm on the following day . On September 1 , Francelia reached hurricane status , shortly before re @-@ curving west @-@ southwest . While approaching Central America , the storm intensified and peaked as a 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane on September 2 . Francelia weakened slightly before making landfall near Punta Gorda , Belize ( then British Honduras ) late on September 3 . The storm quickly weakened inland and dissipated by the following day . 
 During its early stages , Francelia brought gusty winds and light rainfall to several islands in the Caribbean Sea . While remaining nearly stationary offshore Central America , heavy precipitation fell in some countries , especially Guatemala where severe flooding killed 269 people and caused $ 15 million in damage . In neighboring Honduras , the hurricane struck after the undeclared Football War , causing additional damage in the northern portions of the country . Damage in Honduras was heaviest on the offshore Bay Islands , and the hurricane damaged or destroyed the majority of two towns there . In El Salvador , flooding isolated towns for several days and caused crop damage . Several rivers in the region flooded , with the Belize River reaching 36 feet ( 11 m ) above normal . Coastal areas of Belize lost electricity and telephone service , and high winds resulted in extensive damage to banana crops . Francelia ranked as the deadliest tropical cyclone in Guatemala , until Hurricane Mitch in 1998 . Overall damage was estimated at $ 35 @.@ 6 million , and there were 271 deaths . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Hurricane Francelia were from a tropical wave – an elongated low pressure area – that exited the western coast of Africa on August 19 . It moved westward across the tropical Atlantic Ocean , and the annual summary of 1969 tropical cyclone activity indicated there may have been a tropical depression – a cyclone with sustained winds of less 40 mph ( 75 km / h ) – briefly located within the system . On August 26 , an area of convection , or thunderstorms , developed along the wave , about 800 miles ( 1300 km ) east of Barbados . A Hurricane Hunters flight two days later reported no low @-@ level circulation . As the system moved through the southern Lesser Antilles , ship and land observations suggested a circulation had developed , signalling the formation of a tropical depression in the extreme southeastern Caribbean Sea early on August 29 . 
 The new tropical cyclone moved quickly west @-@ northwestward away from South America , and on August 30 reconnaissance aircraft recorded winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) . Based on the observation , the depression was upgraded to tropical storm status and given the name Francelia . Strengthening continued to near hurricane @-@ force , but the fast @-@ moving circulation outran the convection , causing brief weakening as it passed south of Jamaica . Although initially forecast to continue to the west @-@ northwest , Francelia slowed and turned to the west @-@ southwest on September 1 due to a ridge to its north . Concurrently , the storm intensified into hurricane status after its winds reached 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) , and late on September 1 Francelia passed over Swan Island . During its passage , an atmospheric sounding occurred in its eye ; a sounding is a measurement of the physical properties of the atmosphere , and the process had only occurred four times previously . 
 Hurricane Francelia continued west @-@ southwestward toward the northern coast of Central America , strengthening significantly despite its proximity to land . A Hurricane Hunters flight on September 2 reported winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 973 mbar ( 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) as the hurricane crossed over the Bay Islands , only 30 miles ( 50 km ) off the coast of Honduras . Francelia weakened slightly as its forward movement slowed , but it remained a hurricane as it approached land , based on confirmation from ship reports . Late on September 3 , the hurricane made landfall with winds estimated at 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) , just north of Punta Gorda in southern Belize , then known as British Honduras . Tropical storm force winds spread across the country , although hurricane @-@ force winds occurred only in a small area near where the hurricane made landfall . Francelia weakened quickly over land , dissipating late on September 4 over Guatemala . The system continued slowly across Central America , crossing into the eastern Pacific Ocean three days after it moved ashore . On September 8 , the remnants of Francelia redeveloped into Tropical Storm Glenda off the coast of Mexico , which moved parallel to the southwest Mexican coast before dissipating on September 12 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As a developing tropical cyclone , Francelia brought gusty winds to several islands across the eastern Caribbean . A few days later , it passed south of Jamaica , and winds of around 30 mph ( 50 km / h ) were recorded , and there was heavy rainfall . Shortly thereafter , the eye of Francelia crossed over Grand Cayman , producing 0 @.@ 56 in ( 14 mm ) in a 16 ‑ hour period . On Swan Island , located about 90 miles ( 145 km ) offshore Honduras , Francelia produced peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . A station on the island recorded a minimum pressure of 994 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) , as well as 3 @.@ 57 in ( 91 mm ) of rainfall during the storm 's passage . 
 Before Francelia made its final landfall , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) issued warnings for countries in the western Caribbean , although there were few observations confirming the track while it was active due to inadequate regional weather stations and lack of the Hurricane Hunters close to land . When Francelia nearly stalled off the coast of Central America , it brought prolonged rainfall and extensive flooding . In Guatemala , daily rainfall reached 7 @.@ 27 in ( 184 @.@ 6 mm ) at a station along the <unk> River , and totals reached about 20 in ( 510 mm ) in some mountainous areas . Along the Belizean coast , the hurricane produced a storm tide of about 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . Mountain rainfall resulted in overflown rivers , with the Belize River rising to over 36 feet ( 11 m ) above normal . The hurricane forced over 20 @,@ 000 people to evacuate their homes . 
 Offshore northern Honduras , the Bay Islands experienced heavy rainfall and high tides from the hurricane . Most of the houses in French Harbor were damaged or destroyed , leaving 400 families homeless . About half of the town of Coxen Hole on Roatán was destroyed , and the rest of the buildings were damaged . Damage was less severe on Útila and Guanaja islands . Francelia flooded most of the northern coast of Honduras , inundating the airport in San Pedro Sula to a depth of 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) . In San Pedro Sula , the storm cut the water supply for several days , and the floods cut road and rail links between there and Puerto Cortés along the coast . Across the region , Francelia caused widespread power outages . Along the Ulúa River , several residents were stranded when their cars stalled in flooded roadways . The floods wrecked four bridges on a road between La Lima and Tela . Flooding also ruined over 50 % of the United Fruit Company 's banana crop , forcing over 15 @,@ 000 acres ( 6 @,@ 100 ha ) to be replaced . Banana damage totaled $ 4 @.@ 7 million , and United Fruit estimated it would take two years to reach production levels before the hurricane . Other damaged crops included corn , sugar , coconut , and bean . Nationwide , the hurricane destroyed about 1 @,@ 000 houses , leaving 5 @,@ 000 people homeless . Damage was estimated at $ 19 million . 
 In neighboring Guatemala , Francelia caused flash flooding along the Pacific coast due to the heavy rainfall . The rains overflowed rivers , canals , and the crater lake of Volcán de Agua , causing widespread landslides . The floods and landslides wrecked highways , rail lines , and many boats , leaving several towns isolated . A 135 ft ( 41 m ) portion of the Pan @-@ American Highway was washed out in the country 's western portion , and another bridge was destroyed by a landslide between Quetzaltenango and Huehuetenango ; landslides also forced the closure of two roads in Quiché Department . In <unk> , the floods covered the entire town with mud to shoulder @-@ height . Five entire towns were largely destroyed , leaving 10 @,@ 200 people homeless nationwide . Francelia destroyed 1 @,@ 704 houses , mostly along rivers and in landslide zones . The floods also damaged power lines and crops . Throughout the country , the hurricane killed 269 people and caused $ 15 million in damage . 
 Francelia 's rainfall extended into El Salvador , where about 1 @,@ 000 homes were flooded along the <unk> River . Isolated residents along the Paz River required food to be airdropped . The floods damaged corn and sorghum crops , and some livestock were killed . Francelia destroyed 42 houses in El Salvador , destroyed a bridge , and caused $ 1 @.@ 6 million in damage . The hurricane killed two people and injured 40 others . Heavy damage also occurred along the Belize coast , and communications were cut . The storm caused extensive damage to crops , including heavy losses to the banana industry . High waves and heavy rainfall caused power outages and flooded coastal roadways . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 By September 5 , or two days after the hurricane 's landfall , floods were receding across Honduras , and flights were restored to the Bay Islands . Floods receded a day later in Guatemala and not until September 9 in El Salvador . 
 Shortly after Francelia struck the Bay Islands , the Honduran health ministry flew a doctor and nurse with medical supplies to the islands . Undamaged boats were used to transport people and supplies to the islands , utilizing relief goods intended for the recovery after a war earlier in 1969 . In Guatemala , the president organized the National Emergency Committee to coordinate disaster relief , but after few organizations complied , there was duplicate relief work in some areas and no assistance in other areas . The Guatemalan Red Cross and the country 's air force and army helped in the relief efforts . Citizens throughout the country donated over $ 200 @,@ 000 worth of food and clothing . The government made widespread road and bridge repairs following the floods with the assistance of the United States , installing two Bailey bridges that were completed by early November ; there were delays installing the bridges due to persistent unsettled weather . The United States ultimately provided $ 281 @,@ 659 in aid to the country , mostly through the road reconstruction and C @-@ rations . Other countries and Red Cross chapters sent money to Guatemala , including 10 tons of medicine from Brazil , 500 blankets from Chile , and 200 bottles of snake bite serum from Costa Rica . El Salvador also received assistance from the United States , including food and blankets . 
 = M @-@ 29 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 29 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs in a south – north direction from Chesterfield Township to Marysville . It generally runs along the shore of Lake St. Clair and the St. Clair River . 
 The M @-@ 29 designation has been used twice in Michigan starting in 1919 . The first designation near Lansing was replaced by U.S. Route 27 ( US 27 ) in 1926 . At that time , the M @-@ 29 designation was moved to the east side of the state along the current routing and farther north along part of what became US 25 and M @-@ 25 . The 1933 extension of US 25 replaced the northern section of M @-@ 29 leading to the current location of M @-@ 29 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The route generally follows the eastern border of the state along the northwest shore of Lake St. Clair and the western bank of the St. Clair River . From <unk> to its northern terminus in Marysville , M @-@ 29 is within a mile of Ontario , just across the river to the east . The route starts at an interchange with Interstate 94 ( I @-@ 94 ) at exit 243 . The road passes east through the residential areas of Chesterfield Township towards the shores of Lake St. Clair . Upon reaching the lake , the road turns to the northeast as it generally follows the contours of the lakeshore and St. Clair River further down . The road passes through New Baltimore and curves around the northern edge of Anchor Bay , which is part of Lake St. Clair . West of I @-@ 94 , the route continues as 23 Mile Road . 
 From there the route swings to the south , following the eastern shore of the lake before turning back to the east as it approaches the Harsens Island Ferry docks . M @-@ 29 is the main thoroughfare with which to reach Harsens Island which connects to St. Clair Flats Wildlife Area and the communities of Grand Point , Maple Leaf and Sans Souci via M @-@ 154 by auto ferry . After passing by the ferry docks , the road turns back to the north , paralleling the St. Clair River as it runs along the eastern side of <unk> State Park , passing through numerous riverbank communities . The road then turns to the north and runs a few blocks inland as it enters Marine City . On the northern side of the town , the road turns back to the east , to once again , running adjacent the bank of the river . 
 The route continues along the shoreline , until it meanders back inland a bit as it passes by the St. Clair and Belle River power plants , after which it runs close to the bank , once again , buffered by several riverbank residences . As the route enters the city of St. Clair , it is known as River Road and Riverside Avenue as it serves as the main thoroughfare along the shore . As M @-@ 29 approaches Marysville the road turns back inland from the river where it travels through the southeastern side of Marysville before terminating at an intersection with I @-@ 94 Business Loop which leads into Port Huron . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the implementation of the U.S. Highway System , M @-@ 29 existed as a route that connected the Lansing area to Indiana via Charlotte and Marshall . In 1926 , when the U.S. Highway system was created , US 27 overtook the alignment that M @-@ 29 had previously occupied . At the same time the M @-@ 29 designation was shifted to the eastern side of the state , generally where it exists today . However , rather than terminating in Marysville , the route continued all the way around the thumb and into Bay City on a route now occupied by present @-@ day M @-@ 25 . 
 In 1933 , the US 25 designation was extended from Port Huron , along the existing M @-@ 29 roadway , to a terminus in Port Austin . This would have created two discontinuous segments of M @-@ 29 , so the section designated as such from Bay City to Port Austin was renumbered to M @-@ 25 . In 1939 , M @-@ 29 , which formerly terminated at US 25 and Gratiot Avenue was shifted slightly eastward and realigned to run along Jefferson Avenue along the St. Clair Lake shoreline . It continued along Jefferson Avenue down to Grosse Pointe Shores where it then turned west along Vernier Road where it then terminated at US 25 on the Detroit – East Detroit border . 
 In 1949 , the route was altered once again when a new bypass was built in Mount Clemens . From New Baltimore , the road continued along 23 Mile Road , as it had before , to US 25 and proceeded to the southwest to Hall Road where it assumed the new bypass alignment and continued to Crocker Boulevard where it turned southeasterly along its former alignment . Later in 1956 , the Michigan State Highway Department made a few realignments in the Marine City as the route was moved to its present @-@ day course . 
 When I @-@ 94 was completed in 1963 , M @-@ 29 south of 23 Mile Road was routed onto it down to present day exit 235 . Three years later , a realignment in Marysville , realigned M @-@ 29 onto the <unk> Highway , returning the old route to local control . Finally , in 1971 , M @-@ 29 south of exit 243 on I @-@ 94 was truncated back to its present @-@ day terminus , and the route has existed as such since then . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Cholangiocarcinoma = 
 Cholangiocarcinoma or bile duct cancer is a form of cancer that is composed of mutated epithelial cells ( or cells showing characteristics of epithelial differentiation ) that originate in the bile ducts which drain bile from the liver into the small intestine . Other biliary tract cancers include gallbladder cancer and cancer of the ampulla of Vater . 
 Cholangiocarcinoma is a relatively rare neoplasm that is classified as an adenocarcinoma ( a cancer that forms glands or secretes significant amounts of mucins ) . It has an annual incidence rate of 1 – 2 cases per 100 @,@ 000 in the Western world , but rates of cholangiocarcinoma have been rising worldwide over the past several decades . 
 Prominent signs and symptoms of cholangiocarcinoma include abnormal liver function tests , abdominal pain , jaundice , and weight loss . Other symptoms such as generalized itching , fever , and changes in color of stool or urine may also occur . The disease is diagnosed through a combination of blood tests , imaging , endoscopy , and sometimes surgical exploration , with confirmation obtained after a pathologist examines cells from the tumor under a microscope . Known risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma include primary sclerosing cholangitis ( an inflammatory disease of the bile ducts ) , infection with the parasitic liver flukes Opisthorchis viverrini or Clonorchis sinensis , some congenital liver malformations , and exposure to Thorotrast ( thorium dioxide ) , a chemical formerly used in medical imaging . However , most people with cholangiocarcinoma have no identifiable risk factors . 
 Cholangiocarcinoma is considered to be an incurable and rapidly lethal cancer unless both the primary tumor and any metastases can be fully removed by surgery . No potentially curative treatment exists except surgery , but most people have advanced stage disease at presentation and are inoperable at the time of diagnosis . People with cholangiocarcinoma are generally managed - though not cured - with chemotherapy , radiation therapy , and other palliative care measures . These are also used as additional therapies after surgery in cases where resection has apparently been successful ( or nearly so ) . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 The most common physical indications of cholangiocarcinoma are abnormal liver function tests , jaundice ( yellowing of the eyes and skin occurring when bile ducts are blocked by tumor ) , abdominal pain ( 30 % – 50 % ) , generalized itching ( 66 % ) , weight loss ( 30 % – 50 % ) , fever ( up to 20 % ) , and changes in stool or urine color . To some extent , the symptoms depend upon the location of the tumor : patients with cholangiocarcinoma in the extrahepatic bile ducts ( outside the liver ) are more likely to have jaundice , while those with tumors of the bile ducts within the liver more often have pain without jaundice . 
 Blood tests of liver function in patients with cholangiocarcinoma often reveal a so @-@ called " obstructive picture , " with elevated bilirubin , alkaline phosphatase , and gamma glutamyl transferase levels , and relatively normal transaminase levels . Such laboratory findings suggest obstruction of the bile ducts , rather than inflammation or infection of the liver parenchyma , as the primary cause of the jaundice . CA19 @-@ 9 is elevated in most cases of cholangiocarcinoma . 
 = = Risk factors = = 
 Although most patients present without any known risk factors evident , a number of risk factors for the development of cholangiocarcinoma have been described . In the Western world , the most common of these is primary sclerosing cholangitis ( PSC ) , an inflammatory disease of the bile ducts which is closely associated with ulcerative colitis ( UC ) . <unk> studies have suggested that the lifetime risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma for a person with PSC is on the order of 10 % – 15 % , although autopsy series have found rates as high as 30 % in this population . The mechanism by which PSC increases the risk of cholangiocarcinoma is not well understood . 
 Certain parasitic liver diseases may be risk factors as well . Colonization with the liver flukes Opisthorchis viverrini ( found in Thailand , Laos PDR , and Vietnam ) or Clonorchis sinensis ( found in China , Taiwan , eastern Russia , Korea , and Vietnam ) has been associated with the development of cholangiocarcinoma . Patients with chronic liver disease , whether in the form of viral hepatitis ( e.g. hepatitis B or hepatitis C ) , alcoholic liver disease , or cirrhosis of the liver due to other causes , are at significantly increased risk of cholangiocarcinoma . HIV infection was also identified in one study as a potential risk factor for cholangiocarcinoma , although it was unclear whether HIV itself or other correlated and confounding factors ( e.g. hepatitis C infection ) were responsible for the association . 
 Infection with the bacteria Helicobacter <unk> and Helicobacter hepaticus species can cause biliary cancer . 
 Congenital liver abnormalities , such as Caroli 's syndrome ( a specific type of five recognized <unk> cysts ) , have been associated with an approximately 15 % lifetime risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma . The rare inherited disorders Lynch syndrome II and biliary <unk> have also been found to be associated with cholangiocarcinoma . The presence of gallstones ( <unk> ) is not clearly associated with cholangiocarcinoma . However , intrahepatic stones ( called <unk> ) , which are rare in the West but common in parts of Asia , have been strongly associated with cholangiocarcinoma . Exposure to Thorotrast , a form of thorium dioxide which was used as a radiologic contrast medium , has been linked to the development of cholangiocarcinoma as late as 30 – 40 years after exposure ; Thorotrast was banned in the United States in the 1950s due to its carcinogenicity . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Cholangiocarcinoma can affect any area of the bile ducts , either within or outside the liver . Tumors occurring in the bile ducts within the liver are referred to as intrahepatic , those occurring in the ducts outside the liver are extrahepatic , and tumors occurring at the site where the bile ducts exit the liver may be referred to as <unk> . A cholangiocarcinoma occurring at the junction where the left and right hepatic ducts meet to form the common hepatic duct may be referred to eponymously as a <unk> tumor . 
 Although cholangiocarcinoma is known to have the histological and molecular features of an adenocarcinoma of epithelial cells lining the biliary tract , the actual cell of origin is unknown . Recent evidence has suggested that the initial transformed cell that generates the primary tumor may arise from a pluripotent hepatic stem cell . Cholangiocarcinoma is thought to develop through a series of stages - from early hyperplasia and metaplasia , through dysplasia , to the development of frank carcinoma - in a process similar to that seen in the development of colon cancer . Chronic inflammation and obstruction of the bile ducts , and the resulting impaired bile flow , are thought to play a role in this progression . 
 Histologically , cholangiocarcinomas may vary from undifferentiated to well @-@ differentiated . They are often surrounded by a brisk <unk> or desmoplastic tissue response ; in the presence of extensive fibrosis , it can be difficult to distinguish well @-@ differentiated cholangiocarcinoma from normal reactive epithelium . There is no entirely specific immunohistochemical stain that can distinguish malignant from benign biliary ductal tissue , although staining for <unk> , <unk> antigen , and mucins may aid in diagnosis . Most tumors ( > 90 % ) are adenocarcinomas . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Cholangiocarcinoma is definitively diagnosed from tissue , i.e. it is proven by biopsy or examination of the tissue excised at surgery . It may be suspected in a patient with obstructive jaundice . Considering it as the working diagnosis may be challenging in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis ( PSC ) ; such patients are at high risk of developing cholangiocarcinoma , but the symptoms may be difficult to distinguish from those of PSC . Furthermore , in patients with PSC , such diagnostic clues as a visible mass on imaging or biliary ductal dilatation may not be evident . 
 = = = Blood tests = = = 
 There are no specific blood tests that can diagnose cholangiocarcinoma by themselves . Serum levels of <unk> antigen ( CEA ) and CA19 @-@ 9 are often elevated , but are not sensitive or specific enough to be used as a general screening tool . However , they may be useful in conjunction with imaging methods in supporting a suspected diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma . 
 = = = Abdominal imaging = = = 
 Ultrasound of the liver and biliary tree is often used as the initial imaging modality in patients with suspected obstructive jaundice . Ultrasound can identify obstruction and ductal dilatation and , in some cases , may be sufficient to diagnose cholangiocarcinoma . Computed tomography ( CT ) scanning may also play an important role in the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma . 
 = = = Imaging of the biliary tree = = = 
 While abdominal imaging can be useful in the diagnosis of cholangiocarcinoma , direct imaging of the bile ducts is often necessary . Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography ( ERCP ) , an endoscopic procedure performed by a gastroenterologist or specially trained surgeon , has been widely used for this purpose . Although ERCP is an invasive procedure with attendant risks , its advantages include the ability to obtain biopsies and to place stents or perform other interventions to relieve biliary obstruction . Endoscopic ultrasound can also be performed at the time of ERCP and may increase the accuracy of the biopsy and yield information on lymph node invasion and operability . As an alternative to ERCP , percutaneous <unk> <unk> ( PTC ) may be utilized . Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography ( MRCP ) is a non @-@ invasive alternative to ERCP . Some authors have suggested that MRCP should supplant ERCP in the diagnosis of biliary cancers , as it may more accurately define the tumor and avoids the risks of ERCP . 
 = = = Surgery = = = 
 Surgical exploration may be necessary to obtain a suitable biopsy and to accurately stage a patient with cholangiocarcinoma . <unk> can be used for staging purposes and may avoid the need for a more invasive surgical procedure , such as <unk> , in some patients . Surgery is also the only curative option for cholangiocarcinoma , although it is limited to patients with early @-@ stage disease . 
 = = = Pathology = = = 
 Histologically , cholangiocarcinomas are classically well to moderately differentiated adenocarcinomas . <unk> is useful in the diagnosis and may be used to help differentiate a cholangiocarcinoma from hepatocellular carcinoma and metastasis of other gastrointestinal tumors . Cytological scrapings are often nondiagnostic , as these tumors typically have a desmoplastic stroma and , therefore , do not release diagnostic tumor cells with scrapings . 
 = = Staging = = 
 Although there are at least three staging systems for cholangiocarcinoma ( e.g. those of Bismuth , <unk> , and the American Joint Committee on Cancer ) , none have been shown to be useful in predicting survival . The most important staging issue is whether the tumor can be surgically removed , or whether it is too advanced for surgical treatment to be successful . Often , this determination can only be made at the time of surgery . 
 General guidelines for operability include : 
 Absence of lymph node or liver metastases 
 Absence of involvement of the portal vein 
 Absence of direct invasion of adjacent organs 
 Absence of widespread metastatic disease 
 = = Treatment = = 
 Cholangiocarcinoma is considered to be an incurable and rapidly lethal disease unless all the tumors can be fully resected ( that is , cut out surgically ) . Since the operability of the tumor can only be assessed during surgery in most cases , a majority of patients undergo exploratory surgery unless there is already a clear indication that the tumor is inoperable . However , the Mayo Clinic has reported significant success treating early bile duct cancer with liver transplantation using a <unk> approach and strict selection criteria . 
 Adjuvant therapy followed by liver transplantation may have a role in treatment of certain unresectable cases . 
 = = = Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation therapy = = = 
 If the tumor can be removed surgically , patients may receive adjuvant chemotherapy or radiation therapy after the operation to improve the chances of cure . If the tissue margins are negative ( i.e. the tumor has been totally excised ) , adjuvant therapy is of uncertain benefit . Both positive and negative results have been reported with adjuvant radiation therapy in this setting , and no prospective randomized controlled trials have been conducted as of March 2007 . Adjuvant chemotherapy appears to be ineffective in patients with completely resected tumors . The role of combined <unk> in this setting is unclear . However , if the tumor tissue margins are positive , indicating that the tumor was not completely removed via surgery , then adjuvant therapy with radiation and possibly chemotherapy is generally recommended based on the available data . 
 = = = Treatment of advanced disease = = = 
 The majority of cases of cholangiocarcinoma present as inoperable ( unresectable ) disease in which case patients are generally treated with palliative chemotherapy , with or without radiotherapy . Chemotherapy has been shown in a randomized controlled trial to improve quality of life and extend survival in patients with inoperable cholangiocarcinoma . There is no single chemotherapy regimen which is universally used , and enrollment in clinical trials is often recommended when possible . Chemotherapy agents used to treat cholangiocarcinoma include 5 @-@ fluorouracil with <unk> , gemcitabine as a single agent , or gemcitabine plus cisplatin , irinotecan , or <unk> . A small pilot study suggested possible benefit from the tyrosine kinase inhibitor erlotinib in patients with advanced cholangiocarcinoma . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Surgical resection offers the only potential chance of cure in cholangiocarcinoma . For non @-@ resectable cases , the 5 @-@ year survival rate is 0 % where the disease is inoperable because distal lymph nodes show metastases , and less than 5 % in general . Overall median duration of survival is less than 6 months in inoperable , untreated , otherwise healthy patients with tumors involving the liver by way of the intrahepatic bile ducts and hepatic portal vein . 
 For surgical cases , the odds of cure vary depending on the tumor location and whether the tumor can be completely , or only partially , removed . <unk> cholangiocarcinomas ( those arising from the common bile duct ) are generally treated surgically with a Whipple procedure ; long @-@ term survival rates range from 15 % – 25 % , although one series reported a five @-@ year survival of 54 % for patients with no involvement of the lymph nodes . <unk> cholangiocarcinomas ( those arising from the bile ducts within the liver ) are usually treated with partial <unk> . Various series have reported survival estimates after surgery ranging from 22 % – 66 % ; the outcome may depend on involvement of lymph nodes and completeness of the surgery . <unk> cholangiocarcinomas ( those occurring near where the bile ducts exit the liver ) are least likely to be operable . When surgery is possible , they are generally treated with an aggressive approach often including removal of the gallbladder and potentially part of the liver . In patients with operable <unk> tumors , reported 5 @-@ year survival rates range from 20 % – 50 % . 
 The prognosis may be worse for patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis who develop cholangiocarcinoma , likely because the cancer is not detected until it is advanced . Some evidence suggests that outcomes may be improving with more aggressive surgical approaches and adjuvant therapy . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 Cholangiocarcinoma is a relatively rare form of cancer ; each year , approximately 2 @,@ 000 to 3 @,@ 000 new cases are diagnosed in the United States , translating into an annual incidence of 1 – 2 cases per 100 @,@ 000 people . Autopsy series have reported a prevalence of 0 @.@ 01 % to 0 @.@ 46 % . There is a higher prevalence of cholangiocarcinoma in Asia , which has been attributed to endemic chronic parasitic infestation . The incidence of cholangiocarcinoma increases with age , and the disease is slightly more common in men than in women ( possibly due to the higher rate of primary sclerosing cholangitis , a major risk factor , in men ) . The prevalence of cholangiocarcinoma in patients with primary sclerosing cholangitis may be as high as 30 % , based on autopsy studies . 
 Multiple studies have documented a steady increase in the incidence of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma over the past several decades ; increases have been seen in North America , Europe , Asia , and Australia . The reasons for the increasing occurrence of cholangiocarcinoma are unclear ; improved diagnostic methods may be partially responsible , but the prevalence of potential risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma , such as HIV infection , has also been increasing during this time frame . 
 = = Research = = 
 Some areas of ongoing medical research in cholangiocarcinoma include the use of newer targeted therapies , ( such as erlotinib ) or <unk> therapy for treatment , and the techniques to measure the concentration of byproducts of cancer stromal cell formation in the blood for diagnostic purposes . 
 = Free Speech Flag = 
 The Free Speech Flag is a symbol of personal liberty used to promote freedom of speech . Designed by artist John Marcotte , the flag and its colors correspond to a cryptographic key which enabled users to copy HD DVDs and Blu @-@ ray Discs . It was created on May 1 , 2007 , during the AACS encryption key controversy . 
 Marcotte was motivated to create the flag after the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) and the Advanced Access Content System Licensing Administrator ( AACS LA ) began issuing cease and desist letters to websites publishing the key 09 F9 11 02 9D 74 E3 5B D8 41 56 C5 63 56 88 C0 ( commonly referred to as 09 F9 ) . 
 In response to attempts to remove the key from the Internet , netizens publicized the cryptographic key on the news aggregator website Digg , in an example of the Streisand effect . 
 = = Background = = 
 On April 30 , 2007 , a blogger named " Rudd @-@ O " published the encryption key for HD DVDs and asked readers to share it widely . Knowledge of this numeric key value allowed users to bypass digital rights management ( DRM ) and copy HD DVDs that previously could not be duplicated . News media reported on this development and Digg , a news aggregator and social media website , provided a way for users to vote on stories they felt were most newsworthy . Votes by 15 @,@ 000 Digg users drove an article about the encryption key to the front page of the site . 
 The Advanced Access Content System ( AACS ) , the organization which controlled access to the HD DVD encryption key , sent a cease and desist letter to Digg on May 1 , 2007 . In its letter , AACS claimed that by publishing news articles on its website that reported on the encryption key , the website itself was engaging in illegal activity . Articles by numerous journalists reporting on the news story were posted to Digg . Jay Adelson , the CEO of Digg , announced that the website would abide by the AACS ' requests and self @-@ censor articles reporting on the encryption key . 
 Adelson 's decision to self @-@ censor his website caused an unintended backlash from the Digg community in the form of the Streisand effect . " In trying to make the cracked issue go away " , notes Jeremy Goldman in his 2012 book Going Social , " the AACS 's letter ( and Digg 's response ) succeeded only in making the story bigger . " Digg users made sure , by their votes and online participation , that all front @-@ page stories on Digg were about the encryption key . Digg founder Kevin Rose observed : " The Digg community is one that loves to have their voice heard , and this has been something that struck a chord with them . 
 After listening to complaints from Digg 's community about Adelson 's decision to self @-@ censor news stories about the encryption key , Rose wrote a message to his users reversing this decision . He announced that Digg would stop self @-@ censorship and he acknowledged that he understood the message from Digg 's members : " After seeing hundreds of stories and reading thousands of comments , you 've made it clear ... you 'd rather see Digg go down fighting than bow to a bigger company . Effective immediately , we won 't delete stories or comments containing the code , and we will deal with whatever the consequences might be . " 
 = = Design and message = = 
 John Marcotte , a writer and editor at the website <unk> , created the Free Speech Flag with the intent of disseminating the secret HD DVD code on the Internet , eventually publishing it on the website on May 1 , 2007 . In his initial post announcing his flag , Marcotte criticized how the mere use of numbers had become intellectual property . 
 " We want to start a movement " , Marcotte wrote . " A movement to reclaim personal liberties and <unk> the laws of our nation . " He encouraged online viewers of his work to spread his message throughout the Internet and to freely publicize his work . " To that end we have made a flag , a symbol to show support for personal freedoms . Spread it as far and wide as you can . " 
 Marcotte embedded the secret HD DVD key into the colors of the flag itself , using the flag hex code format colors # <unk> # <unk> # <unk> # <unk> # <unk> . By appending the byte " C0 " to the bottom right corner of the flag , Marcotte implied that the act of publishing a number is " Crime Zero " . He originally released the flag " freely " with " rights for people to make similar , derivative works , " but later licensed it via public domain . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Soon after it was first published , bloggers publicized the Free Speech Flag across multiple websites , increasing its popularity and disseminating the forbidden code within the flag . The flag entered popular culture as Internet users chose creative ways to spread knowledge of the HD DVD encryption key . 
 Users wore the code emblazoned on T @-@ shirts , added it to poems , integrated the code into the lyrics of hip hop songs , and created music utilizing its numeric values . Musician Keith Burgun composed a song using the code titled " Oh Nine , <unk> Nine " , and published his work on YouTube . The sole lyrics to the song were the numbers of the digital code itself : " 09 F9 11 02 9D 74 E3 5B D8 41 56 C5 63 56 88 C0 " . " I thought it was a source of comedy that they were trying so futilely to quell the spread of this number , " Burgun said . " The ironic thing is , because they tried to quiet it down it ’ s the most famous number on the Internet . " 
 Matthew Rimmer , senior lecturer at Australian National University , commented upon the legality of the innovative ways Internet users like Marcotte chose to publicize the secret HD DVD code : " I don 't think it 's necessarily designed to stay within the bounds of the law . It 's just a fun way to comment on what 's happened . I think that it 's designed to show that the law is absurd or ridiculous and should be abolished . " 
 Antonio <unk> of Pennsylvania State University placed the flag 's conception within a larger framework — " the formation of a communal ethos ... the 09 F9 tribe " — and posed the question : " Would five striped colors arranged into a flag constitute an anti @-@ circumvention device under the DMCA ? " 
 The flag inspired Jeff Thompson , assistant professor and program director of Visual Art and Technology at the Stevens Institute of Technology , to create a sound file of the AACS encryption key as a melody . After a similar encryption key was cracked for the PlayStation 3 gaming system , a new flag was created by a different user as a tribute to Marcotte 's original flag . 
 = Charles A. Wickliffe = 
 Charles Anderson Wickliffe ( June 8 , 1788 – October 31 , 1869 ) was a U.S. Representative from Kentucky . He also served as Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives , the 14th Governor of Kentucky , and was appointed Postmaster General by President John Tyler . Though he consistently identified with the Whig Party , he was politically independent , and often had differences of opinion with Whig founder and fellow Kentuckian Henry Clay . 
 Wickliffe received a strong education in public school and through private tutors . He studied law and was part of a debate club that also included future U.S. Attorney General Felix Grundy and future Governor of Florida William Pope Duval . He was elected to the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1812 . A vigorous supporter of the War of 1812 , he served for a brief time as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to two American generals in the war . In 1823 , he was elected to the first of five consecutive terms in the U.S. House of Representatives . He returned to the state House in 1833 , and was elected the tenth Lieutenant Governor of Kentucky in 1836 . Governor James Clark died in office on October 5 , 1839 , and Wickliffe served as governor for the remaining nine months of Clark 's term . 
 President Tyler appointed Wickliffe as Postmaster General following Wickliffe 's term as governor . While aboard a steamship in 1844 , he was stabbed by a man who was later found to be insane . In 1845 , President James K. Polk sent Wickliffe on a secret mission to report on British and French intents with regard to annexing Texas and to assess the feasibility of the United States undertaking such an action . Wickliffe 's participation in this endeavor further distanced him from the Whigs . 
 In 1861 , Wickliffe was again elected to the U.S. House , serving a single term . He tried to avert the Civil War by serving as a delegate to both the 1861 Peace Conference and the Border States Convention . After war was declared , he sided with the Union cause . In 1863 , he again sought the office of governor , but federal military forces interfered with the election , resulting in a landslide victory for Thomas E. Bramlette . Later in life , Wickliffe was crippled in a carriage accident and also went completely blind . He died on October 31 , 1869 , while visiting his daughter in Maryland . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Anderson Wickliffe was born June 8 , 1788 , in a log cabin near Springfield , Kentucky . He was the youngest of the nine children born to Charles and Lydia ( Hardin ) Wickliffe . His family emigrated to Kentucky from Virginia in 1784 . 
 Wickliffe attained his early education at the local schools of Springfield , then attended Wilson 's Academy in Bardstown . For a year , he received private instruction from James Blythe , acting president of Transylvania University , then read law with Martin D. Hardin , a cousin on his mother 's side . In 1809 , he was admitted to the bar and began practice in Bardstown . He and five other prominent lawyers of Bardstown formed a debate club called The Pleiades Club . The club included six members : Wickliffe , John Hays , Ben <unk> , Benjamin Hardin ( another of Wickliffe 's cousins ) , Felix Grundy , and William Pope Duval . John Rowan and John Pope also participated in the debates , but were not members of the club . 
 In his early life , Wickliffe was known to gamble at cards . His friends considered his gambling excessive , and two of them – Duval and Judge John Pope Oldham – devised a scheme to break Wickliffe of his habit . The two knew that Wickliffe would be collecting several thousand dollars at the upcoming session of the Bullitt County court . They plotted to invite Wickliffe to play cards with them and agreed upon a secret system of signals to communicate about the strengths and weaknesses of the cards in their hands . In this way , they hoped to win all of Wickliffe 's money , then return it to him in exchange for his promise to forsake the vice . On the night appointed , however , it was Wickliffe who won all the money wagered by Duval and Oldham , despite their schemes . When Wickliffe later learned of the designs of his friends , he agreed to give up gambling . 
 In 1813 , Wickliffe married Margaret Cripps , and the couple had three sons and five daughters . Most notable among the children was Robert , who became Governor of Louisiana . The <unk> contracted with John Rogers , architect of St. Joseph 's Cathedral in Bardstown , to construct their residence , which they dubbed " Wickland " . Later , Wickland was called " the home of three governors " . Besides Wickliffe and his son , J. C. W. Beckham , Wickliffe 's grandson and future governor of Kentucky , occupied the residence . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Wickliffe 's political career began when he was elected to represent Nelson County in the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1812 and 1813 . During his tenure , he enthusiastically supported the War of 1812 . He first served as an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General Joseph <unk> , and on August 24 , 1813 , he enlisted as a private in Martin H. Wickliffe 's company . On September 2 , 1813 , he was chosen as aide @-@ de @-@ camp to General Samuel Caldwell and served in this capacity at the October 5 , 1813 , Battle of the Thames . In 1816 , he succeeded Ben Hardin as Commonwealth 's Attorney for Nelson County . 
 Wickliffe was returned to the Kentucky House in 1822 and 1823 . During this period , a controversy known as the Old Court @-@ New Court controversy was raging in Kentucky . Reeling from the financial Panic of 1819 , many of the state 's citizens demanded debt relief . When some debt relief measures passed by the legislature were declared unconstitutional by the Kentucky Court of Appeals , the legislature attempted to dissolve the court and replace it with a more sympathetic one . For a time , two courts claimed to be the court of last resort in Kentucky . Wickliffe supported the " Old Court " , which was the court that eventually prevailed . 
 = = = First service in the House of Representatives = = = 
 In 1823 , Wickliffe was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives and served five consecutive terms . Again he succeeded his cousin and friend , Ben Hardin . Though a Whig , he disagreed with many of the positions of the party 's founder , Henry Clay . When no candidate received a majority of the electoral votes in the 1824 presidential election , the constitution mandated that the election be decided in the House . Wickliffe bucked Clay 's advice to vote for him and instead voted for Andrew Jackson , who was the choice of the Kentucky legislature . 
 Historian Robert Powell opined that Wickliffe 's break from party loyalty may explain his lack of committee appointments in his early years in the House . Beginning in 1829 , however , he chaired the Committee on Public Lands . In this capacity , he attacked Clay 's plan to distribute surplus revenue among the states as being unfair to younger states . He also differed with Clay over Clay 's willingness to limit slavery . He wrote Clay concerning his slowness to respond to the problem of fugitive slaves ; Clay never responded . Neither was Wickliffe loyal to the Jacksonian platform , however . In a letter to his brother , he lamented Jackson 's attacks on the Second Bank of the United States . He publicly encouraged Kentuckians to strengthen the Whigs , despite his disagreements with Clay . 
 In 1830 , Wickliffe was chosen by his colleagues as one of the managers of the impeachment proceedings against Missouri District Court judge James H. Peck . In 1831 , he was one of several candidates proposed by the Kentucky General Assembly to succeed John Rowan in the U.S. Senate . Of the sixty @-@ nine votes needed to be elected to the seat , Wickliffe received forty @-@ nine . Other candidates included John J. Crittenden ( sixty @-@ eight votes ) , John Breathitt ( sixty @-@ six votes ) , and Richard Mentor Johnson ( sixty @-@ four votes ) . After three days of balloting , the Assembly was still unable to fill the seat , and it was allowed to remain vacant until the next session . Wickliffe did not seek re @-@ election to his seat in the House in 1833 . 
 = = = Governor of Kentucky = = = 
 Wickliffe returned to the state legislature from 1833 to 1835 . In 1834 , he defeated Daniel Breck and John L. Helm to become Speaker of the House . He was elected lieutenant governor of Kentucky in 1836 , defeating Democrat Elijah Hise by a margin of just over 1 @,@ 300 votes . Upon the death of Governor James Clark on October 5 , 1839 , he became acting governor and served the remaining nine months of Clark 's term . 
 As governor , Wickliffe 's primary concern was the Panic of 1837 . He advocated raising property taxes to offset spending deficits that had climbed to $ 42 @,@ 000 by 1839 , but the legislature borrowed money to meet the current expenses instead . Wickliffe maintained the state 's credit by paying the interest due on state securities . The only areas where he called for more spending were improvements in river navigation , preservation of state archives , and public education . Aside from these concerns , he was inundated with requests for clemency . 
 = = = Service to Presidents Tyler and Polk = = = 
 Wickliffe campaigned on behalf of the Whig ticket of William Henry Harrison and John Tyler in the presidential election of 1840 . Wickliffe and Tyler were friends , having shared a room when they were both in Congress . When Harrison 's death elevated Tyler to the office of president , Tyler appointed <unk> as Postmaster General , a choice that angered Clay supporters in the party . Wickliffe served in Tyler 's administration until March 1845 . 
 On August 1 , 1844 , Wickliffe and two of his daughters boarded the steamship Georgia traveling from Old Point Comfort in Virginia to Baltimore , Maryland . While en route , he was stabbed in the chest by a man wielding a <unk> . The knife bounced off Wickliffe 's breastbone without damaging any major internal organs , and a U.S. Navy officer prevented a second blow from hitting Wickliffe . Wickliffe 's attacker , J. McLean Gardner , was disarmed and arrested . Later that night , he wrote Wickliffe a letter of apology . Wickliffe was not seriously injured , and returned home three days after the attack . Gardner was tried and found to be insane ; he was later sent to an asylum . 
 Wickliffe supported the annexation of Texas , an issue that helped seal Clay 's defeat in the 1844 presidential canvass . In 1845 , President James K. Polk sent Wickliffe as an envoy on a secret mission to the Republic of Texas . Originally , his purpose was to quash British and French attempts to forestall the U.S. annexation of Texas , but he later joined Commodore Robert F. Stockton in lobbying leaders of the Republic of Texas to order their military forces across the Rio Grande into Mexico . Stockton and Wickliffe believed that if they could provoke a Texan invasion of Mexico , the United States would have a stronger case for annexing Texas . Ultimately , they failed in convincing the Texans to invade , but succeeded in drumming up support for annexation . Both Wickliffe 's position on annexation and his willingness to carry out Polk 's assignment further distanced him from the Whigs . 
 = = = Later political career = = = 
 On February 18 , 1841 , the Kentucky General Assembly elected James Turner Morehead to the U.S. Senate ; Wickliffe received twenty votes in this contest . In 1849 , he was chosen as a delegate to the state constitutional convention , despite having opposed the calling of such a convention a decade earlier . Wickliffe 's political opponents , including Thomas F. Marshall , claimed this showed Wickliffe 's political inconsistency , a charge that Wickliffe denied . The following year , Wickliffe was appointed to a committee charged with revising the state 's code of laws . On January 8 , 1861 , he chaired the state Democratic convention in Louisville . 
 Wickliffe was elected to another term in Congress , serving from 1861 to 1863 as a Union Whig . He opposed the idea of secession , and was a member of both the 1861 Peace Conference and the Border States Convention that attempted to stave off the Civil War . In April 1861 , he attended a secret meeting at the Capitol Hotel in Frankfort where participants planned to arm Union supporters in key areas of the state . On May 18 , President Lincoln supplied rifles – nicknamed " Lincoln guns " – for the venture . After Braxton Bragg 's forces destroyed the railroad trestles near Bardstown , Wickliffe personally hired Joseph Z. Aud to carry the area 's mail by private carriage . The trestles were rebuilt in February 1863 , precluding the need for Aud 's service . 
 Near the end of his term in Congress , Wickliffe was thrown from a carriage and permanently crippled . Despite his injury , he remained politically active . In 1863 , he ran for governor as a Peace Democrat on an anti @-@ Lincoln platform . Military authorities considered him subversive , however , and interfered with the election ; Wickliffe lost to Thomas E. Bramlette in a landslide . 
 Wickliffe served as a delegate to the 1864 Democratic National Convention in Chicago , casting his vote for George B. McClellan . In the final years of his life , he became totally blind . While visiting his daughter near Ilchester , Maryland , he fell gravely ill and died on October 31 , 1869 . He was buried in Bardstown Cemetery in Bardstown . During World War I , a U.S. naval ship was named in Wickliffe 's honor . 
 = Tropical Depression Nine ( 2003 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Nine was a weak tropical depression that developed and dissipated in the eastern Caribbean Sea in August 2003 . It formed from a tropical wave on August 21 to the south of Puerto Rico , and was initially forecast to strengthen to tropical storm status , due to the favorable conditions for development in the area . However , wind shear developed over the system , and the depression degenerated to a tropical wave on August 22 . The system produced moderate to heavy rainfall throughout its path . In Puerto Rico , the rains flooded ten houses , while in the Dominican Republic the precipitation led to overflown rivers and two injuries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A strong tropical wave exited the coast of Africa on August 14 , moved westward as a disorganized system , and passed through the Cape Verde islands on August 15 . On August 17 , a weak area of low pressure developed in the system about 750 miles ( 1 @,@ 200 km ) west @-@ southwest of the Cape Verde islands . Convection increased over the western portion of the wave axis , and the system began to become better organized on August 18 while located about 1 @,@ 250 miles ( 2 @,@ 000 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . However , convection around the system diminished on August 19 , and later that day it began to move through the Lesser Antilles . Despite favorable upper @-@ level winds and falling atmospheric pressures , there were initially no signs of a circulation at the surface . Convection again increased early on August 20 , and it gradually became better organized . Based on a ship 's wind report of the system , it is estimated the wave developed into Tropical Depression Nine on August 21 while located about 260 miles ( 415 km ) south of San Juan , Puerto Rico . 
 The depression quickly showed signs of organization with the development of banding features around its blossoming convection . Due to a favorable upper level environment , forecasters predicted the depression to intensify to a 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) tropical storm after making landfall on Haiti and eastern Cuba . Upper @-@ level outflow remained well @-@ defined , though convection waned near the center early on August 22 . The depression appeared to continue organizing , with a well @-@ defined cloud band to its north and east . However , strong southwesterly wind shear unexpectedly increased over the system , and the depression degenerated into a tropical wave late on August 22 , south of the eastern tip of the Dominican Republic . The system retained a well @-@ defined cloud pattern with a vigorous mid @-@ level circulation , and forecasters at the National Hurricane Center indicated regeneration could have occurred at any time . The wave axis moved over the Dominican Republic early on August 23 , and became disorganized over the mountainous terrain of Hispaniola . There existed the potential for redevelopment as it moved into a potentially more favorable area , though the National Hurricane Center ceased monitoring the system on August 25 when redevelopment appeared unlikely . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Coinciding with the issuance of the first advisory on the tropical depression , the government of the Dominican Republic issued a tropical storm watch from Barahona to its border with Haiti , while a tropical storm watch was issued from Haiti 's border with the Dominican Republic westward to Port @-@ au @-@ Prince . The United States ' National Hurricane Center in Miami recommended interests in eastern Cuba to monitor the progress of the storm . When the depression was 205 miles ( 330 km ) south @-@ southeast of Santo Domingo , the Dominican Republic issued a tropical storm warning from Punta Palenque to its border with Haiti . While located 155 miles ( 250 km ) from the coast of Hispaniola , the government of the Dominican Republic extended the tropical storm warning eastward to Isla Saona , while the government of Haiti upgraded its watch area to a tropical storm warning along the coast . The National Hurricane Center also recommended citizens in the Bahamas to monitor the progress of the storm . After the heavy rainfall began in the Dominican Republic , officials evacuated citizens of low @-@ lying areas . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Before developing into Tropical Depression Nine , the precursor tropical wave dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across the Lesser Antilles . The depression caused moderate rainfall in Puerto Rico , where two to three inches ( 50 to 75 mm ) of precipitation were recorded . The flooding from the rainfall entered ten houses and left some streets impassable . A mudslide was reported in the eastern portion of the island . A river in northeastern Puerto Rico surpassed its banks from flooding , though it returned to normal levels within hours . Damage in Puerto Rico totaled $ 20 @,@ 000 ( 2003 USD , $ 25 @.@ 7 thousand 2016 USD ) . 
 The depression dropped over 1 inch ( 25 mm ) of precipitation across much of the Dominican Republic ; Santo Domingo reported a peak total of 3 @.@ 9 in ( 98 mm ) . The rainfall led to flooding , primarily east and west of the capital city , while five rivers overflowed their banks . Several roads were inundated , obstructing traffic . The flooding collapsed a sports center and a house , injuring two people inside . Further inland , 160 people had to be evacuated when more than 100 houses were flooded . Crop damage was also reported . In Pedernales , gusty winds uprooted trees , several of which fell on power lines which caused power outages in the town . The rainfall was welcomed in the country , as conditions were dry in the preceding months . Light flooding also occurred in eastern Jamaica , though damage there , if any , is unknown . 
 = Prion = 
 A prion is an infectious agent composed entirely of protein material , called PrP ( short for prion protein ) , that can fold in multiple , structurally distinct ways , at least one of which is transmissible to other prion proteins , leading to disease that is similar to viral infection . They are suspected to be the cause of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies among other diseases . 
 Prions were initially identified as the causative agent in animal TSEs such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy ( BSE ) — known popularly as " mad cow disease " — and scrapie in sheep . Human prion diseases include Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease ( CJD ) and its variant ( <unk> ) , Gerstmann – <unk> – <unk> syndrome , fatal familial insomnia , and kuru . A 2015 study concluded that multiple system atrophy ( MSA ) , a rare human neurodegenerative disease , is caused by a misfolded version of a protein called alpha @-@ synuclein , and is therefore also classifiable as a prion disease . Several yeast proteins have been identified as having <unk> properties as well . 
 A protein as a standalone infectious agent stands in contrast to all other known infectious agents such as viruses , bacteria , fungi , and parasites , all of which contain nucleic acids ( DNA , RNA , or both ) . For this reason , a minority of researchers still consider the prion / TSE hypothesis unproven . All known prion diseases in mammals affect the structure of the brain or other neural tissue ; all are currently untreatable and universally fatal . 
 Prions may propagate by transmitting their misfolded protein state : When a prion enters a healthy organism , it induces existing , properly folded proteins to convert into the misfolded prion form . In this way , the prion acts as a template to guide the misfolding of more proteins into prion form . In yeast , this refolding is assisted by chaperone proteins such as <unk> . These <unk> prions can then go on to convert more proteins themselves , leading to a chain reaction resulting in large amounts of the prion form . All known prions induce the formation of an amyloid fold , in which the protein <unk> into an aggregate consisting of tightly packed beta sheets . Amyloid aggregates are fibrils , growing at their ends , and replicate when breakage causes two growing ends to become four growing ends . The incubation period of prion diseases is determined by the exponential growth rate associated with prion replication , which is a balance between the linear growth and the breakage of aggregates . The propagation of the prion depends on the presence of normally folded protein in which the prion can induce misfolding ; animals that do not express the normal form of the prion protein can neither develop nor transmit the disease . 
 Prion aggregates are extremely stable and accumulate in infected tissue , causing tissue damage and cell death . This structural stability means that prions are resistant to denaturation by chemical and physical agents , making disposal and containment of these particles difficult . Prion structure varies slightly between species , but nonetheless prion replication is subject to occasional epimutation and natural selection just like other forms of replication . 
 = = Prion Protein ( PrP ) = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 During the 1960s , two London @-@ based researchers , radiation biologist <unk> Alper and biophysicist John Stanley Griffith , developed the hypothesis that some transmissible spongiform encephalopathies are caused by an infectious agent consisting solely of proteins . Earlier investigations by E. J. Field into scrapie and kuru had identified the transfer of pathologically inert polysaccharides that only become infectious in the host . Alper and Griffith wanted to account for the discovery that the mysterious infectious agent causing the diseases scrapie and Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease resisted ionizing radiation . ( A single ionizing " hit " normally destroys an entire infectious particle , and the dose needed to hit half the particles depends on the size of the particles . The data suggested that the infectious agent was too small to be a virus . ) 
 Francis Crick recognized the potential importance of the Griffith protein @-@ only hypothesis for scrapie propagation in the second edition of his " Central dogma of molecular biology " ( 1970 ) : While asserting that the flow of sequence information from protein to protein , or from protein to RNA and DNA was " precluded " , he noted that Griffith 's hypothesis was a potential contradiction ( although it was not so promoted by Griffith ) . The revised hypothesis was later formulated , in part , to accommodate reverse transcription ( which both Howard Temin and David Baltimore discovered in 1970 ) . 
 In 1982 , Stanley B. Prusiner of the University of California , San Francisco announced that his team had purified the hypothetical infectious prion , and that the infectious agent consisted mainly of a specific protein – though they did not manage to isolate the protein until two years after Prusiner 's announcement . While the infectious agent was named a prion , the specific protein that the prion was composed of is also known as the Prion Protein ( PrP ) , though this protein may occur both in infectious and non @-@ infectious forms . Prusiner won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1997 for his research into prions . 
 = = = Structure = = = 
 The protein that prions are made of ( PrP ) is found throughout the body , even in healthy people and animals . However , PrP found in infectious material has a different structure and is resistant to proteases , the enzymes in the body that can normally break down proteins . The normal form of the protein is called PrPC , while the infectious form is called PrPSc — the C refers to ' cellular ' PrP , while the Sc refers to ' scrapie ' , the prototypic prion disease , occurring in sheep . While PrPC is structurally well @-@ defined , PrPSc is certainly <unk> and defined at a relatively poor level . PrP can be induced to fold into other more @-@ or @-@ less well @-@ defined isoforms in vitro , and their relationship to the form ( s ) that are pathogenic in vivo is not yet clear . 
 = = = = PrPC = = = = 
 PrPC is a normal protein found on the membranes of cells . It has 209 amino acids ( in humans ) , one disulfide bond , a molecular mass of 35 – 36 kDa and a mainly alpha @-@ helical structure . Several topological forms exist ; one cell surface form anchored via <unk> and two transmembrane forms . The normal protein is not <unk> ; meaning that it cannot be separated by <unk> techniques . Its function is a complex issue that continues to be investigated . PrPC binds copper ( II ) ions with high affinity . The significance of this finding is not clear , but it is presumed to relate to PrP structure or function . PrPC is readily digested by proteinase K and can be liberated from the cell surface in vitro by the enzyme <unk> phospholipase C ( PI @-@ PLC ) , which cleaves the <unk> ( GPI ) <unk> anchor . PrP has been reported to play important roles in cell @-@ cell adhesion and intracellular signaling in vivo , and may therefore be involved in cell @-@ cell communication in the brain . 
 = = = = PrPres = = = = 
 Protease @-@ resistant PrPSc @-@ like protein ( PrPres ) is an isoform of <unk> from which is structurally altered and converted into a misfolded proteinase K @-@ resistant form in vitro . To model conversion of PrPC to PrPSc in vitro , <unk> et al. rapidly converted <unk> into a PrPres by a procedure involving cyclic amplification of protein misfolding . The term " PrPres " has been made to distinguish between PrPSc , which is isolated from infectious tissue and associated with the transmissible spongiform encephalopathy agent . For example , unlike <unk> , PrPres may not necessarily be infectious . 
 = = = = PrPSc = = = = 
 The infectious isoform of PrP , known as PrPSc , is able to convert normal PrPC proteins into the infectious isoform by changing their conformation , or shape ; this , in turn , alters the way the proteins interconnect . PrPSc always causes prion disease . Although the exact 3D structure of PrPSc is not known , it has a higher proportion of β @-@ sheet structure in place of the normal α @-@ helix structure . Aggregations of these abnormal isoforms form highly structured amyloid fibers , which accumulate to form plaques . It is unclear as to whether these aggregates are the cause of cell damage or are simply a side @-@ effect of the underlying disease process . The end of each fiber acts as a template onto which free protein molecules may attach , allowing the fiber to grow . Under most circumstances , only PrP molecules with an identical amino acid sequence to the infectious PrPSc are incorporated into the growing fiber . However , rare cross @-@ species transmission is also possible . 
 = = = Function = = = 
 The physiological function of the prion protein remains a controversial matter . While data from in vitro experiments suggest many dissimilar roles , studies on PrP knockout mice have provided only limited information because these animals exhibit only minor abnormalities . In research done in mice , it was found that the cleavage of PrP proteins in peripheral nerves causes the activation of myelin repair in Schwann Cells and that the lack of PrP proteins caused demyelination in those cells . 
 = = = = PrP and long @-@ term memory = = = = 
 A review of evidence in 2005 suggested that PrP may have a normal function in maintenance of long @-@ term memory . As well , a 2004 study found that mice lacking genes for normal cellular PrP protein show altered hippocampal long @-@ term potentiation . 
 = = = = PrP and stem cell renewal = = = = 
 A 2006 article from the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research indicates that PrP expression on stem cells is necessary for an organism 's self @-@ renewal of bone marrow . The study showed that all long @-@ term hematopoietic stem cells express PrP on their cell membrane and that hematopoietic tissues with PrP @-@ null stem cells exhibit increased sensitivity to cell depletion . 
 = = Prion replication mechanism = = 
 The first hypothesis that tried to explain how prions replicate in a protein @-@ only manner was the heterodimer model . This model assumed that a single PrPSc molecule binds to a single PrPC molecule and catalyzes its conversion into PrPSc . The two PrPSc molecules then come apart and can go on to convert more PrPC . However , a model of prion replication must explain both how prions propagate , and why their spontaneous appearance is so rare . Manfred Eigen showed that the heterodimer model requires PrPSc to be an extraordinarily effective catalyst , increasing the rate of the conversion reaction by a factor of around 1015 . This problem does not arise if PrPSc exists only in aggregated forms such as amyloid , where cooperativity may act as a barrier to spontaneous conversion . What is more , despite considerable effort , infectious monomeric PrPSc has never been isolated . 
 An alternative model assumes that PrPSc exists only as fibrils , and that fibril ends bind PrPC and convert it into PrPSc . If this were all , then the quantity of prions would increase linearly , forming ever longer fibrils . But exponential growth of both PrPSc and of the quantity of infectious particles is observed during prion disease . This can be explained by taking into account fibril breakage . A mathematical solution for the exponential growth rate resulting from the combination of fibril growth and fibril breakage has been found . The exponential growth rate depends largely on the square root of the PrPC concentration . The incubation period is determined by the exponential growth rate , and in vivo data on prion diseases in transgenic mice match this prediction . The same square root dependence is also seen in vitro in experiments with a variety of different amyloid proteins . 
 The mechanism of prion replication has implications for designing drugs . Since the incubation period of prion diseases is so long , an effective drug does not need to eliminate all prions , but simply needs to slow down the rate of exponential growth . Models predict that the most effective way to achieve this , using a drug with the lowest possible dose , is to find a drug that binds to fibril ends and blocks them from growing any further . 
 = = Prion diseases and their transmission properties = = 
 Until 2015 , all known mammalian prion diseases were caused by the so @-@ called prion protein , PrP , when Multiple System <unk> was found to be likely caused by a new prion called Alpha @-@ synuclein , The endogenous , properly folded form is denoted PrPC ( for Common or Cellular ) , whereas the disease @-@ linked , misfolded form is denoted PrPSc ( for <unk> , after one of the diseases first linked to prions and neurodegeneration . ) The precise structure of the prion is not known , though they can be formed by combining PrPC , <unk> acid , and lipids in a Protein <unk> Cyclic Amplification ( <unk> ) reaction . Proteins showing prion @-@ type behavior are also found in some fungi , which has been useful in helping to understand mammalian prions . Fungal prions do not appear to cause disease in their hosts . 
 Prions cause neurodegenerative disease by aggregating <unk> within the central nervous system to form plaques known as amyloid , which disrupt the normal tissue structure . This disruption is characterized by " holes " in the tissue with resultant spongy architecture due to the vacuole formation in the neurons . Other histological changes include <unk> and the absence of an inflammatory reaction . While the incubation period for prion diseases is relatively long ( 5 to 20 years ) , once symptoms appear the disease progresses rapidly , leading to brain damage and death . Neurodegenerative symptoms can include convulsions , dementia , ataxia ( balance and coordination dysfunction ) , and behavioural or personality changes . 
 All known prion diseases , collectively called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies ( TSEs ) , are untreatable and fatal . However , a vaccine developed in mice may provide insight into providing a vaccine to resist prion infections in humans . Additionally , in 2006 scientists announced that they had genetically engineered cattle lacking a necessary gene for prion production – thus theoretically making them immune to BSE , building on research indicating that mice lacking normally occurring prion protein are resistant to infection by scrapie prion protein . In 2013 , a study revealed that 1 in 2 @,@ 000 people in the United Kingdom might harbour the infectious prion protein that causes <unk> . 
 Many different mammalian species can be affected by prion diseases , as the prion protein ( PrP ) is very similar in all mammals . Due to small differences in PrP between different species it is unusual for a prion disease to transmit from one species to another . The human prion disease variant Creutzfeldt @-@ Jakob disease , however , is believed to be caused by a prion that typically infects cattle , causing Bovine spongiform encephalopathy and is transmitted through infected meat . 
 = = = Transmission = = = 
 It has been recognized that prion diseases can arise in three different ways : acquired , familial , or sporadic . It is often assumed that the diseased form directly interacts with the normal form to make it rearrange its structure . One idea , the " Protein X " hypothesis , is that an as @-@ yet unidentified cellular protein ( Protein X ) enables the conversion of PrPC to PrPSc by bringing a molecule of each of the two together into a complex . 
 Current research suggests that the primary method of infection in animals is through ingestion . It is thought that prions may be deposited in the environment through the remains of dead animals and via urine , saliva , and other body fluids . They may then linger in the soil by binding to clay and other minerals . 
 A University of California research team , led by Nobel Prize winner Stanley Prusiner , has provided evidence for the theory that infection can occur from prions in manure . And , since manure is present in many areas surrounding water reservoirs , as well as used on many crop fields , it raises the possibility of widespread transmission . It was reported in January 2011 that researchers had discovered prions spreading through airborne transmission on aerosol particles , in an animal testing experiment focusing on scrapie infection in laboratory mice . Preliminary evidence supporting the notion that prions can be transmitted through use of urine @-@ derived human menopausal gonadotropin , administered for the treatment of infertility , was published in 2011 . 
 = = = = Prions in plants = = = = 
 In 2015 , researchers at The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston found that plants can be a vector for prions . When researchers fed hamsters grass that grew on ground where a deer that died with Chronic wasting disease ( CWD ) were buried , the hamsters became ill with CWD , suggesting that prions can bind to plants , which then take them up into the leaf and stem structure , where they can be eaten by herbivores , thus completing the cycle . It is thus possible that there is a progressively accumulating number of prions in the environment . 
 = = = = Mites = = = = 
 Icelandic researchers discovered in 2000 that mites can be a vector for prions . To determine if mites can spread scrapie , the scientists injected mice with extracts from hay mites collected from farms with sheep afflicted with scrapie . After a long incubation period , some of the mice became sick with a scrapie @-@ like illness . To determine that the disease was scrapie , the scientists injected extracts from sick mice into new , healthy mice . As expected , the incubation period was shortened by a length comparable with that of scrapie , and , as with scrapie , the mice had the typical spongiform degeneration in their brains . Also , as expected , there were different strain properties from isolates from different farms , confirming that it was indeed scrapie . 
 = = = Sterilization = = = 
 Infectious particles possessing nucleic acid are dependent upon it to direct their continued replication . Prions , however , are infectious by their effect on normal versions of the protein . <unk> prions , therefore , requires the denaturation of the protein to a state in which the molecule is no longer able to induce the abnormal folding of normal proteins . In general , prions are quite resistant to proteases , heat , ionizing radiation , and formaldehyde treatments , although their infectivity can be reduced by such treatments . Effective prion decontamination relies upon protein hydrolysis or reduction or destruction of protein tertiary structure . Examples include sodium hypochlorite , sodium hydroxide , and strongly acidic detergents such as <unk> . 134 ° C ( 274 ° F ) for 18 minutes in a pressurized steam autoclave has been found to be somewhat effective in deactivating the agent of disease . Ozone sterilization is currently being studied as a potential method for prion denaturation and deactivation . <unk> of a completely denatured prion to infectious status has not yet been achieved ; however , partially denatured prions can be <unk> to an infective status under certain artificial conditions . 
 The World Health Organization recommends any of the following three procedures for the sterilization of all heat @-@ resistant surgical instruments to ensure that they are not contaminated with prions : 
 Immerse in 1N sodium hydroxide and place in a gravity @-@ displacement autoclave at 121 ° C for 30 minutes ; clean ; rinse in water ; and then perform routine sterilization processes . 
 Immerse in 1N sodium hypochlorite ( 20 @,@ 000 parts per million available chlorine ) for 1 hour ; transfer instruments to water ; heat in a gravity @-@ displacement autoclave at 121 ° C for 1 hour ; clean ; and then perform routine sterilization processes . 
 Immerse in 1N sodium hydroxide or sodium hypochlorite ( 20 @,@ 000 parts per million available chlorine ) for 1 hour ; remove and rinse in water , then transfer to an open pan and heat in a gravity @-@ displacement ( 121 ° C ) or in a porous @-@ load ( 134 ° C ) autoclave for 1 hour ; clean ; and then perform routine sterilization processes . 
 = = Prion @-@ like domains = = 
 While PrP is considered the only mammalian prion , prion @-@ like domains have been found in a variety of other mammalian proteins . Some of these proteins have been implicated in the ontogeny of age @-@ related neurodegenerative disorders such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis ( ALS ) , frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin @-@ positive inclusions ( FTLD @-@ U ) , Alzheimer 's disease , and Huntington 's disease , as well as some forms of Systemic <unk> including AA ( Secondary ) <unk> that develops in humans and animals with inflammatory and infectious diseases such as Tuberculosis , Crohn 's disease , Rheumatoid arthritis , and HIV AIDS . AA amyloidosis , like prion disease , may be transmissible . This has given rise to the ' prion paradigm ' , where otherwise harmless proteins can be converted to a pathogenic form by a small number of misfolded , <unk> proteins . 
 The definition of a prion @-@ like domain arises from the study of fungal prions . In yeast , <unk> proteins have a portable prion domain that is both necessary and sufficient for self @-@ templating and protein aggregation . This has been shown by attaching the prion domain to a reporter protein , which then aggregates like a known prion . Similarly , removing the prion domain from a fungal prion protein inhibits <unk> . This modular view of prion behaviour has led to the hypothesis that similar prion domains are present in animal proteins , in addition to PrP . These fungal prion domains have several characteristic sequence features . They are typically enriched in asparagine , glutamine , tyrosine and glycine residues , with an asparagine bias being particularly conducive to the aggregative property of prions . Historically , <unk> has been seen as independent of sequence and only dependent on relative residue content . However , this has been shown to be false , with the spacing of <unk> and charged residues having been shown to be critical in amyloid formation . 
 Bioinformatic screens have predicted that over 250 human proteins contain prion @-@ like domains ( <unk> ) . These domains are hypothesized to have the same transmissible , <unk> properties of PrP and known fungal proteins . As in yeast , proteins involved in gene expression and RNA binding seem to be particularly enriched in <unk> 's , compared to other classes of protein . In particular , 29 of the known 210 proteins with an RNA recognition motif also have a putative prion domain . Meanwhile , several of these RNA @-@ binding proteins have been independently identified as pathogenic in cases of ALS , FTLD @-@ U , Alzheimer 's disease , and Huntington 's disease . 
 = = = Role in neurodegenerative disease = = = 
 The pathogenicity of prions and proteins with prion @-@ like domains arises from their self @-@ templating ability and the resulting exponential growth of amyloid fibrils . The presence of amyloid fibrils in patients with degenerative diseases has been well documented . These amyloid fibrils are seen as the result of pathogenic proteins that self @-@ propagate and form highly stable , non @-@ functional aggregates . While this does not necessarily imply a causal relationship between amyloid and degenerative diseases , the toxicity of certain amyloid forms and the overproduction of amyloid in familial cases of degenerative disorders supports the idea that amyloid formation is generally toxic . 
 Specifically , aggregation of TDP @-@ 43 , an RNA @-@ binding protein , has been found in ALS patients , and mutations in the genes coding for these proteins have been identified in familial cases of ALS . These mutations promote the misfolding of the proteins into a prion @-@ like conformation . The misfolded form of TDP @-@ 43 forms cytoplasmic inclusions in afflicted neurons , and is found depleted in the nucleus . In addition to ALS and FTLD @-@ U , TDP @-@ 43 pathology is a feature of many cases of Alzheimer 's disease , Parkinson 's disease and Huntington 's disease . The misfolding of TDP @-@ 43 is largely directed by its prion @-@ like domain . This domain is inherently prone to misfolding , while pathological mutations in TDP @-@ 43 have been found to increase this propensity to misfold , explaining the presence of these mutations in familial cases of ALS . As in yeast , the prion @-@ like domain of TDP @-@ 43 has been shown to be both necessary and sufficient for protein misfolding and aggregation . 
 Similarly , pathogenic mutations have been identified in the prion @-@ like domains of heterogeneous nuclear <unk> <unk> and <unk> in familial cases of muscle , brain , bone and motor neuron degeneration . The wild @-@ type form of all of these proteins show a tendency to self @-@ assemble into amyloid fibrils , while the pathogenic mutations exacerbate this behaviour and lead to excess accumulation . 
 = = Fungi = = 
 Fungal proteins exhibiting templated conformational change were discovered in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by Reed <unk> in the early 1990s . For their mechanistic similarity to mammalian prions , they were termed yeast prions . Subsequent to this , a prion has also been found in the fungus <unk> <unk> . These prions behave similarly to PrP , but , in general , are nontoxic to their hosts . Susan Lindquist 's group at the Whitehead Institute has argued some of the fungal prions are not associated with any disease state , but may have a useful role ; however , researchers at the NIH have also provided arguments suggesting that fungal prions could be considered a diseased state . There is mounting evidence that fungal proteins have evolved specific functions that are beneficial to the microorganism that enhance their ability to adapt to their diverse environments . 
 As of 2012 , there are eight known prion proteins in fungi , seven in Saccharomyces cerevisiae ( <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ) and one in <unk> <unk> ( HET @-@ s ) . The article that reported the discovery of a prion form , the <unk> protein , was retracted due to the fact that the data could not be reproduced . Notably , most of the fungal prions are based on glutamine / asparagine @-@ rich sequences , with the exception of HET @-@ s and <unk> . 
 Research into fungal prions has given strong support to the protein @-@ only concept , since purified protein extracted from cells with a prion state has been demonstrated to convert the normal form of the protein into a misfolded form in vitro , and in the process , preserve the information corresponding to different strains of the prion state . It has also shed some light on prion domains , which are regions in a protein that promote the conversion into a prion . Fungal prions have helped to suggest mechanisms of conversion that may apply to all prions , though fungal prions appear distinct from infectious mammalian prions in the lack of cofactor required for propagation . The characteristic prion domains may vary between species — e.g. , characteristic fungal prion domains are not found in mammalian prions . 
 = = Research = = 
 = = = Potential treatments and diagnosis = = = 
 Advancements in computer modeling have allowed scientists to identify compounds that can treat prion @-@ caused diseases , such as one compound found to bind a cavity in the PrPC and stabilize the conformation , reducing the amount of harmful PrPSc . 
 <unk> antibodies capable of crossing the blood @-@ brain @-@ barrier and targeting cytosolic prion protein ( an otherwise major obstacle in prion therapeutics ) have been described . 
 In the last decade , some progress dealing with ultra @-@ high @-@ pressure inactivation of prion infectivity in processed meat has been reported . 
 In 2011 , it was discovered that prions could be degraded by lichens . 
 There continues to be a very practical problem with diagnosis of prion diseases , including BSE and CJD . They have an incubation period of months to decades , during which there are no symptoms , even though the pathway of converting the normal brain PrP protein into the toxic , disease @-@ related PrPSc form has started . At present , there is virtually no way to detect PrPSc reliably except by examining the brain using neuropathological and immunohistochemical methods after death . Accumulation of the abnormally folded PrPSc form of the PrP protein is a characteristic of the disease , but it is present at very low levels in easily accessible body fluids like blood or urine . Researchers have tried to develop methods to measure PrPSc , but there are still no fully accepted methods for use in materials such as blood . 
 In 2010 , a team from New York described detection of PrPSc even when initially present at only one part in a hundred billion ( 10 − 11 ) in brain tissue . The method combines amplification with a novel technology called Surround Optical Fiber <unk> ( SOFIA ) and some specific antibodies against PrPSc . After amplifying and then concentrating any PrPSc , the samples are labelled with a fluorescent dye using an antibody for specificity and then finally loaded into a micro @-@ capillary tube . This tube is placed in a specially constructed apparatus so that it is totally surrounded by optical fibres to capture all light emitted once the dye is excited using a laser . 
 The RT @-@ <unk> assay , a microplate reader @-@ based prion detection method which uses as reagents normally folded prions , fluorescently labelled so that they " light up " when they are misfolded ; samples suspected of containing misfolded prions are added and misfolded reagents can be detected by standard fluorescence detection methods . 
 <unk> has been found to have anti @-@ prion activity . 
 Another chemical that may be effective against prion infection are luminescent conjugated <unk> , fluorescent compounds that are often used to stain tissue samples . In a 2015 study , led by Adriano <unk> , professor of neurobiology at the University of Zurich , found that when they injected mice with a prion disease and then with <unk> , the mice survived eighty percent longer than the control mice that were only injected with the prion disease . 
 = = = Causal hypotheses = = = 
 Whether prions cause disease or are merely a symptom caused by a different agent is still debated by a minority of researchers . The following sections describe several hypotheses : Some pertain to the composition of the infectious agent ( protein @-@ only , protein with other components , virus , or other ) , while others pertain to its mechanism of reproduction . 
 = = = = Protein @-@ only hypothesis = = = = 
 Prior to the discovery of prions , it was thought that all pathogens used nucleic acids to direct their replication . The " protein @-@ only hypothesis " states that a protein structure can replicate without the use of nucleic acids . This was initially controversial as it contradicts the central dogma of molecular biology , which describes nucleic acid as the central form of replicative information . 
 Evidence in favor of a protein @-@ only hypothesis includes : 
 <unk> titre in TSEs roughly correlates with prion amyloid ( PrPSc ) titre , however , prion amyloid is absent in approximately 10 % of CJD cases . 
 No virus particles , bacteria , or fungi have been conclusively associated with prion diseases , although virus @-@ like particles and Spiroplasma @-@ like inclusions can be detected in some TSE cases , but not in controls ( uninfected individuals ) . 
 No nucleic acid has been conclusively associated with infectivity ; agent is resistant to ultraviolet radiation and nucleases , although in 2016 , studies have suggested that the agent can be destroyed by nucleases under certain situations and that part of the resistance to nucleases and radiation may be that byproducts from degenerating neurons may help protect a nucleic acid . 
 No immune or inflammatory response to infection . 
 PrPSc experimentally transmitted between one species and another results in PrPSc with the amino @-@ acid sequence of the recipient species , suggesting that nucleic acid @-@ mediated replication of the donor agent does not occur . 
 Familial prion disease occurs in families with a mutation in the PrP gene , and mice with PrP mutations develop prion disease despite controlled conditions where transmission is prevented . These mice can then transmit the disease to healthy , wild type mice , suggesting that mice with PrP mutations spontaneously generate infectivity . 
 Animals lacking PrPC do not contract prion disease . 
 = = = = Genetic factors = = = = 
 A gene for the normal protein has been identified : the PRNP gene . In all inherited cases of prion disease , there is a mutation in the PRNP gene . Many different PRNP mutations have been identified and these proteins are more likely to fold into abnormal prion . Although this discovery puts a hole in the general prion hypothesis , that prions can aggregate only proteins of identical amino acid make @-@ up . These mutations can occur throughout the gene . Some mutations involve expansion of the <unk> repeat region at the N @-@ terminal of PrP . Other mutations that have been identified as a cause of inherited prion disease occur at positions 102 , 117 & 198 ( GSS ) , 178 , 200 , 210 & 232 ( CJD ) and 178 ( Fatal Familial Insomnia , FFI ) . The cause of prion disease can be sporadic , genetic , or infectious , or a combination of these factors . For example , to have scrapie , both an infectious agent and a susceptible genotype must be present . 
 = = = = Multi @-@ component hypothesis = = = = 
 Despite much effort , significant <unk> of prion infectivity have never been produced by refolding pure PrP molecules , raising doubt about the validity of the " protein only " hypothesis . In addition the " protein only " hypothesis fails to provide a molecular explanation for the ability of prion strains to target specific areas of the brain in distinct patterns . These shortcomings , along with additional experimental data , have given rise to the " multi @-@ component " or " cofactor variation " hypothesis . 
 In 2007 , biochemist Surachai <unk> and his colleagues at Dartmouth College produced purified infectious prions de novo from defined components ( PrPC , co @-@ purified lipids , and a synthetic polyanionic molecule ) . These researchers also showed that the polyanionic molecule required for prion formation was selectively incorporated into high @-@ affinity complexes with PrP molecules , leading them to hypothesize that infectious prions may be composed of multiple host components , including PrP , lipid , and polyanionic molecules , rather than PrPSc alone . 
 In 2010 , <unk> Ma and colleagues at The Ohio State University produced infectious prions from a recipe of <unk> expressed recombinant PrP , <unk> phospholipid , and RNA , further supporting the multi @-@ component hypothesis . This finding is in contrast to studies that found minimally infectious prions produced from recombinant PrP alone . 
 In 2012 , <unk> and colleagues purified the membrane lipid phosphatidylethanolamine as a solitary endogenous cofactor capable of facilitating the formation of high @-@ titer recombinant prions derived from multiple prion strains . They also reported that the cofactor is essential for maintaining the infectious conformation of PrPSc , and that cofactor molecules dictate the strain properties of infectious prions . 
 = = = = Heavy metal poisoning hypothesis = = = = 
 Reports suggest that imbalance of brain metal homeostasis may be a cause of PrPSc @-@ associated neurotoxicity , though the underlying mechanisms are difficult to explain based on existing information . Proposed hypotheses include a functional role for PrPC in metal metabolism , and loss of this function due to aggregation to the disease @-@ associated PrPSc form as the cause of brain metal imbalance . Other views suggest gain of toxic function by PrPSc due to sequestration of PrPC @-@ associated metals within the aggregates , resulting in the generation of redox @-@ active PrPSc complexes . The physiological implications of some PrPC @-@ metal interactions are known , while others are still unclear . The pathological implications of PrPC @-@ metal interaction include metal @-@ induced oxidative damage , and in some instances conversion of PrPC to a PrPSc @-@ like form . 
 = = = = Viral hypothesis = = = = 
 The protein @-@ only hypothesis has been criticised by those maintaining that the simplest explanation of the evidence to date is viral . For more than a decade , Yale University neuropathologist Laura <unk> has been proposing that prion diseases are caused instead by an unidentified slow virus . In January 2007 , she and her colleagues published an article reporting to have found a virus in 10 % , or less , of their scrapie @-@ infected cells in culture . 
 Evidence in favor of a viral hypothesis includes : 
 Strain variation : differences in prion infectivity , incubation , <unk> , and progression among species resembles that seen between viruses , especially RNA viruses 
 The long incubation and rapid onset of symptoms resembles lentiviruses , such as HIV @-@ induced AIDS 
 Viral @-@ like particles that do not appear to be composed of PrP have been found in some of the cells of <unk> or CJD @-@ infected cell lines . 
 Many viruses , including HIV which needs CD4 and CXCR4 , need a receptor to attach to and enter into host cells . The host prion , <unk> may be a receptor protein for an as yet undiscovered TSE virus , explaining why animals lacking host prion do not become infected with experimental prion disease . 
 A prion like protein , called <unk> , has been shown to misfold as part of the innate immune response against pathogenic viruses , similarly the cellular prion , PrPC has been shown to have anti HIV properties , and it is hypothesized that the misfolding of the prion in TSEs may be an antiviral response against an unknown virus . 
 In 2016 , studies have demonstrated susceptibility to nucleases under certain situations : > 99 % of <unk> was destroyed , but there was no reduction of prion protein , suggesting the presence of a nucleic acid . 
 Studies propagating TSE infectivity in cell @-@ free reactions and in purified component chemical reactions is thought to strongly suggest against TSE viral nature . However , some viruses , such as Poliovirus , have the ability to replicate in cell @-@ free reactions . 
 Using a similar defined recipe of multiple components ( PrP , <unk> lipid , RNA ) , <unk> Ma and colleagues generated infectious prions from recombinant PrP expressed from E. coli , casting further doubt on the viral hypothesis . However , the infectivity reported in Ma et al. experiments could be explained by contamination , as infectious material from scrapie infected mice was used to seed the reaction . 
 = = = = <unk> hypothesis = = = = 
 The ' <unk> hypothesis ' postulates that the TSE agent is a foreign , self replicating nucleic acid or nucleic acid fragment bound to PrP . 
 = = = = Spiroplasma hypothesis = = = = 
 Spiroplasma is a cell wall – deficient bacteria related to Mycoplasma , which some think may be the cause of the TSEs . The lack of a cell wall means they are not susceptible to conventional antibiotics such as penicillin , which target cell wall synthesis . Frank O. Bastian of Louisiana State University first discovered Spiroplasma @-@ like inclusions in the brain of a CJD patient during an autopsy in 1979 and has hypothesized that this bacterium could possibly be the cause of the TSEs . 
 However , as of 2015 , with the exception of Spiroplasma <unk> strain <unk> causing spongiform <unk> encephalitis in suckling rats , other researchers have been unable to duplicate these findings , casting doubt on the Spiroplasma hypothesis . In defense of the Spiroplasma hypothesis , Bastian pointed out that Spiroplasma is hard to culture and that strain variation makes it hard to detect certain strains using PCR and other techniques , thus giving a false negative . 
 = = = = <unk> @-@ autoimmunity hypothesis = = = = 
 <unk> is a bacterium which some think is the cause of the TSEs . 
 = = Etymology and pronunciation = = 
 The word prion , coined in 1982 by Stanley B. Prusiner , is a portmanteau derived from protein and infection , hence prion , and is short for " proteinaceous infectious particle " , in reference to its ability to self @-@ propagate and transmit its conformation to other proteins . Its main pronunciation is / <unk> / , although / <unk> / , as the <unk> name of the bird is pronounced , is also heard . 
 = = = General = = = 
 CDC – USA Centers for Disease Control and Prevention – information on prion diseases 
 World Health Organisation – WHO information on prion diseases 
 = = = Reports and committees = = = 
 The UK BSE Inquiry – Report of the UK public inquiry into BSE and variant CJD 
 UK <unk> Encephalopathy Advisory Committee ( SEAC ) 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Mammalian prion classification International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses – <unk> 
 Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man : Prion protein – PrP , inherited prion disease and transgenic animal models . 
 The Surprising World of Prion Biology — A New Mechanism of Inheritance on @-@ line lecture by Susan Lindquist 
 = = = Research = = = 
 Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases – labs studying prion diseases , run by Stanley B. Prusiner , MD 
 Prion Disease Database ( PDDB ) – Comprehensive <unk> resource for systems biology research in prion diseases . 
 Susan Lindquist 's seminars : " The Surprising World of Prion Biology " 
 http : / / <unk> / MRC Prion Unit run by Professor John <unk> . Study of all forms of prion disease and development of therapies . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 UCSF Memory and Aging Center – medical center for diagnosis and care of people with prion disease and research into origin and treatment of prion diseases . ( YouTube channel ) 
 3D electron microscopy structures of Prions from the EM Data Bank ( <unk> ) 
 = Horace Gillom = 
 Horace Albert " Big Horse " Gillom ( March 3 , 1921 – October 28 , 1985 ) was an American football punter and end in the All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) and National Football League ( NFL ) . He played ten seasons for the Cleveland Browns between 1947 and 1956 . Cleveland head coach Paul Brown , who coached Gillom in high school , college and professionally , called him his best all @-@ around high school player and once said there " has never been a better punter than Horace " . 
 Growing up in Ohio , Gillom played for Brown on the football team at Massillon Washington High School , where he excelled as an end , linebacker and punter . In Gillom 's three seasons between 1938 and 1940 , Massillon won all of its games and captured two High School Football National Championships . Gillom followed Brown to Ohio State University in 1941 , playing on the school 's freshman football team before dropping out because of poor grades . He then entered the U.S. Army and served for three years in World War II . Upon his discharge , Gillom enrolled at the University of Nevada , Reno to finish his college career . He led the country in scoring in 1946 but left the school after the season , again because of poor grades . 
 Gillom signed with the Browns , an AAFC team coached by Brown , in 1947 . He handled all of the team 's punting chores and played as a utility end on both offense and defense . Gillom 's Cleveland teams won three straight AAFC championships before the league dissolved and the Browns were absorbed by the NFL . The Browns won the NFL championship in 1950 and repeated in 1954 and 1955 . Gillom was a consistent punter , never averaging below 41 @.@ 2 yards per kick in a season . His abilities declined in his later years , however , and he was released during the 1956 season . Gillom attempted a comeback in 1961 with the New York Titans of the American Football League , but failed to make the team . He moved to Los Angeles and worked as a security guard for the rest of his life . Gillom died of a heart attack in 1985 . He was named in 2007 as a Cleveland Browns Legend , a grouping of the team 's best @-@ ever players . 
 Gillom contributed to the evolution of punting by standing further back from the center than was usual at the time to give himself more room to make kicks . His kicks were also high , which gave the coverage team more time to get down the field and stop punt returns . Gillom 's distance from center and emphasis on hang time were followed by later generations of punters . 
 = = Early life and high school = = 
 Gillom grew up in Massillon , Ohio and attended Massillon Washington High School . He was a star end on the Massillon football team like his older brother Odell , but was also a linebacker and punter . Bud Houghton , who coached him when he was in junior high school , said Gillom needed a step and a half more than usual to get his punts off , but he was the best he had ever seen once he made the kick . Houghton moved Gillom 15 yards behind the snapper instead of the usual 10 , which gave him the room he needed . Gillom was a favorite of Massillon High football coach Paul Brown , who said in his autobiography that there " has never been a better punter than Horace . " 
 Gillom played for the Massillon Tigers between 1938 and 1940 , a period during which the team won all of its games and two High School Football National Championships . Gillom , who also played basketball and other sports , earned All @-@ Ohio honors at Massillon and was one of several black players on the team at a time when many northern high schools excluded them . Brown 's policy was to use his best players , regardless of race . Gillom set school records for points scored in a season and touchdown passes caught in a season . His record of 108 points in a season still stands . 
 = = College and military service = = 
 Brown became Ohio State 's head football coach in 1941 and recruited Gillom to the school . Gillom played on Ohio State 's freshman team that year as an end opposite Dante Lavelli . Gillom was expected to move up to the varsity team the following year as a blocking back , but was kicked out of school in January for failing to maintain his grades . Brown later said Gillom did not fail any courses and was back at Ohio State doing " some extra reading in history that he can make up " , but his struggles with classwork ultimately kept him off the Ohio State team in 1942 . Gillom enlisted in the U.S. Army during World War II before he played on the varsity team . 
 Gillom fought in the European Theatre of World War II and participated in the Battle of the Bulge near the end of the war . He was discharged after three years of service , having earned three Bronze Star Medals . By that time , Brown had become the head coach of the Cleveland Browns , a team in the new All @-@ America Football Conference ( AAFC ) . Brown wanted Gillom on the team , but changed his approach after signing fullback Marion Motley in 1946 . Motley , a black star who played in high school for Massillon rival Canton , joined the Browns from the University of Nevada , Reno , where former Canton coach Jim Aiken was head coach . As compensation for drawing Motley away , Brown arranged for Gillom to go to Nevada for the 1946 season . Gillom led the nation in punting at Nevada that year , but left the school in December because of poor grades . 
 = = Cleveland Browns = = 
 Gillom signed with the Browns in early 1947 , making him the third black player to join the team after Bill Willis and Motley . Before the season started , he played in the College All @-@ Star Game , a now @-@ defunct matchup between the National Football League ( NFL ) champion and a selection of the best college players from around the country . Gillom played well in the game as the All @-@ Stars beat the Chicago Bears , 16 – 0 . With the Browns , Gillom was used mostly as a punter and a defensive end . He came in second in the AAFC in punting average in his rookie season at 44 @.@ 6 yards as Cleveland finished the regular season with a 12 – 1 – 1 record and beat the New York Yankees to win the AAFC championship . " Gillom had such a powerful leg and kicked the ball so far ; before that punters used to line up 10 , 12 yards behind the center , " running back Sherman Howard later said . " He started the 15 @-@ yard drop . And with Horace , he would kick it so high that by the time guys got down , the ball was coming down , so most guys had to fair catch . " 
 The following season , Gillom saw time as an offensive end when regular Dante Lavelli broke his leg and was sidelined for seven games . Cleveland won all of its games in 1948 , recording professional football 's first perfect season and beating the Buffalo Bills in the championship game . The Browns won the championship again in 1949 , but the AAFC dissolved after the season and the Browns were absorbed by the more established NFL . Gillom 's salary was $ 6 @,@ 000 ( $ 59 @,@ 673 in 2016 dollars ) in the Browns ' last AAFC year . 
 The 1950 season was another strong one for Cleveland . The team finished the regular season with a 10 – 2 record , tied with the New York Giants for first place in the American Conference . This set up a playoff with the Giants to secure a spot in the championship game against the Los Angeles Rams . Cleveland won 8 – 3 , thanks in part to Gillom 's punts . His kicks repeatedly gave the Giants poor field position and pinned them near their own end zone . The Browns went on to win the championship against the Rams on a last @-@ minute Lou Groza field goal . Gillom finished second in the league in punting average , with 43 @.@ 2 yards . 
 Cleveland reached the championship game in the following three seasons but lost each time , once to the Rams and twice to the Detroit Lions . Gillom led the NFL in punting in 1951 , with a 45 @.@ 5 @-@ yard average . He again led the league the following season , averaging 45 @.@ 7 yards per punt , and was selected for the Pro Bowl , football 's all @-@ star game . Gillom was second in the NFL in punting average in 1953 . During his years with the Browns , Gillom 's long , high punts and his habit of standing further back from center than was usual set a precedent followed by many of his successors at the position . His kicks had a long hang time , which allowed teammates to get further downfield to defend the punt return . " We didn 't just go back 40 yards , we went back 50 , 60 yards because he just kicked it so damn far and so high , " Otto Schnellbacher , who played against the Browns with the Yankees and Giants , later said . Gillom 's positioning behind the center gave him more space to kick but also put more distance between him and the opposing linemen , reducing the likelihood of a block . 
 The Browns reached the championship game in 1954 and beat the Lions for a second NFL title . Gillom had the league 's second @-@ longest punting average for the second year in a row . Another championship followed in 1955 . Despite his consistency , Gillom 's punting slipped in his last years , and by 1956 he had to compete with rookies for a spot on the roster . At 35 , he was Cleveland 's oldest player and suffered from a sore back . He made the team but was released toward the end of the season in November . When he left the game , his career punting average of 43 @.@ 8 yards was the second @-@ best in NFL history behind Sammy Baugh 's 45 @.@ 1 yards . He never averaged below 41 @.@ 2 yards per punt and was among the top three punters in his league in six of the eight years when he punted full @-@ time . Because his punts were so long and high , opponents ' punt returns were limited . He punted more than 400 times from the start of his career before one was returned for a touchdown . He was also a serviceable end , making 43 receptions when he played the position for periods in 1948 and 1949 . Brown lauded his diverse abilities , calling him " the best all around athlete I coached at Massillon " and saying he was " successful at everything he did " . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Gillom attempted a return to football in 1961 , trying out for a spot on the New York Titans of the American Football League , a circuit formed the previous year . He was released , however , before playing in a game . He moved to Los Angeles in the 1964 and worked at the city 's recreation department as a security guard . He was a " trouble chaser " who patrolled the city 's parks without a uniform or weapon . " Any playground having trouble they call on me , " he said in 1970 . " The last one was a gang fight two weeks ago at a pool in Highland Park . " 
 Gillom lived in Los Angeles for the rest of his life . He died in 1985 of a heart attack suffered while working as a security guard at a hospital . He had a son and a daughter with his wife , Mamie . Gillom was named a Browns Legend in 2007 , an honor given by the team to the best players in its history . He was inducted into Stark County , Ohio 's high school football hall of fame in 2009 . Gillom still holds the Browns record for longest punt , at 80 yards , and is second in career punting yards behind Don Cockroft . 
 = Sticky & Sweet Tour = 
 Sticky & Sweet Tour was the eighth concert tour by American singer Madonna to promote her eleventh studio album , Hard Candy . It began in August 2008 and was Madonna 's first tour from her new recording and business deal with Live Nation . The tour was announced in February 2008 , with dates for European and North American venues revealed . Though initially planned , the tour did not visit Australia due to financial problems and the financial recession . Costume designer Arianne Phillips designed the costumes , supported by a number of famous designers and brands . The stage for the main show was planned similarly to that of her previous 2006 Confessions Tour . After the tour concluded in 2008 , Madonna announced plans of playing a second European leg in 2009 to play in territories she either had never been to or had not played for a long time . 
 The tour was described as a " rock driven dancetastic journey " . It was divided into four acts : Pimp , where S & M was the main theme , Old School , where Madonna 's classic songs were performed while displaying work of deceased artist Keith Haring , Gypsy , a fusion of Romani folk music and dance with the performances ranging from melancholy to joyous , and Rave , where high @-@ energy uptempo songs were performed . The last section of the show included a special ' request song ' , to which the audience was invited to sing @-@ along . Some changes were made to the set list during the second European leg of the tour in 2009 , including a dance tribute to deceased singer Michael Jackson . The tour generated positive reviews from critics . 
 The Sticky & Sweet Tour broke many records in terms of its ticket sales , commercial gross and audience attendance . After the first leg , it became the highest grossing tour by a solo artist , earning US $ 282 million ( $ 309 @.@ 94 in 2016 dollars ) , breaking the previous record Madonna herself held with her Confessions Tour . Overall , Madonna performed to over 3 @.@ 5 million fans in 32 countries , grossing a total of US $ 408 million ( $ 450 @.@ 02 in 2016 dollars ) , making it the second highest @-@ grossing tour of all time , behind only The Rolling Stones 's A Bigger Bang Tour . It still remains the highest @-@ grossing tour by a female artist and the fifth highest @-@ grossing tour of all time . At the 2009 Billboard Touring Awards , the Sticky & Sweet Tour won the Top Tour and Top Draw prizes , which acknowledge the highest @-@ grossing and highest @-@ attended tours of the year , respectively . Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary won the Top Manager award . 
 While on tour , a number of statements by Madonna against 2008 American Republican Presidential and Vice Presidential candidates John McCain and Sarah Palin respectively , faced strong opposition from the Republican Party . While performing in Romania in 2009 , Madonna 's statement about gypsy discrimination in eastern European countries was also received negatively . During the second leg , two workers constructing her stage at Stade Vélodrome in Marseille were killed when the roof of the stage collapsed . The Sticky & Sweet Tour has been broadcast on a number of private channels and a CD @-@ DVD and Blu @-@ ray version of the concert was released in March 2010 . 
 = = Background = = 
 The world tour was officially confirmed on May 8 , 2008 , by Guy Oseary , Madonna 's manager , and Arthur Fogel , Live Nation 's Global Touring CEO and Global Music Chairman . Billboard confirmed that the tour was to begin on August 23 , 2008 in Cardiff , Wales , with performances throughout the rest of the year . It was titled Sticky & Sweet Tour and planned to visit three continents on 50 – 60 dates . The tour was produced globally by Live Nation and promoted Madonna 's studio album Hard Candy ( 2008 ) . Billboard also confirmed performances in Europe until the end of September , arenas and stadiums in sixteen markets of North America in October and November , followed by stadiums of Mexico and South America in late November and early December . The tour was described as a " rock driven dancetastic journey " . The show featured four acts : Pimp , a homage to 1920s deco and modern @-@ day gangsta pimp , Old School , portraying early ' 80s downtown New York City dance roots with works of deceased artist Keith Haring and the dance culture vibe of that time , including the birth of rap – Gypsy , consisting of Romani folk music and dance , and lastly Rave , consisting of eastern influences . 
 On January 30 , 2009 , it was announced that Madonna had decided to resume the tour in the summer of 2009 , with around twenty @-@ five more shows in Europe . The second leg of the tour was to start from London at The O2 on July 4 , wrapping up two months later in Tel Aviv , Israel . The rest of the dates included stadiums and parks in European markets Madonna had either never played or did not play in several years , according to Fogel . He said , " It absolutely has not happened in the four tours I 've been involved with , [ ... ] There has been talk [ of extending ] during each one , but it has never come to be . But with this one , she loves the show , she 's had a great time and she 's excited about playing new markets . [ ... ] We went to quite a few markets she has never played or hasn 't been to in 15 @-@ plus years . This [ extension ] is really a continuation of that in the sense of playing new and different markets . " 
 Originally , Live Nation reported that the tour would make stops in America and Europe . Music promoter and manager Michael <unk> stated that an Australian leg " will happen " and that local promoters were working hard to make it fruitful . Madonna had apologized to her Australian fans during the 2006 Confessions Tour , saying that she tried to work Australia into her schedule but ultimately could not . Her last tour in Australia was The Girlie Show World Tour in 1993 . In October 2008 , the Australian TV show Sunrise reported that Madonna will tour Australia in January 2009 . She had agreed for performances in Sydney and Melbourne , but they were eventually cancelled . Local promoter Michael Coppel stated , 
 " Madonna was coming to Australia , the dates were resolved , then economics got in the way [ ... ] It 's unknown territory at the moment . A lot of tours went on sale before the dollar crashed . We are only starting to see the effect of the economy on the tour industry . [ ... ] Everyone is feeling their way , the risk level has gone up substantially . " 
 With the announcement of the 2009 extension , the Herald Sun reported that Madonna planned to tour Australia in September 2009 , with one show in Melbourne to be held at the Telstra Dome . It was later reported that the rumored date was false . Fogel stated , " [ ... ] there is no validity to the reports . " 
 = = Development = = 
 Costume designer Arianne Phillips designed the main costumes for the tour . According to her , Givenchy designer Riccardo Tisci contributed two outfits , Tom Ford made bespoke suit for the band , Miu Miu created the shoes , Stella McCartney provided the thigh @-@ high boots and Moschino made the sunglasses . Other designers involved in creating the clothes included Yves Saint Laurent , Roberto Cavalli , and Jeremy Scott . Givenchy 's creations were selected for the first and third acts of the tour , while Scott 's designs were selected for the second act . Philips commented on the different sections , saying , 
 " [ First section ] It 's a theme that runs throughout her career . [ ... ] She 's not afraid of being hard . [ Second section ] He [ Keith Harring ] and Madonna were friends . If he were alive , it would be his 50th birthday as well . So I thought , ' What if we revisited that ? ' Riccardo 's a new young talent . If you look at Madonna 's history with fashion , that makes him an obvious choice . [ Madonna ] always wants to push the envelope . There are no vanity considerations based on her age . " 
 NME reported that the tour would comprise 250 travelling workers , 69 guitars , 12 trampolines and 100 pairs of <unk> . The stage 's layout was similar to the Confessions Tour stage . It had two giant textile panels that defined the proscenium arch , supporting two giant M @-@ shaped structures , lit from within . The lighting beams and structures were rigged from the ceiling . There were four different clusters of loudspeakers in the back of the stage , providing sound to the rear tiers . The main stage was accompanied by a catwalk which was shorter than the Confessions Tour one , and a satellite stage at the end of the runway . There was a set of screens on the main stage – which moved and changed shape and layout , from the shape of a cube at the beginning of the show . Also present were two semi @-@ transparent , cylinder @-@ shaped screens , above the satellite stage . Other structures included a number of smaller platforms , ramps , and conveyor belts , which usually were kept beneath the main stage , but were brought out during some of the performances . The catwalks were shaped as a ramp at the very beginning but was transformed into a flat runway eventually . The tour was the first to use a pair of <unk> <unk> digital mixing consoles at the sound production 's core audio . Tim <unk> , who previously presided as the sound consultant of the 2006 Confessions Tour , decided to use the <unk> technology after researching it . Madonna and her background vocalists used Sennheiser SKM 5200 wireless microphones with the highly directional ME 5005 super @-@ cardioid heads , and Sennheiser in @-@ ear monitors . Monitor engineer Matt Napier commented that he chose " the Evolution systems for backline , as their RF is rock @-@ solid , the transmitter units are small and reliable and they are very competitively priced . [ ... ] And I couldn 't imagine giving Madonna another monitor system , she has become so accustomed and comfortable with the IEM G2 . " 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show was divided into four sections : Pimp , Old School , Gypsy and Rave . It began with " The Sweet Machine " , a 3D animation video displaying candy being manufactured and used as a Pinball . As the video ended , " Candy Shop " began with Madonna appearing on a M @-@ shaped throne in the Givenchy @-@ designed dress , sitting with her legs spread apart and holding a staff in her hands . She was accompanied by her dancers in bondage themed costumes . " Beat Goes On " featured Madonna and her dancers on a 1935 Auburn Speedster while Pharrell Williams and Kanye West appeared on the backdrops . Madonna then played the electric guitar for " Human Nature " ; the performance featured a video of Britney Spears trapped in an elevator , who sang along with some of the verses in the song . A modernized " Vogue " , featuring the hook of " 4 Minutes " , was the final song for this section . It led to a video interlude for " Die Another Day " , featuring Madonna as a boxer on screen , while her dancers performed a faux boxing match . The next section , inspired by the style and culture of early 1980s New York , began with Madonna skipping on stage for " Into the Groove " . This performance was a mashup with " Toop Toop " by Cassius and featured the artwork of friend Keith Haring . She then performed a double Dutch dance interlude which led to " Heartbeat " . During that song , Madonna 's dance movements were controlled by her back @-@ up dancers as if they were puppeteers . She performed " Borderline " in a rock version , on electric guitar . " She 's Not Me " followed , where Madonna made fun of her various incarnations and styles , from the music videos of " Open Your Heart " , " Material Girl " , " Vogue " and " Like a Virgin " . The section ended with " Music " which contained elements of " Put Your Hands Up 4 Detroit " and excerpts from " Last Night a DJ Saved My Life " . A short video was played featuring a tagged subway train . The doors of the train then closed to take in Madonna and her dancers . The " Rain " video interlude was played on the video screens ; it featured an animated pixie finding shade under a petal during a rainstorm . This version contained musical elements from " Here Comes the Rain Again " by Eurythmics . 
 In the next section , the song " Devil Wouldn 't Recognize You " featured Madonna atop a piano , cloaked in a black shroud . She was surrounded by a circular video screen which showed imagery of waves splashing and rainfall . Madonna then performed " Spanish Lesson " , featuring a flamenco @-@ influenced dance solo by Alexander Kolpakov . She played the guitar once again for " Miles Away " . " La Isla Bonita " featured the Ukrainian @-@ gypsy group , Kolpakov Trio , incorporating the gypsy wedding song , " Lela Pala Tute " . At the end of the song , Madonna marched ahead with a band of violin players to the front of the stage and then sat aside with her dancers for a solo performance from Kolpakov Trio , who performed the traditional song " Doli Doli " . She returned to the stage for " You Must Love Me " , the Academy Award winning song from , Evita . The act ended with " Get Stupid " , a video interlude portraying global warming , famine and other global issues , while juxtaposing John McCain with Hitler and Barack Obama with Gandhi . In the final act , Madonna appeared on stage for a duet of the song " 4 Minutes " with Justin Timberlake and Timbaland , both of them appearing on screens . A remix of " Like a Prayer " followed , featuring elements from " Feels Like Home " and video screens depicting messages from the Bible , the Quran , the Torah and the Talmud . The electric guitar was played by Madonna for the performance of " Ray of Light " . She then sought audience participation , asking them to request for " an oldie but goodie " . Madonna sang the first verse and chorus of the requested song , before moving onto a rock version of " Hung Up " . After a brief video featuring a modern take on classic arcade games was played , Madonna returned on stage for the finale performance , " Give It 2 Me " , ending the song with a sing @-@ a @-@ long of the chorus . The show ended with the words " Game Over " appearing on the video screens . 
 = = = 2009 revisions = = = 
 After the 2009 extension of the tour was announced , some changes were made to the setlist . " Candy Shop " had a new video backdrop by artist Marilyn Minter , featuring imagery of a giant tongue licking and spitting out neon @-@ colored icing . Madonna also wore new opening outfit designed by Riccardo Tisci . " Heartbeat " was replaced by " Holiday " and incorporated elements of her then latest single " Celebration " , and her first single " Everybody " . After Michael Jackson 's death , it was modified to include a medley of three Michael Jackson songs , as an homage to the recently deceased singer . The performance featured Madonna 's dancer Kento , who danced in similar clothing and dancing style as Jackson . Madonna 's 1985 single " Dress You Up " replaced the rock version of " Borderline " . It featured elements of rock songs like " My Sharona " by The Knack and " God Save The Queen " by Sex Pistols . " Hung Up " was removed and replaced by an up @-@ beat version of " Frozen " with interpolations from " Open Your Heart " , which was set between " Like a Prayer " and " Ray of Light " . The video backdrop for " Frozen " used video outtakes from the song 's music video , directed by Chris Cunningham . " Ray of Light " was also slightly edited for selected performances with the lyrics from Michael Jackson 's song " Man in the Mirror , " If you wanna make the world a better place ... Take a look at yourself , and then make a change " appearing on the screens before the beginning of the song . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The show received positive reviews from critics . Jon Pareles from The New York Times compared the concert with aerobics and said that the concert was more of a workout than being erotic . Isabel <unk> from The Daily Telegraph compared the tour with the 2006 Confessions Tour and said that " two years later , Madonna 's biceps are no smaller and , with the news that 100 pairs of fishnet pantyhose have been procured from eBay for the artist , her costumes no less raunchy . [ ... ] Madonna seemed to have a point to prove . " Another review by Helen Brown from the same publication said that " Sticky Sweet 's highlights include a fresh , crunchy and <unk> @-@ up ' La Isla Bonita ' ( complete with fiddles , flamenco and a spliced @-@ in Romani folk tune ) and a raved @-@ up ' Like a Prayer ' . " Sarah Liss from the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation commented that " something about witnessing the 50 @-@ year @-@ old crow 's feet and wrinkles on Madonna 's face , projected a hundred times larger than life , as she works her ass off ( to paraphrase part of her stage banter ) for a crowd of almost 20 @,@ 000 feels more awe @-@ inspiring than any of her old @-@ school shock tactics . " 
 Jim Farber from New York Daily News wrote that " [ Madonna ] may have just sailed past the half @-@ century mark , but that didn 't stop [ her ] from dancing hard and fast in skimpy clothes for two hours nonstop at the opening show of her Sticky and Sweet tour . [ .. ] No slack in the star 's sexuality or energy was apparent at the icon 's show . " Joey Guerra from Houston Chronicle commented that " most surprising about Madonna 's impeccably choreographed , frequently fantastic show was her willingness to show fans the flip side . She was still larger @-@ than @-@ life — and astonishingly fit for 50 — but Hard Candy 's toot @-@ toot disco beats have softened her edges . " 
 Greg Kot from Chicago Tribune commented that " Smiles don ’ t come easy for Madonna . Instead , there are usually smirks , sneers , pouts , leers and thin @-@ lipped , tough @-@ as @-@ nails displays of contempt for anyone who would dare mess with her . Madonna , she 's one tough dominatrix , and she 's got better developed biceps than just about any of the fans who filled the United Center on Sunday for the first of two concerts . " Adrian Thrills from Daily Mail commented " Nobody does a big stadium show quite like Madonna . She might be pop 's greatest female icon , but she does not rest on her laurels and this was a theatrical , two @-@ hour blockbuster , featuring 16 dancers and a 12 @-@ piece band . " 
 Nekesa Mumbi Moody from USA Today wrote : " Even the superstar 's most cynical critics couldn 't walk away from her two @-@ hour extravaganza at the Izod Center on Saturday night without being thoroughly wowed . It was not only the spectacle of the concert , but the performer herself , as she reasserted her musical relevance and dominance in her 25th year in the spotlight . [ ... ] Madonna is not the world 's most gifted singer or dancer or even musician , but she may be its greatest performer . " Caryn Ganz from Rolling Stone noted that " Madonna may have toyed with dominance and submission on [ 2008 's ] Hard Candy , but there was no question who was carrying the cane at the first New York City date on her Sticky & Sweet Tour last night ( the trek 's second stop in the States ) . Emerging on a throne to the thumpy sound of ' Candy Shop ' , the 50 @-@ year @-@ old singer kicked off a tightly choreographed two @-@ hour set designed to accentuate her physical and musical strength and flexibility . " Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine wrote : " Like a sex instructor , Madonna rules over her audience and tells them when they 're allowed to get off ( at one point mock @-@ masturbating over someone 's head ) . And when the words ' Game Over ' flash on the screen at the end of the show , you 're just happy to have played along . " 
 = = Commercial reception = = 
 The Sticky & Sweet Tour broke many records in terms of its ticket sales , commercial gross and audience attendance . On September 11 , 2008 , Madonna performed to a sell @-@ out crowd of over 74 @,@ 000 fans and grossed over $ 12 million USD , surpassing all previous grosses at both the old and the new Wembley Stadiums . Since that date U2 with their 360 ° Tour has broken the attendance record at Wembley Stadium with a crowd of 88 @,@ 000 people . This performance followed the Zurich performance , which was in front of 72 @,@ 000 people , the largest audience ever for a concert in Switzerland . The September 20 , 2008 , concert at the Stade de France sold 80 @,@ 000 tickets in less than ten days , prompting Live Nation to announce a second and final show at the venue . 50 @,@ 000 tickets for Madonna 's Vancouver concert at BC Place Stadium were sold in 29 minutes . Due to instant sellouts in Toronto at Air Canada Centre on October 18 and Montreal at the Bell Centre on October 22 , second shows in both markets were added on October 19 in Toronto , at the Air Canada Centre , and October 23 , at Montreal 's Bell Centre . The two shows in Mexico City sold out in less than three hours . Madonna 's show in Montenegro was performed to almost 70 @,@ 000 , the biggest @-@ ever event held in the small Adriatic republic . In New York City , Madonna 's four sell @-@ outs at Madison Square Garden shows added up to a record breaking 23 sold out performances since 2001 at that venue – a record for most appearances for a single artist in this decade . Madonna 's performances at Stade de France , Wembley Stadium , Madison Square Garden and Military Airfield ranked at numbers 3 , 13 , 15 and 20 on Billboard 's Top 25 <unk> of 2008 , respectively . The tour ranked third in Billboard 's " Top 25 Tours " , with a gross of over U.S. $ 162 million ( $ 178 @.@ 05 in 2016 dollars ) by mid @-@ November 2008 . Pollstar ranked the tour the leading North American grosser for 2008 at $ 105 @.@ 3 million ( $ 115 @.@ 73 in 2016 dollars ) . On December 2008 , Live Nation announced that the U.S. leg of the tour sold 550 @,@ 000 tickets and grossed $ 91 @.@ 5 million ( $ 100 @.@ 57 in 2016 dollars ) . Together with the European and Mexican dates , the tour grossed a total of $ 282 million ( $ 309 @.@ 94 in 2016 dollars ) , making it the highest grossing tour of 2008 . It also became the biggest selling tour by a solo artist , breaking the record previously held by her own Confessions Tour in 2006 . 
 After the announcement of the 2009 extension of the tour , tickets were sold @-@ out immediately . Second shows were confirmed for July 5 in London and July 8 in Manchester , marking Madonna 's final UK dates in 2009 . The Oslo ( July 30 ) , Tallinn ( August 4 ) , Helsinki ( August 6 ) and Gothenburg ( August 9 ) concerts all sold out on the same day tickets went on sale . In Helsinki , the August 6 performance was the biggest show by one artist ever organized in Finland . In Oslo , all 40 @,@ 000 tickets available for the July 30 concert were sold in 34 minutes , prompting Live Nation to announce an extra concert on July 29 . In Tallinn , all 70 @,@ 300 tickets available for Madonna 's concert at the Tallinn Song Festival Grounds were purchased in just over 24 hours , a record for Estonia . The record previously belonged to Metallica , who sold all of the tickets available for their concert at the same venue in three days . In Tel Aviv , all 50 @,@ 000 tickets available for the first date were sold out in a few days , causing Live Nation to add a second and final date to wrap up the tour . As expected , after the final show , Sticky & Sweet became the highest grossing tour by a solo artist , earning US $ 408 million ( $ 450 @.@ 02 in 2016 dollars ) from 85 shows in 52 countries , with an attendance of 3 @.@ 5 million . It is the second highest grossing tour of all time , behind The Rolling Stones ' 2005 – 07 A Bigger Bang Tour which earned $ 558 million ( $ 636 @.@ 81 in 2016 dollars ) . At the 2009 Billboard Touring Awards , the Sticky & Sweet Tour won the Top Tour and Top Draw prizes , which acknowledge the highest @-@ grossing and highest @-@ attended tours of the year , respectively . Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary won the Top Manager award . Additionally , in 2009 Billboard magazine announced that Madonna placed second ( behind U2 ) in the " Top 25 Tours of 2009 " with a gross of $ 222 million ( $ 243 @.@ 99 in 2016 dollars ) . 
 = = Madonna 's statements = = 
 During the tour , a number of statements made by Madonna faced strong opposition from socio @-@ political leaders . The " Get Stupid " video interlude featured images of disasters throughout the ages along with images of Adolf Hitler and Robert Mugabe . US Republican presidential candidate John McCain was featured in the segment as well along Hitler and Mugabe . Images of John Lennon , Gandhi and Al Gore are featured towards the end of the video along with US Democratic presidential candidate Barack Obama . The video caused an uproar in the political world , especially in McCain 's camp . Tucker Bounds , McCain 's spokesperson , stated : 
 " The comparisons are outrageous , unacceptable and crudely divisive all at the same time [ ... ] It clearly shows that when it comes to supporting Barack Obama , his fellow worldwide celebrities refuse to consider any smear or attack off limits . " 
 At the conclusion of the presidential election , the image of McCain was removed from the video . During her performance at Petco Park , Madonna congratulated Barack Obama , on his historic win for presidency of the United States . Madonna stated , " This is a historical evening . This is a motherfucking important evening and we are lucky to be sharing it with the World [ ... ] This is the beginning of a whole new world . Are you ready ? ! Are you fucking ready ? ! " The video screens displayed images of Obama along with the message , " We Won " . Madonna also publicly voiced her opposition for Republican Vice Presidential candidate for 2008 , Sarah Palin . While performing on the tour , Madonna shouted " Sarah Palin can 't come to my party . Sarah Palin can 't come to my show . It 's nothing personal . [ ... ] Here 's the sound of Sarah Palin 's husband 's snowmobile when it won 't start . ( followed by a loud screeching noise ) . " While performing " I Love New York " during the request section , the line " Get off my street " was replaced by Madonna screaming " You know who can get off of my street ? Sarah Palin ! I 'm gonna kick her ass if she don 't get off of my street . " Then she mocked Palin 's accent and told the crowd that she loves her . 
 During her show at the Olympic Stadium in Rome , Madonna dedicated her song " Like a Virgin " to Pope Benedict XVI . She stated , " I 'm gonna dedicate this song to the Pope , because , I know he loves me . I am a child of God ! And you know what else ? ... [ begins to sing first verse of Like a Virgin ] . " Italian newspaper Corriere della Sera called the dedication a surprising provocation . During the 2009 leg , at the Bucharest concert in Romania , Madonna began talking about gypsy discrimination in East @-@ European countries . She said that " It has been brought to my attention ... that there is a lot of discrimination against Romanies and Gypsies in general in Eastern Europe . [ ... ] It made me feel very sad . " Immediately boos and jeers resounded from the 60 @,@ 000 crowd . Madonna added that " [ w ] e don 't believe in discrimination [ ... ] we believe in freedom and equal rights for everyone . " Although some applauded this statement , many others continued booing when Madonna mentioned discrimination against gay people . Madonna 's publicist Liz Rosenberg issued a statement saying that " Madonna has been touring with a phenomenal troupe of Roma musicians who made her aware of the discrimination toward them in several countries so she felt compelled to make a brief statement , [ ... ] She will not be issuing a further statement . " In January 2009 , Florin <unk> , self @-@ proclaimed King of Roma , announced that he wished to present Madonna with a gold plaque to thank the singer for criticising discrimination against the Roma people . 
 = = Marseille accident = = 
 On July 16 , 2009 , as workers were assembling Madonna 's stage at the Stade Vélodrome in Marseille for her July 19 concert , the stage collapsed , injuring eight workers and killing two . The accident caused city officials to cancel the concert . Charles <unk> , a 53 @-@ year @-@ old French worker , was killed outright in the accident , which took place at around 17 : 15 GMT . The other worker Charles Prow , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old from Headingley in Leeds , died overnight at a hospital in Marseille . Firefighters said the accident occurred when the roof of the stage became unbalanced as it was being lifted by four cranes , toppling one of them . Marseille city councillor Maurice de <unk> said that the roof started shaking and then collapsed gradually . This allowed the other workers to get out in time . 
 Following the tragedy , Madonna visited some of the other workers injured in the accident and went to pay her respects at the family of the deceased ones as well . She also issued the following statement : " I am devastated to have just received this tragic news . My prayers go out to those who were injured and their families along with my deepest sympathy to all those affected by this heartbreaking news . " At her concert in Italy Madonna made an emotional tribute for the deceased technicians by saying : " I just wanted to take a moment to acknowledge and pay tribute to two people who lost their lives today , [ ... ] It 's a great tragedy to me , I feel so devastated to be in any way associated with anyone 's suffering . [ ... ] Let 's all just take a moment to say a prayer for Charles <unk> and Charlie Prow . Our hearts go out to their family and loved ones . " 
 = = Broadcast and recordings = = 
 According to the Argentine newspaper La Nación , the tour DVD was filmed during the performances at River Plate Stadium . Production director Chris Lamb stated that Madonna chose the Argentine audience because of the strong emotional bond they shared . However , at the time of Lamb 's comments , no release date for the DVD had been announced , despite a trailer showing highlights of the Argentine performance on Madonna 's official website . On June 15 , 2009 , British newspaper The Sun reported that Sky1 had acquired the rights to broadcast the Sticky & Sweet Tour . The " Sweet Machine " video was shortened , and the request song in Argentina , " Like a Virgin " , was not aired . Latin American channel <unk> broadcast the show exclusively for Argentina , Mexico , Peru and Venezuela on September 19 , 2009 . Unlike Sky1 , the channel aired " Madonna : Sticky & Sweet " without any commercial block ; additionally , both " The Sweet Machine " and the requested song were uncut . On October 30 , 2009 the show was made available to watch on the Epix television channel , video @-@ on @-@ demand and the website , for those that have a subscription . 
 On January 12 , 2010 Madonna 's official website confirmed the video release of the tour . Titled Sticky & Sweet Tour , the live album was released by Live Nation on March 30 , 2010 and distributed by Madonna 's former record company , Warner Bros. It was available on DVD , Blu @-@ ray and CD , accompanied by a picture book by Madonna 's manager Guy Oseary , titled Madonna : Sticky & Sweet . Madonna commented that she had not been able to focus on the release of the DVD as she was involved with the development of her directorial venture , titled W.E. Upon its release , Sticky & Sweet Tour received mixed reviews from critics , who panned it for being lifeless , but also praised the album for the performances , with " Into the Groove " being listed as a highlight of the tour . It became Madonna 's 19th top @-@ ten album on the Billboard 200 , while reached the top of the charts in Greece , Hungary , Mexico and Portugal . The album also reached the top @-@ ten in the charts of Australia , Belgium , Canada , France , Japan , Sweden and Switzerland , but had failed to reach the top @-@ ten in Germany and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Set list = = 
 Source : 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Cancelled shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = Wasp = 
 A wasp is any insect of the order Hymenoptera and suborder Apocrita that is neither a bee nor an ant . This means that wasps are paraphyletic with respect to bees and ants , and that all three groups are descended from a common ancestor ; the Apocrita form a clade . 
 The most commonly known wasps , such as yellow jackets and hornets , are in the family Vespidae and are eusocial , living together in a nest with an egg @-@ laying queen and non @-@ reproducing workers . Eusociality is favoured by the unusual haplodiploid system of sex determination in Hymenoptera , as it makes sisters exceptionally closely related to each other . However , the majority of wasp species are solitary , with each adult female living and breeding independently . Many of the solitary wasps are parasitoidal , meaning that they raise their young by laying eggs on or in other insects ( any life stage from egg to adult ) . Unlike true parasites , the wasp larvae eventually kill their hosts . Solitary wasps parasitize almost every pest insect , making wasps valuable in horticulture for biological pest control of species such as whitefly in tomatoes and other crops . 
 Wasps first appeared in the fossil record in the Jurassic , and diversified into many surviving superfamilies by the Cretaceous . They are a successful and diverse group of insects with tens of thousands of described species ; wasps have spread to all parts of the world except for the polar regions . The largest social wasp is the Asian giant hornet , at up to 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in length ; among the largest solitary wasps is the giant scoliid of Indonesia , <unk> <unk> . The smallest wasps are solitary chalcid wasps in the family <unk> , including the world 's smallest known insect , with a body length of only 0 @.@ 139 mm ( 0 @.@ 0055 in ) , and the smallest known flying insect , only 0 @.@ 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 0059 in ) long . 
 Wasps play many ecological roles . Some are predators , whether to feed themselves or to provision their nests . Many , notably the cuckoo wasps , are kleptoparasites , laying eggs in the nests of other wasps . Wasps have appeared in literature from Classical times , as the eponymous chorus of old men in Aristophanes ' 422 BC comedy <unk> ( <unk> ) , The Wasps , and in science fiction from H. G. Wells 's 1904 novel The Food of the Gods and How It Came to Earth , featuring giant wasps with three @-@ inch @-@ long stings . The name " Wasp " has been used for many warships and other military equipment . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 = = = <unk> grouping = = = 
 The wasps are a cosmopolitan paraphyletic grouping of hundreds of thousands of species , consisting of the narrow @-@ waisted Apocrita without the ants and bees . The Hymenoptera also contain the somewhat <unk> but <unk> Symphyta , the sawflies . 
 The term wasp is sometimes used more narrowly for the Vespidae , which includes the common wasp or yellow jacket genera Vespula and Dolichovespula and the hornets , Vespa ; or simply for the common wasp and close lookalikes . 
 = = = Fossils = = = 
 Hymenoptera in the form of Symphyta ( <unk> ) first appeared in the fossil record in the Lower Triassic . Apocrita , wasps in the broad sense , appeared in the Jurassic , and had diversified into many of the extant superfamilies by the Cretaceous ; they appear to have evolved from the Symphyta . Fig wasps with modern anatomical features first appeared in the Lower Cretaceous of the Crato Formation in Brazil , some 65 million years before the first fig trees . 
 The Vespidae include the extinct genus <unk> , seven species of which are known from the Eocene rocks of the Florissant fossil beds of Colorado and from fossilised Baltic amber in Europe . Also found in Baltic amber are crown wasps of the genus <unk> . 
 = = = Diversity = = = 
 Wasps are a diverse group , estimated at over a hundred thousand described species around the world , and a great many more as yet undescribed . For example , there are over 800 species of fig trees , mostly in the tropics , and almost all of these has its own specific chalcid wasp to effect pollination . 
 Many wasp species are parasitoids ; the females deposit eggs on or in a host arthropod on which the larvae then feed . Some larvae start off as parasitoids , but convert at a later stage to consuming the plant tissues that their host is feeding on . In other species , the eggs are laid directly into plant tissues and form galls , which protect the developing larvae from predators but not necessarily from other parasitic wasps . In some species , the larvae are predatory themselves ; the wasp eggs are deposited in clusters of eggs laid by other insects , and these are then consumed by the developing wasp larvae . 
 The largest social wasp is the Asian giant hornet , at up to 5 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) in length . The tarantula hawk wasp is a similar size and can overpower a spider many times its own weight , and move it to its burrow , with a sting that is excruciatingly painful to humans . The solitary giant scoliid , <unk> <unk> , with a wingspan of 11 @.@ 5 cm , has subspecies in Sumatra and Java ; it is a parasitoid of the <unk> Atlas beetle <unk> atlas . The female giant ichneumon wasp Megarhyssa macrurus is 12 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 5 in ) long including its very long but slender ovipositor which is used for boring into wood and inserting eggs . The smallest wasps are solitary chalcid wasps in the family <unk> , including the world 's smallest known insect , <unk> <unk> ( 139 micrometres long ) and <unk> nana with a body length of only 158 micrometres , the smallest known flying insect . 
 There are estimated to be 100 @,@ 000 species of <unk> wasps in the families <unk> and Ichneumonidae . These are almost exclusively parasitoids , mostly utilising other insects as hosts . Another family , the Pompilidae , is a specialist parasitoid of spiders . Some wasps are even parasitoids of parasitoids ; the eggs of <unk> are laid beside lepidopteran larvae and the wasp larvae feed temporarily on their haemolymph , but if a parasitoid emerges from the host , the <unk> continue their life cycle inside the parasitoid . Parasitoids maintain their extreme diversity through narrow specialism . In Peru , 18 wasp species were found living on 14 fly species in only two species of <unk> climbing squash . 
 = = Social wasps = = 
 Of the dozens of extant wasp families , only the family Vespidae contains any social species , primarily in the subfamilies <unk> and Polistinae . With their powerful stings and conspicuous warning coloration , often in black and yellow , social wasps are frequent models for Batesian mimicry by non @-@ stinging insects , and are themselves involved in mutually beneficial Müllerian mimicry of other distasteful insects including bees and other wasps . All species of social wasps construct their nests using some form of plant fiber ( mostly wood pulp ) as the primary material , though this can be supplemented with mud , plant secretions ( e.g. , resin ) , and secretions from the wasps themselves ; multiple fibrous brood cells are constructed , arranged in a honeycombed pattern , and often surrounded by a larger protective envelope . Wood fibers are gathered from weathered wood , softened by chewing and mixing with saliva . The placement of nests varies from group to group ; yellow jackets such as D. media and D. sylvestris prefer to nest in trees and shrubs ; P. exigua attaches its nests on the underside of leaves and branches ; Polistes <unk> chooses sites close to a water source . Other wasps , like A. <unk> and V. germanica , like to nest in cavities that include holes in the ground , spaces under homes , wall cavities or in lofts . While most species of wasps have nests with multiple combs , some species , such as <unk> <unk> , only have one comb . The length of the reproductive cycle depends on latitude ; Polistes <unk> , for example , has a much longer ( up to 3 months longer ) cycle in temperate regions . 
 = = Solitary wasps = = 
 The vast majority of wasp species are solitary insects . Having mated , the adult female forages alone and if it builds a nest , does so for the benefit of its own offspring . Some solitary wasps nest in small groups alongside others of their species , but each is involved in caring for its own offspring ( except for such actions as stealing other wasp 's prey or laying in other wasp 's nests ) . There are some species of solitary wasp that build communal nests , each insect having its own cell and providing food for its own offspring , but these wasps do not adopt the division of labour and the complex behavioural patterns adopted by eusocial species . 
 Adult solitary wasps spend most of their time in preparing their nests and foraging for food for their young , mostly insects or spiders . Their nesting habits are more diverse than those of social wasps . Many species dig burrows in the ground . Mud <unk> and pollen wasps construct mud cells in sheltered places . Potter wasps similarly build vase @-@ like nests from mud , often with multiple cells , attached to the twigs of trees or against walls . 
 Predatory wasp species normally subdue their prey by stinging it , and then either lay their eggs on it , leaving it in place , or carry it back to their nest where an egg may be laid on the prey item and the nest sealed , or several smaller prey items may be deposited to feed a single developing larva . Apart from providing food for their offspring , no further maternal care is given . Members of the family <unk> , the cuckoo wasps , are kleptoparasites and lay their eggs in the nests of unrelated host species . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Anatomy = = = 
 Like all insects , wasps have a hard exoskeleton which protects their three main body parts , the head , the mesosoma ( including the thorax and the first segment of the abdomen ) and the metasoma . There is a narrow waist , the petiole , joining the first and second segments of the abdomen . The two pairs of membranous wings are held together by small hooks and the forewings are larger than the hind ones ; in some species , the females have no wings . In females there is usually a rigid ovipositor which may be modified for injecting venom , piercing or sawing . It either extends freely or can be retracted , and may be developed into a stinger for both defence and for paralysing prey . 
 In addition to their large compound eyes , wasps have several simple eyes known as ocelli , which are typically arranged in a triangle just forward of the vertex of the head . Wasps possess mandibles adapted for biting and cutting , like those of many other insects , such as grasshoppers , but their other mouthparts are formed into a suctorial proboscis , which enables them to drink nectar . 
 The larvae of wasps resemble maggots , and are adapted for life in a protected environment ; this may be the body of a host organism or a cell in a nest , where the larva either eats the provisions left for it or , in social species , is fed by the adults . Such larvae have soft bodies with no limbs , and have a blind gut ( presumably so that they do not foul their cell ) . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Adult solitary wasps mainly feed on nectar , but the majority of their time is taken up by foraging for food for their carnivorous young , mostly insects or spiders . Apart from providing food for their larval offspring , no maternal care is given . Some wasp species provide food for the young repeatedly during their development ( progressive provisioning ) . Others , such as potter wasps ( <unk> ) and sand wasps ( Ammophila , <unk> ) , repeatedly build nests which they stock with a supply of immobilised prey such as one large caterpillar , laying a single egg in or on its body , and then sealing up the entrance ( mass provisioning ) . 
 Predatory and parasitoidal wasps subdue their prey by stinging it . They hunt a wide variety of prey , mainly other insects ( including other Hymenoptera ) , both larvae and adults . The Pompilidae specialize in catching spiders to provision their nests . 
 Some social wasps are omnivorous , feeding on fallen fruit , nectar , and carrion such as dead insects . Adult male wasps sometimes visit flowers to obtain nectar . Some wasps , such as Polistes fuscatus , commonly return to locations where they previously found prey to forage . In many social species , the larvae exude copious amounts of salivary secretions that are avidly consumed by the adults . These include both sugars and amino acids , and may provide essential protein @-@ building nutrients that are otherwise unavailable to the adults ( who cannot digest proteins ) . 
 = = = Sex determination = = = 
 In wasps , as in other Hymenoptera , sex is determined by a haplodiploid system , which means that females are unusually closely related to their sisters , enabling kin selection to favour the evolution of eusocial behaviour . Females are diploid , meaning that they have 2n chromosomes and develop from fertilized eggs . Males have a haploid ( n ) number of chromosomes and develop from an unfertilized egg . Wasps store sperm inside their body and control its release for each individual egg as it is laid ; if a female wishes to produce a male egg , she simply lays the egg without fertilizing it . Therefore , under most conditions in most species , wasps have complete voluntary control over the sex of their offspring . Experimental infection of <unk> <unk> with the bacterium Wolbachia induced thelytokous reproduction and an inability to produce fertile , viable male offspring . 
 = = = Inbreeding avoidance = = = 
 Females of the solitary wasp parasitoid <unk> canescens can avoid mating with their brothers through kin recognition . In experimental comparisons , the probability that a female will mate with an unrelated male was about twice as high as the chance of her mating with brothers . Female wasps appear to recognize <unk> on the basis of a chemical signature carried or emitted by males . Sib @-@ mating avoidance reduces inbreeding depression that is largely due to the expression of homozygous deleterious recessive mutations . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = As pollinators = = = 
 While the vast majority of wasps play no role in pollination , a few species can effectively transport pollen and are therefore pollinators of several plant species . Since wasps generally do not have a fur @-@ like covering of soft hairs as bees do , pollen does not stick to them well . Pollen wasps in the subfamily <unk> gather nectar and pollen in a crop inside their bodies , rather than on body hairs like bees , and pollinate flowers of Penstemon and the water leaf family , <unk> . 
 The Agaonidae ( fig wasps ) are the only pollinators of nearly 1000 species of figs , and thus are crucial to the survival of their host plants . Since the wasps are equally dependent on their fig trees for survival , the relationship is fully mutualistic . 
 = = = As parasitoids = = = 
 Many solitary wasps are parasitoids . As adults , these wasps themselves do not take any nutrients from their prey , and those that do feed as adults typically only take nectar from flowers . Parasitoid wasps are extremely diverse in habits , many laying their eggs in inert stages of their host ( egg or pupa ) , sometimes paralysing their prey by injecting it with venom through their ovipositor . They then insert one or more eggs into the host or deposit them upon the outside of the host . The host remains alive until the parasitoid larvae pupate or emerge as adults . 
 The Ichneumonidae are specialized parasitoids , often of Lepidoptera larvae deeply buried in plant tissues , which may be woody . For this purpose , they have exceptionally long ovipositors ; they detect their hosts by smell and vibration . Some of the largest species , including Rhyssa persuasoria and Megarhyssa macrurus , parasitise <unk> , large sawflies whose adult females also have impressively long ovipositors . Some parasitic species have a mutualistic relationship with a <unk> that weakens the host 's immune system and replicates in the oviduct of the female wasp . 
 One family of chalcid wasps , the <unk> , has specialized as parasitoids of ants , most species hosted by one genus of ant . <unk> are among the few parasitoids that have been able to overcome ants ' effective defences against parasitoids . 
 = = = As parasites = = = 
 Many species of wasp , including especially the cuckoo or jewel wasps ( <unk> ) , are kleptoparasites , laying their eggs in the nests of other wasp species to exploit their parental care . Most such species attack hosts that provide provisions for their immature stages ( such as paralyzed prey items ) , and they either consume the provisions intended for the host larva , or wait for the host to develop and then consume it before it reaches adulthood . An example of a true brood parasite is the paper wasp Polistes <unk> , which lays its eggs in the nests of other paper wasps ( specifically Polistes <unk> ) , and whose larvae are then fed directly by the host . Sand wasps Ammophila often save time and energy by parasitising the nests of other females of their own species , either <unk> stealing prey , or as brood parasites , removing the other female 's egg from the prey and laying their own in its place . According to Emery 's rule , social parasites , especially among insects , tend to parasitise species or genera to which they are closely related . For example , the social wasp Dolichovespula <unk> parasitises other members of its genus such as D. <unk> and D. arenaria . 
 = = = As predators = = = 
 Many wasp lineages , including those in the families Vespidae , Crabronidae , <unk> , and Pompilidae , attack and sting prey items that they use as food for their larvae ; while Vespidae usually macerate their prey and feed the resulting bits directly to their brood , most predatory wasps paralyze their prey and lay eggs directly upon the bodies , and the wasp larvae consume them . Apart from collecting prey items to provision their young , many wasps are also opportunistic feeders , and will suck the body fluids of their prey . Although vespid mandibles are adapted for chewing and they appear to be feeding on the organism , they are often merely <unk> it into submission . The impact of the predation of wasps on economic pests is difficult to establish . 
 The roughly 140 species of <unk> ( <unk> ) hunt bees , including honeybees , to provision their nests ; the adults feed on nectar and pollen . 
 = = = As models for mimics = = = 
 With their powerful stings and conspicuous warning coloration , social wasps are the models for many species of mimic . Two common cases are Batesian mimicry , where the mimic is harmless and is essentially bluffing , and Müllerian mimicry , where the mimic is also distasteful , and the mimicry can be considered mutual . Batesian mimics of wasps include many species of hoverfly and the wasp beetle . Many species of wasp are involved in Müllerian mimicry , as are many species of bee . 
 = = = As prey = = = 
 While wasp stings deter many potential predators , bee @-@ eaters ( in the bird family <unk> ) specialise in eating stinging insects , making aerial sallies from a perch to catch them , and removing the venom from the stinger by repeatedly brushing the prey firmly against a hard object , such as a twig . The honey buzzard attacks the nests of social hymenopterans , eating wasp larvae ; it is the only known predator of the dangerous Asian giant hornet or " yak @-@ killer " ( Vespa <unk> ) . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 = = = As pests = = = 
 Social wasps are considered pests when they become excessively common , or nest close to buildings . People are most often stung in late summer , when wasp colonies stop breeding new workers ; the existing workers search for sugary foods and are more likely to come into contact with humans ; if people then respond aggressively , the wasps sting . Wasp nests made in or near houses , such as in roof spaces , can present a danger as the wasps may sting if people come close to them . Stings are usually painful rather than dangerous , but in rare cases people may suffer life @-@ threatening anaphylactic shock . 
 = = = In horticulture = = = 
 Some species of parasitic wasp , especially in the <unk> , are exploited commercially to provide biological control of insect pests . For example , in Brazil , farmers control sugarcane borers with the parasitic wasp <unk> <unk> . One of the first species to be used was <unk> formosa , a parasitoid of a range of species of whitefly . It entered commercial use in the 1920s in Europe , was overtaken by chemical pesticides in the 1940s , and again received interest from the 1970s . <unk> is used especially in greenhouses to control whitefly pests of tomato and cucumber , and to a lesser extent of aubergine ( eggplant ) , flowers such as marigold , and strawberry . Several species of parasitic wasp are natural predators of aphids and can help to control them . For instance , <unk> <unk> is used to control the peach @-@ potato aphid . 
 = = = In sport = = = 
 Wasps RFC is an English professional rugby union team originally based in London but now playing in Coventry ; the name dates from 1867 at a time when names of insects were fashionable for clubs . The club 's first kit is black with yellow stripes . The club has an amateur side called Wasps FC . 
 Among the other clubs bearing the name are a basketball club in <unk> , Australia , and Alloa Athletic F.C. , a football club in Scotland . 
 = = = In fashion = = = 
 Wasps have been modelled in jewellery since at least the nineteenth century , when diamond and emerald wasp brooches were made in gold and silver settings . A fashion for wasp waisted female silhouettes with sharply cinched <unk> emphasizing the wearer 's hips and bust arose repeatedly in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries . 
 = = = In literature = = = 
 The Ancient Greek playwright Aristophanes wrote the comedy play <unk> ( <unk> ) , The Wasps , first put on in 422 BC . The " wasps " are the chorus of old jurors . 
 H. G. Wells made use of giant wasps in his novel The Food of the Gods and How It Came to Earth ( 1904 ) : 
 It flew , he is convinced , within a yard of him , struck the ground , rose again , came down again perhaps thirty yards away , and rolled over with its body wriggling and its sting stabbing out and back in its last agony . He emptied both barrels into it before he ventured to go near . When he came to measure the thing , he found it was twenty @-@ seven and a half inches across its open wings , and its sting was three inches long . ... The day after , a cyclist riding , feet up , down the hill between Sevenoaks and Tonbridge , very narrowly missed running over a second of these giants that was crawling across the roadway . 
 Wasp ( 1957 ) is a science fiction book by the English writer Eric Frank Russell ; it is generally considered Russell 's best novel . In Stieg Larsson 's book The Girl Who Played with Fire ( 2006 ) and its film adaptation , Lisbeth Salander has adopted her kickboxing <unk> , " The Wasp " , as her hacker handle and has a wasp tattoo on her neck , indicating her high status among hackers , unlike her real world situation , and that like a small but painfully stinging wasp , she could be dangerous . 
 <unk> wasps played an indirect role in the nineteenth @-@ century evolution debate . The Ichneumonidae contributed to Charles Darwin 's doubts about the nature and existence of a well @-@ meaning and all @-@ powerful Creator . In an 1860 letter to the American naturalist Asa Gray , Darwin wrote : 
 I own that I cannot see as plainly as others do , and as I should wish to do , evidence of design and beneficence on all sides of us . There seems to me too much misery in the world . I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent and omnipotent God would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae with the express intention of their feeding within the living bodies of caterpillars , or that a cat should play with mice . 
 = = = In military equipment = = = 
 With its powerful sting and familiar appearance , the wasp has given its name to many ships , aircraft and military vehicles . Nine ships and one shore establishment of the Royal Navy have been named HMS Wasp , the first an 8 @-@ gun sloop launched in 1749 . Eleven ships of the United States Navy have similarly borne the name USS Wasp , the first a merchant schooner acquired by the Continental Navy in 1775 . The eighth of these , an aircraft carrier , gained two Second World War battle stars , prompting Winston Churchill to remark " Who said a Wasp couldn 't sting twice ? " In the Second World War , a German self @-@ propelled howitzer was named <unk> , while the British developed the Wasp flamethrower from the Bren Gun Carrier . In aerospace , the Westland Wasp was a military helicopter developed in England and used by the Royal Navy and other navies ; it first flew in 1958 . The AeroVironment Wasp III is a Miniature UAV developed for United States Air Force special operations . 
 = Sapo National Park = 
 Sapo National Park is a national park in Sinoe County , Liberia . It is the country 's largest protected area of rainforest and its only national park , and contains the second @-@ largest area of primary tropical rainforest in West Africa after Taï National Park in neighbouring Côte d 'Ivoire . Agriculture , construction , fishing , hunting , human settlement , and logging are prohibited in the park . 
 Sapo National Park is located in the Upper Guinean forest ecosystem , a biodiversity hotspot that has " the highest mammal species diversity of any region in the world " , according to Conservation International , and in the Western Guinean lowland forests ecoregion , according to the World Wide Fund for Nature 's ecoregions classification scheme . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Designation and early history = = = 
 In 1976 , the Liberian Forestry Development Authority was created to manage and preserve the country 's forest resources . A year later , in 1977 , the Division of Wildlife and National Parks was formed under the leadership of Alexander Peal , who served as its head until 1990 . By 1982 , seven protected areas has been proposed in Liberia , including three national parks . Of these , only Sapo National Park — named after the local Sapo ( or Sao ) tribe — was formally designated , in 1983 , by the People 's Redemption Council . At the time , and for twenty years , it covered an area of 1 @,@ 308 km2 ( 505 sq mi ) east of the Sinoe River and south of the Putu Mountains . The park 's original boundaries were set and its management plan drafted by the Division of Wildlife and National Parks , in cooperation with the World Wildlife Fund , the World Conservation Union , and the Peace Corps . 
 Throughout its history , Sapo National Park has been threatened by illegal farming , hunting , logging , and mining , " all exacerbated by the country 's grinding poverty " and social and political instability . However , in the early 1990s , the World Conservation Monitoring Centre reported that " [ rural development projects around the park and general acceptance of its existence have helped to minimise potential conflicts . " Until the 1990s , poaching was limited due to various initiatives , funded by the United States Agency for International Development , that made local villagers stakeholders to the park 's preservation . 
 = = = Civil war in Liberia = = = 
 During the First Liberian Civil War , Sapo National Park fell into the hands of rebel forces , and much of the park 's infrastructure and equipment was damaged or destroyed , including a wildlife rehabilitation and orphanage facility constructed in 1989 and supported by Friends of Animals . Of 33 park employees , at least three were killed and seven became refugees . The extent of illegal resource extraction from inside the park during the period of rebel control is disputed . John <unk> , a professor of environmental science and biology at Duke University , writes that " [ l ] <unk> was rampant during the war " . However , Peal reported that logging was limited , and that farming and hunting pressures were minimised , by population displacement — including the exodus of people out of over two dozen villages surrounding the park — and the prevailing climate of insecurity , to the extent that species populations actually increased during the war years . William Powers , a Catholic Relief Services official posted to Liberia from 1999 to 2001 , noted that the Park was a war @-@ time haven for small groups of people , who scavenged for food and hunted bushmeat to survive . Logging and poaching became more common after the war 's end in 1996 . 
 In 2002 , allegations surfaced that President Charles Taylor had sold concessions worth several millions of United States dollars to a Hong Kong @-@ based timber company — the Oriental Timber Company — to conduct logging within the boundaries of the park . The funds were reportedly pocketed by Taylor or used to secure the loyalty of various senior commanders , to arm loyalist forces embroiled in the Second Liberian Civil War ( 1999 – 2003 ) , and to acquire mercenary fighters from South Africa . Liberia 's Minister of Information , Reginald Goodridge , denied the allegations , noting that no evidence of logging was found during a National Geographic Society team 's two @-@ week visit to the park . 
 = = = Post @-@ war developments = = = 
 Fauna and Flora International and the World Wildlife Fund ( WWF ) worked with Liberia 's Forestry Development Authority and the Society for the Conservation of Nature of Liberia ( <unk> ) to prepare a two @-@ year initiative to restart management of the park . Mainly funded by the Darwin Initiative of the United Kingdom 's Department for Environment , Food and Rural Affairs and the World Wildlife fund from 2000 – 2002 , the objectives of the initiative were to re @-@ establish the park 's management , build support for the park among the local community , and to build Liberia 's capacity in conservation management and planning . The <unk> also received a grant from the Whitley Foundation to begin a programme to monitor the park 's large mammals . 
 There has been very slow progress in the establishment of protected areas in Liberia . Sapo National Park , proclaimed in 1983 , was the country 's first protected area . The approval of the Sapo National Park Act ( An Act for the extension of the Sapo National Park ) on October 10 , 2003 expanded the size of the park to 1 @,@ 804 km2 ( 697 sq mi ) , constituting an increase of more than 37 % . The act recognised the park as being " at the core of an immense forests block of the Upper Guinea Forest Ecosystem that is important to the conservation of the biodiversity of Liberia and of West Africa as a whole " . The 135 km2 ( 33 @,@ 359 acres ) Mount <unk> Nature Reserve , covering four percent of Liberia 's forest land , was created at the same time to become Liberia 's second protected area . 
 The peace that followed the conclusion of the Second Liberian Civil War gave rise to new threats to the park . Groups of fighters and civilians moved into the park during the final months of the conflict — some to escape the conflict and others to harvest timber or prospect for gold . The influx of people into the park continued after the war 's end , eventually growing into a full @-@ scale gold rush . Accompanying or following the prospectors were hunters , many of them former combatants , who poached the park 's animals to sell as meat to the settlers . By March 2005 , an estimated 5 @,@ 000 people lived in the park , according to the United Nations Mission in Liberia . Although efforts were undertaken to remove the illegal squatters , the park was not completely emptied until late August @-@ early September 2005 , and then only through the participation of conservationists , the Liberian government , and United Nations peacekeeping forces . 
 Due to its remote location and the near @-@ complete absence of tangible amenities , such as visitor housing or recreational facilities , there are few visitors to Sapo National Park . Entry into the park is prohibited without approval from the Forestry Development Authority . No roads lead into the park , so it can be reached only on foot . The park also has no trails . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Located in Sinoe County in southwestern Liberia , Sapo National Park covers an area of 1 @,@ 804 km2 ( 697 sq mi ) . The park is bounded to the north by the Putu Mountains and to the west by the Sinoe River . The park 's quite homogeneous , flat and marshy topography supports a large area of uninhabited forest . Its southeastern area has lower elevations of approximately 100 m ( 328 ft ) and gentle hills , while there are elevations of about 400 m ( 1 @,@ 312 ft ) and steep ridges in the north . There are many small streams and rivers between these ridges . Sinoe River is the largest river in the park . Mount Putu 's 640 m ( 2 @,@ 100 ft ) summit is the highest elevation in the park . 
 The park has a tropical climate , with temperatures ranging between 22 – 28 ° C ( 72 – 82 ° F ) . The forest 's average relative humidity is 91 % . Annual precipitation at <unk> , 4 km ( 2 mi ) south of the park 's headquarters , averaged 2 @,@ 596 mm ( 100 in ) in the 1980s . The park 's dry season occurs from November to April and the wet season lasts from May to October . January and December are the driest months in the park , and May and August are the wettest months . There is a mid @-@ dry period of decreased rainfall in July , which occasionally extends into August . During the dry season , many of the smaller streams dry up and their sandy and rocky stream beds are exposed . The dry season also causes the larger rivers shrink in size , exposing waterfalls and sandbars . In the rainy season , river levels can rise by more than 4 m ( 13 ft ) in one night , inundating forests near the rivers . 
 = = Biodiversity = = 
 From the airplane I stare down upon this forest for the first time . ... Below me is a block of peacock , kelly , and olive green stretching out to the horizon . I search for breaks in the canopy but find none . As far as my eyes can see , the earth is solid rainforest . 
 = = = Flora = = = 
 Liberia has the largest remaining part of the Upper Guinean forest ecosystem , with an estimated 42 % of the remaining forest . The rest of the Upper Guinean forest is located in Côte d 'Ivoire ( 28 % of the remaining forest ) , Ghana ( 16 % ) , Guinea ( 8 % ) , Sierra Leone ( 5 % ) , and Togo ( 1 % ) . Just an estimated 40 @-@ 45 % of Liberia 's original forest cover remains , and less than 30 % of its area is covered by natural forest . Its tracts of forest were once continuous , but are now fragmented into blocks that are isolated from each other as a result of logging , road @-@ building , cultivation , and human settlements . Before the civil war , the Forestry Development Authority calculated that about 35 % of Liberia 's original forest was " undisturbed " , 45 % was " disturbed but productive " , and 20 % was " disturbed and unproductive . " Sapo National Park 's forest is one of the country 's last remaining blocks of tropical lowland rain forest , and one of West Africa 's least disturbed lowland rainforests . It is the second @-@ largest area of primary tropical rainforest in West Africa after Taï National Park in Côte d 'Ivoire . 
 The park has one of the richest amounts of floral species in the country , with many endemic species . A 1983 survey of the park determined it to be composed of 63 % primary and mature secondary forest , 13 % swamp forest , 13 % seasonally inundated forest , and 11 % young secondary forest . The forest is luxuriant , with trees that can grow to a height of 70 m ( 230 ft ) . The forest canopy 's height ranges from 12 – 32 m ( 39 – 105 ft ) , with an average height of 25 m ( 82 ft ) . Plant species found in the park include the legumes <unk> <unk> and Gilbertiodendron splendidum , and the tree Brachystegia <unk> . 
 = = = Fauna = = = 
 Sapo National Park is a " regional centre of endemism " and biodiversity , at one time hosting around 125 mammal species and 590 types of bird , including a number of threatened species , such as the African golden cat , drill , Gola <unk> , Liberian mongoose , white @-@ breasted guineafowl , and white @-@ necked rockfowl . The park is also home to the African civet , African fish eagle , African grey parrot , giant forest hog , great blue turaco , speckle @-@ throated otter , water chevrotain , three species of pangolin , seven species of monkey ( including the endangered Diana monkey ) , crocodiles , leopards , bee @-@ eaters , egrets , hornbills , kingfishers , rollers , and sunbirds . 
 Prior to the formal designation of Sapo National Park in 1983 there had been " no systematic study of chimpanzee populations in Liberia " . Since then , various surveys have confirmed the existence of the common chimpanzee ( Pan troglodytes ) in Sapo National Park , located primarily in the park 's center and western areas , with estimates of the population ranging from 500 to 1 @,@ 640 . The culture of the local Sapo people includes a reverence for the chimpanzee and , therefore , a taboo against their hunting . 
 Seven species of duiker antelopes are found in Sapo National Park , including the vulnerable Jentink 's duiker ( Cephalophus jentinki ) and zebra duiker ( Cephalophus zebra ) . bay duikers ( Cephalophus dorsalis ) and Maxwell 's duikers ( Cephalophus <unk> ) are reported to be locally abundant . 
 Sapo National Park contains populations of the pygmy hippopotamus ( Hexaprotodon liberiensis ) , an endangered species which has legal protection in Liberia under the Wildlife and National Park Act of 1988 . Unique to West Africa , the wild population of pygmy hippopotamuses is thought to number less than 3 @,@ 000 individuals . According to the World Conservation Union ( IUCN ) , conservation efforts targeted at the species have " historically been most effective in the Sapo National Park ... where protection is good " . According to an action plan published by the IUCN Species Survival Commission , Sapo National Park is " the only realistic choice " of a " of suitable conservation area " for the Pygmy Hippopotamus . In February 2008 , automatic heat- and motion @-@ sensing cameras set up in Sapo National Park captured the first photographs of the pygmy hippopotamus ever taken in Liberia . The photographs confirmed the continued presence of the species inside the boundaries of the park ; previously , scientists did not know whether the pygmy hippopotamus population in the park had survived the civil wars and subsequent poaching and logging . 
 The endangered African forest elephant ( Loxodonta cyclotis ) is also present in Sapo National park , with population estimates ranging from " as many as 500 " for the early 1980s to between 313 and 430 for the end of the decade ; however , the IUCN considers the most recent surveys — both of which relied on dung counts — to be of low quality and reliability . 
 = Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga : Cheek to Cheek Live ! = 
 Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga : Cheek to Cheek Live ! is an American concert television special featuring live performances by Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga in support of their collaborative studio album , Cheek to Cheek , released in September 2014 . It was held at the Rose Theater of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts in July following the announcement of the album 's release , and was aired on PBS on October 24 , 2014 , as part of the network 's Great Performances series . The concert was watched by an audience consisting of invited guests and students from New York schools . Bennett and Gaga were joined on stage by 39 @-@ piece orchestra and jazz musicians associated with both artists . A number of costumes were worn by Gaga , provided by designers including Roberto Cavalli , Michael Costello , Mathieu <unk> , Valentino as well as David Samuel Menkes . The special received one nomination at the 67th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 Bennett and Gaga performed a total of 13 songs from the album , including the number one singles on Billboard 's Jazz chart " Anything Goes " and " I Can 't Give You Anything but Love " . Before the concert was aired , a number of promotional videos from the show were released . Additionally , PBS announced that the concert was filmed in 4K resolution . On January 20 , 2015 , the DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released , and later for digital download on iTunes Store . It reached the top @-@ ten of the record charts in many countries , reaching number one in the US and Belgium . Bennett and Gaga partnered with LG Electronic , who aired the concert across all retail chains in the United States , on LG 's 4K Ultra High @-@ definition TV screens . Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga : Cheek to Cheek Live ! became the first concert to be streamed in 4K resolution . The show received positive reviews , with critics praising Gaga and Bennett 's vocals and their camaraderie on stage . 
 = = Development = = 
 Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga first met backstage in 2011 after she had performed a rendition of Nat King Cole 's " Orange Colored Sky " , at the Robin Hood Foundation gala in New York City . Bennett then asked Gaga to sing a duet with him on his album Duets II . The two recorded " The Lady Is a Tramp " for Duets II , and subsequently rumors arose of a jazz album from them . On July 29 , 2014 , Gaga and Bennett made an appearance on The Today Show to formally announce their collaboration , titled Cheek to Cheek , and confirmed their album would be released in September 2014 . Following the announcement of the release , a short concert was held at the Rose Theater of Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts . Titled Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga : Cheek to Cheek Live ! , the concert aired on PBS as part of their Great Performances series on October 24 , 2014 . It was watched by an audience consisting of invited guests and students from New York schools . Set and lighting was created by Robert Wilson , while David Horn directed it . Bennett and Gaga were joined onstage by 39 @-@ piece orchestra conducted by Jorge Calandrelli , soloists Chris Botti on trumpet and David Mann on tenor sax , and jazz musicians associated with both artists . 
 Gaga wore a myriad of costumes , including a feathered crown from Gympie milliner Cindy Vogels during " I Won 't Dance " . Vogels was contacted by Brandon Maxwell Studios from New York — Gaga 's stylist — for designer pieces available for the concert . According to the milliner the crown almost never reached Gaga since the entire shipment was seized in Anchorage , Alaska due to the feathers on the piece being subjected to wildlife import issues with US customs officials . After much paperwork for five days the millinery designs were finally released and arrived just in time for the Cheek to Cheek promotional photo shoot . Vogels recalled , " It was nerve racking and exciting at the same time and a relief when the shipment was finally released from customs . " Maxwell said that he and his team did the wardrobe for the dancers and Gaga , and first took references from Wilson regarding the set and lighting designs . The team then started with eight full racks of clothing , between 200 and 300 dresses , and afterwards zeroed in on eight costumes for the show , along with its accessories . Regarding the absence of jewellery , Maxwell explained that most of the outfits " were more about the silhouette and structure of gowns " and too much of accessories would have been a distraction . He wanted the emphasis on Gaga 's vocals , hence the jewellery usage was reduced . Designers used for the costumes include Roberto Cavalli , Michael Costello , Mathieu <unk> , Valentino as well as David Samuel Menkes , who created the leather jumpsuit . Gaga had wanted costumes with teal or turquoise colours and flowing gowns , belted in the middle . Maxwell took care to ensure that the dresses were not too tight in Gaga 's abdomen area , since it would have been difficult for her to sing . Sandals were provided by Brian Atwood , Stuart Weitzman and Sophia Webster , while a pair of boots were designed by Giuseppe Zanotti . They created custom made shoes which made Gaga appear tall and move freely in the long gowns . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 Bennett and Gaga performed thirteen songs . The concert started with Bennett and Gaga appearing before the crowd and singing " Anything Goes " , then moving on to the title track , " Cheek to Cheek " . A costume change ensues , and Gaga and Bennett appear on stage to sing " Nature Boy " . Bennett continues with " How Do You Keep the Music Playing ? " following which Gaga appears on stage in Menkes ' red jumpsuit and a big wig to sing her solo rendition of " Bang Bang ( My Baby Shot Me Down ) " . Following a standing ovation , the duo come together to perform the Billy Strayhorn penned " Firefly " and Gaga disappears for a third costume change . She appears in Vogels ' crown hat and a Valentino gown and together they sing " I Won 't Dance " and " I Can 't Give You Anything but Love " , wearing Cavalli . Gaga stays on stage for solo rendition of " Lush Life " , followed by Bennett with his solo performance of " Sophisticated Lady " . After another costume change , the duo sing " Let 's Face the Music and Dance " and " But Beautiful " . The final performance is aided by the full band and dancers , as they sing " It Don 't Mean a Thing ( If It Ain 't Got That Swing ) " . After taking a bow , Bennett and Gaga disappear behind the curtains . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga : Cheek to Cheek Live ! received mostly positive reviews from critics . Kathryn Shattuck of The New York Times said that is difficult to recognize Lady Gaga " out of her usual get @-@ ups : the meat dresses , seashell bikinis , towering stilettos and skyscraper hair " and praised Bennett 's vocals " his voice still strong at 88 , take on the Great American Songbook and prove again that the classics can bridge many divides . " Soraya Nadia McDonald of The Washington Post wrote " It 's become practically cliché to note what an odd couple they make , so we 'll just remind you they 're actually both divine live performers and they 've got great chemistry . " Jeff Pfeiffer from Channel Guide said that although Bennett and Gaga " engage in some playfulness and camaraderie which is generally fun , though Lady Gaga may be trying too hard at times " . He added that " The artists and the terrific orchestra are in fine form , and though the editing between numbers seemed a bit rapid on occasion , the production and directing is effective to capture the performances " . 
 Lori Rackl from Chicago Sun @-@ Times rated the concert three stars out of four , and observed that it could have " easily fallen into creepy / weird territory " due to the unlikely pairing , but deduced that it was " a classy affair jazzed up by Gaga 's always interesting wardrobe choices , which bounce between 70s Cher and Cleopatra . " Erin Strecker from Billboard reviewed Gaga 's performance of " Bang Bang ( My Baby Shot Me Down ) " calling her rendition as " incredible " and saying that her " version is all big notes and dramatic tension . Note to Gaga : More of this , please . " 
 Writing for the Seattle Post @-@ Intelligencer , Matt Rush , who had attended the concert in July , noted that the original concert was much longer than the broadcast , due to the time taken by Gaga for changing her costumes . Rush complimented Bennett 's performance saying " At 88 , the remarkable Tony Bennett ... can still deliver the goods , and his solo rendition of ' How Do You Keep the Music Playing ? ' is the soaring highlight of [ the special ] . Bennett 's rapport with Gaga seems genuine , and they have a sweet , unforced musical chemistry in these selections from their current album of standards . " Brad Oswald from the Winnipeg Free Press was impressed by the duos vocal delivery , saying that " the 88 @-@ year @-@ old crooner and the 28 @-@ year @-@ old pop diva meld voices seamlessly as they serve up swinging duet versions of such standards " . New York Daily News TV Critic David Hinckley , who awarded the concert with four out of five stars , was surprised by Lady Gaga being a " multifaceted singer , not just a dance diva " and stated that Gaga handled the fashion side of the event . He finished the review declaring " The singing in general is solid . Bennett can still hit some remarkable notes , and more important , he understands the songs . " 
 Rand Duren from The Dallas Morning News wrote five reasons why people should not miss the special , claiming " The show is filled to the brim with stunning performances so be ready for a night of musical bliss . " Dave Walker from The Times @-@ Picayune complimented Gaga 's vocals , likening them to that of singer Liza Minnelli . CNET 's Ty Pendlebury was present during the recording of the special and remarked that " without the autotune and other electronic fiddling , Lady Gaga can really sing " , but found Bennett 's voice to be " bit croaky " sometimes . He also noticed that the whole concert was especially filmed for television , without any audience <unk> and " dead silences in between songs . " 
 At the 67th Primetime Creative Arts Emmy Awards on September 12 , 2015 , the special was nominated for Outstanding Variety , Music or Comedy Special , which went to the Saturday Night Live 40th Anniversary Special . 
 = = Promotion and video release = = 
 Promotional videos were released for " Anything Goes " ( from Brussels performance ) and " Bang Bang ( My Baby Shot Me Down ) " ( from the PBS special ) on September 27 , 2014 . Videos for " Nature Boy " , " I Won 't Dance " , and a backstage video filmed prior to the concert were also included . While the show was being transmitted , Gaga tweeted live and answered questions from fans . 
 The special was shot with a total of 13 Red Digital Cinema Camera Company 's Epic Dragon camera line . Bennett and Gaga partnered with LG Electronic , who had also co @-@ sponsored the concert . According to their deal , the concert started airing across all retail chains in the United States , on LG 's 4K Ultra High @-@ definition TV screens . Tony Bennett and Lady Gaga : Cheek to Cheek Live ! became the first such concert to be streamed in 4K resolution . LG provided the streaming to dealers for in @-@ store display on their HD TV screens . Dave <unk> , the company 's head of marketing , said that " thanks in part to LG 's co @-@ sponsorship , customers will be able to stream the performance in the highest resolution at no added cost . " <unk> further clarified that LG had been looking for a way to be upfront in the 4K market and found the option of streaming the concert for its customers as informative and lucrative . Besides , he felt that Bennett and Gaga were suitable from a brand perspective and they would be able to have exclusive rights on the concert . 
 PBS later announced that the concert was filmed in 4K resolution and was recorded for a 73 @-@ minute DVD , which customers from Amazon Video would be able to stream firstly . On January 20 , 2015 , the DVD and Blu @-@ ray was released , being released later for digital download on iTunes Store . The DVD and Blu @-@ ray editions include additional songs originally not aired on television including , " They All Laughed " , " Lady 's In Love With You " , " Goody Goody " , " Bewitched , Bothered and Bewildered " , " Don 't Wait Too Long " and " Ev 'ry Time We Say Goodbye " . The DVD charted at number four on the Australian DVD Chart and number one in the US . It also charted on top 10 in many countries , including UK and France . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from the concert special program . 
 Tony Bennett – lead vocals 
 Lady Gaga – lead vocals 
 = = = Tony Bennett Quartet = = = 
 = = = Brian Newman Quartet = = = 
 = = = Dancers = = = 
 = = = The After Midnight Band = = = 
 = = = Orchestra = = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 = Operation Tiger ( 1992 ) = 
 Operation Tiger ( Croatian : Operacija Tigar ) was a Croatian Army ( HV ) offensive conducted in areas of Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina near Dubrovnik between 1 and 13 July 1992 . It was designed to push the Army of Republika Srpska ( VRS ) away from the city towards Popovo field and secure a supply route via Rijeka Dubrovačka , which was gained in early June as the Siege of Dubrovnik by the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) was lifted . The operation 's success was facilitated by the establishment of the HV 's Southern Front command and the successful conclusion of the May – June 1992 operations against the VRS in the Neretva River valley , which concluded with Operation Jackal . 
 Although Operation Tiger captured only 40 square kilometres ( 15 square miles ) of territory , it secured the Ploče – Dubrovnik road and placed the HV in a position to capture the rest of southern Dalmatia over the following three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months . That was achieved through a negotiated JNA withdrawal from Konavle followed by a HV amphibious operation in the area of Cavtat — capturing Konavle before the VRS could move in and reach the Adriatic Sea coast . Two additional HV offensives aimed at securing the Dubrovnik area defences — Operation Liberated Land and an assault on the Vlaštica Peak — stabilized the HV hold on the area and threatened VRS @-@ held Trebinje in the eastern Herzegovina . As a result of the JNA pullback , the Prevlaka peninsula was demilitarized and placed under United Nations control until 1996 . 
 = = Background = = 
 In August 1990 , a revolution took place in Croatia ; it was centred on the predominantly Serb @-@ populated areas of the Dalmatian hinterland around the city of Knin , and in parts of the Lika , Kordun , and Banovina regions , and settlements in eastern Croatia with significant Serb populations . The areas were subsequently named the Republic of Serbian Krajina ( RSK ) . After declaring its intention to integrate with Serbia , the Government of Croatia declared the RSK a rebellion . By March 1991 , the conflict escalated into the Croatian War of Independence . In June 1991 , Croatia declared its independence as Yugoslavia disintegrated . A three @-@ month moratorium followed , after which the decision came into effect on 8 October . The RSK then initiated a campaign of ethnic cleansing against Croatian civilians , and most non @-@ Serbs were expelled by early 1993 . By November 1993 , fewer than 400 ethnic Croats remained in the UN @-@ protected area known as Sector South , and a further 1 @,@ 500 – 2 @,@ 000 remained in Sector North . 
 The Croatian National Guard ( ZNG ) was formed in May 1991 because the Yugoslav People 's Army ( JNA ) increasingly supported the RSK and the Croatian Police were unable to cope with the situation . The ZNG was renamed the HV in November . The establishment of the military of Croatia was hampered by a UN arms embargo introduced in September . The final months of 1991 saw the fiercest fighting of the war , culminating in the Battle of the barracks , the Siege of Dubrovnik , and the Battle of Vukovar . 
 In January 1992 , the Sarajevo Agreement was signed by representatives of Croatia , the JNA and the UN , and fighting between the two sides was paused . After a series of unsuccessful ceasefires , the United Nations Protection Force ( UNPROFOR ) was deployed to Croatia to supervise and maintain the agreement . The conflict largely passed on to entrenched positions and the JNA retreated from Croatia into Bosnia and Herzegovina , where a new conflict was anticipated . Serbia continued to support the RSK after the JNA pullout . 
 As the JNA disengaged from Croatia , its personnel prepared to set up a new Bosnian Serb army ; Bosnian Serbs declared the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 . Between 29 February and 1 March 1992 , a referendum on independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina — which would later be cited as a pretext for the Bosnian War — was held . Bosnian Serbs set up barricades in the capital Sarajevo and elsewhere on 1 March , and the next day the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , the Bosnian Serb army started shelling Bosanski Brod , and the HV 108th Brigade crossed the border adjacent to the town in <unk> and on 4 April , Serb artillery began shelling Sarajevo . The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina were confronted by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( HVO ) , under the control of the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively . The HV sometimes deployed to Bosnia and Herzegovina to support the HVO . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 In April 1992 , the JNA renewed its offensive operations against the HV and the HVO near Kupres and Stolac in western and southern Herzegovina . The JNA 's 2nd Military District , commanded by Colonel General Milutin <unk> , deployed elements of the 5th Banja Luka Corps and the 9th Knin Corps to the Kupres area , capturing the town from the HV and the HVO jointly defending the area in the Battle of Kupres on 7 April 1992 and threatening Livno and Tomislavgrad to the south @-@ west . The 4th Military District of the JNA , commanded by General Pavle Strugar , employed the 13th Bileća Corps and the 2nd Titograd Corps to capture Stolac and most of the eastern bank of the Neretva River south of Mostar . The JNA attacked Mostar with artillery and fighting around the city started on 6 April , and the Yugoslav Air Force attacked Široki Brijeg on 7 – 8 April . A Croatian attack on 9 April failed to capture a JNA @-@ controlled airfield in Mostar . On April 11 , the Bosnian Serb Territorial Defence Force captured two nearby hydroelectric power plants on the Neretva River and the JNA pushed the HV / HVO force from Stolac . Čapljina , 25 kilometres ( 16 miles ) south @-@ west of Mostar , came under intermittent JNA artillery and air attacks . A ceasefire was arranged on 7 May , but the JNA and the Bosnian Serb forces resumed the attack the next day . The attack captured a large part of Mostar and some territory on the western bank of the Neretva River . On 12 May , JNA forces based in Bosnia and Herzegovina became part of the VRS . 
 Although the JNA planned the offensive to preempt a Croatian attack on Serb @-@ held territory , Croatia saw the moves as a prelude to JNA attacks on southern Croatia , specifically aimed at the Port of Ploče and possibly Split . To counter the perceived threat , the HV deployed additional troops to the area , now designated the " Southern Front " . HV General Janko Bobetko , appointed to lead the Southern Front , reorganized the HVO command structure and assumed control of its forces in the area to stop the expected JNA / VRS offensive and regain the lost territory . In late May , Bobetko launched an attack along the Adriatic coast and in its immediate hinterland , towards besieged Dubrovnik , linking up with the HV force in the city and ending its encirclement by the JNA on 1 June . The attack coincided with the JNA 's withdrawal from the area towards Dubrovnik Airport in Konavle and to positions within the borders of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The <unk> in this area is located 2 to 10 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 to 6 @.@ 2 miles ) from the coast . On 23 May , the HV / HVO captured Hum Mountain south of Mostar . 
 Operation Jackal — also known as Operation June Dawns — commenced on 7 June 1992 . The attacking HV / HVO force moved east and north from Čapljina towards Stolac and Mostar , aiming to push the VRS back from the Neretva River and capture positions around Mostar . As the VRS Herzegovina Corps positions around Tasovčići collapsed on 8 June , the HV / HVO advanced quickly in both of the planned directions . On 11 June , Mostar HVO forces attacked VRS positions on the western bank of the Neretva River south of Mostar in support of the main attack . The advance was immediately successful , gaining ground there , and in Mostar . On 12 June , no VRS forces remained on the western bank of the Neretva . By 15 June , the HV / HVO completed their capture of Stolac and the surrounding area , while the linkup of the HV / HVO forces approaching Mostar from the south , and those already in the city , was completed on 17 June . By 26 June , the HV / HVO advanced further eastwards along the slopes of Velež Mountain . Although the front lines did not move significantly to the east , Mostar was rendered relatively safe from future VRS attacks . On 10 June , in an operation codenamed Eagle 92 ( Croatian : Orao 92 ) , the HV tried to push VRS forces back from the high ground of Golubov Kamen , where the only road to Dubrovnik runs 700 metres ( 2 @,@ 300 feet ) from the national border , and inside Bosnia and Herzegovina , dominating over Dubrovnik . The attack was not sufficiently organized and it failed . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 The HV initially deployed 1 @,@ 475 troops to conduct Operation Tiger . Although the VRS in the area had fewer troops , it had greater artillery firepower at its disposal and the advantage of defending in rugged terrain . Operation Tiger was executed by the HV 's 1st Guards Brigade , reinforced with the special forces Zrinski Battalion , the 3rd Battalion of the 4th Guards Brigade , supported by the 163rd Infantry Brigade based in Dubrovnik , and additional HV troops brought in to hold positions captured by the guards brigades . Because of inefficient command structures in the reserve units , the HV 's Southern Front command was forced to forge tactical groups out of multiple regular units . There was also a lack of manpower in individual reserve units because of their inadequately executed mobilization . To fend off any counter @-@ attacks by the VRS Herzegovina Corps — specifically the <unk> Motorized Brigade stationed in the eastern Herzegovina — the positions captured by the 1st Guards Brigade were turned over to elements of the 115th Infantry Brigade , the 145th Infantry Brigade , the 148th Infantry Brigade , a battalion of the 156th Infantry Brigade and a company of the 102nd Infantry Brigade . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 Following the HV 's failed attempt to push the VRS further away from Dubrovnik in early June , Bobetko planned another effort to secure the city , codenamed Operation Tiger . Another effort to capture Golubov Kamen at the head of the Rijeka Dubrovačka embayment of the Adriatic Sea was made on 1 July . The initial attack , spearheaded by the 3rd Battalion of the 4th Guards Brigade , gained ground but the objective was not secured until 2 July , after VRS troops mounted a counter @-@ attack . On the left flank of the 4th Guards Brigade , the 1st Guards Brigade — reinforced with a special operations Zrinski Battalion — was tasked with capturing high ground on the southern rim of Popovo field . Their advance met stiff resistance and progressed slowly . By 10 July the 1st Guards Brigade reached its immediate objectives , consisting of numerous significant hills . By 13 July , it had covered approximately 17 kilometres ( 11 miles ) in the Dubrovnik hinterland , from the villages of <unk> and <unk> to the road running through <unk> village at the rim of Popovo field , north of Cavtat where their advance was halted . 
 As the guards brigades reached their objectives , the newly gained ground was gradually turned over to reserve HV units . The 163rd Infantry Brigade , defending Dubrovnik during the JNA siege , took over positions captured by the 4th Guards Brigade . The 1st Guards Brigade was relieved and its territorial gains were garrisoned by elements of the 115th Infantry Brigade , the 145th Infantry Brigade , the 148th Infantry Brigade , a battalion of the 156th Infantry Brigade and a company of the 102nd Infantry Brigade . The VRS counter @-@ attacked the reserve infantry on 9 July , causing losses and the withdrawal of the 102nd Infantry Brigade company east of Zavala and the 115th Infantry Brigade from Zavala and <unk> Do . The retreat created a gap in the HV defences , threatening the town of Slano , but the 3rd Battalion of the 4th Guards Brigade closed it . Days later , the 148th Infantry Brigade conceded some of the offensive 's gains to another VRS counter @-@ attack near <unk> . On 13 July , a platoon drawn from the 2nd Guards Brigade attempted to capture the Vlaštica Peak , but the attack failed , marking the end of Operation Tiger . 
 = = Follow @-@ up operations = = 
 = = = Operation Liberated Land = = = 
 Until 17 July , the VRS continued its attacks aimed at retaking territory lost in Operation Tiger , gradually pushing the HV back towards Dubrovnik . On 23 July , the HV 1st Guards Brigade counter @-@ attacked north of Zaton , pushing the VRS north and east towards Popovo field . The attack , codenamed Operation Liberated Land ( Croatian : Operacija <unk> <unk> ) , failed to cut off a battalion of the VRS 472nd Motorized Brigade deployed to <unk> , and the 4th Guards Brigade had to be deployed to mop up the area . Although substantial parts of the territory gained during the attack were surrendered to the VRS , the operation strengthened the HV defences in the area by 8 August . 
 = = = Battle of Konavle = = = 
 In late July 1992 , the HV , the VRS and the JNA began talks on the withdrawal of the JNA from the Dubrovnik Airport and the Konavle region east of Dubrovnik towards the Bay of Kotor . The talks were mediated by representatives of the UN and the European Union ( EU ) . The JNA 's main concern was retaining control in the area , and specifically on the Prevlaka peninsula at the entrance of the Bay of Kotor . The strategic importance of the bay increased in 1992 because it contained the last remaining Yugoslav Navy base after it lost all its bases in Croatia . The talks soon halted because the military commanders involved had no authority to resolve the political issues under discussion . Another round of peace talks mediated by the UN and the EU , this time between Croatian President Franjo Tuđman and Yugoslav President Dobrica Ćosić , produced an agreement on the JNA pullout by 20 October in return for the UN @-@ monitored demilitarization of the Prevlaka peninsula . The agreement specified the removal of the JNA from Konavle and a 15 @-@ kilometre ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) buffer zone within Montenegro . The VRS began to plan replacing the JNA in the region , since the pullout would expose an unprotected flank of the VRS in Popovo field , and the HV planned to preempt the VRS move . 
 The JNA withdrew from the area as agreed , leaving Croatian soil by 8 : 30 pm on 20 October . However , it was replaced by the VRS on the high ground overlooking the low @-@ lying coastal plateau containing Dubrovnik Airport and the town of Cavtat . On 20 October , two Croatian police boats carrying Croatian Minister of the Interior Ivan <unk> , the EU monitoring mission 's Lieutenant General David Cranston and journalists docked in Cavtat , but the VRS fired mortars at them . Bobetko appointed Major General <unk> Marinović — commander of the HV during the Siege of Dubrovnik — to perform a landing operation in the Cavtat area the same day . The first landing took place at 3 : 15 am on 21 October when the ferry <unk> transported elements of the 5th Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade to Cavtat . The amphibious operation was also supported by the ferries <unk> and Blace which landed tanks , and other personnel @-@ transporting craft . The 5th Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade was joined that day by elements of the 1st and the 3rd Battalions of the same brigade . At 1 : 15 pm , the <unk> was hit by VRS fire , but sustained only minor damage . 
 After they landed in Cavtat , the HV moved towards the high ground to the north through <unk> and Uskoplje , east of Cavtat . The 1st Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade first reached the VRS positions at <unk> Hill , which quickly overrun and the battalion proceeded towards Jasenica , about 3 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 9 miles ) north @-@ east of Cavtat , reaching the village by the afternoon . On 21 October , the 5th Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade took positions in <unk> and <unk> villages adjacent to the Croatia – Bosnia and Herzegovina border in the north of the region , while the special police moved to the villages of <unk> and <unk> in the east of Konavle near the Yugoslav border . The 3rd Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade advanced towards Čilipi and <unk> along the Adriatic Highway running through the centre of Konavle . The 2nd Battalion of the 1st Guards Brigade entered the area to secure the Dubrovnik — Plat road connecting the region with the rest of Croatia . In the afternoon , the HV deployed a battalion of reserve infantry drawn from Dubrovnik Home Guard , and on 23 October the 156th Infantry Brigade was deployed to relieve the 1st Guards Brigade troops protecting the national border . 
 = = = Operation Vlaštica = = = 
 On 22 October , as the HV neared completion of the operations to secure Konavle , the 4th Guards Brigade and the 163rd Infantry Brigade moved north @-@ east from Dubrovnik and attacked the VRS positions closest to the city . The main HV attack , assigned to the 3rd and the 5th Battalions of the 4th Guards Brigade , was directed to capture Vlaštica Peak . The 1st Battalion and an independent armoured @-@ mechanized company of the 4th Guards Brigade were deployed to draw off some of the VRS defences as they attacked towards the village of <unk> and Hum railway station . The 163rd Infantry Brigade supported the main axis of the operation , advancing from Župa Dubrovačka towards Vlaštica . By 26 October , the VRS left flank in Popovo field collapsed and the town of Trebinje , the main Bosnian Serb centre in the region , came into jeopardy . However , Tuđman gave way to international pressure to halt the military operations around Dubrovnik and the fighting stopped by 1 November 1992 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Tiger captured only 40 square kilometres ( 15 square miles ) of territory around Dubrovnik , but it created a buffer zone around the city which increased its security . It also improved the security of the Ploče – Dubrovnik section of the Adriatic Highway — especially at Golubov Kamen and Rijeka Dubrovačka — allowing the safer resupply of Dubrovnik . The subsequent negotiated withdrawal of the JNA from Konavle and the HV 's rapid capture of the region before the VRS could move in , and other offensive operations in the Dubrovnik hinterland secured a Croatian strategic victory . The entire region of southern Dalmatia was brought under Croatian control , the siege of Dubrovnik was lifted and the city 's safety was largely improved by the end of October 1992 . However , that part of Croatia continued to suffer intermittent VRS artillery attacks until after Operation Storm in August 1995 . 
 In the wake of the 1995 Split Agreement and the large @-@ scale deployment of the HV to Bosnia and Herzegovina , the HV General Staff planned to attack and capture a large part of eastern Herzegovina . The attack — codenamed Operation Burin — was formally ordered on 3 September 1995 , and the HVO and the ARBiH were scheduled to join the attack . The operation was postponed on 17 September , but on 7 November was again ordered to be carried out should the Dayton peace talks fail . The plan was cancelled in early December 1995 . 
 The Tuđman – Ćosić agreement on the pullout of JNA troops from Konavle provoked an emotional response in Yugoslavia , where it was interpreted as a defeat and betrayal . Following the agreement , the Prevlaka Peninsula was demilitarized and placed under the United Nations Mission of Observers in Prevlaka ( UNMOP ) , established by the UN Security Council Resolution 779 of 6 October 1992 . The resolution placed the peninsula under the control of UNPROFOR . The UN Security Council Resolution 981 transferred control to the newly established United Nations Confidence Restoration Operation in Croatia on 31 March 1995 , and then to UNMOP through the UN Security Council Resolution 1038 of 15 January 1996 . The UN mission there expired two months later . As of February 2013 , the Prevlaka Peninsula remains demilitarized , with Croatian and Montenegrin police jointly patrolling the sea . The border in the area remains disputed between Croatia and Montenegro . 
 = Jaws Wired Shut = 
 " Jaws Wired Shut " is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 27 , 2002 . In the episode , Homer gets his jaw injured by running into the fist of Drederick Tatum 's statue . As a result , Homer 's jaw is wired shut , making him unable to speak . Initially , Marge enjoys Homer 's inability to talk , as it makes him a better listener and a more compassionate person . However , when Homer 's jaw is finally healed , Marge starts to miss his earlier , wilder personality . 
 The episode was written by Matt Selman and directed by Nancy Kruse . The plot idea for the episode was pitched by Selman , as was the setpiece , which originated from a discussion he had with current showrunner Al Jean . Comedian John Kassir guest @-@ starred as one of the gay dogs in the gay pride parade in the episode . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 8 @.@ 7 million viewers , making it the most watched scripted program on Fox that night . Following its home video release , " Jaws Wired Shut " received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Springfield gay pride parade passes by the Simpsons ' home , during which Santa 's Little Helper flirts with one of the gay dogs . Uncomfortable , Homer drags his family to the Springfield <unk> to see a movie called " <unk> @-@ Goats " starring Tim Allen and rated PG @-@ 13 for brief rudeness and appearances by Garry Shandling . Homer grows impatient at the number of short films , previews ( including one for a family movie called Soccer Mummy starring Ed O 'Neill ) , on @-@ screen trivia games , and public service announcements preceding the film . He jumps up in front of the screen chanting , " Stop the madness ! Start the movie ! " The angry ushers then chase Homer out of the cinema , wielding oversized Kit Kat bars . While running without looking where he is going , Homer collides with the fist of a large metal statue of boxer Drederick Tatum . 
 At the Springfield General Hospital , Dr. Hibbert wires Homer 's broken jaw shut , saying that he will not be able to speak or eat solid food for a while . Not being able to talk , Homer starts to listen to his family , which pleases them , especially Marge . She decides that , since Homer is so well @-@ behaved , they can risk going to the Springfield annual formal event at the Country Club . The next day , the jaw wires come off . Homer and Marge appear on a chat show called " Afternoon Yak " to discuss how Homer became a changed man . During the show , Marge , with the support of the hosts , pleads with Homer to stop his " <unk> ways " and stay well behaved . Despite the temptation of the upcoming demolition derby , Homer decides not to do it for Marge 's sake . 
 Five weeks after Homer made his pledge to behave , Marge realizes that she is bored by all the sudden peace and quiet . The demolition derby form flies into her hand , and she decides to give it a try . When she leaves , Homer wakes up and finds Marge is gone and so is the demolition derby form , so he heads off to the derby with the kids to stop her . Although Marge initially enjoys the demolition derby , things soon get too dangerous for her . Homer has no idea how to save her , as he has given up being reckless . Bart comes up with an idea and calls for a beer can from a vendor . Homer then drinks the beer and rescues Marge ( in a style similar to Popeye ) , who makes him promise not to make her the live wire in the family . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by executive producer Matt Selman and directed by Nancy Kruse . It was first broadcast on the Fox network in the United States on January 27 , 2002 . The episode 's setpiece was pitched by Selman , and originated from a discussion he had with current showrunner Al Jean , about " how much crap there is at the movie theater before the movie actually begins . " The episode 's plot was also pitched by Selman , who had wanted to do an episode with a " jaws @-@ wired @-@ shut plot " for a while . It was not until long after the episode was completed that Selman learned that one can in fact talk with one 's jaw wired shut . He learned this from fellow Simpsons writer Brian Kelley , who had had his jaw wired shut once in high school . Kelley joined the writing staff during the writing stage of the episode , however he did not mention that one could talk , since he did not want to " ruin " the episode . However , he did say that one should eat a lot before since one will lose weight when their jaw is wired shut . These trivias were subsequently included in the episode . 
 According to Jean , the episode 's table read went " great " until the third act . The Simpsons writers found the third act " pretty challenging " to write , because by having Homer 's jaws wired shut , they " took [ their ] funniest character " and " remove [ d ] comedy . " In the DVD commentary for the episode , Selman described it as " It 's the comedy of saying : ' Oh , he [ Homer ] can 't do all the stuff you want him to do ' . " It was also hard to " keep the story moving " back to normal , since they kept having to " re @-@ use the premise " . The episode features American comedian John Kassir as one of the dogs in the gay pride parade in the beginning of the episode . Barbara Walters and Star Jones , the hosts of The View , were portrayed by American voice @-@ actor Tress MacNeille . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Jean stated that MacNeille is " very versatile " . Lisa Ling and Joy Behar were portrayed by voice @-@ actor Pamela Hayden . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode was pitched by The Simpsons writer Max Pross , and is a reference to Stanley Kubrick 's 1999 drama film Eyes Wide Shut . According to Jean , the writers chose the title because " [ they ] thought it would have been more well @-@ remembered . " When Homer 's jaw is wired shut , he writes words on a portable chalkboard to communicate with people . This is a reference to Anthony Hopkins ' character in Legends of the Fall , who , after having a stroke , also communicates with people using a chalkboard . The song used in the ballet scene is " The Blue Danube Waltz " , which was also used in 2001 : A Space Odyssey , another film by Kubrick . 
 A scene in the episode takes place on the American talk show The View , and the hosts are based on The View 's real @-@ life host Barbara Walters and Joy Behar , and former hosts Lisa Ling and Star Jones . The View 's audience members are also referenced , and are depicted in the episode as " giv [ ing ] a huge response " to everything in the program . The play that Bart and Homer are rehearsing in the living room was written by American playwright Edward Albee . Near the end of the episode , Homer gains strength by drinking a can of beer . The scene parodies the character Popeye , who gained super @-@ strength from eating spinach . Homer also talks in a manner similar to Popeye after drinking the beer . Marge also resembles Popeye 's love interest Olive Oyl in the scene . The message on the marquee announcing the demolition derby name @-@ checks the exploitation film series Faces of Death . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast on January 27 , 2002 , " Jaws Wired Shut " received an 8 @.@ 7 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 8 @.@ 7 million viewers . The episode finished in 22nd place in the ratings for the week of January 21 – 27 , 2002 , making it the most watched scripted program on Fox that night . On August 24 , 2010 , " Jaws Wired Shut " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Matt Groening , Al Jean , Matt Selman , Carolyn Omine , Dana Gould , Joe Mantegna and Pete Michels participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its home video release , " Jaws Wired Shut " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Stuart O 'Conner of Screen Jabber described " Jaws Wired Shut " , " The Parent Rap " , " She of Little Faith " and " Poppa 's Got a Brand New Badge " as " first @-@ rate ep [ <unk> ] . " Giving the episode a B + , Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict described the episode as having " nicely gooey family moments . " She called the " gay pride parade 's ' Salute to Safer Sex ' float " the episode 's " highlight " . Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com gave the episode a positive review as well , calling it " a welcome return to a more old school Simpsons storytelling style , capable of being both comical , and , in its own bizarro way , touching . " Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide wrote " While Season 13 doesn ’ t threaten to approach the high standards of the series ’ strongest years , episodes like “ Shut ” help make it better than expected . Sure , it follows fairly predictable patterns , but it develops them in a satisfying comedic manner . " He concluded his review by writing that the episode 's overall " entertaining , " even though its ending " falters . " 
 On the other hand , Ron Martin of 411Mania gave the episode a mixed review , calling it " uneven at best , mediocre at worst . " Although he praised the episode 's setpiece , Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu gave the episode an overall negative review , writing : " With a hilarious take on movie theaters to start the episode , the <unk> of the rest can be forgiven ... almost . " Adam Rayner of Obsessed with Film wrote that the episode was " woefully weak " and felt " contrived , rushed and handled by hacks . " He added that the episode was " Dull " . 
 In an article on gay marriage , The Economist references the Simpsons ' blasé acceptance of the annual Springfield gay pride parade in this episode as being " a few steps ahead of real life . But only a few " . 
 = Brazilian ironclad Barroso = 
 The Brazilian ironclad Barroso was an armoured gunboat built for the Brazilian Navy during the Paraguayan War in the mid @-@ 1860s . Barroso bombarded Paraguayan fortifications in 1866 and 1867 a number of times before she participated in the Passagem de Humaitá in February 1868 . Afterwards the ship provided fire support for the army for the rest of the war . She was assigned to the Mato Grosso Flotilla after the war . Barroso was decommissioned in 1882 , but was not scrapped until 1937 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Barroso was designed to meet the need of the Brazilian Navy for a small , simple , shallow @-@ draft armored ship capable of withstanding heavy fire . The ship is best characterized as a central battery design because the casemate did not extend the length of the ship . A bronze ram , 1 @.@ 8 meters ( 5 ft 11 in ) long , was fitted . The hull was sheathed with Muntz metal to reduce biofouling . For sea passages the ship 's free board could be increased to 1 @.@ 7 meters ( 5 ft 7 in ) by use of removable bulwarks 1 @.@ 1 meters ( 3 ft 7 in ) high . On riverine operations , the bulkwarks and the ship 's masts were usually removed . 
 The ship measured 61 @.@ 44 meters ( 201 ft 7 in ) long overall , with a beam of 10 @.@ 97 meters ( 36 ft 0 in ) and had a mean draft of 2 @.@ 74 meters ( 9 ft 0 in ) . <unk> normally displaced 980 metric tons ( 960 long tons ) and 1 @,@ 354 metric tons ( 1 @,@ 333 long tons ) at deep load . Her crew numbered 149 officers and men . 
 = = = Propulsion = = = 
 Barroso had a single John Penn & Sons 2 @-@ cylinder steam engine driving a single 2 @-@ bladed propeller . Her engine was powered by two tubular boilers . The engine produced a total of 420 indicated horsepower ( 310 kW ) which gave the ship a maximum speed of 9 knots ( 17 km / h ; 10 mph ) . The ship 's funnel was mounted directly in front of her casemate . Barroso carried enough coal for six days ' steaming . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 Barroso mounted one 120 @-@ pounder Whitworth and two 70 @-@ pounder Whitworth rifled muzzle loaders , two 68 @-@ pounder and two 12 @-@ pounder smoothbore guns in her casemate . To minimize the possibility of shells or splinters entering the casemate through the gun ports they were as small as possible , allowing only a 24 ° -arc of fire for each gun . The rectangular , 9 @.@ 8 @-@ meter ( 32 ft 2 in ) casemate had two gun ports on each side as well as the front and rear . 
 The 7 @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) shell of the 120 @-@ pounder gun weighed 151 pounds ( 68 @.@ 5 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 16 @,@ 660 pounds ( 7 @,@ 556 @.@ 8 kg ) . The 70 @-@ pounder gun weighed 8 @,@ 582 pounds ( 3 @,@ 892 @.@ 7 kg ) and fired a 5 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 140 mm ) shell that weighed 81 pounds ( 36 @.@ 7 kg ) . The 7 @.@ 9 @-@ inch ( 201 mm ) solid shot of the 68 @-@ pounder gun weighed approximately 68 pounds ( 30 @.@ 8 kg ) while the gun itself weighed 10 @,@ 640 pounds ( 4 @,@ 826 @.@ 2 kg ) . The gun had a range of 3 @,@ 200 yards ( 2 @,@ 900 m ) at an elevation of 12 ° . The exact type of 12 @-@ pounder gun is not known . All of the guns could fire both solid shot and explosive shells . 
 = = = Armor = = = 
 The hull of Barroso was made from three layers of wood , each 203 millimeters ( 8 @.@ 0 in ) thick . The ship had a complete wrought iron waterline belt , 1 @.@ 52 meters ( 5 @.@ 0 ft ) high . It had a maximum thickness of 102 millimeters ( 4 in ) covering the machinery and magazines , 51 millimeters ( 2 in ) elsewhere . The curved deck , as well as the roof of the casemate , was armoured with 12 @.@ 7 millimeters ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) of wrought iron . The casemate was protected by 102 millimetres of armour on all four sides , backed by 609 millimeters ( 24 @.@ 0 in ) of wood capped with a 102 mm layer of peroba hardwood . 
 = = Service = = 
 Barroso was laid down at the Arsenal de Marinha da Côrte in Rio de Janeiro on 21 February 1865 . She was launched on 4 November 1865 and completed on 11 January 1866 . On 26 – 28 March 1866 she bombarded the Paraguayan fortifications at Curupaity where she was hit 20 times , but not significantly damaged . The ship bombarded Curuzu Fort , downstream of Curupaity , on 1 September in company with the ironclads Rio de Janeiro , Brasil , Lima Barros , Tamandaré , and the monitor Bahia . The ships bombarded Curupaity again on 4 September and Barroso was hit four more times . On 22 September the Allied army attempted to storm the fortifications at Curupaity , supported by fire from the Brazilian ironclads , but was rebuffed with heavy losses . Between 24 and 29 December Barroso , Tamandaré , Brasil , and 11 gunboats bombarded Curuzu Fort again . 
 The Brazilians broke through the river defences at Curupaity during daylight on 15 August 1867 with Barroso , <unk> , and eight other ironclads . The ships were hit 256 times , but not seriously damaged , and only suffered 10 killed and 22 wounded . They repeated the operation again on 9 September . On 19 February 1868 six Brazilian ironclads , including Barroso , sailed past Humaitá at night . Three Pará @-@ class river monitors , Rio Grande , Alagoas and Pará were lashed to the larger ironclads in case any engines were disabled by the Paraguayan guns . Barroso led with Rio Grande , followed by Bahia with Alagoas and Tamandaré with Pará . Barroso continued upstream with the other undamaged ships and they bombarded Asunción on 24 February . On 23 March Rio Grande and Barroso sank the steamer Igurey and both ships were boarded by Paraguayan soldiers on the evening of 9 July , although they managed to repel the boarders . 
 After the war the ship served with the Mato Grosso Flotilla and was decommissioned in 1882 . However , Barroso was not scrapped until 1937 . 
 = Pinguicula moranensis = 
 Pinguicula moranensis / <unk> <unk> / is a perennial rosette @-@ forming insectivorous herb native to Mexico and Guatemala . A species of butterwort , it forms summer rosettes of flat , succulent leaves up to 10 centimeters ( 4 in ) long , which are covered in mucilaginous ( sticky ) glands that attract , trap , and digest arthropod prey . Nutrients derived from the prey are used to supplement the nutrient @-@ poor substrate that the plant grows in . In the winter the plant forms a non @-@ carnivorous rosette of small , fleshy leaves that conserves energy while food and moisture supplies are low . Single pink , purple , or violet flowers appear twice a year on upright stalks up to 25 centimeters long . 
 The species was first collected by Humboldt and Bonpland on the outskirts of Mina de Morán in the Sierra de Pachuca of the modern @-@ day Mexican state of Hidalgo on their Latin American expedition of 1799 – 1804 . Based on these collections , Humboldt , Bonpland and Carl Sigismund Kunth described this species in Nova Genera et Species Plantarum in 1817 . The extremely variable species has been redefined at least twice since , while several new species have been segregated from it based on various geographical or morphological distinctions , although the legitimacy of some of these is still debated . P. moranensis remains the most common and most widely distributed member of the Section Orcheosanthus . It has long been cultivated for its carnivorous nature and attractive flowers , and is one of the most common <unk> in cultivation . 
 The generic name Pinguicula is derived from the Latin pinguis ( meaning " fat " ) due to the buttery texture of the surface of the carnivorous leaves . The specific epithet moranensis refers to its type location , Mina de Moran . 
 = = Plant characteristics = = 
 = = = Habit = = = 
 P. moranensis is seasonally dimorphic , in that it undergoes two distinct growth habits throughout the year . During the summer when rain and insect prey are most plentiful , the plant forms a ground hugging rosette composed of 6 – 8 generally obovate leaves , each up to 95 millimeters ( 3 ¾ in ) long . These leaves are carnivorous , having a large surface area densely covered with stalked mucilaginous glands with which they attract , trap , and digest arthropod prey , most commonly flies . These so @-@ called " summer leaves " are replaced by " winter rosettes " of small , <unk> succulent leaves with the onset of the dry season in October . This protective winter rosette allows the plant to undergo winter dormancy until the first rains begin in May . Flowers born singly on upright 10 – 25 centimeters ( 4 – 10 in . ) peduncles emerge twice during the year ( from the summer rosette and again from the winter rosette ) , a feature rare among the Mexican species . In the summer these appear in June , peak in August and September , and disappear with the return to the winter rosette in October or November . 
 = = = Leaves and carnivory = = = 
 The leaf blades of the summer rosettes of P. moranensis are smooth , rigid , and succulent , varying from bright yellow @-@ green to maroon in colour . The laminae are generally obovate to <unk> , between 5 @.@ 5 and 13 centimeters ( 2 – 5 in . ) long and supported by a 1 to 3 @.@ 5 centimetre ( ⅜ – 1 ⅜ in . ) petiole . 
 As with all members of the genus , these leaf blades are densely covered by peduncular ( stalked ) mucilaginous glands and sessile ( flat ) digestive glands . The peduncular glands consist of a few secretory cells on top of a single @-@ celled stalk . These cells produce a mucilaginous secretion which forms visible droplets across the leaf surface . This wet appearance probably helps lure prey in search of water ; a similar phenomenon is observed in the sundews . The droplets secrete only limited enzymes and serve mainly to entrap insects . On contact with an insect , the peduncular glands release additional mucilage from special reservoir cells located at the base of their stalks . The insect struggles , triggering more glands and encasing itself in mucilage . P. moranensis can bend its leaf edges slightly by <unk> , bringing additional glands into contact with the trapped insect . The sessile glands , which lie flat on the leaf surface , serve to digest the insect prey . Once the prey is entrapped by the peduncular glands and digestion begins , the initial flow of nitrogen triggers enzyme release by the sessile glands . These enzymes , which include amylase , esterase , phosphatase , protease , and ribonuclease break down the digestible components of the insect body . These fluids are then absorbed back into the leaf surface through cuticular holes , leaving only the chitin exoskeleton of the larger insects on the leaf surface . 
 The holes in the cuticle which allow for this digestive mechanism pose a challenge for the plant , since they serve as breaks in the cuticle ( waxy layer ) that protects the plant from desiccation . As a result , P. moranensis is usually found in relatively humid environments . The production of the stalked capture glands and sessile digestive glands is also costly . A recent study found that the density of these respective glands can be correlated to environmental gradients . For example , capture gland density was found to be highest where prey availability was low , whereas digestive glands density showed direct correlation to prey availability . These results suggest that the amount of investment in carnivorous features is an adaptation to the environmental gradients . 
 = = = = Winter rosette = = = = 
 The " winter " or " resting " rosette of P. moranensis is two to three ( maximum five ) centimeters ( ¾ – 2 in . ) in diameter and consists of 60 to 100 or more small , fleshy , non @-@ glandular leaves . These are each 10 to 30 millimeters ( ⅜ – 1 ¼ in . ) long and three to eight millimeters ( ⅛ – 5 ⁄ 16 in . ) wide , generally spatulate or oblong @-@ spatulate , and densely covered with fine hairs . The rosette is either open or compact and bulb @-@ like , depending on variety ( see below ) . 
 = = = Flowers = = = 
 P. moranensis produces one to seven flowers during each flowering period . These are borne singly on upright flower stalks which are green to brown @-@ green in color and usually , like the upper surface of the carnivorous leaves , are densely covered in glandular hairs ; the peduncles do , in fact , trap insect prey . The peduncles are 10 to 25 centimeters ( 4 – 10 in . ) long and taper from two to three millimeters ( ⅛ in . ) at the base to one millimeter ( 1 ⁄ 16 in . ) at the top . 
 The flowers themselves are composed of five petals which are fused at one end . The throat , the portion of the flower near the attachment point which holds the reproductive organs , is funnel shaped , and the petals flare out from there into a five @-@ lobed zygomorphic corolla . The flowers 30 to 50 millimeters ( 1 ¼ – 2 in . ) long . Below the attachment point to the stem the petals are fused into a 15 – 30 millimeter long spur which protrudes backwards roughly perpendicular to the rest of the flower . 
 The ovary and attached pistil protrude from the top of the floral tube near its opening , with the receptive stigma surface toward the front . Two 1 millimeter anthers hang from recurved , 2 millimeter filaments behind the pistil . Pollinators exiting after collecting nectar from the spur brush against the anther , transferring pollen to the stigma of the next flower they visit . The flowers can last up to 10 days but will wilt once they are pollinated . Pollinated ovaries ripen into 5 millimeter ( 3 ⁄ 16 in . ) dehiscent seed capsules containing numerous 1 millimeter long seeds . The chromosome count for this species is 2n = 44 . 
 The color and morphology of the flowers of this species is extremely variable , a source of delight to the horticulturist and headache to the taxonomist . Some generalizations , however , can be made . 
 The corolla flares open into five lobes , two upper lobes and three lower lobes . The upper lobes are 7 – 16 millimeters ( ¼ – ⅜ in . ) long by 4 – 9 millimeters ( 5 ⁄ 32 – ⅜ in . ) wide and generally oblong , obovate , or cuneate . The lower lobes are similarly shaped and are 7 – 20 millimeters ( ¼ – ¾ in . ) long by 4 – 18 millimeters ( 5 ⁄ 32 – ¾ in . ) wide . The central lower lobe is usually slightly longer than its neighbors . All of the petal lobes have rounded ends . The floral tube that houses the reproductive organs and is visible at the base of corolla lobes is white or lilac in color and 4 – 6 millimeters ( 5 ⁄ 32 – ¼ in . ) long . The white color of the floral tube can extend to a variable distance onto the corolla lobes , particularly in a stripe on the lower middle lobe . The color of the corolla lobes generally varies from pink to purple , but has been described by collectors as being " purple , scarlet , rosy @-@ lavender to bluish @-@ purple , dark pink to lavender , pinkish @-@ purple , deep violet @-@ purple , dark purple , bright mauve @-@ pink , bright purple @-@ pink , magenta with [ white eye ] , [ and ] reddish pale with white eye . " A rare white @-@ flowered form is also known . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Sergio Zamudio Ruiz , in his 2001 revision of the section Orcheosanthus , called the identity and exact delimitation of P. moranensis " perhaps the most difficult problem to solve within the genus " . This difficulty is due mainly to the high variability and large geographic distribution of the species , which has given rise to the description of many synonyms since the species was first described nearly 200 years ago . Botanists have attempted to <unk> the species through various morphological , ecological and genetic methods , though to this date some debate remains as to the placement and description of P. moranensis and its relationship to the species to which it is closely related . 
 = = = Botanical history = = = 
 Prior to Alexander von Humboldt and Aimé Bonpland 's Latin American expedition in 1799 – 1804 , only 8 Pinguicula species were known to science — 5 from Europe , 2 from North America and P. involuta from Peru . From 1803 – 1805 , three additional species from Europe and North America were described , bringing the total of known species to 11 . In 1817 Humboldt , Bonpland and Carl Sigismund Kunth described 3 new species from their Latin American expedition : The Peruvian P. <unk> and the first known Mexican species : P. macrophylla and P. moranensis . At this point no infrageneric classification had yet been suggested . 
 In 1844 a French @-@ Swiss botanist by the name of Alphonse Pyrame de Candolle ( who created the first Code of Botanical Nomenclature ) proposed a division of the genus into three sections based on floral morphology . He placed in the section Orcheosanthus those species with purple , deeply <unk> corollas with 5 sub @-@ equal lobes , a short floral tube , and a large spur not protruding past this tube . He included four species in this section , all of them from Mexico : P. oblongiloba , P. <unk> , P. caudata and P. moranensis . He excluded P. macrophylla H.B.K. on the grounds that it was a " dubious species " . 
 The section Orcheosanthus grew as Charles <unk> described P. flos @-@ <unk> in 1872 , Eugene Fournier added P. <unk> in 1873 and Sander proposed P. <unk> in 1881 . In 1879 – 1888 , however , botanist William Hemsley , after studying multiple specimens in <unk> and in culture , came to the conclusion that all the taxa placed in the section Orcheosanthus up to that point belonged to the same single species . Due to doubts as to the identity of the original two species described by H.B.K. , Hemsley decided to use the name P. caudata <unk> for his conglomerate species . This name has been " indiscriminately " applied to members of the complex ever since . 
 = = = = Twentieth century = = = = 
 When Barnhart revised the family <unk> in 1916 , he recognized six species in the section Orcheosanthus , admitting however that this number was likely to change as others studied the section in the future . Sprague in 1928 proposed that the species joined by Hemsley were probably distinct , but that they were likely so interrelated that distinguishing between them would require observing characteristics that were usually or always indistinct in dried specimens . Sprague recognized eight species in the section : P. moranensis <unk> , P. caudata <unk> . , P. oblongiloba , P. flos @-@ <unk> , P. <unk> , a P. moranensis @-@ like P. <unk> described by Watson in 1911 , and the very distinct P. <unk> . 
 In 1966 Casper published the first ever monograph of the genus . He clearly defined his taxonomic organization according to a broad range of morphological and phenotypic characteristics . Casper considered P. caudata , as well as various other taxa , to be synonyms of P. moranensis . He therefore recognized only 6 species for the section Orcheosanthus : P. moranensis , P. <unk> , P. macrophylla H.B.K. , P. oblongiloba , and the two recently discovered species P. <unk> and P. <unk> . Since that time 14 additional species have been discovered and assigned to the section . When Zamudio redefined the section in 1999 , however , he chose to include only 12 species , including all six of Casper 's choices . P. moranensis , therefore , remains in the section Orcheosanthus , along with over a dozen synonyms it has inherited in its 200 @-@ year taxonomic history . 
 = = = Phylogenetics = = = 
 The varying importance which different authors have placed on various morphological characteristics when determining the taxonomy of the genus has long made the resulting subdivision of the genus a subject of controversy . Ruiz ( 2001 ) supported his revision of the section Orcheosanthus with a phylogenetic analysis , using 20 morphological and phenological characteristics . In 2005 , <unk> et al. conducted the first comprehensive phylogenetic analysis of the entire genus Pinguicula . Using molecular data , they were able to isolate those morphological characteristics that were synapomorphies for various groups , providing evidence for a genetically based taxonomic structure . Their overall results did not support the placement of P. moranensis in the section Orcheosanthus , rather indicating that it should be placed in the section <unk> along with P. <unk> . 
 In further disagreement with Ruiz 's 2001 revision of the section Orcheosanthus , <unk> et al . ' s phylogenetic data indicated that P. <unk> and several unnamed taxa that had been treated as synonyms of P. moranensis are in fact a distinct complex . They isolated several morphological characteristics that could be used to differentiate between the complexes , including floral spur length ( longer in P. moranensis ) , flower color ( never with a blue tinge in P. moranensis ) , and the shape of the lateral corolla lobe ( exhibiting a twist in P. <unk> ) . A more thorough study analyzing numerous P. moranensis populations and other members of closely related taxa is needed to resolve this complex . 
 = = = Varieties = = = 
 After extensively studying P. moranensis in habitat , Ruiz ( 1999 ) came to the conclusion that the species could be divided into two distinct varieties , mainly on the basis of the shape of the leaves composing their winter ( resting ) rosettes : 
 Pinguicula moranensis Kunth in <unk> . , <unk> et <unk> var. moranensis 
 This variety has open winter rosettes composed of leaves which are spatulate in shape and have an obtuse or rounded end . It tends to grow in limestone @-@ based substrates . 
 Pinguicula moranensis Kunth in <unk> . , <unk> et <unk> var. neovolcanica 
 This variety has a closed , bulb @-@ like rosette of winter leaves which are acicular ( pointy ) at the tip . It tends to grow on igneous substrates . 
 Ruiz also noted that these subspecies differed in their preference of soil substrate . He first noted this while attempting to find the population of plants from which Humboldt and Bonpland had collected their type specimens in 1803 . Although Ruiz was able to find many populations of the species growing in the areas that Humboldt and Bonpland had visited in the vicinity if Mina de Moran , only one population , the only one growing on limestone , matched H.B.K. ' s description and their type and isotype specimens now housed in the herbarium of the French national museum of natural history . The other populations in the area grew on substrate of igneous origin and more closely matched Hooker 's 1846 description of P. <unk> . These latter plants then became the new variety , P. moranensis ssp. neovolcanica . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 P. moranensis is the most widely distributed member of the Section Orcheosanthus . It is also the most common and widely distributed Pinguicula species in Mexico , being found in all the major mountain ranges except Sierra Madre Occidental and Baja California . Locations are known from the Mexican states of Tamaulipas , Guanajuato , Nuevo León , Campeche , Chiapas , Oaxaca , Puebla , Distrito Federal , Veracruz , México , Querétaro , San Luis Potosí , Morelos , Hidalgo , Guerrero , Zacatecas , Tlaxcala , Quintana Roo , and Michoacán and the Guatemalan departments of Huehuetenango , Quiché , San Marcos , Quetzaltenango , Totonicapán , Sololá , Chimaltenango , Baja Verapaz , Guatemala and El Progreso . Here it grows in mountainous regions between 800 and 3200 meters ( 2600 – <unk> ft ) in altitude . Generally , the species tends to follow sedimentary outcrops of the Cretaceous period . P. moranensis var. neovolcanica , however , tends to grow on igneous rocks of the Trans @-@ Mexican Volcanic Belt . 
 P. moranensis most often grows in oak , pine @-@ oak , or temperate montane woodlands . However , its distribution penetrates into tropical forests and xerophytic shrublands , as well as in gorges and canyon walls with high environmental humidity . P. moranensis prefers humid and shady environments , such as slopes by streams , gullies , or road cuts , or among leaf litter in sandy soil high in organic matter . Its ability to gather nutrients from the arthropod prey it catches allows it to grow in low @-@ nutrient environments where other plants would usually out @-@ compete it . As a result , it is often found in disturbed areas or on steep cliffs or hillsides . Since its roots do little more than provide anchorage , the plant requires little or no soil , and dense clusters can be found clinging onto boulders , moss or crags in rock faces , or even <unk> on tree trunks . Common companion plants include mosses , <unk> , ferns and other herbaceous plants , as well as canopy trees such as pines and oaks . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 P. moranensis is one of the most popular and commonly cultivated Pinguicula , in part due to its large size , large and pretty flowers , and the ease with which it can be grown as a container plant . Most growers use an open soil mix composed of some combination of washed sand , perlite , vermiculite , peat moss , gypsum and / or decomposed granite . Soil should be kept well drained , but watered regularly with distilled water in the summer and only very rarely once the plant enters its winter rosette . The species grows readily on well @-@ lit windowsills , under fluorescent lights , or in warm to hot greenhouses . 
 = = = Hybrids and cultivars = = = 
 Although no natural hybrids involving P. moranensis have been reported , the species is known to hybridize quite readily in cultivation . As a result , a number of cultivars involving the species have been registered and are recognized by the International Carnivorous Plant Society : 
 Additionally , three clones of P. moranensis have been registered as cultivars : 
 = Yeah 3x = 
 " Yeah 3x " ( pronounced " Yeah three times " or " Yeah Yeah Yeah " ) is a song by American recording artist Chris Brown , released as the lead single from his fourth studio album F.A.M.E. on October 25 , 2010 . It was written by Brown , DJ Frank E , Kevin McCall , Amber Streeter and Calvin Harris , and was produced by DJ Frank E. Brown recorded the song for his pop audience as he had been doing a lot of mixtapes and urban records . " Yeah 3x " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop , Europop , and electro house song ; it uses a video game @-@ type beat and features a thick bassline and big synth chords . The song uses elements of Harris ' 2009 single " I 'm Not Alone " . 
 Critical reception towards the song was positive , with critics praising its production and lyrics . Other critics noted its similarities to Brown 's 2008 single " Forever " . " Yeah 3x " attained top @-@ ten positions in Australia , Austria , Belgium ( Flanders ) , Denmark , Germany , Hungary , Ireland , Netherlands , New Zealand , Switzerland and the United Kingdom . It also reached the top @-@ twenty in Canada , Norway , Slovakia and Sweden . In the United States , the song peaked at number 15 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart , and at number seven on the Mainstream Top 40 chart . 
 An accompanying music video was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed at Universal Studios . The video features Brown in various dance sequences in a neighborhood of old time storefronts and brownstones . It also features cameo appearances by Teyana Taylor , Kevin McCall , and Future Funk from America 's Got Talent . Brown promoted the song with live performances on televised shows , including Dancing with the Stars , Today and the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards . It was also included on the set list of his 2011 F.A.M.E. Tour . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Yeah 3x " was written by Brown , DJ Frank E , Kevin McCall , Amber Streeter and Calvin Harris , and was produced by DJ Frank E. It was recorded at The Record Plant — a studio in Los Angeles , California — and Serban Ghenea mixed the track at Mixstar Studios — a studio in Virginia Beach , Virginia . On September 2 , 2010 , Brown tweeted that the Polow da Don @-@ produced song titled " Calypso " would be released soon as the follow @-@ up single to " Deuces " ( 2010 ) . However , those plans were changed when " Yeah 3x " was released instead . While filming the music video for the song , Brown elaborated on the song 's inspiration in an interview with Access Hollywood . He stated that he wanted to record the song for his pop audience since he had been doing so much urban material . 
 Brown said the song was given to him by DJ Frank E while he was in the studio writing songs for other artists and himself . " I heard the track and I was like man this is incredible . It kind of gave me the ' Forever ' feeling so I wanted to do more of a song for my pop audience . I ’ ve been doing a lot of mix @-@ tape stuff , a lot of urban records ... the pop audience didn ’ t really have anything to gauge from so I really wanted to give them this and I feel like ' Yeah 3x ' is something different , something new and it ’ s just [ a ] positive record . It ’ s not anything too over the top ; it ’ s just right where it needs to be . " During a chat with fans on <unk> on September 27 , 2010 , Brown said that the song was written in 15 minutes ; " We actually got the beat and we did it in no time . It was effortless . It was fun . It was sort of like when we wrote ' Forever ' , so I hope you guys like that record . It 's more of a pop record , in the club record . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Yeah 3x " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop , Europop , and electro house song . Over a video game @-@ type beat , Brown opens the song by proclaiming , " In the moment , can 't believe / You 're so beautiful / Feels like I 'm in a dream . " Throughout the song , it features a thick bassline . " Yeah 3x " is set in common time with a moderate dance tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of D major with Brown 's vocal range spanning from the note of A4 to the note of B5 . The song uses a portion of the melody from " I 'm Not Alone " by Calvin Harris . According to Robbie Daw of Idolator , " Yeah 3x " is a mixture of " Forever " ( 2008 ) and La Roux 's " Bulletproof " ( 2009 ) , while Sean Michaels of The Guardian commented that the song seems to be inspired by David Guetta 's Eurodance sound . Nick Levine of Digital Spy musically compared the song 's production to the sounds of Usher , Taio Cruz , Jay Sean , The Black Eyed Peas and Calvin Harris . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received critical acclaim . Amar Toor of AOL Radio called the song " dance @-@ friendly " , and wrote " with its electro @-@ vibe and frenetic pulse , ' Yeah 3x ' sounds like the perfect club banging anthem to get any night off to a raucous start . " Ed Easton Jr. of radio station WNOW @-@ FM noted the song 's similarities to Brown 's 2008 single " Forever " ( 2008 ) , writing that " it has that fun and simple lyrical flow and puts more emphasis on the intoxicating beat . " He also called the song " a beat banging dance track " that would keep Brown rising back to the top . Megan Vick of Billboard magazine added that " Brown 's career has had its share of twists and turns , but ' Yeah 3x ' proves he can still turn out a speaker @-@ bumping track . " Bri LaPelusa of UR Chicago called it a " true party anthem " due to the chorus : " You love to drink / So do we / Get my bottles / Bring ' em to me / Hold your glasses up / People everywhere . " Tom Howard of Yahoo ! Music called it a " clubby summer tune . " Hannah Ash of The Harber Herald wrote that " it 's a great song , full of party @-@ <unk> electronic beats made for dancing . " 
 = = Controversy = = 
 British producer and DJ Calvin Harris claimed that " Yeah 3x " plagiarised his 2009 single " I 'm Not Alone " . He tweeted , " Choked on my <unk> when I heard [ the ] new Chris Brown single this morning . Do you know what I mean ? " After receiving many abusive messages from Brown 's fans after posting the comment , he later tweeted , " I don 't care that you call me a nobody . Stealing is still stealing , doesn 't matter who you are ! ... Because Chris Brown is an international celebrity doesn 't make it OK to rip off a guy from [ the ] UK not many people have heard of . " 
 When asked in an interview with Australia 's Herald Sun if Brown knew him , Harris replied , " Well , he 's never heard of me , that 's the funniest thing . But the producer he 's worked with , DJ Frank E , has definitely heard of me . He 's a respected producer , he 's worked with Tiësto on a few tracks , perhaps that 's where the link is . It 's all a bit of fun . " Brown later spoke with Harris and upon hearing the similarities between the two songs , had Harris ' name added to the songwriting credits . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
