 In the United States , " Yeah 3x " debuted at number 33 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart dated November 13 , 2010 . After weeks of ascending and descending the Hot 100 , " Yeah 3x " peaked at number 15 in the issue dated January 29 , 2011 , and spent 20 weeks on the chart . The song charted successfully on the US Pop Songs chart at number seven . " Yeah 3x " failed to chart on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , instead reaching number 22 on the Bubbling Under R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles chart , which lists the 25 songs below the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs ' number 100 position . As of February 2011 , the song has sold 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 digital copies in the US . In Canada , " Yeah 3x " debuted at number 42 on the Canadian Hot 100 and peaked at number 12 . 
 Internationally , " Yeah 3x " reached the top 10 in nine countries . On the Australian Singles Chart , " Yeah 3x " debuted at number seven on November 29 , 2010 , and peaked at number four on December 27 , 2010 . The song was certified five times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting sales of 350 @,@ 000 copies . In Belgium , " Yeah 3x " peaked at number eight on the Flanders Ultratop 50 , where it remained in the top 10 for four non @-@ consecutive weeks . In Denmark , the song debuted at number six on the Danish Singles Chart , giving Brown his second top 10 single in that country , following " No Air " ( 2008 ) , a duet with Jordin Sparks . The song also attained top 10 positions on the German Singles Chart and the Netherlands ' Dutch Top 40 at numbers seven and ten , respectively . " Yeah 3x " was certified gold by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) in Germany , denoting sales of 150 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , " Yeah 3x " reached number one on January 10 , 2011 , where it remained for one week , and became Brown 's sixth number @-@ one single in the country . It was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , denoting sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies . In Switzerland , the song debuted at number 51 on the Swiss Singles Chart on February 13 , 2011 , and peaked at number seven on April 10 , 2011 . It was certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) , denoting sales of 15 @,@ 000 copies . In Ireland , " Yeah 3x " peaked at number eight on the Irish Singles Chart and spent 22 weeks on the chart . In the United Kingdom , " Yeah 3x " entered the UK Singles Chart at number 10 on February 5 , 2011 , and became Brown 's fourth UK top 10 single as a lead artist . It peaked at number six in its third week on the chart , and remained in the top 10 for six consecutive weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The accompanying music video for " Yeah 3x " was directed by Colin Tilley and filmed at the Universal Studios . It premiered on MTV on October 21 , 2010 , and features cameo appearances by Teyana Taylor , Kevin McCall , and Future Funk from America 's Got Talent . The video opens with Brown walking down a deserted street wearing a navy sweatshirt , dark blue denim , and white sneakers . It then cuts to another scene where Brown makes an acrobatic entrance onto the top of a truck in a neighborhood of old @-@ timey storefronts and brownstones . Wearing a black vest , trousers and a red skinny tie , Brown then leads a mob of kids , teenagers and older residents down the street . As the first chorus nears , Brown begins his first dance sequence with two male dancers . Together , they pull off high mid @-@ air twirls , each seemingly jumping several feet above the ground . Brown then follows a woman down the street , and runs into four female dancers wearing tank tops and suspenders . Together , they perform arm movements , and work in a few hip thrusts . The next scene , Brown is seen at a storefront labeled " Popin Pete 's " and continues more dancing with Pete . During the bridge , Brown can be seen wearing a hot pink / salmon @-@ colored blazer , gold chain and , in one shot , carrying a massive shiny boombox . Brown then rallies the crowd from a fire escape just before someone opens a fire hydrant and unleashes a spray of water onto the crowd . In the final scene , Brown is wearing a peach blazer while baring his chest , and performs the last bit of choreography with male and female dancers . The video ends as Brown spins , stops and looks off into the distance . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Ed Easton Jr. of WNOW @-@ FM gave the video a rating of seven out of ten , writing that , " there is plenty of choreographed dancing as Breezy shows us he still got it , getting everyone in the neighborhood to dance with him . The video is good for the most part , especially if you are a fan of dancing . " Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly wrote that , " it 's genuinely a fun clip , absent of any overdone , sexed up R & B corniness . " Robbie Daw of Idolator compared the video to Michael Jackson 's " The Way You Make Me Feel " ( 1987 ) , and Janet Jackson 's " Alright " ( 1990 ) , concluding that " sure , the ' Yeah 3x ' clip is derivative . But at least Brown is making a serious effort to polish up his commercial appeal once again with both a feel @-@ good , sing @-@ along song and an equally sunny video . " Mariel Concepcion of Billboard magazine simply called it a " kid @-@ friendly clip " . The video was nominated for Best Choreography at the 2012 MTV Video Music Awards Japan . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 A pre @-@ taped performance of Brown performing " Yeah 3x " and a medley of " Beautiful People " and " Forever " was shown on the American version of Dancing with the Stars on March 29 , 2011 . For the performance , Brown wore a tomato red tuxedo and a black shirt and bow tie . The performance started off with a young boy doing break dancing moves and announcing , ' Here is Chris Brown ' . Brown then appeared doing flips and somersaults , as he lip @-@ synced most of the song . The performance earned him a standing ovation from the judges and members of the crowd . Prior to the performance , some of the show 's cast were unhappy that Brown was going to perform because of the domestic violence assault that occurred with his then @-@ girlfriend Rihanna in 2009 . Brown was sentenced to five years of probation , ordered to complete more than 1 @,@ 400 hours of community service and was given a restraining order which required him to stay away from Rihanna . Professional dancer Cheryl Burke told Extra , " As a victim of domestic violence , I don 't agree with him coming on the show , but it 's out of my control " , while host Tom Bergeron told the On Air with Ryan Seacrest radio show that , " I did tell the producers it may be to their advantage to not have me interview him , because my natural tendency would be to say something . So don 't put me in a position where you are asking me to not say something , because I really won 't do that . " 
 On July 15 , 2011 Brown performed the song in front of an audience of 18 @,@ 000 at the Rockefeller Plaza in New York City for the Today concert series . For the performance , Brown wore a white shirt and black pants , and was accompanied by male dancers wearing black jumpsuits and red sneakers . On August 28 , 2011 , Brown performed a medley of " Beautiful People " and " Yeah 3x " at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards . He opened his performance with " Yeah 3x " and was dressed in a white formal suit , accompanied by " full @-@ skirted dancers " . Brown was eventually joined onstage by tuxedo @-@ clad dancers and began dancing to the 1993 Wu @-@ Tang Clan single " Protect Ya Neck " . His dance routine then moved into 1991 , where he danced to Nirvana 's " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Brown 's performance then came back to the future , where he began to sing " Beautiful People " . While performing the song , he was suspended in the air , and then lowered to another stage where he continued to perform the song . Brown then went back in the air , where he did splits and back @-@ flips . " Yeah 3x " was added to the set list of Brown 's 2011 F.A.M.E. Tour in Australia and North America , and at the Supafest tour in April 2012 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " Yeah 3x " – 4 : 01 
 German CD single 
 " Yeah 3x " – 4 : 01 
 " Deuces " featuring Drake and Kanye West ( Remix ) – 4 : 34 
 Australian and New Zealand Digital EP 
 " Yeah 3x " – 4 : 01 
 " Deuces " featuring Drake , T.I. , Kanye West , Fabolous , Rick Ross and André 3000 ( Remix ) – 6 : 43 
 " Deuces " featuring Drake and Kanye West ( Remix ) – 4 : 34 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Chris Brown – songwriter , lead vocals 
 Justin " DJ Frank E " Franks – songwriter , producer 
 Kevin McCall – songwriter 
 Amber Streeter – songwriter 
 Calvin Harris – songwriter 
 Serban Ghenea – audio mixing 
 John Hanes – engineering 
 Tim Roberts – assistant engineering 
 Source : 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = <unk> plant = 
 A protocarnivorous plant ( sometimes also paracarnivorous , <unk> , or borderline carnivore ) , according to some definitions , traps and kills insects or other animals but lacks the ability to either directly digest or absorb nutrients from its prey like a carnivorous plant . The morphological adaptations such as sticky trichomes or pitfall traps of protocarnivorous plants parallel the trap structures of confirmed carnivorous plants . 
 Some authors prefer the term " protocarnivorous " because it implies that these plants are on the evolutionary path to true carnivory , whereas others oppose the term for the same reason . The same problem arises with " <unk> " . Donald Schnell , author of the book Carnivorous Plants of the United States and Canada , prefers the term " paracarnivorous " for a less rigid definition of carnivory that can include many of the possible carnivorous plants . 
 The demarcation between carnivorous and protocarnivorous is blurred by the lack of a strict definition of botanical carnivory and ambiguous academic literature on the subject . Many examples of protocarnivorous plants exist , some of which are counted among the ranks of true carnivorous plants as a matter of historical preference . Further research into these plants ' carnivorous adaptations may reveal that a few protocarnivorous plants do meet the more rigid definition of a carnivorous plant . 
 = = Historical observations = = 
 Historical observations of the carnivorous syndrome in plant species have been restricted to the more obvious examples of carnivory , such as the active trapping mechanisms of Drosera and Dionaea , though authors have often noted speculation about other species that may not be so obviously carnivorous . In one of the earlier publications on carnivorous plants , Charles Darwin had suggested many plants that have developed adhesive glands , such as Erica <unk> , Mirabilis longifolia , Pelargonium <unk> , Primula <unk> , and Saxifraga umbrosa , may indeed be carnivorous but little research has been done on them . Darwin himself only mentioned these species in passing and did not follow through with any investigation . Adding to the small but growing list , Francis Lloyd provided his own list of species suspected of carnivory in his 1942 book on carnivorous plants , though these species and their potential were only mentioned in the introduction . Later , in a 1981 review of the literature , Paul Simons rediscovered Italian journal articles from the early 1900s that identified several additional sticky species that digested insect prey . Simons was surprised to find these articles lacking in the literature cited sections of many modern books and articles on carnivorous plants , suggesting that academic research has treated Lloyd 's 1942 book as the authoritative and comprehensive source on pre @-@ 1942 research on the carnivorous syndrome . 
 = = Defining carnivory = = 
 Debate about what criteria a plant must meet to be considered carnivorous has yielded two proposed definitions : one with strict requirements and the other less restrictive . 
 The strict definition requires that a plant must possess morphological adaptations that attract prey through scent or visual cues , capture and retain prey ( e.g. , the waxy scales of Brocchinia reducta or downward facing hairs of Heliamphora prevent escape ) , digest the dead prey through enzymes produced by the plant , and absorb the products of digestion through specialized structures . The presence of commensals is also listed as strong evidence of a long evolutionary history of carnivory . By this definition , many sun pitcher plants ( Heliamphora ) and the cobra lily ( Darlingtonia californica ) would not be included on a roster of carnivorous plants because they rely on symbiotic bacteria and other organisms to produce the necessary proteolytic enzymes . 
 The broader definition differs mainly in including plants that do not produce their own digestive enzymes but rely on internal food webs or microbes to digest prey , such as Darlingtonia and some species of Heliamphora . The original definition of botanical carnivory , set out in Givnish et. al . ( 1984 ) , required a plant to exhibit an adaptation of some trait specifically for the attraction , capture , or digestion of prey while gaining a fitness advantage through the absorption of nutrients derived from said prey . Upon further analysis of genera currently considered carnivorous , botanists widened the original definition to include species that use mutualistic interactions for digestion . 
 Both the strict and broad definitions require absorption of the digested nutrients stipulates that the plant must receive some benefit from the carnivorous syndrome . That is , the plant must display some increase in fitness because of the nutrients obtained from its carnivorous adaptations ; that it must have increased growth rate , increased chance of survival , higher pollen production or seed set . 
 = = Degrees of carnivory = = 
 One prevailing idea is that carnivory in plants is not a black and white duality , but rather a spectrum from strict non @-@ carnivorous photoautotrophs ( a rose , for example ) to fully carnivorous plants with active trapping mechanisms like those of Dionaea or Aldrovanda . However , passive traps are still considered fully carnivorous . Plants that fall between the definitions in the strict carnivorous / non @-@ carnivorous demarcation can be defined as being protocarnivorous . 
 It is thought that these plants that have evolved protocarnivorous habits typically reside in habitats where there is a significant nutrient deficiency , but not the severe deficiency in nitrogen and phosphorus seen where true carnivorous plants grow . The function of the protocarnivorous habit , however , need not be directly related to lack of nutrient access . Some classic protocarnivorous plants represent convergent evolution in form but not necessarily in function . Plumbago , for example , possesses glandular trichomes on its <unk> that structurally resemble the tentacles of Drosera and <unk> . The function of the Plumbago tentacles is , however , disputed . Some contend that their function is to aid in pollination , adhering seeds to visiting pollinators . Others note that on some species ( Plumbago <unk> ) , small , crawling insects have been trapped in the Plumbago 's mucilage , which supports the conclusion that these tentacles could have evolved to exclude crawling insects and favor flying pollinators for greater seed dispersal or perhaps for protection against crawling insect predators . 
 = = Trapping mechanisms = = 
 There are visible parallels between the trapping mechanisms of carnivorous plants and protocarnivorous plants . Plumbago and other species with glandular trichomes resemble the flypaper traps of Drosera and <unk> . The pitfall traps of protocarnivorous plants , such as some Heliamphora species and Darlingtonia californica , are so similar to those of true carnivorous plants that the only reason they may be considered protocarnivorous instead of carnivorous is that they do not produce their own digestive enzymes . There are also protocarnivorous bromeliads that form a pitfall trap in an " urn " of <unk> leaves that are held together tightly . There are also other plants that produce a sticky mucilage not necessarily associated with a tentacle or glandular trichome , but instead can be described more like a slime capable of trapping and killing insects . 
 = = = <unk> traps = = = 
 Dr. George <unk> of the University of Idaho has discovered protocarnivorous activity and function in several glandular plant species , including Cerastium <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> cylindrica , <unk> lewisii , Penstemon attenuata , Penstemon <unk> , Potentilla glandulosa var. intermedia , Ribes <unk> , Rosa <unk> var. hispida , Rosa <unk> var. <unk> , Solanum tuberosum , Stellaria americana , and Stellaria <unk> . These species tested positive for protease activity , though it is unclear whether the protease is produced by the plant or by surface microbes . Two other species evaluated by Dr. <unk> , Geranium <unk> and Potentilla arguta , exhibited protease activity and were further examined with 14C @-@ labeled algal protein for nutrient absorption activity . Both of these latter species displayed an ability to digest and absorb the labeled protein . 
 Other plants that are considered to be protocarnivorous have sticky trichomes on some surface , such as the flower scape and bud of Stylidium and Plumbago , the bracts of Passiflora <unk> , and leaves of Roridula . The trichomes of Stylidium , which appear below the flower , have been known to trap and kill small insects since their discovery several centuries ago , but their purpose remained ambiguous . In November 2006 , Dr. Douglas Darnowski published a paper describing the active digestion of proteins when they come in contact with a trichome of a Stylidium species grown in aseptic tissue culture , proving that the plant , rather than the surface microbes , was the source of protease production . Darnowski asserts in that paper that given this evidence , Stylidium species are properly called carnivorous , though in order to fulfill the strict definition of carnivory it needs to be proven that they are capable of absorbing nutrients derived from prey and that this adaptation gives the plants some competitive advantage . 
 Roridula has a more complex relationship with its prey . The plants in this genus produce sticky leaves with resin @-@ tipped glands that look similar to those of larger Drosera . However , the resin , unlike mucilage , is unable to carry digestive enzymes . Therefore , Roridula species do not directly benefit from the insects they catch . Instead , they form a mutualistic symbiosis with species of assassin bugs that eat the trapped insects . The plant benefits from the nutrients in the bugs ' feces . 
 Likewise , the sticky , modified bracts of Passiflora <unk> have been investigated for their carnivorous ability . A 1995 paper published in the Journal of Biosciences detailed the evidence that the glandular bracts played a distinct role in defense of the flower and were also capable of digesting captured prey and absorbing the nutrients . 
 <unk> lutea is another flypaper <unk> that has been the subject of several studies . Early studies concluded that the plant digested proteinaceous offerings , though the methods were crude . Subsequent studies done more carefully tested for the presence of protease activity and found none , though it was noted that the plant has a great capacity for capturing and killing prey . 
 = = = Pitfall traps = = = 
 The pitfall traps of protocarnivorous plants are identical to those of carnivorous plants in every way except in the plant 's mode of digestion . The rigid definition of carnivory in plants requires digestion of prey by enzymes produced by the plant . Given this criterion , many of the pitfall trap plants commonly considered to be carnivorous would instead be classified as protocarnivorous . However , this is highly contentious and generally not reflected in current carnivorous plant phylogenies or literature . Darlingtonia californica and several Heliamphora species do not produce their own enzymes , relying instead on an internal food web to break down the prey into absorbable nutrients . 
 Another pitfall trap form unrelated to the Sarraceniaceae family are the urns of bromeliad leaves that are formed when leaves are tightly packed together in a rosette , collecting water and trapping insects . Unlike Brocchinia reducta , which has been proven to produce at least one digestive enzyme and can therefore be considered carnivorous , the epiphytic <unk> berteroniana has little evidence supporting the claims that it is carnivorous . It is able to attract and kill prey and the trichomes on the surface of the leaves can absorb nutrients , but so far no enzyme activity has been detected . It may be that this plant also relies on an internal food web for soft tissue digestion . The same could be said for <unk> <unk> , though it is a member of <unk> and not a bromeliad . It also forms a central water reservoir that has adaptations to attract insects . It , like C. berteroniana , produces no digestive enzymes . 
 Another potential protocarnivorous pitfall trap is a species of teasel , <unk> <unk> , which has been only suggested as a possible carnivore . Only one major study has examined D. <unk> for carnivory and no evidence of digestive enzymes or foliar nutrient absorption was revealed . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 <unk> bursa @-@ <unk> , shepherd 's purse , is another plant where the claim of carnivory is contested . This unique protocarnivorous plant is only capable of capturing prey during one stage of its life cycle . The seeds of the plant , when moistened , secrete a viscous fluid that actively attracts and kills prey . There is also evidence of protease activity and absorption of nutrients . The only carnivory criterion not explored is how much the plant benefits from the carnivorous adaptation . 
 = = Loss of carnivory = = 
 A few plants that could be considered protocarnivorous or paracarnivorous are those that once had carnivorous adaptations but appear to be evolving or have evolved away from a direct prey relationship with arthropods and rely on other sources for obtaining nutrients . One example of such a phenomenon is the pitfall trap of Nepenthes <unk> , a tropical pitcher plant . Although it retains its ability to attract , capture , kill , and digest insect prey , this species has acquired adaptations that appear to favor digestion of leaf litter . It could potentially be referred to as a <unk> . Another tropical pitcher plant , Nepenthes lowii , is known to catch very few prey items compared to other Nepenthes . Preliminary observations suggest that this particular species may have moved away from a solely ( or even primarily ) carnivorous nature and be adapted to " catching " the droppings of birds feeding at its nectaries . A 2009 study found that mature N. lowii plants derived 57 – 100 % of their foliar nitrogen from treeshrew droppings . 
 Utricularia purpurea , a bladderwort , comes from another genus of carnivorous plants and may have lost its appetite for carnivory , at least in part . This species can still trap and digest arthropod prey in its specialized bladder traps , but does so sparingly . Instead , it harbors a community of algae , zooplankton , and debris in the bladders , giving rise to the hypothesis that the bladders of U. purpurea favor a mutualistic interaction in place of a predator @-@ prey relationship . 
 = = Evolution = = 
 The disciplines of ecology and evolutionary biology have presented several hypotheses on the evolution of carnivorous plants that may also apply to protocarnivorous plants . The name " protocarnivorous plant " itself suggests that these species are on their way to carnivory , though others may simply be an example of a defense @-@ related adaptation , such as that found in Plumbago . Still others ( Utricularia purpurea , Nepenthes <unk> , and Nepenthes lowii ) may be examples of carnivorous plants moving away from the carnivorous syndrome . 
 In his 1998 book , <unk> Between Insects and Plants , Pierre Jolivet only considered four species of plants to be protocarnivorous : <unk> berteroniana , Brocchinia reducta , B. <unk> , and <unk> <unk> . Jolivet writes , " It is important to remember that all carnivorous plants are dicots and all protocarnivorous plants are monocots , " though he does not explain why nor does he describe his reasons for excluding other dicotyledonous plants that are protocarnivorous . 
 = Longfin mako shark = 
 The longfin mako shark ( Isurus paucus ) is a species of mackerel shark in the family Lamnidae , with a probable worldwide distribution in temperate and tropical waters . An uncommon species , it is typically lumped together under the name " mako " with its better @-@ known relative , the shortfin mako shark ( I. <unk> ) . The longfin mako is a pelagic species found in moderately deep water , having been reported to a depth of 220 m ( 720 ft ) . Growing to a maximum length of 4 @.@ 3 m ( 14 ft ) , the slimmer build and long , broad pectoral fins of this shark suggest that it is a slower and less active swimmer than the shortfin mako . 
 Longfin mako sharks are predators that feed on small schooling bony fishes and cephalopods . It is uncertain whether this shark is capable of elevating its body temperature above that of the surrounding water like the other members of its family , though it possesses the requisite physiological adaptations . Reproduction in this species is aplacental viviparous , meaning that the embryos hatch from eggs inside the uterus . In the latter stages of development , the unborn young are fed non @-@ viable eggs by the mother ( oophagy ) . The litter size is typically two but may be as many as eight . The longfin mako is of limited commercial value as its meat and fins are of lower quality than those of other pelagic sharks ; it is caught unintentionally in low numbers across its range . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Vulnerable due to its rarity , low reproductive rate , and continuing bycatch mortality . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The original description of the longfin mako was published in 1966 by Cuban marine scientist Darío <unk> @-@ <unk> , in the scientific journal <unk> , based on three adult specimens from the Caribbean Sea . An earlier synonym of this species may be <unk> <unk> , described by Glückman in 1964 . However , the type specimen designated by Glückman consists of a set of fossil teeth that could not be confirmed as belonging to the longfin mako , and thus the name paucus took precedence over <unk> despite being published later . The specific epithet paucus is Latin for " few " , referring to the rarity of this species relative to the shortfin mako . 
 The sister species relationship between the longfin and shortfin makos has been confirmed by several phylogenetic studies based on mitochondrial DNA . In turn , the closest relative of the two mako sharks is the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) . Fossil teeth belonging to the longfin mako have been recovered from the Muddy Creek Marl of the Grange Burn formation , south of Hamilton , Australia , and from <unk> Group in Gifu Prefecture , Japan . Both deposits date to the Middle Miocene epoch ( 15 – 11 Ma ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Widely scattered records suggest that the longfin mako shark has a worldwide distribution in tropical and warm @-@ temperate oceans ; the extent of its range is difficult to determine due to confusion with the shortfin mako . In the Atlantic Ocean , it is known from the Gulf Stream off the east coast of the United States , Cuba , and southern Brazil in the west , and from the Iberian Peninsula to Ghana in the east , possibly including the Mediterranean Sea and Cape Verde . In the Indian Ocean , it has been reported from the Mozambique Channel . In the Pacific Ocean , it occurs off Japan and Taiwan , northeastern Australia , a number of islands in the Central Pacific northeast of Micronesia , and southern California . 
 An inhabitant of the open ocean , the longfin mako generally remains in the upper mesopelagic zone during the day and ascends into the epipelagic zone at night . Off Cuba , it is most frequently caught at a depth of 110 – 220 m ( 360 – 720 ft ) and is rare at depths above 90 m ( 300 ft ) . Off New South Wales , Australia , most catches occur at a depth of 50 – 190 m ( 160 – 620 ft ) , in areas with a surface temperature around 20 – 24 ° C ( 68 – 75 ° F ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The longfin mako is the larger of the two makos and the second @-@ largest species in its family ( after the great white ) , reaching upwards of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) in length and weighing over 70 kg ( 150 lb ) ; females grow larger than males . The largest reported longfin mako was a 4 @.@ 3 m ( 14 ft ) long female caught off Pompano Beach , Florida , in February 1984 . This species has a slim , fusiform shape with a long pointed snout and large eyes that lack nictating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . There are 12 – 13 tooth rows on either side of the upper jaw and 11 – 13 tooth rows on either side of the lower jaw . The teeth are large and knife @-@ shaped , without serrations or secondary cusps ; the outermost teeth in the lower jaw protrude prominently from the mouth . The gill slits are long and extend onto the top of head . 
 The pectoral fins are as long or longer than the head , with a nearly straight front margin and broad tips . The first dorsal fin is large with a rounded apex , and is placed behind the pectoral fins . The second dorsal and anal fins are tiny . The caudal peduncle is expanded laterally into strong keels . The caudal fin is crescent @-@ shaped , with a small notch near the tip of the upper lobe . The dermal denticles are elliptical , longer than wide , with 3 – 7 horizontal ridges leading to a toothed posterior margin . The coloration is dark blue to grayish black above and white below . The unpaired fins are dark except for a white rear margin on the anal fin ; the pectoral and pelvic fins are dark above and white below with sharp gray posterior margins . In adults and large juveniles , the area beneath the snout , around the jaw , and the origin of the pectoral fins have dusky mottling . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The biology of the longfin mako is little @-@ known ; it is somewhat common in the western Atlantic and possibly the central Pacific , while in the eastern Atlantic it is rare and outnumbered over a thousandfold by the shortfin mako in fishery landings . The longfin mako 's slender body and long , broad pectoral fins evoke the oceanic whitetip shark ( Carcharhinus longimanus ) and the blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) , both slow @-@ cruising sharks of upper oceanic waters . This morphological similarity suggests that the longfin mako is less active than the shortfin mako , one of the fastest and most energetic sharks . Like the other members of its family , this species possesses blood vessel countercurrent exchange systems called the rete mirabilia ( Latin for " wonderful net " , singular rete mirabile ) in its trunk musculature and around its eyes and brain . This system enables other mackerel sharks to conserve metabolic heat and maintain a higher body temperature than their environment , though it is uncertain whether the longfin mako is capable of the same . 
 The longfin mako has large eyes and is attracted to <unk> sticks ( chemical lights ) , implying that it is a visual hunter . Its diet consists mainly of small , schooling bony fishes and squids . In October 1972 , a 3 @.@ 4 m ( 11 ft ) long female with the broken bill from a swordfish ( Xiphius <unk> ) lodged in her abdomen was caught in the northeastern Indian Ocean ; it is unknown whether the shark was preying on swordfish as the shortfin mako does , or encountered the swordfish in some other aggressive context . Adult longfin makos likely have no natural predators , while young individuals may fall prey to larger sharks . 
 As in other mackerel sharks , the longfin mako is aplacental viviparous and typically gives birth to two pups at a time ( one inside each uterus ) , though a 3 @.@ 3 m ( 11 ft ) long female pregnant with eight well @-@ developed embryos was caught in the Mona Passage near Puerto Rico in January 1983 . The developing embryos are oophagous : once they deplete their supply of yolk , they sustain themselves by consuming large quantities of non @-@ viable eggs ovulated by their mother . There is no evidence of sibling cannibalism as in the sand tiger shark ( Carcharias taurus ) . The pups measure 97 – 120 cm ( 3 @.@ 18 – 3 @.@ 94 ft ) long at birth , relatively larger than the young of the shortfin mako , and have proportionally longer heads and pectoral fins than the adults . Capture records off Florida suggest that during the winter , females swim into shallow coastal waters to give birth . Male and female sharks reach sexual maturity at lengths of about 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) and 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 No attacks on humans have been attributed to the longfin mako shark . Nevertheless , its large size and teeth make it potentially dangerous . This shark is caught , generally in low numbers , as bycatch on longlines intended for tuna , swordfish , and other pelagic sharks , as well as in anchored gillnets and on hook @-@ and @-@ line . The meat is marketed fresh , frozen , or dried and salted , though it is considered to be of poor quality due to its mushy texture . The fins are also considered to be of lower quality for use in shark fin soup , though are valuable enough that captured sharks are often finned at sea . The carcasses may be processed into animal feed and fishmeal , while the skin , cartilage , and jaws are also of value . 
 The most significant longfin mako catches are by Japanese tropical longline fisheries , and those sharks occasionally enter Tokyo markets . From 1987 to 1994 , United States fisheries reported catches ( discarded , as this species is worthless on the North American market ) of 2 – 12 tons per year . Since 1999 , retention of this species has been prohibited by the U.S. National Marine Fisheries Service ( NMFS ) Fishery Management Plan ( FMP ) for Atlantic sharks . Longfin makos were once significant in the Cuban longline fishery , comprising a sixth of the shark landings from 1971 to 1972 ; more recent data from this fishery is not available . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed this species as Vulnerable due to its <unk> , low reproductive rate , and susceptibility to shark fishing gear . It has also been listed under Annex I of the Convention on Migratory Species ( CMS ) Migratory Shark Memorandum of Understanding . In the North Atlantic , stocks of the shortfin mako have declined 40 % or more since the late 1980s , and there are concerns that populations of the longfin mako are following the same trend . 
 = Home Sweet Homediddly @-@ Dum @-@ Doodily = 
 " Home Sweet Homediddly @-@ Dum @-@ Doodily " is the third episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 1 , 1995 . In the episode , the Simpson children are put in the custody of Ned and Maude Flanders after a series of misadventures . Homer and Marge have to attend a class for bad parents so that they can get their children back . Learning that none of the children have been baptized , Flanders sets up a baptism , but Homer and Marge are able to stop him just in time . 
 The episode was written by Jon Vitti and directed by Susie Dietter . The story was pitched by another writer on the show , George Meyer . It was the first episode on which writers Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein served as show runners . The episode features cultural references to the 1965 film Faster , Pussycat ! Kill ! Kill ! and Sonny & Cher 's song " I Got You Babe " . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 0 , and was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer books Spa treatments for himself and Marge . Despite Marge 's warning for them to clean up the house before they leave , Homer refuses and they leave their messy house in the care of Grandpa . When Bart is sent home from school with head lice and wearing a burlap sack , because he had his clothes burned to prevent contagion and Lisa all messed up and without shoes , because of a result of being continuously bullied at school , Homer and Marge are accused of being negligent parents . Two Child Protective Services agents arrive at their house and take Bart , Lisa , and Maggie to a foster home , which is right next door , at Ned Flanders 's house . 
 The kids have to get used to bedtime at seven o 'clock with the sunlight still out , and hours of Bible board games . Bart and Lisa hate the Flanders house , but Maggie enjoys being there as she gets more attention from the Flanders than she did with Homer . Meanwhile , Homer and Marge have to attend a special class for bad parents so that they can get their children back . 
 When Ned finds out that Bart and Lisa were not baptised , he takes it upon himself to give the kids an emergency baptism . Marge and Homer are declared decent parents and they quickly head for the Springfield River to stop Ned from baptising their children . Just as Ned is about to pour holy water on Bart , Homer shoves Bart over to prevent the water from hitting him . However the water hits Homer , apparently burning him and momentarily making him saintly until he goes back to his crude self . Maggie is unsure if she should return home to her family since Ned 's family has been more attentive to her . Then Marge arrives in time and resumes being a loving mother to her . With a new sense of family unity , the Simpsons happily head home . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Home Sweet Homediddly @-@ Dum @-@ Doodily " was the first episode to be made after Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein became show runners of The Simpsons . They wanted to start the season with an episode centering on the Simpson family . The story was pitched by writer George Meyer at a story retreat . Story retreats were held twice a year at a hotel room close to the studio lot , where all the writers gathered to pitch their ideas . Seventeen episodes were pitched at this particular story retreat . Out of them all , Weinstein considered this episode to be the best , and he thought the pitch by Meyer was the " best " he had ever heard . Oakley and Weinstein selected former full @-@ time staff writer Jon Vitti to write the episode , wanting a " heavy hitter " , since it was going to start the seventh production season . Vitti retained in his script most of what Meyer pitched at the retreat . 
 The episode was directed by Susie Dietter . There is a statue portraying The Simpsons writer John Swartzwelder outside the courthouse in the episode . Oakley said that this was a mistake because he and Weinstein thought that Springfield was located in Swartzwelder County , incorrectly going off a montage in the season three episode " Dog of Death " . That montage depicts Springfield as being located in Springfield County ; while Swartzwelder is the adjoining county . The female Child Protective Services agent , in appearance , is based on a teacher both Oakley and Weinstein had in high school that they " hated " . Cast member Hank Azaria 's voice for the character Cletus was off in this episode because , over the summer between seasons , Azaria and the producers had forgotten what Cletus sounds like . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , the episode finished 53rd in the ratings for the week of September 25 to October 1 , 1995 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 0 . The episode was the fourth highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files , Beverly Hills , 90210 and Melrose Place . 
 Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson enjoyed the episode and said that " its best elements come from the amusing <unk> of the Flanders home , but Homer and Marge ’ s classes are also fun . Chalk this one up as season seven 's first great episode . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict considered the best part of the episode to be when Marge tells Bart and Lisa that someday they will have to be adults and take care of themselves , just before Homer comes to Marge about a spider near his car keys . She concluded her review by giving the episode a grade of B + . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " one of the most disturbing episodes , as Bart and Lisa are dragged into the Flanders ' sinister lifestyle . " They thought the ending , when Ned tries to baptize the children , was " nail @-@ biting stuff " , and Maggie 's second first @-@ word was " a truly shocking moment " . The authors added : " It 's astonishing that anything this radical made it on to prime time television . The final moments are perhaps the most moving in the entire series , a wonderful affirmation of everything the series , and the Simpson family , are about . " Matt Groening , the creator of The Simpsons , thought the episode was " fantastic " and he called it one of his favorites . He particularly liked the ending which he thought was " sweet " . 
 = The Long Game = 
 " The Long Game " is the seventh episode of the first series of the British science fiction television programme Doctor Who that was first broadcast on 7 May 2005 on BBC One . It was written by executive producer Russell T Davies and directed by Brian Grant . 
 In the episode , alien time traveller the Doctor ( Christopher Eccleston ) and his companion Rose Tyler ( Billie Piper ) , having been joined by near @-@ future genius Adam Mitchell ( Bruno Langley ) , land on Satellite 5 in the far future . Satellite 5 is a space station that broadcasts news across the entire human empire . However , the Doctor notices that the station is suspicious : there are no aliens , and those who are promoted to Floor 500 seem to disappear . The Doctor and Rose discover that the Editor ( Simon Pegg ) and an alien are controlling the rest of humanity by way of the press . Meanwhile , Adam makes a mistake that forces the Doctor and Rose to take him home . 
 The concept of " The Long Game " was originally submitted by Davies to the Doctor Who script office in the 1980s . Davies had also been interested in doing a storyline about a failed companion . In addition , critics have pointed out that the story is a satire on the media . Production for the episode took place in November and December 2004 , with some location filming in Coryton , Cardiff . " The Long Game " was watched by 8 @.@ 01 million viewers in the UK and received generally mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Doctor , Rose , and Adam arrive on Floor 139 of Satellite 5 , a space station orbiting Earth in the year 200 @,@ 000 . The Doctor uses his sonic screwdriver to get Adam and Rose some credits to buy food while he looks around the station . The Doctor meets a woman named Cathica , a reporter who tells him that the station is a giant broadcast tower transmitting news across Earth . They are led to a room where she sits down in a chair located in the center of a round table . The reporters are connected to the computer via a special port installed directly into the brain . The Doctor believes there is a malevolent purpose to the station that is holding back human development . He learns from Cathica that a select few are invited to Floor 500 , which is believed to be the highest promotion that can be earned on the station . 
 The Doctor , with Rose , hacks into the computer systems of the station and is detected by the Editor . The Editor allows the Doctor and Rose to travel to Floor 500 , with Cathica following soon after . On Floor 500 the Doctor and Rose find the Editor directing control over the station through a number of dead humans . On the ceiling resides the Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief , the Mighty Jagrafess of the Holy <unk> <unk> , to whom the Editor answers . The Doctor learns that the Jagrafess has controlled the humans aboard Satellite 5 to control the lives of the people on the planet below , by manipulating the news . 
 Meanwhile , Adam discovers that he can gain access to information about Earth 's future . He has an information port installed in his brain and uses Rose 's phone to call his answering machine at home and transfer data to it . The port also allows the Jagrafess into Adam 's mind , who discovers the true nature of the Doctor and makes plans to kill him . The Doctor , aware of Cathica 's presence outside the room , loudly comments on how altering the environmental systems will likely kill the Jagrafess . Cathica takes the hint and reverses the cooling system , causing Floor 500 to overheat and killing the Jagrafess and the Editor . As the humans on board the station and on Earth come to wake from the stupor they 've been in , the Doctor congratulates Cathica and gives her hope for the future . The Doctor discovers Adam 's duplicity and takes him to his home on Earth . The Doctor destroys the answering machine with the data from the future on it and tells Adam he is no longer welcome in the TARDIS . Adam tries to plead with the Doctor and Rose , saying that they can 't just leave him to walk around with a port to his brain for the rest of his life , but the Doctor tells him that if he just leads a quiet life , it probably won 't be discovered . But as soon as the Doctor and Rose leaves , Adam 's mother returns home and manages , by pure accident and much to her shock , to activate his port . 
 = = = Continuity = = = 
 The related update the tie @-@ in website " Who is Doctor Who ? " was an essay from a 14 @-@ year @-@ old Adam Mitchell . " The Long Game " takes place in the time period of the " Fourth Great and Bountiful Human Empire " . The first Earth Empire was featured in several Third Doctor stories in the 1970s . Following the " bad wolf " theme begun in earlier episodes of the season , one of the broadcast channels featuring the Face of Boe ( from " The End of the World " ) is named " BAD <unk> " . In the two @-@ part finale of the 2005 series , " Bad Wolf " and " The Parting of the Ways " , those behind the Jagrafess are revealed to be the Daleks . The finale is set on Satellite 5 a hundred years after " The Long Game " . The Doctor claims in " Bad Wolf " that " someone has been playing a long game " , referring to the manipulation of humanity both before and after " The Long Game " took place . 
 = = Production = = 
 In the book The Shooting Scripts , Russell T Davies claims that he had originally set out to write this episode from Adam 's perspective , watching the adventure unfolding from his point of view ( exactly as Rose did in " Rose " ) and seeing both the Doctor and Rose as enigmatic , frightening characters . He even gave this outline a working title : " Adam " . Another working title for this story was " The Companion Who Couldn 't " . According to Davies , the concept of " The Long Game " was originally written in the early 1980s and submitted to the Doctor Who production office . Whether it was ever read by the production team of the time is unclear , as Davies received a rejection from the BBC Script Unit , who advised him to write more realistic television about " a man and his mortgage " instead . Davies reworked the story for the new series . 
 In the DVD commentary for this episode , director Brian Grant and actor Bruno Langley refer to an additional motivation for Adam 's actions . Apparently , in earlier drafts of the script , Adam 's father suffered from a disease that was incurable in his time ( 2012 ) and he hoped to learn about a cure which had been discovered between that year and 200 @,@ 000 . In the shooting script , the condition is arthritis . No trace of this motivation remains in the finished programme , although Grant discusses it as if it were still present . Langley and Grant also reveal that the " frozen vomit " that Adam spits out in one scene was in fact a " kiwi and orange ice cube " . 
 Simon Pegg had grown up with Doctor Who and considered it a " great honour " to guest star . He was pleased at being cast as a bad guy . Pegg had previously played Don Chaney in the Eighth Doctor audio play Invaders from Mars . When the Editor announces the Jagrafess 's name to the Doctor and Rose , he pronounces it as " The Mighty <unk> of the Holy <unk> <unk> . " Pegg has stated during interviews that he found this an extremely difficult line to say . Voice artist Nicholas Briggs had recorded voice work for the Jagrafess , but his contribution was not used because it sounded too similar to the Nestene Consciousness ( which Briggs had voiced in " Rose " ) . " The Long Game " was produced singularly in the series ' fourth production block . Filming in the studio took place in November and December 2004 . Some location filming was done in the former BT building in Coryton , Cardiff for five days in December . The <unk> was entirely made of computer @-@ generated imagery ( CGI ) , animated by The Mill . It was given a shark @-@ like design , with the intention that it would " snap out " like a shark . The initial design was also described as a " lump of meat on the ceiling " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Long Game " was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC One on 7 May 2005 . Overnight ratings showed that the episode had been watched by 7 @.@ 51 million viewers live , a 38 @.@ 9 % audience share . It received a final rating of 8 @.@ 01 million viewers in the UK , the sixth highest @-@ rated broadcast on BBC One for the week . The episode also received an Appreciation Index of 81 . " The Long Game " was released on DVD in Region 2 alongside the following episodes " Father 's Day " , " The Empty Child " , and " The Doctor Dances " on 1 August 2005 . It was then re @-@ released as part of the first series boxset on 21 November 2005 . 
 The episode received generally mixed reviews . SFX described it as an " okay " episode that was reminiscent of the earlier episode " The End of the World . " Despite praising Pegg , the theme of " media control , " and the Jagrafess , they criticised it for " [ failing ] to capture the imagination " because there was " no real palpable sense of threat " and that human culture looked identical to modern day . Rupert Smith of The Guardian wrote , " Anything that satirises the profession of journalism is all right with me , but this did it with style . " Arnold T Blumburg of Now Playing gave " The Long Game " a grade of B- , describing it as " entertaining " and a welcome throwback to the classic series . However , he questioned the developing tradition of the Doctor not being the hero of the episode and noted that there were some dangling threads . Reviewing the episode in 2013 , Patrick Mulkern of Radio Times was more positive , writing that it " acts brilliantly as a satire of the media . " He also praised the guest cast and characters and Adam 's departure . In 2011 , Den of Geek 's Mark Harrison wrote that " In retrospect , ' The Long Game ' is an underrated and perfectly enjoyable mid @-@ series episode , " praising Adam 's departure . 
 Reviewing " The Long Game " for The A.V. Club in 2013 , Alasdair Wilkins gave it a grade of " B- " . He found it " inessential " and commented that it was not very clear on the motives of the Editor and Jagrafess , but Pegg 's performance was almost enough to make up for it . Overall he felt that the story " presents a few too many simple ideas , with the cumulative effect that this is a story that feels slight at best , underdeveloped at worst . The episode is hardly a failure , but it could have been so much more . " In Who Is the Doctor , a guide to the revived series , Graeme Burk described the episode as " entertaining , if unspectacular . " He called Pegg the best guest star so far , and stated that Langley did a " superb job " at conveying Adam , but he felt that the episode did not have much else beside the failed companion storyline . Burk criticised the satire for not being subtle enough and borrowing from other stories such as Nineteen Eighty @-@ Four . He also remarked that it was a shame Adam 's motives were cut , as well as development between Rose and Adam . Burk 's coauthor Robert Smith ? [ the " ? " is part of his <unk> de plume ] was more positive , opining that a satire did not have to be subtle to be effective , and that viewers could still relate it to the news media today . He also praised the way " The Long Game " showed the Ninth Doctor as an " inspirational figure . " The two also questioned the decision to leave Adam in the 21st century with future technology . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " The Long Game " reviews at Outpost Gallifrey 
 " The Long Game " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Joseph Franklin Rutherford = 
 Joseph Franklin Rutherford ( November 8 , 1869 – January 8 , 1942 ) , also known as " Judge " Rutherford , was the second president of the incorporated Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society of Pennsylvania . He played a primary role in the organization and doctrinal development of Jehovah 's Witnesses , which emerged from the Bible Student movement established by Charles Taze Russell . 
 Rutherford began a career in law , working as a court stenographer , trial lawyer and prosecutor . He became a special judge in the 14th Judicial District of Missouri at some time after 1895 . He developed an interest in the doctrines of Watch Tower Society president Charles Taze Russell , which led to his joining the Bible Student movement , and he was baptized in 1906 . He was appointed the legal counsel for the Watch Tower Society in 1907 , as well as a traveling representative prior to his election as president in 1917 . His early presidency was marked by a dispute with the Society 's board of directors , in which four of its seven members accused him of autocratic behavior and sought to reduce his powers . The resulting leadership crisis divided the Bible Student community and contributed to the loss of one @-@ seventh of adherents by 1919 and thousands more by 1931 . Rutherford and seven other Watch Tower executives were imprisoned in 1918 after charges were laid over the publication of The Finished Mystery , a book deemed seditious for its opposition to World War I. 
 Rutherford introduced many organizational and doctrinal changes that helped shape the current beliefs and practices of Jehovah 's Witnesses . He imposed a centralized administrative structure on the worldwide Bible Student movement , which he later called a theocracy , requiring all adherents to distribute literature via door to door preaching and to provide regular reports of their activity . He also instituted training programs for public speaking as part of their weekly meetings for worship . He established 1914 as the date of Christ 's invisible return , asserted that Christ died on a tree rather than a cross , formulated the current Witness concept of Armageddon as God 's war on the wicked , and reinforced the belief that the start of Christ 's millennial reign was imminent . He condemned the observance of traditional celebrations such as Christmas and birthdays , the saluting of national flags and the singing of national anthems . He introduced the name " Jehovah 's witnesses " in 1931 and the term " Kingdom Hall " for houses of worship in 1935 . 
 He wrote twenty @-@ one books and was credited by the Society in 1942 with the distribution of almost 400 million books and booklets . Despite significant decreases during the 1920s , overall membership increased more than sixfold by the end of Rutherford 's 25 years as president . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rutherford was born on November 8 , 1869 to James Calvin Rutherford and Leonora Strickland and raised in near @-@ poverty in a Baptist farm family . Some sources list his place of birth as Boonville , Missouri , but according to his death certificate he was born in Versailles , Missouri . Rutherford developed an interest in law from the age of 16 . Although his father discouraged this interest , he allowed Rutherford to go to college under the condition that he pay for a laborer to take his place on the family farm . Rutherford took out a loan and helped to pay for his law studies by working as a door @-@ to @-@ door encyclopedia salesman and court stenographer . 
 = = = Law career = = = 
 Rutherford spent two years as a judge 's intern , became an official court reporter at age 20 , and was admitted to the Missouri bar in May 1892 at age 22 . He became a trial lawyer for a law firm and later served for four years in Boonville as a public prosecutor . He campaigned briefly for Democratic presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan . He was appointed as a Special Judge in the Eighth Judicial Circuit Court of Missouri , sitting as a substitute judge at least once when a regular judge was unable to hold court . As a result of this appointment he became known by the sobriquet " Judge " Rutherford . He was admitted to the New York bar in 1909 and admitted to practice before the Supreme Court of the United States the same year . 
 = = Watch Tower Society = = 
 In 1894 Rutherford purchased the first three volumes of Charles Taze Russell 's Millennial Dawn series of Bible study textbooks from two <unk> who visited his office . Rutherford , who then viewed all religions as insincere , shallow and hypocritical , was struck by Russell 's sincerity and his sentiments towards religion , which mirrored his own view . Rutherford immediately wrote to the Watch Tower Society to express appreciation for the books . He was baptized twelve years later and he and his wife began holding Bible classes in their home . In 1907 , he became legal counsel for the Watch Tower Society at its Pittsburgh headquarters , and from around that time began to give public talks as a " pilgrim " representative of the Society . As Russell 's health deteriorated , Rutherford represented him on trips to Europe and in April 1915 he was deputized to speak at a major debate with Baptist preacher J. H. Troy over four nights in Los Angeles before an audience of 12 @,@ 000 , debating various subjects , including the state of the dead , hellfire and Christ 's Second Coming . Rutherford wrote a pamphlet , A Great Battle in the Ecclesiastical Heavens , in defense of Russell and served as chairman of the Bible Students ' Los Angeles convention in September 1916 . 
 = = = Board of directors = = = 
 By 1916 Rutherford had become one of the seven directors of the Watch Tower Society ; when Russell died on October 31 , 1916 he joined vice @-@ President Alfred I. Ritchie and Secretary @-@ Treasurer William E. Van Amburgh on a three @-@ man executive committee that ran the Pennsylvania corporation until a new president was elected at the annual general meeting the following January . He also joined a five @-@ person editorial committee to run The Watch Tower from the December 15 , 1916 issue . Russell 's will , drawn up in 1907 , had named the five people he wished to run the magazine after his death ; Rutherford appeared only on a second list of five alternative members to fill any vacancies that arose . 
 Bible Student Alexander H. Macmillan , who served as an aide to the executive committee , later wrote that tensions at the Watch Tower Society headquarters mounted as the day for election of the Society 's officers approached . He wrote : " A few ambitious ones at headquarters were holding caucuses here and there , doing a little electioneering to get their men in . However , Van Amburgh and I held a large number of votes . Many shareholders , knowing of our long association with Russell , sent their proxies to us to be cast for the one whom we thought best fitted for office . " Macmillan , who claimed he had declined an offer from an ailing Russell months earlier to accept the position of president after his death , agreed with Van Amburgh that Rutherford was the best candidate . According to Macmillan , " Rutherford did not know what was going on . He certainly didn 't do any electioneering or canvassing for votes , but I guess he was doing some worrying , knowing if he was elected he would have a big job on his hands ... There is no doubt in our minds that the Lord 's will was done in this choice . It is certain that Rutherford himself had nothing to do with it . " 
 = = = Presidency dispute = = = 
 On January 6 , 1917 , Rutherford , aged 47 , was elected president of the Watch Tower Society , unopposed , at the Pittsburgh convention . By @-@ laws passed by both the Pittsburgh convention and the board of directors stated that the president would be the executive officer and general manager of the Society , giving him full charge of its affairs worldwide . 
 By June , four of the seven Watch Tower Society directors — Robert H. Hirsh , Alfred I. Ritchie , Isaac F. Hoskins and James D. Wright — had decided they had erred in endorsing Rutherford 's expanded powers of management , claiming Rutherford had become autocratic . In June , Hirsch attempted to rescind the new by @-@ laws and reclaim the board 's authority from the president . Rutherford later claimed he had by then detected a conspiracy among the directors to seize control of the society . In July , Rutherford gained a legal opinion from a Philadelphia corporation lawyer that none of his opposers were legally directors of the society . The Watch Tower Society 's official 1959 account of its history claimed the legal advice given to the ousted directors confirmed that given to Rutherford ; however , the pamphlets produced by the expelled board members at the time indicated that their legal advice , acquired from several attorneys , disagreed with Rutherford 's . On July 12 , Rutherford filled what he claimed were four vacancies on the board , appointing Macmillan and Pennsylvania Bible Students W. E. Spill , J. A. <unk> and George H. Fisher as directors . Between August and November the society and the four ousted directors published a series of pamphlets , with each side accusing the other of ambitious and reckless behavior . The former directors also claimed Rutherford had required all headquarters workers to sign a petition supporting him and threatened dismissal for any who refused to sign . The former directors left the Brooklyn headquarters on August 8 . On January 5 , 1918 , shareholders returned Rutherford to office . 
 The controversy fractured the Bible Student movement and some congregations split into opposing groups loyal either to Rutherford or those he had expelled . By mid @-@ 1919 about one in seven Bible Students had chosen to leave rather than accept Rutherford 's leadership , and over the following decade they helped form or joined other groups including the Stand Fast Movement , the Layman 's Home Missionary Movement , the Dawn Bible Students Association , the Pastoral Bible Institute , the Elijah Voice Movement , the <unk> Publishing Concern , and the Eagle Society . 
 = = The Finished Mystery = = 
 In late 1916 Fisher and another prominent Bible Student at the Brooklyn headquarters , Clayton J. Woodworth , sought the Executive Committee 's approval to produce a book about the prophecies of the books of Revelation and Ezekiel based primarily on Russell 's writings . Work on the book , The Finished Mystery , proceeded without the knowledge of the full Board of Directors and Editorial Committee and was released by Rutherford to headquarters staff on July 17 , 1917 , the day he announced the appointment of the four replacement directors . 
 The book , which was misleadingly labeled as the posthumous seventh volume of Russell 's Studies in the Scriptures , was denounced by Rutherford 's opponents , but became a best @-@ seller and was translated into six languages and serialized in The Watch Tower . Expecting God 's Kingdom to establish rule on earth and for the saints to be raised to heaven in 1918 , Rutherford wrote in January of that year : " The Christian looks for the year to bring the full consummation of the church 's hopes . " He embarked on a vast advertising campaign to expose the " <unk> " of religions and their alliances with " beastly " governments , expanding on claims in The Finished Mystery that patriotism was a delusion and murder . The campaign attracted the attention of governments and on February 12 , 1918 the book was banned by the Canadian government for what a Winnipeg newspaper described as " seditious and antiwar statements " On February 24 in Los Angeles Rutherford gave a talk entitled " The World Has Ended — Millions Now Living May Never Die " ( subsequent talks in the series were renamed , " Millions Now Living Will Never Die " ) in which he attacked the clergy , declaring : " As a class , according to the Scriptures , the clergymen are the most reprehensible men on earth for the great war that is now afflicting mankind . " Three days later the Army Intelligence Bureau seized the Society 's Los Angeles offices and confiscated literature . 
 = = = Imprisonment and release = = = 
 In early May 1918 US Attorney General Thomas Watt Gregory condemned The Finished Mystery as " one of the most dangerous examples of ... propaganda ... a work written in extremely religious language and distributed in enormous numbers " . Warrants were issued for the arrest of Rutherford and seven other Watch Tower directors , who were charged under the 1917 Espionage Act of attempting to cause insubordination , disloyalty , refusal of duty in the armed forces and obstructing the recruitment and enlistment service of the U.S. while it was at war . On June 21 seven of them , including Rutherford , were sentenced to 20 years ' imprisonment . Rutherford feared his opponents would gain control of the Society in his absence , but on January 2 , 1919 he learned he had been re @-@ elected president at the Pittsburgh convention the day before , convincing him that God wanted him in the position . In March 1919 the directors were released on bail after an appeals court ruled they had been wrongly convicted ; in May 1920 the government announced that all charges had been dropped . 
 = = Reorganization = = 
 = = = Administrative changes = = = 
 Following his release from prison , Rutherford began a major reorganization of Bible Student activities . At a May , 1919 convention in Ohio he announced the publication of a new magazine , The Golden Age ( later renamed Awake ! ) . Because Russell 's will had decreed the Society should publish no other periodicals the new magazine was at first published by " Woodworth , <unk> & Martin " , with a Manhattan ( rather than Brooklyn ) address . Within months Bible Students were organized to distribute it door @-@ to @-@ door . He expanded the Society 's printing facilities , revived the <unk> work and in 1920 introduced the requirement for weekly reports of Bible Students ' preaching activity . He expanded and reorganized overseas branch offices in what he regarded as a " cleansing " and " sifting " work . 
 Beginning with an eight @-@ day convention at Cedar Point , Ohio , in September 1922 Rutherford , launched a series of major international conventions under the theme " <unk> the King and Kingdom " , attracting crowds of up to 20 @,@ 000 . Audiences were urged to " herald the message far and wide " . He stressed that the primary duty of all Bible Students was to become " publicity agents " in fulfillment of Matthew 24 : 14 , especially in the form of door @-@ to @-@ door evangelism with the Society 's publications . In 1928 Rutherford began to teach that the Cedar Point convention and the events resulting from it fulfilled the prophecy of the 1290 days at Daniel 12 : 11 . 
 In 1920 , Rutherford published a booklet , Millions Now Living Will Never Die , and a year later published his first hardcover book , The Harp of God . This was followed by a further nineteen hardcover books , each with one @-@ word titles , such as Creation ( 1927 ) , Jehovah ( 1934 ) and Children ( 1941 ) . His publications reached a total printing of 36 million copies . In 1925 he gained full control over what doctrines would be taught in Watch Tower Society publications , overruling the refusal by the five @-@ man Editorial Committee to publish his article , " Birth of the Nation " , which contained significant doctrinal changes . Rutherford later claimed Satan had " tried to prevent the publication of that article ... but failed in that effort " ; In 1927 the Watch Tower Society ceased printing of Russell 's Studies in the Scriptures . The Editorial Committee was dissolved in 1931 , after which Rutherford wrote every leading article in The Watch Tower until his death . The 1933 Watch Tower Society Yearbook observed that the demise of the Editorial Committee indicated " that the Lord himself is running his organization " . 
 Rutherford expanded his means of spreading the Watch Tower message in 1924 with the start of 15 @-@ minute radio broadcasts , initially from WBBR , based on Staten Island , and eventually via a network of as many as 480 radio stations . A 1931 talk was broadcast throughout North America , Australia and France , but his attacks on the clergy resulted in both the NBC and BBC radio networks banning his broadcasts . 
 In 1928 Rutherford began to abolish the system of electing elders by congregational voting , dismissing them as " haughty " and " lazy " , and finally asserting in 1932 that electing elders was <unk> . He impressed on elders the need to obey the Society 's " regulations " , " instructions " and " directions " without complaint . Service directors , who reported back to Brooklyn , were appointed in each congregation and a weekly " service meeting " introduced to meeting programs . In 1933 Rutherford claimed that abolishing elective elders was a fulfillment of the prophecy of 2300 days at Daniel 8 : 13 – 14 , and that God 's sanctuary ( the Watch Tower Society ) was thereby cleansed . 
 At a 1931 Bible Student assembly in Columbus , Ohio Rutherford proposed a new name for the organization , Jehovah 's witnesses , to differentiate them from the proliferation of other groups that followed Russell 's teachings . Bible Students who opposed or abandoned Rutherford to form new groups were increasingly described as the " evil servant class " by The Watchtower , which said it was wrong to pray for those who were " unfaithful " . Four years later the term " Kingdom Hall " was introduced for the local meeting place of congregations . 
 In 1937 , the door @-@ to @-@ door preaching program was extended to formally include " back calls " on interested people and Witnesses were urged to start one @-@ hour Bible studies in the homes of householders . In the late 1930s , he advocated the use of " sound cars " and portable phonographs with which talks by Rutherford were played to passersby and householders . 
 In 1938 he introduced the term " theocracy " to describe the religion 's system of government , with Consolation explaining : " The Theocracy is at present administered by the Watch Tower Bible and Tract Society , of which Judge Rutherford is the president and general manager . " " Zone servants " ( now known as circuit overseers ) were appointed to supervise congregations . In a Watchtower article Rutherford declared the need for congregations to " get in line " with the changed structure . 
 By 1942 , the year of his death , worldwide attendance at the annual Memorial of Christ 's death was 140 @,@ 450 though his restructuring of the Bible Student community coincided with a dramatic loss of followers during the 1920s and 1930s . Worldwide attendance of the annual Memorial of Christ 's death fell from 90 @,@ 434 in 1925 to 17 @,@ 380 in 1928 . Memorial attendance figures did not surpass 90 @,@ 000 again until 1940 . Author Tony Wills , who analyzed attendance and " field worker " statistics , suggests it was the " more dedicated " Bible Students who quit through the 1920s , to be replaced by newcomers in larger numbers , although Rutherford dismissed the loss of the original Bible Students as the Lord " shaking out " the unfaithful . In the 1942 Yearbook of Jehovah 's Witnesses , Rutherford wrote that the year 's achievements " would , on the face of it , show that the <unk> witness work on earth is about done " . 
 = = = Doctrinal changes = = = 
 In July 1917 , Rutherford had The Finished Mystery published as a seventh volume of the Studies in the Scriptures series . The volume , though written by Fisher and Woodworth , was advertised as Russell 's " posthumous work " and " last legacy " but contained several interpretations and viewpoints not espoused by Russell , including an urging of all Bible Students to cast judgment upon Christendom and its clergy , the adoption of new dates for the fulfillment of particular prophecies , a claim that salvation is tied to membership within the Watch Tower Society , as well as shunning and censuring any who reject the interpretations given in the volume or related articles in The Watch Tower magazine . 
 In the February 1918 discourse " Millions Now Living Will Never Die " ( printed in booklet form in May 1920 ) a revision of Russell 's calculation of a " Jubilee type " was presented , changing it from 1875 to 1925 , despite Russell 's rejection of such a change a few months prior to his death . In October 1920 the Society published a new edition of Russell 's 1881 Tabernacle Shadows of the Better Sacrifices . It included an appendix introducing many alterations or reinterpretations of Russell 's original views on the death of Jesus and the role of Christ 's followers in heaven as typified in the ceremonies of the Jewish tabernacle . 
 At the 1922 Cedar Point convention Rutherford began teaching that Christ 's reign had begun in 1914 , and not 1878 as Russell had taught . Rutherford expanded on this view in the March 1 , 1925 issue of The Watch Tower in the article " Birth of The Nation " , which he later acknowledged " caused a real stir or shake @-@ up within the ranks . " In 1927 he moved the date of the resurrection of the " sleeping saints " ( all Christians who had died since Jesus ' time ) from 1878 to 1918 and as early as 1930 began to dismiss the year 1874 as the date for the invisible presence of Christ in favor of the year 1914 . 
 From 1925 he developed the view of the battle of Armageddon as a universal war waged by God rather than Russell 's belief that it was the decline of human society into social , political and religious anarchy . Rutherford based his interpretations on the books of Exodus , Jeremiah , Ezekiel and Psalms as well as additional material from the books of Samuel , Kings and Chronicles . An article in the January 1 , 1926 Watch Tower introduced new emphasis on the importance of the name " Jehovah " ; from 1929 Rutherford taught that the vindication of God 's name — which would ultimately occur when millions of unbelievers were destroyed at Armageddon — was the primary doctrine of Christianity and more important than God 's display of goodness or grace toward humankind . In 1932 he published an interpretation of a passage in Ezekiel describing the attack on Jerusalem by Gog of Magog , in which he predicted an intensification of persecution of Jehovah 's Witnesses that would culminate in God intervening on their behalf to begin the battle of Armageddon , which would destroy all opposers of God 's organization . 
 In 1926 he discredited Russell 's teaching on the importance of Christian " character development " or personal " sanctification " and a year later discarded the teaching that Russell had been the " faithful and wise servant " of Matthew 24 : 45 – 47 , warning that the desire to revere men was a snare set by the Devil . In May 1926 Rutherford released his book Deliverance at the Bible Student 's convention in Kensington , England later interpreting the event as the fulfillment of the 1335 days of Daniel 12 : 12 . 
 In 1927 , Christmas was declared to be of pagan origin , and the following year its celebration by Bible Students was condemned as supporting " Satan 's organization " . Mother 's Day was condemned in 1931 , with other holidays as well as birthdays officially renounced in subsequent years . 
 In 1928 Rutherford discarded Russell 's teaching that the natural Jews would be restored to Palestine and return to God 's favor , despite having declared ten years earlier that prophecies of their restoration were already being fulfilled with the British takeover of Palestine from Turkey during World War I. He denied there was a role for Jews in God 's Kingdom arrangement and by 1933 he had reversed Russell 's earlier teaching , claiming that prominent Jewish business leaders were " arrogant , self @-@ important and extremely selfish , " and would gain no favored standing with God . The teaching that God would restore the Jews to Palestine was discontinued around the same time . 
 Russell 's teaching that the Great Pyramid of Giza was built under God 's direction was overturned in 1928 , when Rutherford asserted that it had been built under the direction of Satan for the purpose of deceiving God 's people in the last days . The announcement prompted further defections among long @-@ time Bible Students . 
 In 1930 , Rutherford published a systematic reinterpretation of the book of Revelation . Many of the symbols recorded in the book were applied to events following 1918 , specifically to Watch Tower conventions held in the years 1922 through 1928 . These reinterpretations reflected both a wholesale rejection of his own earlier views as well as the historicist interpretations of Pastor Russell . 
 At a Washington , D.C. convention in 1935 , Rutherford rejected Russell 's teaching that the " great company " of Revelation 7 : 9 was a " secondary spiritual class " composed of millions of Christians who would be resurrected to heaven apart from the 144 @,@ 000 " elect " , and instead argued that the " great multitude " , the " sheep " of Matthew 25 and the " <unk> " of 2 Kings chapter 10 all picture the people who could potentially survive Armageddon and receive everlasting human life on earth if they became Jehovah 's Witnesses before it began . 
 In 1935 , Rutherford objected to U.S. state laws requiring school students to salute the flag as a means of instilling patriotism ; in the 1936 Yearbook he declared that baptized Jehovah 's Witnesses who did salute the flag were breaking their covenant with God and were thus " guilty of death " . In 1940 , children in 43 states were expelled for refusing to salute the flag and the Watch Tower Society took most cases to court , with Rutherford personally leading the unsuccessful case of <unk> School District v. <unk> . Controversy over the flag salute issue escalated and mob attacks became prevalent in many U.S. states until 1943 when the court overruled its previous decision in the case of West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette . A U.S. law magazine noted how Jehovah 's Witnesses had helped shape the course of constitutional law , remarking : " Through almost constant litigation this organization had made possible an ever @-@ increasing list of precedents concerning the application of the 14th amendment to freedom of speech and religion " . 
 In 1936 , Rutherford rejected the belief that Jesus had been executed on a Roman cross , in favor of an upright stake or " tree . " 
 = = Character and attitudes = = 
 Biographers describe Rutherford as tall and solidly built with a senatorial demeanor , and a strong booming voice that helped make him a powerful orator . In 1917 , The New York Times stated that Rutherford " has a reputation as an eloquent , forceful speaker " . Watch Tower Society literature states that his personality contrasted strongly with that of his predecessor . One Witness history book says that while Russell was kind , warm and tactful , Rutherford " was warm and generous toward his associates but he was also a brusque and direct type of person , and his legal background and experiences in early life gave him a directness in his approach to problems in dealing with his brothers that caused some to take offense . " Another Watch Tower Society account says he did not hide his feelings , adding , " His bluntness , even when spoken in kindness , was sometimes misunderstood . " Fellow Watch Tower Society director A. H. Macmillan says Rutherford " spoke as simply and directly to the people as he knew how , and he was an extremely forthright man . He was thoroughly convinced that what he had to say was the truth and that it was a matter of life and death . " Macmillan added , " He would never tolerate anything that would be contrary to what he clearly understood the Bible to teach . He was so strict about that , he would permit nothing that would seem to show a compromise when it came to an issue of the truth . " Author Tony Wills describes him as charitable and generous , and says his sympathy for the poor and oppressed was exceeded only by his hatred for the rich , the oppressors . Wills also notes that he was a dynamic , impatient extrovert . Other authors also address Rutherford 's abrasiveness : James Penton describes him as blunt and moody with an explosive temper , with " a streak of self @-@ righteousness which caused him to regard anyone who opposed him as of the Devil " , while Alan Rogerson notes that he was a " dogmatic and insensitive person , obsessed with his own self @-@ importance . " 
 Rutherford 's confrontation with four Watch Tower Society directors who opposed him in 1917 highlighted both the forcefulness of his personality and his determination to fight for what he believed was right . Penton claims Rutherford played " hard @-@ fisted church politics " and Rogerson accuses Rutherford of using The Watchtower as a propaganda medium to attack his opposers in what was effectively a battle for his position as president . At the heart of his opponents ' complaints was his " autocratic " behavior as he strove to " exercise complete management of the Society and its affairs . " Penton similarly describes Rutherford 's actions in his first year of presidency — including his appointment of new directors , refusal to allow the Society 's accounts to be examined , and his unilateral decision to publish The Finished Mystery — as high @-@ handed and secretive . In contrast , Rutherford claimed , " It was my duty to use the power the Lord had put into my hands to support the interests of the shareholders and all others interested in the Truth throughout the world ... to be unfaithful to them would be unfaithful to the Lord . " Macmillan , who supported Rutherford throughout the crisis , claimed the president was extremely patient and " did everything that he could to help his opposers see their mistake , holding a number of meetings with them , trying to reason with them and show them how contrary their course was to the Society 's charter " . 
 According to Wills , Rutherford emerged from prison in 1919 bitter against the world and the collusion he saw between the clergy and military that had secured his imprisonment . Soon after his release he coined the term " Satan 's organization " to refer to this supposed conspiracy . In Watchtower articles Rutherford was similarly scathing towards big business , politics and the League of Nations . Rogerson describes Rutherford 's attitude towards the clergy — his avowed enemies — as " unadulterated hatred " . His attacks on clergymen , particularly those of the Catholic Church , from the late 1920s were strong enough to attract a ban on his broadcasts by the NBC radio network , which condemned his " rabid attack upon organized religion and the clergy " . He also applied criticizing terms to those who had deserted Watch Tower ranks , calling them the " evil servant " . He urged readers to view with contempt anyone who had " openly rebelled against God 's order or commandments " and also described elective elders of the 1930s who refused to submit to Watch Tower Society administrative changes as " despicable " . 
 Wills states that Rutherford seemed to relish his descriptions of how completely the wicked would be destroyed at Armageddon , dwelling at great length on prophecies of destruction . He claims that towards the close of his ministry Rutherford spent about half of each year 's <unk> writing about Armageddon . 
 According to Penton , Rutherford 's austerity — evidenced by his distaste for Christmas , birthday parties and other popular customs that were described as of pagan origin or that encouraged creature worship and were not to be observed — led in turn to austerity becoming a part of Witness life . In 1938 , he directed that singing be dispensed with at congregation meetings ; singing was reinstated soon after his death . 
 Rutherford 's books and magazine articles reveal his strong views on " the proper place of women " in the church and society . In a 1931 book he linked the post @-@ 1919 rise of women 's movements that encouraged equality of the sexes with satanic influence , and claimed the custom of men tipping their hats to women or standing when a woman approached was a scheme of the devil to turn men from God and indicated an effeminate streak in men who practiced the custom . Mother 's Day was similarly described as part of a plan to turn people away from God . In 1938 he urged adherents to delay marriage and child @-@ bearing until after Armageddon , which Wills claims prompted a strong community bias among Witnesses against marriage . Those who did marry , says Wills , were considered to be weak in faith . At a 1941 convention in Missouri he quoted Rudyard Kipling 's description of women as " a rag and a bone and a hank of hair " . 
 Former Jehovah 's Witness and former Governing Body member Raymond Franz claimed there was no evidence Rutherford engaged in door @-@ to @-@ door ministry despite his assertion that it was a requirement and sacred duty of all Witnesses . Franz claimed to have heard Rutherford 's associates say his responsibilities as president " do not permit his engaging in this activity " . Macmillan , however , related details of Rutherford 's home preaching in 1905 or 1906 when he was baptized , and a 1975 article quoted several Witnesses relating their experiences with Rutherford in the house @-@ to @-@ house ministry in the 1920s . The official history of Jehovah 's Witnesses also notes , " Rutherford personally shared with other <unk> as they engaged in the work of Kingdom proclamation from house to house . " On August 2 , 1928 in a meeting with the Bible Student elders who had attended a general convention in Detroit , Michigan Rutherford listed his responsibilities and concluded " when I have attended to many other details , I have not had very much time to go from door to door . " 
 Authors William Whalen and James Penton have claimed that Rutherford was to Russell what Brigham Young was to Mormon prophet Joseph Smith . Penton contends that both Russell and Smith were capable religious leaders but naive visionaries , while Rutherford and Young were " hard @-@ bitten pragmatists who gave a degree of permanency to the movements they dominated " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rutherford married Mary Malcolm Fetzer of Boonville , Missouri on December 31 , 1891 . Their only child , Malcolm Cleveland , was born on November 10 , 1892 . The couple separated after Joseph Rutherford became president of the Watch Tower Society . Mary remained an active member of the Jehovah 's Witnesses until becoming confined to her home in the years before her death in 1962 at age 93 . 
 Rutherford had reportedly lost the use of one lung from pneumonia suffered during his imprisonment in 1918 and 1919 ; finding New York 's winter weather " impossible " , Rutherford was encouraged by a doctor to " spend as much time as possible " in a more favorable climate . In 1929 , a residence named Beth Sarim ( literally , House of Princes ) was constructed at San Diego , California for Rutherford 's use , initially as winter accommodation and later as a full @-@ time residence . He died at the property in 1942 . The villa was sold in 1948 , with The Watchtower declaring , " It had fully served its purpose and was now only serving as a monument quite expensive to keep . " 
 The standard of Rutherford 's accommodation and his personal conduct attracted criticism from some Bible Students and Jehovah 's Witnesses in the 1930s . Walter F. Salter , the Society 's former branch manager in Canada , wrote a public letter to Rutherford in 1937 , the month he was expelled from the religion , claiming that Rutherford had exclusive use of " luxurious " and " expensive " residences ( in Brooklyn , Staten Island , Germany , and San Diego ) , as well as two Cadillacs and alleged that on more than one occasion he had purchased for Rutherford cases of whiskey , brandy , beer and other liquors , and ' go from " drink to drink " ' . In July 1939 Olin R. Moyle , legal counsel for the Society , wrote an open letter of resignation to the president , in which he complained about behavior of some members of the Watch Tower Society , including Rutherford himself , that he considered excessive and inappropriate . Moyle mentioned California when discussing " the difference between the accommodations furnished to you , and your personal attendants , compared with those furnished to some of your brethren . " Moyle also accused Rutherford of " unkind treatment of the staff , outbursts of anger , discrimination and vulgar language " and condemned his allowing the " glorification of alcohol " at Bethel . Penton notes that Moyle was a " teetotaller " and " puritanical " , but claims Rutherford 's drinking habits were " notorious " and cites unnamed former Brooklyn Bethel workers who told of occasional difficulties in getting Rutherford to the podium to give public talks due to inebriation . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 From the age of 70 , Rutherford underwent several medical treatments for cancer of the colon . This included an operation on November 5 , 1941 , which found " carcinoma of the rectal sigmoid " . Doctors gave him less than six months to live . Rutherford died at Beth Sarim on January 8 , 1942 at the age of 72 . Cause of death was " uraemia due to carcinoma of the rectum due to pelvic metastasis . " 
 A Watch Tower Society staff member said of the announcement of Rutherford 's death , " It was at noontime when the family was assembled for lunch . ... The announcement was brief . There were no speeches . No one took the day off to mourn . Rather , we went back to the factory and worked harder than ever . " 
 Rutherford 's burial was delayed for five months due to legal proceedings arising from his desire to be buried at Beth Sarim , which he had previously expressed to three close advisers from Brooklyn headquarters . According to Consolation , " Judge Rutherford looked for the early triumph of ' the King of the East ' , Christ Jesus , now leading the host of heaven , and he desired to be buried at dawn facing the rising sun , in an isolated part of the ground which would be administered by the princes , who should return from their graves . " Based on his claims that resurrected biblical characters would live at Beth Sarim , Rutherford concluded that it was appropriate that his bones be buried on the property . 
 The legal problem arose because Beth Sarim was not a legally zoned cemetery . Witnesses collected more than 14 @,@ 000 signatures for two petitions — one supporting his burial at Beth Sarim , another for a second preferred site on a nearby Watch Tower Society property named Beth @-@ Shan — that Rutherford 's dying wish might be granted . Consolation condemned San Diego County officials for their refusal to grant a permit for Rutherford 's burial at either property , stating " It was not the fate of the bones which they decided , but their own destiny . Nor is their blood on anyone else 's head , because they were told three times that to fight against God , or to tamper with His servant 's bones even , would bring upon them the condemnation of the Lord . ... So their responsibility is fixed , and they followed the course of Satan . " 
 Speculation that Rutherford was secretly buried at Beth Sarim has been called " private rumor " , ' frequently disproven ' , and " myth " . The May 4 , 1942 issue of Time magazine noted Rutherford 's burial at Rossville , New York , on Staten Island ; a private burial plot for Watch Tower branch volunteers is on Woodrow Road . In 2002 , a caretaker at the immediately adjoining graveyard answered an inquiry about Watch Tower 's graveyard by noting , " I couldn 't tell you who is buried on it because it has absolutely no markers or headstones " . 
 Rutherford was succeeded by Nathan Homer Knorr as president of the Watch Tower Society . 
 = Harold Pinter = 
 Harold Pinter CH CBE ( / <unk> / ; 10 October 1930 – 24 December 2008 ) was a Nobel Prize @-@ winning English playwright , screenwriter , director and actor . One of the most influential modern British dramatists , his writing career spanned more than 50 years . His best @-@ known plays include The Birthday Party ( 1957 ) , The Homecoming ( 1964 ) , and Betrayal ( 1978 ) , each of which he adapted for the screen . His screenplay adaptations of others ' works include The Servant ( 1963 ) , The Go @-@ Between ( 1971 ) , The French Lieutenant 's Woman ( 1981 ) , The Trial ( 1993 ) , and Sleuth ( 2007 ) . He also directed or acted in radio , stage , television , and film productions of his own and others ' works . 
 Pinter was born and raised in Hackney , east London , and educated at Hackney Downs School . He was a sprinter and a keen cricket player , acting in school plays and writing poetry . He attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art but did not complete the course . He was fined for refusing National service as a conscientious objector . Subsequently , he continued training at the Central School of Speech and Drama and worked in repertory theatre in Ireland and England . In 1956 he married actress Vivien Merchant and had a son , Daniel born in 1958 . He left Merchant in 1975 and married author Lady Antonia Fraser in 1980 . 
 Pinter 's career as a playwright began with a production of The Room in 1957 . His second play , The Birthday Party , closed after eight performances , but was enthusiastically reviewed by critic Harold Hobson . His early works were described by critics as " comedy of menace " . Later plays such as No Man 's Land ( 1975 ) and Betrayal ( 1978 ) became known as " memory plays " . He appeared as an actor in productions of his own work on radio and film . He also undertook a number of roles in works by other writers . He directed nearly 50 productions for stage , theatre and screen . Pinter received over 50 awards , prizes , and other honours , including the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2005 and the French Légion d 'honneur in 2007 . 
 Despite frail health after being diagnosed with oesophageal cancer in December 2001 , Pinter continued to act on stage and screen , last performing the title role of Samuel Beckett 's one @-@ act monologue Krapp 's Last Tape , for the 50th anniversary season of the Royal Court Theatre , in October 2006 . He died from liver cancer on 24 December 2008 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Pinter was born on 10 October 1930 , in Hackney , east London , the only child of English parents of Jewish Eastern European ancestry : his father , Hyman " Jack " Pinter ( 1902 – 1997 ) was a ladies ' tailor ; his mother , Frances ( née Moskowitz ; 1904 – 1992 ) , a housewife . Pinter believed an aunt 's erroneous view that the family was Sephardic and had fled the Spanish Inquisition ; thus , for his early poems , Pinter used the pseudonym Pinta and at other times used variations such as da Pinto . Later research by Lady Antonia Fraser , Pinter 's second wife , revealed the legend to be apocryphal ; three of Pinter 's grandparents came from Poland and the fourth from Odessa , so the family was Ashkenazic . 
 Pinter 's family home in London is described by his official biographer Michael Billington as " a solid , red @-@ brick , three @-@ storey villa just off the noisy , bustling , traffic @-@ ridden thoroughfare of the Lower Clapton Road " . In 1940 and 1941 , after the Blitz , Pinter was evacuated from their house in London to Cornwall and Reading . Billington states that the " life @-@ and @-@ death intensity of daily experience " before and during the Blitz left Pinter with profound memories " of loneliness , bewilderment , separation and loss : themes that are in all his works . " 
 Pinter discovered his social potential as a student at Hackney Downs School , a London grammar school , between 1944 and 1948 . " Partly through the school and partly through the social life of Hackney Boys ' Club ... he formed an almost <unk> belief in the power of male friendship . The friends he made in those days — most particularly Henry Woolf , Michael ( Mick ) Goldstein and Morris ( Moishe ) Wernick — have always been a vital part of the emotional texture of his life . " A major influence on Pinter was his inspirational English teacher Joseph Brearley , who directed him in school plays and with whom he took long walks , talking about literature . According to Billington , under Brearley 's instruction , " Pinter shone at English , wrote for the school magazine and discovered a gift for acting . " In 1947 and 1948 , he played Romeo and Macbeth in productions directed by Brearley . 
 At the age of 12 , Pinter began writing poetry , and in spring 1947 , his poetry was first published in the Hackney Downs School Magazine . In 1950 , his poetry was first published outside of the school magazine in Poetry London , some of it under the pseudonym " Harold Pinta " . 
 = = = Sport and friendship = = = 
 Pinter enjoyed running and broke the Hackney Downs School sprinting record . He was a cricket enthusiast , taking his bat with him when evacuated during the Blitz . In 1971 he told Mel Gussow : " one of my main obsessions in life is the game of cricket — I play and watch and read about it all the time . " He was chairman of the <unk> Cricket Club , a supporter of Yorkshire Cricket Club , and devoted a section of his official website to the sport . One wall of his study was dominated by a portrait of himself as a young man playing cricket , which was described by Sarah Lyall , writing in The New York Times : " The painted Mr. Pinter , poised to swing his bat , has a wicked glint in his eye ; testosterone all but flies off the canvas . " Pinter approved of the " urban and exacting idea of cricket as a bold theatre of aggression . " After his death , several of his school contemporaries recalled his achievements in sports , especially cricket and running . The BBC Radio 4 memorial tribute included an essay on Pinter and cricket . 
 Other interests that Pinter mentioned to interviewers are family , love and sex , drinking , writing , and reading . According to Billington , " If the notion of male loyalty , competitive rivalry and fear of betrayal forms a constant thread in Pinter 's work from The Dwarfs onwards , its origins can be found in his teenage Hackney years . Pinter adores women , enjoys flirting with them , worships their resilience and strength . But , in his early work especially , they are often seen as disruptive influences on some pure and Platonic ideal of male friendship : one of the most crucial of all Pinter 's lost Edens . " 
 = = = Early theatrical training and stage experience = = = 
 Beginning in late 1948 , Pinter attended the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art for two terms , but hating the school , missed most of his classes , feigned a nervous breakdown , and dropped out in 1949 . In 1948 he was called up for National Service . He registered as a conscientious objector , was brought to trial twice , and was ultimately fined for refusing to serve . He had a small part in the Christmas pantomime Dick Whittington and His Cat at the Chesterfield Hippodrome in 1949 to 1950 . From January to July 1951 , he attended the Central School of Speech and Drama . 
 From 1951 to 1952 , he toured Ireland with the <unk> McMaster repertory company , playing over a dozen roles . In 1952 he began acting in regional English repertory productions ; from 1953 to 1954 , he worked for the Donald Wolfit Company , at the King 's Theatre , Hammersmith , performing eight roles . From 1954 until 1959 , Pinter acted under the stage name David Baron . In all , Pinter played over 20 roles under that name . To supplement his income from acting , Pinter worked as a waiter , a postman , a bouncer , and a snow @-@ clearer , meanwhile , according to Mark Batty , " harbouring ambitions as a poet and writer . " In October 1989 Pinter recalled : " I was in English rep as an actor for about 12 years . My favourite roles were undoubtedly the sinister ones . They 're something to get your teeth into . " During that period , he also performed occasional roles in his own and others ' works for radio , TV , and film , as he continued to do throughout his career . 
 = = = Marriages and family life = = = 
 From 1956 until 1980 , Pinter was married to Vivien Merchant , an actress whom he met on tour , perhaps best known for her performance in the 1966 film Alfie . Their son , Daniel , was born in 1958 . Through the early 1970s , Merchant appeared in many of Pinter 's works , including The Homecoming on stage ( 1965 ) and screen ( 1973 ) , but the marriage was turbulent . For seven years , from 1962 to 1969 , Pinter was engaged in a clandestine affair with BBC @-@ TV presenter and journalist Joan Bakewell , which inspired his 1978 play Betrayal , and also throughout that period and beyond he had an affair with an American socialite , whom he nicknamed " Cleopatra " . This relationship was another secret he kept from both his wife and Bakewell . Initially , Betrayal was thought to be a response to his later affair with historian Antonia Fraser , the wife of Hugh Fraser , and Pinter 's " marital crack @-@ up " . 
 Pinter and Merchant had both met Fraser in 1969 , when all three worked together on a National Gallery programme about Mary , Queen of Scots ; several years later , on 8 – 9 January 1975 , Pinter and Fraser became romantically involved . That meeting initiated their five @-@ year extramarital love affair . After hiding the relationship from Merchant for two and a half months , on 21 March 1975 , Pinter finally told her " I 've met somebody " . After that , " Life in Hanover Terrace gradually became impossible " , and Pinter moved out of their house on 28 April 1975 , five days after the première of No Man 's Land . 
 In mid @-@ August 1977 , after Pinter and Fraser had spent two years living in borrowed and rented quarters , they moved into her former family home in Holland Park , where Pinter began writing Betrayal . He reworked it later , while on holiday at the Grand Hotel , in Eastbourne , in early January 1978 . After the Frasers ' divorce had become final in 1977 and the <unk> ' in 1980 , Pinter married Fraser on 27 November 1980 . Because of a two @-@ week delay in Merchant 's signing the divorce papers , however , the reception had to precede the actual ceremony , originally scheduled to occur on his 50th birthday . Vivien Merchant died of acute alcoholism in the first week of October 1982 , at the age of 53 . Billington writes that Pinter " did everything possible to support " her and regretted that he ultimately became estranged from their son , Daniel , after their separation , Pinter 's remarriage , and Merchant 's death . 
 A reclusive gifted musician and writer , Daniel changed his surname from Pinter to Brand , the maiden name of his maternal grandmother , before Pinter and Fraser became romantically involved ; while according to Fraser , his father couldn 't understand it , she says that she could : " Pinter is such a distinctive name that he must have got tired of being asked , ' Any relation ? ' " Michael Billington wrote that Pinter saw Daniel 's name change as " a largely pragmatic move on Daniel 's part designed to keep the press ... at bay . " Fraser told Billington that Daniel " was very nice to me at a time when it would have been only too easy for him to have turned on me ... simply because he had been the sole focus of his father 's love and now manifestly wasn 't . " Still unreconciled at the time of his father 's death , Daniel Brand did not attend Pinter 's funeral . 
 Billington observes that " The break @-@ up with Vivien and the new life with Antonia was to have a profound effect on Pinter 's personality and his work , " though he adds that Fraser herself did not claim to have influence over Pinter or his writing . In her own contemporaneous diary entry dated 15 January 1993 , Fraser described herself more as Pinter 's literary midwife . Indeed , she told Billington that " other people [ such as Peggy Ashcroft , among others ] had a shaping influence on [ Pinter 's ] politics " and attributed changes in his writing and political views to a change from " an unhappy , complicated personal life ... to a happy , uncomplicated personal life " , so that " a side of Harold which had always been there was somehow released . I think you can see that in his work after No Man 's Land [ 1975 ] , which was a very bleak play . " 
 Pinter was content in his second marriage and enjoyed family life with his six adult stepchildren and 17 step @-@ grandchildren . Even after battling cancer for several years , he considered himself " a very lucky man in every respect " . Sarah Lyall notes in her 2007 interview with Pinter in The New York Times that his " latest work , a slim pamphlet called " Six Poems for A. , " comprises poems written over 32 years , with " A " of course being Lady Antonia . The first of the poems was written in Paris , where she and Mr. Pinter traveled soon after they met . More than three decades later the two are rarely apart , and Mr. Pinter turns soft , even cozy , when he talks about his wife . " In that interview Pinter " acknowledged that his plays — full of infidelity , cruelty , inhumanity , the lot — seem at odds with his domestic contentment . ' How can you write a happy play ? ' he said . ' Drama is about conflict and degrees of perturbation , disarray . I 've never been able to write a happy play , but I 've been able to enjoy a happy life . ' " After his death , Fraser told The Guardian : " He was a great man , and it was a privilege to live with him for over 33 years . He will never be forgotten . " 
 = = = Civic activities and political activism = = = 
 In 1948 – 49 , when he was 18 , Pinter opposed the politics of the Cold War , leading to his decision to become a conscientious objector and to refuse to comply with National Service in the British military . However , he told interviewers that , if he had been old enough at the time , he would have fought against the Nazis in World War II . He seemed to express ambivalence , both indifference and hostility , towards political structures and politicians in his Fall 1966 Paris Review interview conducted by Lawrence M. <unk> . Yet , he had been an early member of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and also had supported the British Anti @-@ Apartheid Movement ( 1959 – 1994 ) , participating in British artists ' refusal to permit professional productions of their work in South Africa in 1963 and in subsequent related campaigns . In " A Play and Its Politics " , a 1985 interview with Nicholas Hern , Pinter described his earlier plays retrospectively from the perspective of the politics of power and the dynamics of oppression . 
 In his last 25 years , Pinter increasingly focused his essays , interviews and public appearances directly on political issues . He was an officer in International PEN , travelling with American playwright Arthur Miller to Turkey in 1985 on a mission co @-@ sponsored with a Helsinki Watch committee to investigate and protest against the torture of imprisoned writers . There he met victims of political oppression and their families . Pinter 's experiences in Turkey and his knowledge of the Turkish suppression of the Kurdish language inspired his 1988 play Mountain Language . He was also an active member of the Cuba Solidarity Campaign , an organisation that " campaigns in the UK against the US blockade of Cuba " . In 2001 Pinter joined the International Committee to Defend Slobodan Milošević ( <unk> ) , which appealed for a fair trial and for the freedom of Slobodan Milošević , signing a related " Artists ' Appeal for Milošević " in 2004 . 
 Pinter strongly opposed the 1991 Gulf War , the 1999 NATO bombing campaign in Yugoslavia during the Kosovo War , the United States ' 2001 War in Afghanistan , and the 2003 Invasion of Iraq . Among his provocative political statements , Pinter called Prime Minister Tony Blair a " deluded idiot " and compared the administration of President George W. Bush to Nazi Germany . He stated that the United States " was charging towards world domination while the American public and Britain 's ' mass @-@ murdering ' prime minister sat back and watched . " He was very active in the antiwar movement in the United Kingdom , speaking at rallies held by the Stop the War Coalition and frequently criticising American aggression , as when he asked rhetorically , in his acceptance speech for the Wilfred Owen Award for Poetry on 18 March 2007 : " What would Wilfred Owen make of the invasion of Iraq ? A bandit act , an act of blatant state terrorism , demonstrating absolute contempt for the conception of international law . " 
 Harold Pinter earned a reputation for being notoriously pugnacious , enigmatic , taciturn , terse , prickly , explosive and forbidding . Pinter 's blunt political statements , and the award of the Nobel Prize in Literature , elicited strong criticism and even , at times , provoked ridicule and personal attacks . The historian Geoffrey Alderman , author of the official history of Hackney Downs School , expressed his own " Jewish View " of Harold Pinter : " Whatever his merit as a writer , actor and director , on an ethical plane Harold Pinter seems to me to have been intensely flawed , and his moral compass deeply fractured . " David Edgar , writing in The Guardian , defended Pinter against what he termed Pinter 's " being berated by the <unk> " like Johann Hari , who felt that he did not " deserve " to win the Nobel Prize . Later Pinter continued to campaign against the Iraq War and on behalf of other political causes that he supported . As Alderman points out , for example , Pinter signed the mission statement of Jews for Justice for Palestinians in 2005 and its full @-@ page advertisement , " What Is Israel Doing ? A Call by Jews in Britain " , published in The Times on 6 July 2006 , and he was a patron of the Palestine Festival of Literature . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = As actor = = = 
 Pinter 's acting career spanned over 50 years and , although he often played villains , included a wide range of roles on stage and in radio , film , and television . In addition to roles in radio and television adaptations of his own plays and dramatic sketches , early in his screenwriting career he made several cameo appearances in films based on his own screenplays ; for example , as a society man in The Servant ( 1963 ) and as Mr. Bell in Accident ( 1967 ) , both directed by Joseph Losey ; and as a bookshop customer in his later film Turtle Diary ( 1985 ) , starring Michael Gambon , Glenda Jackson , and Ben Kingsley . 
 Pinter 's notable film and television roles included the corrupt lawyer Saul Abrahams , opposite Peter O 'Toole , in BBC TV 's Rogue Male ( 1976 ) , a remake of the 1941 film noir Man Hunt , released on DVD in 2002 ; and a drunk Irish journalist in <unk> , Go Down ( starring Judi Dench and Jeremy Irons ) distributed on BBC Two in 1978 and released in movie theatres in 2002 . Pinter 's later film roles included the criminal Sam Ross in Mojo ( 1997 ) , written and directed by Jez Butterworth , based on Butterworth 's play of the same name ; Sir Thomas Bertram ( his most substantial feature @-@ film role ) in Mansfield Park ( 1998 ) , a character that Pinter described as " a very civilised man ... a man of great sensibility but in fact , he 's upholding and sustaining a totally brutal system [ the slave trade ] from which he derives his money " ; and Uncle Benny , opposite Pierce Brosnan and Geoffrey Rush , in The Tailor of Panama ( 2001 ) . In television films , he played Mr. Bearing , the father of ovarian cancer patient Vivian Bearing , played by Emma Thompson in Mike Nichols 's HBO film of the Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning play Wit ( 2001 ) ; and the Director opposite John Gielgud ( Gielgud 's last role ) and Rebecca Pidgeon in Catastrophe , by Samuel Beckett , directed by David Mamet as part of Beckett on Film ( 2001 ) . 
 = = = As director = = = 
 Pinter began to direct more frequently during the 1970s , becoming an associate director of the National Theatre ( NT ) in 1973 . He directed almost 50 productions of his own and others ' plays for stage , film , and television , including 10 productions of works by Simon Gray : the stage and / or film premières of Butley ( stage , 1971 ; film , 1974 ) , Otherwise Engaged ( 1975 ) , The Rear Column ( stage , 1978 ; TV , 1980 ) , Close of Play ( NT , 1979 ) , Quartermaine 's Terms ( 1981 ) , Life Support ( 1997 ) , The Late Middle Classes ( 1999 ) , and The Old Masters ( 2004 ) . Several of those productions starred Alan Bates ( 1934 – 2003 ) , who originated the stage and screen roles of not only Butley but also Mick in Pinter 's first major commercial success , The Caretaker ( stage , 1960 ; film , 1964 ) ; and in Pinter 's double @-@ bill produced at the Lyric Hammersmith in 1984 , he played Nicolas in One for the Road and the cab driver in Victoria Station . Among over 35 plays that Pinter directed were Next of Kin ( 1974 ) , by John Hopkins ; Blithe Spirit ( 1976 ) , by Noël Coward ; The Innocents ( 1976 ) , by William Archibald ; Circe and Bravo ( 1986 ) , by Donald Freed ; Taking Sides ( 1995 ) , by Ronald Harwood ; and Twelve Angry Men ( 1996 ) , by Reginald Rose . 
 = = = As playwright = = = 
 Pinter was the author of 29 plays and 15 dramatic sketches and the co @-@ author of two works for stage and radio . He was considered to have been one of the most influential modern British dramatists , Along with the 1967 Tony Award for Best Play for The Homecoming and several other American awards and award nominations , he and his plays received many awards in the UK and elsewhere throughout the world . His style has entered the English language as an adjective , " Pinteresque " , although Pinter himself disliked the term and found it meaningless . 
 = = = = " Comedies of menace " ( 1957 – 1968 ) = = = = 
 Pinter 's first play , The Room , written and first performed in 1957 , was a student production at the University of Bristol , directed by his good friend , actor Henry Woolf , who also originated the role of Mr. Kidd ( which he reprised in 2001 and 2007 ) . After Pinter mentioned that he had an idea for a play , Woolf asked him to write it so that he could direct it to fulfill a requirement for his postgraduate work . Pinter wrote it in three days . The production was described by Billington as " a staggeringly confident debut which attracted the attention of a young producer , Michael <unk> , who decided to present Pinter 's next play , The Birthday Party , at the Lyric Hammersmith , in 1958 . " 
 Written in 1957 and produced in 1958 , Pinter 's second play , The Birthday Party , one of his best @-@ known works , was initially both a commercial and critical disaster , despite an enthusiastic review in The Sunday Times by its influential drama critic Harold Hobson , which appeared only after the production had closed and could not be reprieved . Critical accounts often quote Hobson : 
 I am well aware that Mr Pinter [ ' ] s play received extremely bad notices last Tuesday morning . At the moment I write these [ words ] it is uncertain even whether the play will still be in the bill by the time they appear , though it is probable it will soon be seen elsewhere . Deliberately , I am willing to risk whatever reputation I have as a judge of plays by saying that The Birthday Party is not a Fourth , not even a Second , but a First [ as in Class Honours ] ; and that Pinter , on the evidence of his work , possesses the most original , disturbing and arresting talent in theatrical London ... Mr Pinter and The Birthday Party , despite their experiences last week , will be heard of again . Make a note of their names . 
 Pinter himself and later critics generally credited Hobson as bolstering him and perhaps even rescuing his career . 
 In a review published in 1958 , borrowing from the subtitle of The Lunatic View : A Comedy of Menace , a play by David <unk> , critic Irving Wardle called Pinter 's early plays " comedy of menace " — a label that people have applied repeatedly to his work . Such plays begin with an apparently innocent situation that becomes both threatening and " absurd " as Pinter 's characters behave in ways often perceived as inexplicable by his audiences and one another . Pinter acknowledges the influence of Samuel Beckett , particularly on his early work ; they became friends , sending each other drafts of their works in progress for comments . 
 Pinter wrote The Hothouse in 1958 , which he shelved for over 20 years ( See " Overtly political plays and sketches " below ) . Next he wrote The Dumb Waiter ( 1959 ) , which premièred in Germany and was then produced in a double bill with The Room at the Hampstead Theatre Club , in London , in 1960 . It was then not produced often until the 1980s , and it has been revived more frequently since 2000 , including the West End Trafalgar Studios production in 2007 . The first production of The Caretaker , at the Arts Theatre Club , in London , in 1960 , established Pinter 's theatrical reputation . The play transferred to the Duchess Theatre in May 1960 and ran for 444 performances , receiving an Evening Standard Award for best play of 1960 . Large radio and television audiences for his one @-@ act play A Night Out , along with the popularity of his revue sketches , propelled him to further critical attention . In 1964 , The Birthday Party was revived both on television ( with Pinter himself in the role of Goldberg ) and on stage ( directed by Pinter at the Aldwych Theatre ) and was well received . 
 By the time Peter Hall 's London production of The Homecoming ( 1964 ) reached Broadway in 1967 , Pinter had become a celebrity playwright , and the play garnered four Tony Awards , among other awards . During this period , Pinter also wrote the radio play A Slight Ache , first broadcast on the BBC Third Programme in 1959 and then adapted to the stage and performed at the Arts Theatre Club in 1961 . A Night Out ( 1960 ) was broadcast to a large audience on Associated British Corporation 's television show Armchair Theatre , after being transmitted on BBC Radio 3 , also in 1960 . His play Night School was first televised in 1960 on Associated Rediffusion . The Collection premièred at the Aldwych Theatre in 1962 , and The Dwarfs , adapted from Pinter 's then unpublished novel of the same title , was first broadcast on radio in 1960 , then adapted for the stage ( also at the Arts Theatre Club ) in a double bill with The Lover , which was then televised on Associated Rediffusion in 1963 ; and Tea Party , a play that Pinter developed from his 1963 short story , first broadcast on BBC TV in 1965 . 
 Working as both a screenwriter and as a playwright , Pinter composed a script called The Compartment ( 1966 ) , for a trilogy of films to be contributed by Samuel Beckett , Eugène Ionesco , and Pinter , of which only Beckett 's film , titled Film , was actually produced . Then Pinter turned his unfilmed script into a television play , which was produced as The Basement , both on BBC 2 and also on stage in 1968 . 
 = = = = " Memory plays " ( 1968 – 1982 ) = = = = 
 From the late 1960s through the early 1980s , Pinter wrote a series of plays and sketches that explore complex ambiguities , elegiac mysteries , comic vagaries , and other " quicksand @-@ like " characteristics of memory and which critics sometimes classify as Pinter 's " memory plays " . These include Landscape ( 1968 ) , Silence ( 1969 ) , Night ( 1969 ) , Old Times ( 1971 ) , No Man 's Land ( 1975 ) , The Proust Screenplay ( 1977 ) , Betrayal ( 1978 ) , Family Voices ( 1981 ) , Victoria Station ( 1982 ) , and A Kind of Alaska ( 1982 ) . Some of Pinter 's later plays , including Party Time ( 1991 ) , Moonlight ( 1993 ) , Ashes to Ashes ( 1996 ) , and Celebration ( 2000 ) , draw upon some features of his " memory " dramaturgy in their focus on the past in the present , but they have personal and political resonances and other tonal differences from these earlier memory plays . 
 = = = = Overtly political plays and sketches ( 1980 – 2000 ) = = = = 
 Following a three @-@ year period of creative drought in the early 1980s after his marriage to Antonia Fraser and the death of Vivien Merchant , Pinter 's plays tended to become shorter and more overtly political , serving as critiques of oppression , torture , and other abuses of human rights , linked by the apparent " invulnerability of power . " Just before this hiatus , in 1979 , Pinter re @-@ discovered his manuscript of The Hothouse , which he had written in 1958 but had set aside ; he revised it and then directed its first production himself at Hampstead Theatre in London , in 1980 . Like his plays of the 1980s , The Hothouse concerns authoritarianism and the abuses of power politics , but it is also a comedy , like his earlier comedies of menace . Pinter played the major role of <unk> in a 1995 revival at the Minerva Theatre , Chichester . 
 Pinter 's brief dramatic sketch Precisely ( 1983 ) is a <unk> between two bureaucrats exploring the absurd power politics of mutual nuclear annihilation and deterrence . His first overtly political one @-@ act play is One for the Road ( 1984 ) . In 1985 Pinter stated that whereas his earlier plays presented metaphors for power and powerlessness , the later ones present literal realities of power and its abuse . Pinter 's " political theater dramatizes the interplay and conflict of the opposing poles of involvement and disengagement . " Mountain Language ( 1988 ) is about the Turkish suppression of the Kurdish language . The dramatic sketch The New World Order ( 1991 ) provides what Robert Cushman , writing in The Independent described as " 10 nerve wracking minutes " of two men threatening to torture a third man who is blindfolded , gagged and bound in a chair ; Pinter directed the British première at the Royal Court Theatre Upstairs , where it opened on 9 July 1991 , and the production then transferred to Washington , D.C. , where it was revived in 1994 . Pinter 's longer political satire Party Time ( 1991 ) premièred at the Almeida Theatre in London , in a double @-@ bill with Mountain Language . Pinter adapted it as a screenplay for television in 1992 , directing that production , first broadcast in the UK on Channel 4 on 17 November 1992 . 
 Intertwining political and personal concerns , his next full @-@ length plays , Moonlight ( 1993 ) and Ashes to Ashes ( 1996 ) are set in domestic households and focus on dying and death ; in their personal conversations in Ashes to Ashes , Devlin and Rebecca allude to unspecified atrocities relating to the Holocaust . After experiencing the deaths of first his mother ( 1992 ) and then his father ( 1997 ) , again merging the personal and the political , Pinter wrote the poems " Death " ( 1997 ) and " The Disappeared " ( 1998 ) . 
 Pinter 's last stage play , Celebration ( 2000 ) , is a social satire set in an opulent restaurant , which lampoons The Ivy , a fashionable venue in London 's West End theatre district , and its patrons who " have just come from performances of either the ballet or the opera . Not that they can remember a darn thing about what they saw , including the titles . [ These ] gilded , foul @-@ mouthed souls are just as myopic when it comes to their own table mates ( and for that matter , their food ) , with conversations that usually connect only on the surface , if there . " On its surface the play may appear to have fewer overtly political resonances than some of the plays from the 1980s and 1990s ; but its central male characters , brothers named Lambert and Matt , are members of the elite ( like the men in charge in Party Time ) , who describe themselves as " peaceful strategy consultants [ because ] we don 't carry guns . " At the next table , Russell , a banker , describes himself as a " totally disordered personality ... a psychopath , " while Lambert " vows to be reincarnated as ' [ a ] more civilised , [ a ] gentler person , [ a ] nicer person ' . " These characters ' deceptively smooth exteriors mask their extreme viciousness . Celebration evokes familiar Pinteresque political contexts : " The ritzy <unk> in ' Celebration ' ... and the quieter working @-@ class <unk> of ' The Room ' ... have everything in common beneath the surface " . " Money remains in the service of entrenched power , and the brothers in the play are ' strategy consultants ' whose jobs involve force and violence ... It is tempting but inaccurate to equate the comic power inversions of the social behavior in Celebration with lasting change in larger political structures " , according to Grimes , for whom the play indicates Pinter 's pessimism about the possibility of changing the status quo . Yet , as the Waiter 's often comically unbelievable reminiscences about his grandfather demonstrate in Celebration , Pinter 's final stage plays also extend some expressionistic aspects of his earlier " memory plays " , while harking back to his " comedies of menace " , as illustrated in the characters and in the Waiter 's final speech : 
 My grandfather introduced me to the mystery of life and I 'm still in the middle of it . I can 't find the door to get out . My grandfather got out of it . He got right out of it . He left it behind him and he didn 't look back . He got that absolutely right . And I 'd like to make one further <unk> stands still . Slow fade . 
 During 2000 – 2001 , there were also simultaneous productions of Remembrance of Things Past , Pinter 's stage adaptation of his unpublished Proust Screenplay , written in collaboration with and directed by Di Trevis , at the Royal National Theatre , and a revival of The Caretaker directed by Patrick Marber and starring Michael Gambon , Rupert Graves , and Douglas Hodge , at the Comedy Theatre . 
 Like Celebration , Pinter 's penultimate sketch , Press Conference ( 2002 ) , " invokes both torture and the fragile , circumscribed existence of dissent " . In its première in the National Theatre 's two @-@ part production of Sketches , despite undergoing chemotherapy at the time , Pinter played the ruthless Minister willing to murder little children for the benefit of " The State " . 
 = = = As screenwriter = = = 
 Pinter composed 27 screenplays and film scripts for cinema and television , many of which were filmed , or adapted as stage plays . His fame as a screenwriter began with his three screenplays written for films directed by Joseph Losey , leading to their close friendship : The Servant ( 1963 ) , based on the novel by Robin Maugham ; Accident ( 1967 ) , adapted from the novel by Nicholas Mosley ; and The Go @-@ Between ( 1971 ) , based on the novel by L. P. Hartley . Films based on Pinter 's adaptations of his own stage plays are : The Caretaker ( 1963 ) , directed by Clive Donner ; The Birthday Party ( 1968 ) , directed by William Friedkin ; The Homecoming ( 1973 ) , directed by Peter Hall ; and Betrayal ( 1983 ) , directed by David Jones . 
 Pinter also adapted other writers ' novels to screenplays , including The Pumpkin Eater ( 1964 ) , based on the novel by Penelope Mortimer , directed by Jack Clayton ; The Quiller Memorandum ( 1966 ) , from the 1965 spy novel The Berlin Memorandum , by <unk> Trevor , directed by Michael Anderson ; The Last Tycoon ( 1976 ) , from the unfinished novel by F. Scott Fitzgerald , directed by Elia Kazan ; The French Lieutenant 's Woman ( 1981 ) , from the novel by John Fowles , directed by Karel Reisz ; Turtle Diary ( 1985 ) , based on the novel by Russell Hoban ; The Heat of the Day ( 1988 ) , a television film , from the 1949 novel by Elizabeth Bowen ; The Comfort of Strangers ( 1990 ) , from the novel by Ian McEwan , directed by Paul Schrader ; and The Trial ( 1993 ) , from the novel by Franz Kafka , directed by David Jones . 
 His commissioned screenplays of others ' works for the films The <unk> 's Tale ( 1990 ) , The Remains of the Day ( 1990 ) , and Lolita ( 1997 ) , remain unpublished and in the case of the latter two films , uncredited , though several scenes from or aspects of his scripts were used in these finished films . His screenplays The Proust Screenplay ( 1972 ) , Victory ( 1982 ) , and The Dreaming Child ( 1997 ) and his unpublished screenplay The Tragedy of King Lear ( 2000 ) have not been filmed . A section of Pinter 's Proust Screenplay was , however , released as the 1984 film Swann in Love ( Un amour de Swann ) , directed by Volker <unk> , and it was also adapted by Michael Bakewell as a two @-@ hour radio drama broadcast on BBC Radio 3 in 1995 , before Pinter and director Di Trevis collaborated to adapt it for the 2000 National Theatre production . 
 Pinter 's last filmed screenplay was an adaptation of the 1970 Tony Award @-@ winning play Sleuth , by Anthony Shaffer , which was commissioned by Jude Law , one of the film 's producers . It is the basis for the 2007 film Sleuth , directed by Kenneth Branagh . Pinter 's screenplays for The French Lieutenant 's Woman and Betrayal were nominated for Academy Awards in 1981 and 1983 , respectively . 
 = = = 2001 – 2008 = = = 
 From 16 to 31 July 2001 , a Harold Pinter Festival celebrating his work , curated by Michael Colgan , artistic director of the Gate Theatre , Dublin , was held as part of the annual Lincoln Center Festival at Lincoln Center in New York City . Pinter participated both as an actor , as Nicolas in One for the Road , and as a director of a double bill pairing his last play , Celebration , with his first play , The Room . As part of a two @-@ week " Harold Pinter Homage " at the World Leaders Festival of Creative Genius , held from 24 September to 30 October 2001 , at the <unk> Centre , in Toronto , Canada , Pinter presented a dramatic reading of Celebration ( 2000 ) and also participated in a public interview as part of the International Festival of Authors . 
 In December 2001 , Pinter was diagnosed with oesophageal cancer , for which , in 2002 , he underwent an operation and chemotherapy . During the course of his treatment , he directed a production of his play No Man 's Land , and wrote and performed in a new sketch , " Press Conference " , for a production of his dramatic sketches at the National Theatre , and from 2002 on he was increasingly active in political causes , writing and presenting politically charged poetry , essays , speeches , as well as involved in developing his final two screenplay adaptations , The Tragedy of King Lear and Sleuth , whose drafts are in the British Library 's Harold Pinter Archive ( Add MS <unk> / 2 ) . 
 From 9 to 25 January 2003 , the Manitoba Theatre Centre , in Manitoba , Canada , held a nearly month @-@ long <unk> , in which over 130 performances of twelve of Pinter 's plays were performed by a dozen different theatre companies . Productions during the Festival included : The Hothouse , Night School , The Lover , The Dumb Waiter , The Homecoming , The Birthday Party , Monologue , One for the Road , The Caretaker , Ashes to Ashes , Celebration , and No Man 's Land . 
 In 2005 , Pinter stated that he had stopped writing plays and that he would be devoting his efforts more to his political activism and writing poetry : " I think I 've written 29 plays . I think it 's enough for me ... My energies are going in different directions — over the last few years I 've made a number of political speeches at various locations and ceremonies ... I 'm using a lot of energy more specifically about political states of affairs , which I think are very , very worrying as things stand . " Some of this later poetry included " The ' Special Relationship ' " , " Laughter " , and " The Watcher " . 
 From 2005 , Pinter suffered ill health , including a rare skin disease called <unk> and " a form of septicaemia that afflict [ ed ] his feet and made it difficult for him to walk . " Yet , he completed his screenplay for the film of Sleuth in 2005 . His last dramatic work for radio , Voices ( 2005 ) , a collaboration with composer James Clarke , adapting selected works by Pinter to music , premièred on BBC Radio 3 on his 75th birthday on 10 October 2005 . Three days later , it was announced that he had won the 2005 Nobel Prize in Literature . 
 In an interview with Pinter in 2006 , conducted by critic Michael Billington as part of the cultural programme of the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin , Italy , Pinter confirmed that he would continue to write poetry but not plays . In response , the audience shouted No in unison , urging him to keep writing . Along with the international symposium on Pinter : Passion , Poetry , Politics , curated by Billington , the 2006 Europe Theatre Prize theatrical events celebrating Pinter included new productions ( in French ) of Precisely ( 1983 ) , One for the Road ( 1984 ) , Mountain Language ( 1988 ) , The New World Order ( 1991 ) , Party Time ( 1991 ) , and Press Conference ( 2002 ) ( French versions by Jean Pavans ) ; and Pinter Plays , Poetry & Prose , an evening of dramatic readings , directed by Alan Stanford , of the Gate Theatre , Dublin . In June 2006 , the British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) hosted a celebration of Pinter 's films curated by his friend , the playwright David Hare . Hare introduced the selection of film clips by saying : " To jump back into the world of Pinter 's movies ... is to remind yourself of a literate mainstream cinema , focused as much as Bergman 's is on the human face , in which tension is maintained by a carefully crafted mix of image and dialogue . " 
 After returning to London from the Edinburgh International Book Festival , in September 2006 , Pinter began rehearsing for his performance of the role of Krapp in Samuel Beckett 's one @-@ act monologue Krapp 's Last Tape , which he performed from a motorised wheelchair in a limited run the following month at the Royal Court Theatre to sold @-@ out audiences and " ecstatic " critical reviews . The production ran for only nine performances , as part of the 50th @-@ anniversary celebration season of the Royal Court Theatre ; it sold out within minutes of the opening of the box office and tickets commanded large sums from ticket resellers . One performance was filmed and broadcast on BBC Four on 21 June 2007 , and also screened later , as part of the memorial PEN Tribute to Pinter , in New York , on 2 May 2009 . 
 In October and November 2006 , Sheffield Theatres hosted Pinter : A Celebration . It featured productions of seven of Pinter 's plays : The Caretaker , Voices , No Man 's Land , Family Voices , Tea Party , The Room , One for the Road , and The Dumb Waiter ; and films ( most his screenplays ; some in which Pinter appears as an actor ) . 
 In February and March 2007 , a 50th anniversary of The Dumb Waiter , was produced at the Trafalgar Studios . Later in February 2007 , John Crowley 's film version of Pinter 's play Celebration ( 2000 ) was shown on More4 ( Channel 4 , UK ) . On 18 March 2007 , BBC Radio 3 broadcast a new radio production of The Homecoming , directed by Thea Sharrock and produced by Martin J. Smith , with Pinter performing the role of Max ( for the first time ; he had previously played Lenny on stage in 1964 ) . A revival of The Hothouse opened at the National Theatre , in London , in July 2007 , concurrently with a revival of Betrayal at the Donmar Warehouse , directed by Roger Michell . 
 Revivals in 2008 included the 40th @-@ anniversary production of the American première of The Homecoming on Broadway , directed by Daniel J. Sullivan . From 8 to 24 May 2008 , the Lyric Hammersmith celebrated the 50th anniversary of The Birthday Party with a revival and related events , including a gala performance and reception hosted by Harold Pinter on 19 May 2008 , exactly 50 years after its London première there . 
 The final revival during Pinter 's lifetime was a production of No Man 's Land , directed by Rupert Goold , opening at the Gate Theatre , Dublin , in August 2008 , and then transferring to the Duke of York 's Theatre , London , where it played until 3 January 2009 . On the Monday before Christmas 2008 , Pinter was admitted to Hammersmith Hospital , where he died on Christmas Eve from liver cancer . On 26 December 2008 , when No Man 's Land reopened at the Duke of York 's , the actors paid tribute to Pinter from the stage , with Michael Gambon reading Hirst 's monologue about his " photograph album " from Act Two that Pinter had asked him to read at his funeral , ending with a standing ovation from the audience , many of whom were in tears : 
 I might even show you my photograph album . You might even see a face in it which might remind you of your own , of what you once were . You might see faces of others , in shadow , or cheeks of others , turning , or jaws , or backs of necks , or eyes , dark under hats , which might remind you of others , whom once you knew , whom you thought long dead , but from whom you will still receive a sidelong glance , if you can face the good ghost . Allow the love of the good ghost . They possess all that emotion ... trapped . Bow to it . It will assuredly never release them , but who knows ... what relief ... it may give them ... who knows how they may quicken ... in their chains , in their glass jars . You think it cruel ... to quicken them , when they are fixed , imprisoned ? No ... no . Deeply , deeply , they wish to respond to your touch , to your look , and when you smile , their joy ... is unbounded . And so I say to you , tender the dead , as you would yourself be tendered , now , in what you would describe as your life . 
 = = Posthumous events = = 
 = = = Funeral = = = 
 Pinter 's funeral was a private , half @-@ hour secular ceremony conducted at the graveside at Kensal Green Cemetery , 31 December 2008 . The eight readings selected in advance by Pinter included passages from seven of his own writings and from the story " The Dead " , by James Joyce , which was read by actress Penelope Wilton . Michael Gambon read the " photo album " speech from No Man 's Land and three other readings , including Pinter 's poem " Death " ( 1997 ) . Other readings honoured Pinter 's widow and his love of cricket . The ceremony was attended by many notable theatre people , including Tom Stoppard , but not by Pinter 's son , Daniel Brand . At its end , Pinter 's widow , Antonia Fraser , stepped forward to his grave and quoted from Horatio 's speech after the death of Hamlet : " Goodnight , sweet prince , / And flights of angels sing thee to thy rest . " 
 = = = Memorial tributes = = = 
 The night before Pinter 's burial , theatre marquees on Broadway dimmed their lights for a minute in tribute , and on the final night of No Man 's Land at the Duke of York 's Theatre on 3 January 2009 , all of the Ambassador Theatre Group in the West End dimmed their lights for an hour to honour the playwright . 
 Diane Abbott , the Member of Parliament for Hackney North & Stoke Newington proposed an early day motion in the House of Commons to support a residents ' campaign to restore the Clapton Cinematograph Theatre , established in Lower Clapton Road in 1910 , and to turn it into a memorial to Pinter " to honour this Hackney boy turned literary great . " On 2 May 2009 , a free public memorial tribute was held at The Graduate Center of The City University of New York . It was part of the 5th Annual PEN World Voices Festival of International Literature , taking place in New York City . Another memorial celebration , held in the Olivier Theatre , at the Royal National Theatre , in London , on the evening of 7 June 2009 , consisted of excerpts and readings from Pinter 's writings by nearly three dozen actors , many of whom were his friends and associates , including : Eileen Atkins , David Bradley , Colin Firth , Henry Goodman , Sheila Hancock , Alan Rickman , Penelope Wilton , Susan Wooldridge , and Henry Woolf ; and a troupe of students from the London Academy of Music and Dramatic Art , directed by Ian Rickson . 
 On 16 June 2009 , Antonia Fraser officially opened a commemorative room at the Hackney Empire . The theatre also established a writer 's residency in Pinter 's name . Most of issue number 28 of Craig Raine 's Arts Tri @-@ Quarterly <unk> was devoted to pieces remembering Pinter , beginning with Pinter 's 1987 unpublished love poem dedicated " To Antonia " and his poem " Paris " , written in 1975 ( the year in which he and Fraser began living together ) , followed by brief memoirs by some of Pinter 's associates and friends , including Patrick Marber , Nina Raine , Tom Stoppard , Peter Nichols , Susanna Gross , Richard Eyre , and David Hare . 
 A memorial cricket match at Lord 's Cricket Ground between the <unk> Cricket Club and the Lord 's Taverners , followed by performances of Pinter 's poems and excerpts from his plays , took place on 27 September 2009 . 
 In 2009 , English PEN established the PEN Pinter Prize , which is awarded annually to a British writer or a writer resident in Britain who , in the words of Pinter 's Nobel speech , casts an ' unflinching , unswerving ' gaze upon the world , and shows a ' fierce intellectual determination ... to define the real truth of our lives and our societies ' . The prize is shared with an international writer of courage . The inaugural winners of the prize were Tony Harrison and the Burmese poet and comedian Maung <unk> ( a.k.a. <unk> ) . 
 = = = Being Harold Pinter = = = 
 In January 2011 Being Harold Pinter , a theatrical collage of excerpts from Pinter 's dramatic works , his Nobel Lecture , and letters of Belarusian prisoners , created and performed by the Belarus Free Theatre , evoked a great deal of attention in the public media . The Free Theatre 's members had to be smuggled out of Minsk , owing to a government crackdown on dissident artists , to perform their production in a two @-@ week sold @-@ out engagement at La MaMa in New York as part of the 2011 Under the Radar Festival . In an additional sold @-@ out benefit performance at the Public Theater , co @-@ hosted by playwrights Tony Kushner and Tom Stoppard , the prisoner 's letters were read by ten guest performers : Mandy Patinkin , Kevin Kline , Olympia Dukakis , Lily Rabe , Linda Emond , Josh Hamilton , Stephen <unk> , Lou Reed , Laurie Anderson , and Philip Seymour Hoffman . In solidarity with the Belarus Free Theatre , collaborations of actors and theatre companies joined in offering additional benefit readings of Being Harold Pinter across the United States . 
 = = = The Harold Pinter Theatre , London = = = 
 In September 2011 , British Theatre owners , Ambassador Theatre Group ( ATG ) announced it was renaming its Comedy Theatre , Panton Street , London to become The Harold Pinter Theatre . Howard Panter , Joint CEO and Creative Director of ATG told the BBC , " The work of Pinter has become an integral part of the history of the Comedy Theatre . The re @-@ naming of one of our most successful West End theatres is a fitting tribute to a man who made such a mark on British theatre who , over his 50 year career , became recognised as one of the most influential modern British dramatists . " 
 = = Honours = = 
 An Honorary Associate of the National Secular Society , a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature , and an Honorary Fellow of the Modern Language Association of America ( 1970 ) , Pinter was appointed CBE in 1966 and became a Companion of Honour in 2002 , having declined a knighthood in 1996 . In 1995 , he accepted the David Cohen Prize , in recognition of a lifetime of literary achievement . In 1996 , he received a Laurence Olivier Special Award for lifetime achievement in the theatre . In 1997 he became a BAFTA Fellow . He received the World Leaders Award for " Creative Genius " as the subject of a week @-@ long " Homage " in Toronto , in October 2001 . In 2004 , he received the Wilfred Owen Award for Poetry for his " lifelong contribution to literature , ' and specifically for his collection of poetry entitled War , published in 2003 ' " . In March 2006 , he was awarded the Europe Theatre Prize in recognition of lifetime achievements pertaining to drama and theatre . In conjunction with that award , the critic Michael Billington coordinated an international conference on Pinter : Passion , Poetry , Politics , including scholars and critics from Europe and the Americas , held in Turin , Italy , from 10 to 14 March 2006 . 
 In October 2008 , the Central School of Speech and Drama announced that Pinter had agreed to become its president and awarded him an honorary fellowship at its graduation ceremony . On his appointment , Pinter commented : " I was a student at Central in 1950 – 51 . I enjoyed my time there very much and I am delighted to become president of a remarkable institution . " But he had to receive that honorary degree , his 20th , in absentia owing to ill health . His presidency of the school was brief ; he died just two weeks after the graduation ceremony , on 24 December 2008 . 
 = = = Nobel Prize and Nobel Lecture = = = 
 On 13 October 2005 , the Swedish Academy announced that it had decided to award the Nobel Prize in Literature for that year to Pinter , who " in his plays uncovers the precipice under everyday prattle and forces entry into oppression 's closed rooms " . Its selection instigated some public controversy and criticism relating both to characteristics of Pinter 's work and to his politics . When interviewed that day about his reaction to the announcement , Pinter said : " I was told today that one of the Sky channels said this morning that ' Harold Pinter is dead . ' Then they changed their mind and said , ' No , he 's won the Nobel prize . ' So I 've risen from the dead . " The Nobel Prize Awards Ceremony and related events throughout Scandinavia took place in December 2005 . After the Academy notified Pinter of his award , he had planned to travel to Stockholm to present his Nobel Lecture in person . In November , however , his doctor sent him to hospital and barred such travel , after a serious infection was diagnosed . Pinter 's publisher , Stephen Page of Faber and Faber , accepted the Nobel Diploma and Nobel Medal at the Awards Ceremony in his place . 
 Although still being treated in hospital , Pinter videotaped his Nobel Lecture , " Art , Truth and Politics " , at a Channel 4 studio . It was projected on three large screens at the Swedish Academy on the evening of 7 December 2005 , and transmitted on More 4 that same evening in the UK . The 46 @-@ minute lecture was introduced on television by David Hare . Later , the text and streaming video formats ( without Hare 's introduction ) were posted on the Nobel Prize and Swedish Academy official websites . It has since been released as a DVD . 
 Pinter quoted Father John Metcalf speaking to Raymond Seitz , then Minister at the US Embassy in London , " My parishioners built a school , a health centre , a cultural centre . We have lived in peace . A few months ago a Contra force attacked the parish . They destroyed everything : the school , the health centre , the cultural centre . They raped nurses and teachers , slaughtered doctors , in the most brutal manner . They behaved like savages . Please demand that the US government withdraw its support from this shocking terrorist activity . " Seitz responded , " Let me tell you something . In war , innocent people always suffer . " Pinter called the US invasion of Iraq " an arbitrary military action inspired by a series of lies upon lies and gross manipulation of the media and therefore of the public " , and condemned the British government for its cooperation . 
 Pinter 's lecture has been widely distributed by print and online media and has provoked much commentary and debate , with some commentators accusing Pinter of " anti @-@ Americanism " . In his Nobel Lecture , however , Pinter emphasises that he criticises policies and practices of American administrations ( and those who voted for them ) , not all American citizens , many of whom he recognises as " demonstrably sickened , shamed and angered by their government 's actions " . 
 = = = Légion d 'honneur = = = 
 On 18 January 2007 , French Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin presented Pinter with France 's highest civil honour , the Légion d 'honneur , at a ceremony at the French Embassy in London . De Villepin praised Pinter 's poem " American Football " ( 1991 ) stating : " With its violence and its cruelty , it is for me one of the most accurate images of war , one of the most telling metaphors of the temptation of imperialism and violence . " In response , Pinter praised France 's opposition to the war in Iraq . M. de Villepin concluded : " The poet stands still and observes what doesn 't deserve other men 's attention . Poetry teaches us how to live and you , Harold Pinter , teach us how to live . " He said that Pinter received the award particularly " because in seeking to capture all the facets of the human spirit , [ Pinter 's ] works respond to the aspirations of the French public , and its taste for an understanding of man and of what is truly universal " . Lawrence Pollard observed that " the award for the great playwright underlines how much Mr Pinter is admired in countries like France as a model of the uncompromising radical intellectual " . 
 = = Scholarly response = = 
 Some scholars and critics challenge the validity of Pinter 's critiques of what he terms " the modes of thinking of those in power " or dissent from his retrospective viewpoints on his own work . In 1985 , Pinter recalled that his early act of conscientious objection resulted from being " terribly disturbed as a young man by the Cold War . And McCarthyism ... A profound hypocrisy . ' They ' the monsters , ' we ' the good . In 1948 , the Russian suppression of Eastern Europe was an obvious and brutal fact , but I felt very strongly then and feel as strongly now that we have an obligation to subject our own actions and attitudes to an equivalent critical and moral scrutiny . " Scholars agree that Pinter 's dramatic rendering of power relations results from this scrutiny . 
 Pinter 's aversion to any censorship by " the authorities " is epitomised in Petey 's line at the end of The Birthday Party . As the broken @-@ down and reconstituted Stanley is being carted off by the figures of authority Goldberg and McCann , Petey calls after him , " Stan , don 't let them tell you what to do ! " Pinter told Gussow in 1988 , " I 've lived that line all my damn life . Never more than now . " The example of Pinter 's stalwart opposition to what he termed " the modes of thinking of those in power " — the " brick wall " of the " minds " perpetuating the " status quo " — infused the " vast political pessimism " that some academic critics may perceive in his artistic work , its " drowning landscape " of harsh contemporary realities , with some residual " hope for restoring the dignity of man . " 
 As Pinter 's long @-@ time friend David Jones reminded analytically inclined scholars and dramatic critics , Pinter was one of the " great comic writers " : 
 The trap with Harold 's work , for performers and audiences , is to approach it too earnestly or <unk> . I have always tried to interpret his plays with as much humor and humanity as possible . There is always mischief lurking in the darkest corners . The world of The Caretaker is a bleak one , its characters damaged and lonely . But they are all going to survive . And in their dance to that end they show a frenetic vitality and a wry sense of the ridiculous that balance heartache and laughter . Funny , but not too funny . As Pinter wrote , back in 1960 : " As far as I am concerned The Caretaker IS funny , up to a point . Beyond that point , it ceases to be funny , and it is because of that point that I wrote it . " 
 His dramatic conflicts present serious implications for his characters and his audiences , leading to sustained inquiry about " the point " of his work and multiple " critical strategies " for developing interpretations and stylistic analyses of it . 
 = = Pinter research collections = = 
 Pinter 's unpublished manuscripts and letters to and from him are held in the Harold Pinter Archive in the Modern Literary Manuscripts division of the British Library . Smaller collections of Pinter manuscripts are in the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center , the University of Texas at Austin ; The Lilly Library , Indiana University at Bloomington ; the Mandeville Special Collections Library , Geisel Library , at the University of California , San Diego ; the British Film Institute , in London ; and the Margaret Herrick Library , Pickford Center for Motion Picture Study , the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences , Beverly Hills , California . 
 = = = Editions = = = 
 Pinter , Harold . Plays : One | The Birthday Party , The Room , The Dumb Waiter , A Slight Ache , The Hothouse , A Night Out . ( London : Methuen , 1983 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 413 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 Contains an introductory essay , Writing for the Theatre . 
 Pinter , Harold . Plays : Two | The Caretaker , The Collection , The Lover , Night School , The Dwarfs . ( London : Eyre Methuen , 1979 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 413 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 Contains an introductory essay , Writing for Myself . 
 Pinter , Harold . Plays : Three | The Homecoming , The Tea Party , The Basement , Landscape , Silence . ( London : Eyre Methuen , 1978 ) ISBN 0 @-@ 413 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 = = = Works of criticism = = = 
 Naismith , Bill ( ed . ) Harold Pinter : Faber Critical Guide : The Caretaker , The Birthday Party , The Homecoming ( London : Faber and Faber , 2000 ) . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 571 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 Contains introductory essays and explanatory notes . 
 = Water fluoridation = 
 Water fluoridation is the controlled addition of fluoride to a public water supply to reduce tooth decay . Fluoridated water has fluoride at a level that is effective for preventing cavities ; this can occur naturally or by adding fluoride . Fluoridated water operates on tooth surfaces : in the mouth it creates low levels of fluoride in saliva , which reduces the rate at which tooth enamel <unk> and increases the rate at which it <unk> in the early stages of cavities . Typically a fluoridated compound is added to drinking water , a process that in the U.S. costs an average of about $ 1 @.@ 02 per person @-@ year . <unk> is needed when the naturally occurring fluoride level exceeds recommended limits . In 2011 the World Health Organization suggested a level of fluoride from 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 mg / L ( milligrams per litre ) , depending on climate , local environment , and other sources of fluoride . Bottled water typically has unknown fluoride levels . 
 Dental caries remains a major public health concern in most industrialized countries , affecting 60 – 90 % of schoolchildren and the vast majority of adults . Water fluoridation reduces cavities in children , while efficacy in adults is less clear . A Cochrane review estimates a reduction in cavities when water fluoridation was used by children who had no access to other sources of fluoride to be 35 % in baby teeth and 26 % in permanent teeth . The evidence quality was poor . Most European countries have experienced substantial declines in tooth decay without its use . Recent studies suggest that water fluoridation , particularly in industrialized countries , may be unnecessary because topical fluorides ( such as in toothpaste ) are widely used and caries rates have become low . 
 Although fluoridation can cause dental fluorosis , which can alter the appearance of developing teeth or enamel fluorosis , the differences are mild and usually not considered to be of aesthetic or public @-@ health concern . There is no clear evidence of other adverse effects from water fluoridation . Fluoride 's effects depend on the total daily intake of fluoride from all sources . Drinking water is typically the largest source ; other methods of fluoride therapy include fluoridation of toothpaste , salt , and milk . The views on the most effective method for community prevention of tooth decay are mixed . The Australian government states that water fluoridation is the most effective means of achieving fluoride exposure that is community @-@ wide . The World Health Organization states water fluoridation , when feasible and culturally acceptable , has substantial advantages , especially for subgroups at high risk , while the European Commission finds no advantage to water fluoridation compared with topical use . 
 Public water fluoridation was first practiced in the U.S. As of 2012 , 25 countries have artificial water fluoridation to varying degrees , 11 of them have more than 50 % of their population drinking fluoridated water . A further 28 countries have water that is naturally fluoridated , though in many of them the fluoride is above the recommended safe level . As of 2012 about 435 million people worldwide received water fluoridated at the recommended level ( i.e. , about 5 @.@ 4 % of the global population ) . About 214 million of them living in the United States . Major health organizations such as the World Health Organization and FDI World Dental Federation supported water fluoridation as safe and effective . The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention lists water fluoridation as one of the ten great public health achievements of the 20th century in the U.S. Despite this , the practice is controversial as a public health measure ; some countries and communities have discontinued it , while others have expanded it . Opponents of the practice argue that neither the benefits nor the risks have been studied adequately , and debate the conflict between what might be considered mass medication and individual liberties . 
 = = Goal = = 
 The goal of water fluoridation is to prevent tooth decay by adjusting the concentration of fluoride in public water supplies . Tooth decay ( dental caries ) is one of the most prevalent chronic diseases worldwide . Although it is rarely life @-@ threatening , tooth decay can cause pain and impair eating , speaking , facial appearance , and acceptance into society , and it greatly affects the quality of life of children , particularly those of low socioeconomic status . In most industrialized countries , tooth decay affects 60 – 90 % of schoolchildren and the vast majority of adults ; although the problem appears to be less in Africa 's developing countries , it is expected to increase in several countries there because of changing diet and inadequate fluoride exposure . In the U.S. , minorities and the poor both have higher rates of decayed and missing teeth , and their children have less dental care . Once a cavity occurs , the tooth 's fate is that of repeated restorations , with estimates for the median life of an amalgam tooth filling ranging from 9 to 14 years . Oral disease is the fourth most expensive disease to treat . The motivation for fluoridation of salt or water is similar to that of iodized salt for the prevention of mental retardation and goiter . 
 The goal of water fluoridation is to prevent a chronic disease whose burdens particularly fall on children and the poor . Another of the goals was to bridge inequalities in dental health and dental care . Some studies suggest that fluoridation reduces oral health inequalities between the rich and poor , but the evidence is limited . There is anecdotal but not scientific evidence that fluoride allows more time for dental treatment by slowing the progression of tooth decay , and that it simplifies treatment by causing most cavities to occur in pits and fissures of teeth . Other reviews have found not enough evidence to determine if water fluoridation reduces oral @-@ health social disparities . 
 Its use presents a conflict between the common good and individual rights . It is controversial , and opposition to it has been based on ethical , legal , safety , and efficacy grounds . Health and dental organizations worldwide have endorsed its safety and effectiveness . Its use began in 1945 , following studies of children in a region where higher levels of fluoride occur naturally in the water . Further research showed that moderate fluoridation prevents tooth decay . 
 = = Implementation = = 
 Fluoridation does not affect the appearance , taste , or smell of drinking water . It is normally accomplished by adding one of three compounds to the water : sodium fluoride , fluorosilicic acid , or sodium fluorosilicate . 
 Sodium fluoride ( NaF ) was the first compound used and is the reference standard . It is a white , odorless powder or crystal ; the crystalline form is preferred if manual handling is used , as it minimizes dust . It is more expensive than the other compounds , but is easily handled and is usually used by smaller utility companies . It is toxic in gram quantities by ingestion or inhalation . 
 <unk> acid ( <unk> ) is the most commonly used additive for water fluoridation in the United States . It is an inexpensive liquid by @-@ product of phosphate fertilizer manufacture . It comes in varying strengths , typically 23 – 25 % ; because it contains so much water , shipping can be expensive . It is also known as <unk> , <unk> , hydrofluosilicic , and <unk> acid . 
 Sodium fluorosilicate ( <unk> ) is the sodium salt of fluorosilicic acid . It is a powder or very fine crystal that is easier to ship than fluorosilicic acid . It is also known as sodium silicofluoride . 
 These compounds were chosen for their solubility , safety , availability , and low cost . A 1992 census found that , for U.S. public water supply systems reporting the type of compound used , 63 % of the population received water fluoridated with fluorosilicic acid , 28 % with sodium fluorosilicate , and 9 % with sodium fluoride . 
 = = = Recommendations = = = 
 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention developed recommendations for water fluoridation that specify requirements for personnel , reporting , training , inspection , monitoring , surveillance , and actions in case of overfeed , along with technical requirements for each major compound used . 
 Although fluoride was once considered an essential nutrient , the U.S. National Research Council has since removed this designation due to the lack of studies showing it is essential for human growth , though still considering fluoride a " beneficial element " due to its positive impact on oral health . The European Food Safety Authority 's Panel on <unk> Products , Nutrition and Allergies ( NDA ) considers fluoride not to be an essential nutrient , yet , due to the beneficial effects of dietary fluoride on prevention of dental caries they have defined an Adequate Intake ( AI ) value for it . The AI of fluoride from all sources ( including non @-@ dietary sources ) is 0 @.@ 05 mg / kg body weight per day for both children and adults , including pregnant and lactating women . 
 In 2011 , the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services ( HHS ) and the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( EPA ) lowered the recommended level of fluoride to 0 @.@ 7 mg / L. In 2015 , the U.S. Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) , based on the recommendation of the U.S. Public Health Service ( <unk> ) for fluoridation of community water systems , recommended that bottled water manufacturers limit fluoride in bottled water to no more than 0 @.@ 7 milligrams per liter ( mg / L ) ( milligrams per liter , equivalent to parts per million ) . 
 Previous recommendations were based on evaluations from 1962 , when the U.S. specified the optimal level of fluoride to range from 0 @.@ 7 to 1 @.@ 2 mg / L ( milligrams per liter , equivalent to parts per million ) , depending on the average maximum daily air temperature ; the optimal level is lower in warmer climates , where people drink more water , and is higher in cooler climates . 
 These standards are not appropriate for all parts of the world , where fluoride levels might be excessive and fluoride should be removed from water , and is based on assumptions that have become obsolete with the rise of air conditioning and increased use of soft drinks , processed food , fluoridated toothpaste , and other sources of fluorides . In 2011 the World Health Organization stated that 1 @.@ 5 mg / L should be an absolute upper bound and that 0 @.@ 5 mg / L may be an appropriate lower limit . A 2007 Australian systematic review recommended a range from 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 1 mg / L. 
 = = = Occurrences = = = 
 Fluoride naturally occurring in water can be above , at , or below recommended levels . Rivers and lakes generally contain fluoride levels less than 0 @.@ 5 mg / L , but groundwater , particularly in volcanic or mountainous areas , can contain as much as 50 mg / L. Higher concentrations of fluorine are found in alkaline volcanic , hydrothermal , sedimentary , and other rocks derived from highly evolved magmas and hydrothermal solutions , and this fluorine dissolves into nearby water as fluoride . In most drinking waters , over 95 % of total fluoride is the F − ion , with the magnesium – fluoride complex ( <unk> + ) being the next most common . Because fluoride levels in water are usually controlled by the solubility of fluorite ( CaF2 ) , high natural fluoride levels are associated with calcium @-@ deficient , alkaline , and soft waters . <unk> is needed when the naturally occurring fluoride level exceeds recommended limits . It can be accomplished by percolating water through granular beds of activated alumina , bone meal , bone char , or <unk> phosphate ; by coagulation with alum ; or by precipitation with lime . 
 Pitcher or faucet @-@ mounted water filters do not alter fluoride content ; the more @-@ expensive reverse osmosis filters remove 65 – 95 % of fluoride , and distillation removes all fluoride . Some bottled waters contain undeclared fluoride , which can be present naturally in source waters , or if water is sourced from a public supply which has been fluoridated . The FDA states that bottled water products labeled as de @-@ ionized , purified , demineralized , or distilled have been treated in such a way that they contain no or only trace amounts of fluoride , unless they specifically list fluoride as an added ingredient . 
 = = Evidence = = 
 Existing evidence suggests that water fluoridation reduces tooth decay . Consistent evidence also suggests that it causes dental fluorosis , most of which is mild and not usually of aesthetic concern . No clear evidence of other adverse effects exists , though almost all research thereof has been of poor quality . 
 = = = Effectiveness = = = 
 Reviews have shown that water fluoridation reduces cavities in children . A conclusion for the efficacy in adults is less clear with some reviews finding benefit and others not . Studies in the U.S. in the 1950s and 1960s showed that water fluoridation reduced childhood cavities by fifty to sixty percent , while studies in 1989 and 1990 showed lower reductions ( 40 % and 18 % respectively ) , likely due to increasing use of fluoride from other sources , notably toothpaste , and also the ' halo effect ' of food and drink that is made in fluoridated areas and consumed in unfluoridated ones . 
 A 2000 UK systematic review ( York ) found that water fluoridation was associated with a decreased proportion of children with cavities of 15 % and with a decrease in decayed , missing , and filled primary teeth ( average decreases was 2 @.@ 25 teeth ) . The review found that the evidence was of moderate quality : few studies attempted to reduce observer bias , control for confounding factors , report variance measures , or use appropriate analysis . Although no major differences between natural and artificial fluoridation were apparent , the evidence was inadequate for a conclusion about any differences . A 2007 Australian systematic review used the same inclusion criteria as York 's , plus one additional study . This did not affect the York conclusions . A 2011 European Commission systematic review based its efficacy on York 's review conclusion . A 2015 Cochrane systematic review estimated a reduction in cavities when water fluoridation was used by children who had no access to other sources of fluoride to be 35 % in baby teeth and 26 % in permanent teeth . The evidence was of poor quality . 
 Fluoride may also prevent cavities in adults of all ages . A 2007 meta @-@ analysis by CDC researchers found that water fluoridation prevented an estimated 27 % of cavities in adults , about the same fraction as prevented by exposure to any delivery method of fluoride ( 29 % average ) . A 2011 European Commission review found that the benefits of water fluoridation for adult in terms of reductions in decay are limited . A 2015 Cochrane review found no conclusive research regarding the effectiveness of water fluoridation in adults . A 2016 review found variable quality evidence that , overall , stopping of community water fluoridation programs was typically followed by an increase in cavities . 
 Most countries in Europe have experienced substantial declines in cavities without the use of water fluoridation . For example , in Finland and Germany , tooth decay rates remained stable or continued to decline after water fluoridation stopped . Fluoridation may be useful in the U.S. because unlike most European countries , the U.S. does not have school @-@ based dental care , many children do not visit a dentist regularly , and for many U.S. children water fluoridation is the prime source of exposure to fluoride . The effectiveness of water fluoridation can vary according to circumstances such as whether preventive dental care is free to all children . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Fluoride 's adverse effects depend on total fluoride dosage from all sources . At the commonly recommended dosage , the only clear adverse effect is dental fluorosis , which can alter the appearance of children 's teeth during tooth development ; this is mostly mild and is unlikely to represent any real effect on aesthetic appearance or on public health . In April 2015 , recommended fluoride levels in the United States were changed to 0 @.@ 7 ppm from 0 @.@ 7 – 1 @.@ 2 ppm to reduce the risk of dental fluorosis . The 2015 Cochrane review estimated that for a <unk> level of 0 @.@ 7 ppm the percentage of participants with <unk> of aesthetic concern was approximately 12 % . This increases to 40 % when considering <unk> of any level not of aesthetic concern . In the US mild or very mild dental fluorosis has been reported in 20 % of the population , moderate fluorosis in 2 % and severe fluorosis in less than 1 % . 
 The critical period of exposure is between ages one and four years , with the risk ending around age eight . <unk> can be prevented by monitoring all sources of fluoride , with fluoridated water directly or indirectly responsible for an estimated 40 % of risk and other sources , notably toothpaste , responsible for the remaining 60 % . Compared to water naturally fluoridated at 0 @.@ 4 mg / L , fluoridation to 1 mg / L is estimated to cause additional fluorosis in one of every 6 people ( 95 % CI 4 – 21 people ) , and to cause additional fluorosis of aesthetic concern in one of every 22 people ( 95 % CI 13 @.@ 6 – ∞ people ) . Here , aesthetic concern is a term used in a standardized scale based on what adolescents would find unacceptable , as measured by a 1996 study of British 14 @-@ year @-@ olds . In many industrialized countries the prevalence of fluorosis is increasing even in unfluoridated communities , mostly because of fluoride from swallowed toothpaste . A 2009 systematic review indicated that fluorosis is associated with consumption of infant formula or of water added to reconstitute the formula , that the evidence was distorted by publication bias , and that the evidence that the formula 's fluoride caused the fluorosis was weak . In the U.S. the decline in tooth decay was accompanied by increased fluorosis in both fluoridated and unfluoridated communities ; accordingly , fluoride has been reduced in various ways worldwide in infant formulas , children 's toothpaste , water , and fluoride @-@ supplement schedules . 
 = = = Safety = = = 
 Fluoridation has little effect on risk of bone fracture ( broken bones ) ; it may result in slightly lower fracture risk than either excessively high levels of fluoridation or no fluoridation . There is no clear association between fluoridation and cancer or deaths due to cancer , both for cancer in general and also specifically for bone cancer and osteosarcoma . Other adverse effects lack sufficient evidence to reach a confident conclusion . 
 Fluoride can occur naturally in water in concentrations well above recommended levels , which can have several long @-@ term adverse effects , including severe dental fluorosis , skeletal fluorosis , and weakened bones ; water utilities in the developed world reduce fluoride levels to regulated maximum levels in regions where natural levels are high , and the WHO and other groups work with countries and regions in the developing world with naturally excessive fluoride levels to achieve safe levels . The World Health Organization recommends a guideline maximum fluoride value of 1 @.@ 5 mg / L as a level at which fluorosis should be minimal . 
 In rare cases improper implementation of water fluoridation can result in <unk> that causes outbreaks of acute fluoride poisoning , with symptoms that include nausea , vomiting , and diarrhea . Three such outbreaks were reported in the U.S. between 1991 and 1998 , caused by fluoride concentrations as high as 220 mg / L ; in the 1992 Alaska outbreak , 262 people became ill and one person died . In 2010 , approximately 60 gallons of fluoride were released into the water supply in <unk> , North Carolina in 90 minutes — an amount that was intended to be released in a 24 @-@ hour period . 
 Like other common water additives such as chlorine , hydrofluosilicic acid and sodium silicofluoride decrease pH and cause a small increase of corrosivity , but this problem is easily addressed by increasing the pH . Although it has been hypothesized that hydrofluosilicic acid and sodium silicofluoride might increase human lead uptake from water , a 2006 statistical analysis did not support concerns that these chemicals cause higher blood lead concentrations in children . Trace levels of arsenic and lead may be present in fluoride compounds added to water , but no credible evidence exists that their presence is of concern : concentrations are below measurement limits . 
 The effect of water fluoridation on the natural environment has been investigated , and no adverse effects have been established . Issues studied have included fluoride concentrations in groundwater and downstream rivers ; lawns , gardens , and plants ; consumption of plants grown in fluoridated water ; air emissions ; and equipment noise . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 Fluoride exerts its major effect by interfering with the demineralization mechanism of tooth decay . Tooth decay is an infectious disease , the key feature of which is an increase within dental plaque of bacteria such as Streptococcus mutans and Lactobacillus . These produce organic acids when carbohydrates , especially sugar , are eaten . When enough acid is produced to lower the pH below 5 @.@ 5 , the acid dissolves carbonated hydroxyapatite , the main component of tooth enamel , in a process known as demineralization . After the sugar is gone , some of the mineral loss can be recovered — or remineralized — from ions dissolved in the saliva . <unk> result when the rate of demineralization exceeds the rate of <unk> , typically in a process that requires many months or years . 
 All fluoridation methods , including water fluoridation , create low levels of fluoride ions in saliva and plaque fluid , thus exerting a topical or surface effect . A person living in an area with fluoridated water may experience rises of fluoride concentration in saliva to about 0 @.@ 04 mg / L several times during a day . Technically , this fluoride does not prevent cavities but rather controls the rate at which they develop . When fluoride ions are present in plaque fluid along with dissolved hydroxyapatite , and the pH is higher than 4 @.@ 5 , a fluorapatite @-@ like remineralized veneer is formed over the remaining surface of the enamel ; this veneer is much more acid @-@ resistant than the original hydroxyapatite , and is formed more quickly than ordinary remineralized enamel would be . The cavity @-@ prevention effect of fluoride is mostly due to these surface effects , which occur during and after tooth eruption . Although some systemic ( whole @-@ body ) fluoride returns to the saliva via blood plasma , and to unerupted teeth via plasma or crypt fluid , there is little data to determine what percentages of fluoride 's <unk> effect comes from these systemic mechanisms . Also , although fluoride affects the physiology of dental bacteria , its effect on bacterial growth does not seem to be relevant to cavity prevention . 
 Fluoride 's effects depend on the total daily intake of fluoride from all sources . About 70 – 90 % of ingested fluoride is absorbed into the blood , where it distributes throughout the body . In infants 80 – 90 % of absorbed fluoride is retained , with the rest excreted , mostly via urine ; in adults about 60 % is retained . About 99 % of retained fluoride is stored in bone , teeth , and other calcium @-@ rich areas , where excess quantities can cause fluorosis . Drinking water is typically the largest source of fluoride . In many industrialized countries swallowed toothpaste is the main source of fluoride exposure in unfluoridated communities . Other sources include dental products other than toothpaste ; air pollution from fluoride @-@ containing coal or from phosphate fertilizers ; trona , used to <unk> meat in Tanzania ; and tea leaves , particularly the tea bricks favored in parts of China . High fluoride levels have been found in other foods , including barley , cassava , corn , rice , taro , yams , and fish protein concentrate . The U.S. Institute of Medicine has established Dietary Reference Intakes for fluoride : Adequate Intake values range from 0 @.@ 01 mg / day for infants aged 6 months or less , to 4 mg / day for men aged 19 years and up ; and the Tolerable Upper Intake Level is 0 @.@ 10 mg / kg / day for infants and children through age 8 years , and 10 mg / day thereafter . A rough estimate is that an adult in a temperate climate consumes 0 @.@ 6 mg / day of fluoride without fluoridation , and 2 mg / day with fluoridation . However , these values differ greatly among the world 's regions : for example , in Sichuan , China the average daily fluoride intake is only 0 @.@ 1 mg / day in drinking water but 8 @.@ 9 mg / day in food and 0 @.@ 7 mg / day directly from the air due to the use of high @-@ fluoride soft coal for cooking and drying foodstuffs indoors . 
 = = Alternatives = = 
 The views on the most effective method for community prevention of tooth decay are mixed . The Australian government review states that water fluoridation is the most effective means of achieving fluoride exposure that is community @-@ wide . The European Commission review states " No obvious advantage appears in favour of water fluoridation compared with topical prevention " . Other fluoride therapies are also effective in preventing tooth decay ; they include fluoride toothpaste , mouthwash , gel , and varnish , and fluoridation of salt and milk . Dental sealants are effective as well , with estimates of prevented cavities ranging from 33 % to 86 % , depending on age of sealant and type of study . 
 Fluoride toothpaste is the most widely used and rigorously evaluated fluoride treatment . Its introduction in the early 1970s is considered the main reason for the decline in tooth decay in industrialized countries , and toothpaste appears to be the single common factor in countries where tooth decay has declined . Toothpaste is the only realistic fluoride strategy in many low @-@ income countries , where lack of infrastructure renders water or salt fluoridation infeasible . It relies on individual and family behavior , and its use is less likely among lower economic classes ; in low @-@ income countries it is unaffordable for the poor . Fluoride toothpaste prevents about 25 % of cavities in young permanent teeth , and its effectiveness is improved if higher concentrations of fluoride are used , or if the <unk> is supervised . Fluoride mouthwash and gel are about as effective as fluoride toothpaste ; fluoride varnish prevents about 45 % of cavities . By comparison , brushing with a <unk> toothpaste has little effect on cavities . 
 The effectiveness of salt fluoridation is about the same as that of water fluoridation , if most salt for human consumption is fluoridated . Fluoridated salt reaches the consumer in salt at home , in meals at school and at large kitchens , and in bread . For example , Jamaica has just one salt producer , but a complex public water supply ; it started fluoridating all salt in 1987 , achieving a decline in cavities . Universal salt fluoridation is also practiced in Colombia and the Swiss Canton of Vaud ; in Germany fluoridated salt is widely used in households but unfluoridated salt is also available , giving consumers a choice . Concentrations of fluoride in salt range from 90 to 350 mg / kg , with studies suggesting an optimal concentration of around 250 mg / kg . 
 Milk fluoridation is practiced by the Borrow Foundation in some parts of Bulgaria , Chile , Peru , Russia , Macedonia , Thailand and the UK . Depending on location , the fluoride is added to milk , to powdered milk , or to yogurt . For example , milk powder fluoridation is used in rural Chilean areas where water fluoridation is not technically feasible . These programs are aimed at children , and have neither targeted nor been evaluated for adults . Systematic reviews in 2005 and 2015 found insufficient evidence to support the practice , but also concluded that available studies suggest that fluoridated milk benefits schoolchildren . 
 Other public @-@ health strategies to control tooth decay , such as education to change behavior and diet , have lacked impressive results . Although fluoride is the only well @-@ documented agent which controls the rate at which cavities develop , it has been suggested that adding calcium to the water would reduce cavities further . Other agents to prevent tooth decay include antibacterials such as <unk> and sugar substitutes such as <unk> . <unk> @-@ sweetened chewing gum has been recommended as a supplement to fluoride and other conventional treatments if the gum is not too costly . Two proposed approaches , bacteria replacement therapy ( probiotics ) and caries vaccine , would share water fluoridation 's advantage of requiring only minimal patient compliance , but have not been proven safe and effective . Other experimental approaches include fluoridated sugar , polyphenols , and casein <unk> – amorphous calcium phosphate <unk> . 
 A 2007 Australian review concluded that water fluoridation is the most effective and socially the most equitable way to expose entire communities to fluoride 's cavity @-@ prevention effects . A 2002 U.S. review estimated that sealants decreased cavities by about 60 % overall , compared to about 18 – 50 % for fluoride . A 2007 Italian review suggested that water fluoridation may not be needed , particularly in the industrialized countries where cavities have become rare , and concluded that toothpaste and other topical fluoride are the best way to prevent cavities worldwide . A 2004 World Health Organization review stated that water fluoridation , when it is culturally acceptable and technically feasible , has substantial advantages in preventing tooth decay , especially for subgroups at high risk . 
 = = Usage = = 
 As of November 2012 , a total of about 378 million people worldwide received artificially fluoridated water . The majority of those were in the United States . About 40 million worldwide received water that was naturally fluoridated to recommended levels . 
 Much of the early work on establishing the connection between fluoride and dental health was performed by scientists in the U.S. during the early 20th century , and the U.S. was the first country to implement public water fluoridation on a wide scale . It has been introduced to varying degrees in many countries and territories outside the U.S. , including Argentina , Australia , Brazil , Canada , Chile , Colombia , Hong Kong , Ireland , Israel , Korea , Malaysia , New Zealand , the Philippines , Serbia , Singapore , Spain , the UK , and Vietnam . In 2004 , an estimated 13 @.@ 7 million people in western Europe and 194 million in the U.S. received artificially fluoridated water . In 2010 about 66 % of the U.S. population was receiving fluoridated water . 
 Naturally fluoridated water is used by approximately 4 % of the world 's population , in countries including Argentina , France , Gabon , Libya , Mexico , Senegal , Sri Lanka , Tanzania , the U.S. , and Zimbabwe . In some locations , notably parts of Africa , China , and India , natural fluoridation exceeds recommended levels . 
 Communities have discontinued water fluoridation in some countries , including Finland , Germany , Japan , the Netherlands , Sweden , and Switzerland . On August 26 , 2014 , Israel stopped mandating fluoridation , stating " Only some 1 % of the water is used for drinking , while 99 % of the water is intended for other uses ( industry , agriculture , flushing toilets etc . ) . There is also scientific evidence that fluoride in large amounts can lead to damage to health . When fluoride is supplied via drinking water , there is no control regarding the amount of fluoride actually consumed , which could lead to excessive consumption . Supply of fluoridated water forces those who do not so wish to also consume water with added fluoride . This approach is therefore not accepted in most countries in the world . " This change was often motivated by political opposition to water fluoridation , but sometimes the need for water fluoridation was met by alternative strategies . The use of fluoride in its various forms is the foundation of tooth decay prevention throughout Europe ; several countries have introduced fluoridated salt , with varying success : in Switzerland and Germany , fluoridated salt represents 65 % to 70 % of the domestic market , while in France the market share reached 60 % in 1993 but dwindled to 14 % in 2009 ; Spain , in 1986 the second West European country to introduce fluoridation of table salt , reported a market share in 2006 of only 10 % . In three other West European countries , Greece , Austria and the Netherlands , the legal framework for production and marketing of fluoridated edible salt exists . At least six Central European countries ( Hungary , the Czech and Slovak Republics , Croatia , Slovenia , Romania ) have shown some interest in salt fluoridation ; however , significant usage of approximately 35 % was only achieved in the Czech Republic . The Slovak Republic had the equipment to treat salt by 2005 ; in the other four countries attempts to introduce fluoridated salt were not successful . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of water fluoridation can be divided into three periods . The first ( c . 1801 – 1933 ) was research into the cause of a form of mottled tooth enamel called the Colorado brown stain . The second ( c . 1933 – 1945 ) focused on the relationship between fluoride concentrations , fluorosis , and tooth decay , and established that moderate levels of fluoride prevent cavities . The third period , from 1945 on , focused on adding fluoride to community water supplies . 
 In the first half of the 19th century , investigators established that fluoride occurs with varying concentrations in teeth , bone , and drinking water . In the second half they speculated that fluoride would protect against tooth decay , proposed supplementing the diet with fluoride , and observed mottled enamel ( now called severe dental fluorosis ) without knowing the cause . In 1874 , the German public health officer Carl Wilhelm Eugen Erhardt recommended potassium fluoride supplements to preserve teeth . In 1892 the British physician James Crichton @-@ Browne noted in an address that fluoride 's absence from diets had resulted in teeth that were " peculiarly liable to decay " , and who proposed " the reintroduction into our diet ... of fluorine in some suitable natural form ... to fortify the teeth of the next generation " . 
 The foundation of water fluoridation in the U.S. was the research of the dentist Frederick McKay ( b <unk> d 1959 ) . McKay spent thirty years investigating the cause of what was then known as the Colorado brown stain , which produced mottled but also cavity @-@ free teeth ; with the help of <unk> Black and other researchers , he established that the cause was fluoride . The first report of a statistical association between the stain and lack of tooth decay was made by UK dentist Norman Ainsworth in 1925 . In 1931 , an Alcoa chemist , H.V. Churchill , concerned about a possible link between aluminum and staining , analyzed water from several areas where the staining was common and found that fluoride was the common factor . 
 In the 1930s and early 1940s , H. <unk> Dean and colleagues at the newly created U.S. National Institutes of Health published several epidemiological studies suggesting that a fluoride concentration of about 1 mg / L was associated with substantially fewer cavities in temperate climates , and that it increased fluorosis but only to a level that was of no medical or aesthetic concern . Other studies found no other significant adverse effects even in areas with fluoride levels as high as 8 mg / L. To test the hypothesis that adding fluoride would prevent cavities , Dean and his colleagues conducted a controlled experiment by fluoridating the water in Grand Rapids , Michigan , starting January 25 , 1945 . The results , published in 1950 , showed significant reduction of cavities . Significant reductions in tooth decay were also reported by important early studies outside the U.S. , including the Brantford – Sarnia – Stratford study in Canada ( 1945 – 1962 ) , the Tiel – <unk> study in the Netherlands ( 1953 – 1969 ) , the Hastings study in New Zealand ( 1954 – 1970 ) , and the Department of Health study in the U.K. ( 1955 – 1960 ) . By present @-@ day standards these and other pioneering studies were crude , but the large reductions in cavities convinced public health professionals of the benefits of fluoridation . 
 Fluoridation became an official policy of the U.S. Public Health Service by 1951 , and by 1960 water fluoridation had become widely used in the U.S. , reaching about 50 million people . By 2006 , 69 @.@ 2 % of the U.S. population on public water systems were receiving fluoridated water , amounting to 61 @.@ 5 % of the total U.S. population ; 3 @.@ 0 % of the population on public water systems were receiving naturally occurring fluoride . In some other countries the pattern was similar . New Zealand , which led the world in per @-@ capita sugar consumption and had the world 's worst teeth , began fluoridation in 1953 , and by 1968 fluoridation was used by 65 % of the population served by a piped water supply . Fluoridation was introduced into Brazil in 1953 , was regulated by federal law starting in 1974 , and by 2004 was used by 71 % of the population . In the Republic of Ireland , fluoridation was legislated in 1960 , and after a constitutional challenge the two major cities of Dublin and Cork began it in 1964 ; fluoridation became required for all sizeable public water systems and by 1996 reached 66 % of the population . In other locations , fluoridation was used and then discontinued : in Kuopio , Finland , fluoridation was used for decades but was discontinued because the school dental service provided significant fluoride programs and the cavity risk was low , and in Basel , Switzerland , it was replaced with fluoridated salt . 
 McKay 's work had established that fluorosis occurred before tooth eruption . Dean and his colleagues assumed that fluoride 's protection against cavities was also pre @-@ eruptive , and this incorrect assumption was accepted for years . By 2000 , however , the topical effects of fluoride ( in both water and toothpaste ) were well understood , and it had become known that a constant low level of fluoride in the mouth works best to prevent cavities . 
 = = Economics = = 
 Fluoridation costs an estimated $ 1 @.@ 02 per person @-@ year on the average ( range : $ 0 @.@ 24 – $ 10 @.@ 82 ; all costs in this paragraph are for the U.S. and are in 2016 dollars , inflation @-@ adjusted from earlier estimates ) . Larger water systems have lower per capita cost , and the cost is also affected by the number of fluoride injection points in the water system , the type of feeder and monitoring equipment , the fluoride chemical and its transportation and storage , and water plant personnel expertise . In affluent countries the cost of salt fluoridation is also negligible ; developing countries may find it prohibitively expensive to import the fluoride additive . By comparison , fluoride toothpaste costs an estimated $ 9 – $ 17 per person @-@ year , with the incremental cost being zero for people who already brush their teeth for other reasons ; and dental cleaning and application of fluoride varnish or gel costs an estimated $ 94 per person @-@ year . Assuming the worst case , with the lowest estimated effectiveness and highest estimated operating costs for small cities , fluoridation costs an estimated $ 16 – $ 24 per saved tooth @-@ decay surface , which is lower than the estimated $ 92 to restore the surface and the estimated $ 156 average discounted lifetime cost of the decayed surface , which includes the cost to maintain the restored tooth surface . It is not known how much is spent in industrial countries to treat dental fluorosis , which is mostly due to fluoride from swallowed toothpaste . 
 Although a 1989 workshop on cost @-@ effectiveness of cavity prevention concluded that water fluoridation is one of the few public health measures that save more money than they cost , little high @-@ quality research has been done on the cost @-@ effectiveness and solid data are scarce . Dental sealants are cost @-@ effective only when applied to high @-@ risk children and teeth . A 2002 U.S. review estimated that on average , sealing first permanent molars saves costs when they are decaying faster than 0 @.@ 47 surfaces per person @-@ year whereas water fluoridation saves costs when total decay incidence exceeds 0 @.@ 06 surfaces per person @-@ year . In the U.S. , water fluoridation is more cost @-@ effective than other methods to reduce tooth decay in children , and a 2008 review concluded that water fluoridation is the best tool for combating cavities in many countries , particularly among socially disadvantaged groups . A 2016 review of studies published between 1995 to 2013 found that water fluoridation in the U.S. was cost @-@ effective , and that it was more so in larger communities . 
 U.S. data from 1974 to 1992 indicate that when water fluoridation is introduced into a community , there are significant decreases in the number of employees per dental firm and the number of dental firms . The data suggest that some dentists respond to the demand shock by moving to non @-@ fluoridated areas and by retraining as specialists . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 The water fluoridation controversy arises from political , moral , ethical , economic , and safety concerns regarding the fluoridation of public water supplies . Those opposed argue that water fluoridation may cause serious health problems , is not effective enough to justify the costs , and has a dosage that cannot be precisely controlled . 
 With regard to ethics , like vaccination and food fortification , fluoridation pits the common good against individual rights . 
 Opposition to fluoridation has existed since its initiation in the 1940s . During the 1950s and 1960s , conspiracy theorists claimed that fluoridation was a communist plot to undermine American public health . In recent years water fluoridation has become a pervasive health and political issue in many countries , resulting in changes to public policy regarding water fluoridation . 
 Public health authorities find a medical consensus that water fluoridation at appropriate levels is a safe and effective means to prevent suffering and promote oral health , and generally support fluoridation . Opponents of fluoridation include some researchers , dental and medical professionals , alternative medical practitioners , health food enthusiasts , a few religious groups ( mostly Christian Scientists in the U.S. ) , and occasionally consumer groups and environmentalists . Organized political opposition has come from libertarians , the John Birch Society , and from groups like the Green parties in the UK and New Zealand . 
 = Express Yourself ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Express Yourself " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna , from her fourth studio album Like a Prayer ( 1989 ) . It was released as the second single from the album on May 9 , 1989 by Sire Records . The song was included on the greatest hits compilation albums The Immaculate Collection ( 1990 ) , and Celebration ( 2009 ) . " Express Yourself " was the first song that Madonna and producer Stephen Bray collaborated on for Like a Prayer . Written and produced by them , the song was a tribute to American funk and soul band Sly and the Family Stone . The main inspiration behind the song is female empowerment , urging women never to go for second @-@ best and to always express their inner feelings . 
 " Express Yourself " is an upbeat dance @-@ pop song that features instrumentation from brass , hand claps and drum beats , while the chorus is backed by the sound of saxophone and percussion . The lyrics talk about rejecting material pleasures and only accepting the best for oneself ; subtexts are employed throughout the song . " Express Yourself " received positive reviews from critics , who applauded the gender equality message of the song and complimented the song for being a hymn to freedom and encouragement to women and all oppressed minorities . Commercially , the song peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and became Madonna 's sixth number @-@ one hit on the European Hot 100 Singles chart . It also reached the top of the singles charts in Canada , Italy and Switzerland , and the top five elsewhere . 
 The accompanying music video , directed by David Fincher , was inspired by the Fritz Lang classic film Metropolis ( 1927 ) . It had a total budget of $ 5 million ( $ 9 @.@ 54 million in 2016 dollars ) , which made it the most expensive music video made up to then , and currently the third most expensive of all time . The video portrayed a city full of tall skyscrapers and railway lines . Madonna played the part of a glamorous lady and chained masochist , with muscular men acting as her workers . In the end , she picks one of them — played by model Cameron <unk> — as her date . Critics noted the video for its exploitation of female sexuality and came to the conclusion that Madonna 's masculine image in the video was gender @-@ bending . 
 " Express Yourself " has been performed on four of Madonna 's world tours , and has been covered by the female leads of the Fox TV show Glee , who performed the song in the episode titled " The Power of Madonna " . The song and the video are noted for their freedom expression and feminist aspects , and its postmodern nature entranced academics , by resisting definition . It has also left its mark on the work of contemporary music artists , including the Spice Girls , Christina Aguilera and Lady Gaga . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Express Yourself " was released as the second single from her fourth studio album , Like a Prayer , on May 9 , 1989 , with " The Look of Love " , from the 1987 film soundtrack Who 's That Girl , on its B @-@ side . When Madonna started work on Like a Prayer , she considered many options , and thought about the musical direction for it . She had certain matters on her mind , including her troubled relationship with her ex @-@ husband Sean Penn , her family , her lost mother and even her belief in God . Madonna thought about lyrical ideas for the songs on topics that , until then , were personal mediation never to be shared with her public so openly and pointedly . She came to the realization that as she and her fans were growing up , and it was time for her to move away from the teen appeal to wider audiences , and en @-@ cash on the longevity of the album market . Madonna wanted her new sound to be <unk> and indicative of what was fashionable , and ride the changing trend of music . 
 As Madonna considered her alternatives , producers Patrick Leonard and Stephen Bray had individually began to tinker with various instrumental tracks and musical ideas to present to her for consideration . " Express Yourself " was the first song that Madonna and Bray collaborated on for Like a Prayer , co @-@ written and co @-@ produced as a tribute to American funk and soul band Sly and the Family Stone . The main inspiration behind the song is female empowerment , urging women never to " go for second @-@ best " and to put their love " to the test " . Madonna explained to Becky Johnston in the May 1989 issue of Interview : 
 " The ultimate thing behind the song is that if you don 't express yourself , if you don 't say what you want , then you 're not going to get it . And in effect you are chained down by your inability to say what you feel or go after what you want . No matter how in control you think are about sexuality in a relationship there is always the power struggle ... always a certain amount of compromise . Of being beholden , if you love them . You do it because you choose to . No one put the chain around this neck but me . I wrote ' Express Yourself ' to tell women around the world that pick and choose the best for yourself , before that chain around your neck , kills you instead . It 's my take on how man can express what they want , the same prerogative should be there for a woman too . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Express Yourself " begins with the sound of brass tinkling along , as Madonna chimes the opening line : " Come on girls , do you believe in love ? ' Cause I got something to say about it , And it goes something like this . " Handclaps and drum beats start as Madonna moves into the chorus of the song , with a thick vocal texture and high @-@ pitched background singing . The chorus is aided by instrumentation from a saxophone and percussion . Madonna then sings the first verse of the song , as a violin sound is added after she finishes the bridge , " Make you feel like a queen on the throne , make you love it till you never come down " , a male voice repeating the last line . A synthesizer is played after the second verse as Madonna continues chanting the words " Express yourself " with background vocals singing " Hey , hey , hey , hey " alongside her . 
 After a small saxophone interlude , a break @-@ down comes with Madonna singing in a fuller voice , as horns and percussion beats continue . Madonna changes the lyrics at the end to " express himself " , and after another repetition of the bridge and the intermediate verse , the chorus comes where she changes the lyrics back to the original title . The song ends with the words " Respect yourself " , fading out . Set within a simple song structure , " Express Yourself " plays with ambiguity through a subtle control of harmony and the avoidance of diatonic closure . The song is clearly in the key of G major , but the first note of the melody , " don 't " in B ♭ major , implies the G Dorian mode . This is also evident in Madonna 's vocal nuance on the words " express yourself " , which initially centers on G , before moving down a semitone to E minor , the raised 6th in G Dorian . Per the sheet music published by Alfred Publishing Co . Inc . , " Express Yourself " is set in time signature of common time , with a tempo of 120 beats per minute . Madonna 's voice range spans from G3 to C5 with a chord progression of G – F / G – C – G. 
 According to Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , the lyrics of " Express Yourself " make it a simple love song , with Madonna exhorting the women in her audience not to go for second @-@ best , to express their feelings and get their men to express theirs . Lucy O 'Brien , author of Madonna : Like an Icon , described them as a " feminist call @-@ to @-@ arms " , with Madonna dismissing the satin sheets and gold baubles of material pleasures . As she said in the interview with Rolling Stone , " the lyrics are my way of saying if it doesn 't work , then you 're better off on your own . Quite possibly there were some personal feelings mixed in the lyrics as well . " <unk> are employed throughout the song , especially in the line " What you need is a big strong hand , to lift you to your higher ground " , where the " big strong hand " is implied as one 's own hand , and not the typical male helping hand . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Express Yourself " received mainly positive reviews from critics . J. Randy Taraborrelli , author of Madonna : An Intimate Biography called the song a " funky dance anthem " and reacted positively to its message of a " female call @-@ to @-@ arms in communication and self @-@ respect . " Stephen Holden of The New York Times observed that Madonna repudiated the philosophy of her previous single " Material Girl " ( 1985 ) in " Express Yourself " , which he described as " a 30 @-@ year @-@ old 's view of life <unk> by rebellion and lingering lapsed Catholic pain . " In another article from the same newspaper , Carn James declared it as one of her most exuberant songs . Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández and Freya Jarman @-@ Ivens , authors of Madonna 's Drowned Worlds , complimented the lyrics of the song , and added that it apparently espouses " gender fluidity as a road to gender equality . " In his book Madonna As Postmodern Myth , journalist Georges Claude Guilbert described " Express Yourself " as a hymn to freedom , " an encouragement for all women and all oppressed minorities to resist , to express their ideas and their strength faced with tyranny . " 
 Biographer Mary Cross noted in her book Madonna : A Biography , how the song paved the way for its music video and became a testament to freedom . Authors Allen Metz and Carol Benson noted in their essays on Madonna , how she decimated " patriarchal , racist and capitalist constructions " , by the way she pronounced the word " self " in " Express Yourself " . They added that the opening line " Don 't go for second best , baby " transformed the song into a postmodernist anthem . Scholar Sheila Whiteley noted in her book Women and Popular Music : Sexuality , Identity , and Subjectivity , that Madonna 's acknowledgement of the pastiche and of being capable of imitating musical style was interesting to her , but given Madonna 's ability to manipulate image , the musical exuberance of " Express Yourself " did not appear surprising . Mark Bego , author of Madonna : Blond Ambition declared that " the song that most reflected the Madonna everyone had come to know and be shocked by was ' Express Yourself ' . " O 'Brien was impressed with the song , and gave a detailed review : 
 " Express Yourself " is a feminist call @-@ to @-@ arms , complete with muscular brass playing and soulful voice . Here Madonna is the anti @-@ materialism girl , exhorting her female audiences to respect themselves . That means having a man who loves your head and your heart . If he doesn 't treat you right ( and here 's the revolutionary rhetoric ) you 're better off on your own . Like a female preacher , Madonna emphasizes each word of the chorus , invoking God and the power of orgasm . In parts Cosmo @-@ woman , girl @-@ talk , and swinging dance track , it presages the deliciously declarative stance of " Vogue " and shows Madonna moving from introspective to survivalist mode . 
 Professor Maury Dean wrote in his book Rock ' n ' Roll Gold Rush : A Singles Un @-@ Cyclopedia , that the main appeal of " Express Yourself " lay in its teen appeal , although he understood that at its core , it was addressing a very important issue of female liberation . Kevin Phinney from Austin American @-@ Statesman commented that with " Express Yourself " , Madonna struck out her " Material Girl " persona , there by demonstrating once more that no image of hers is concrete . Based on the lyrics of the song , Ken Blakely of Philadelphia Daily News declared the song as a rare example of good taste and good advice from Like a Prayer . Andy Goldberg from The Jerusalem Post was impressed with Madonna 's vocals on the song , complimenting the soul <unk> . Rolling Stone 's J. D. Considine called " Express Yourself " an unabashed groove tune and felt that it seemed " smart and sassy , right down to Madonna 's soul @-@ style testimony on the intro : ' Come on , girls , do you believe in love ? " Don McCleese from Chicago Sun @-@ Times declared the song as one of the highlights of the album , feeling that it would become anthemic . Sal Cinquemani from Slant magazine , while reviewing Like a Prayer , announced " Express Yourself " as the most soulful performance of Madonna 's career . He added that the song " turned Madonna 's ' Material Girl ' image on its head , denouncing material things for a little r @-@ e @-@ s @-@ p @-@ e @-@ c @-@ t . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic felt that the song consisted of " deep funk " music . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United States , " Express Yourself " was the highest debuting single at number 41 on the Billboard Hot 100 , for the issue dated June 3 , 1989 , and after four weeks reached the top @-@ ten of the chart , at number six . It eventually peaked at number two , held at the runner @-@ up spot for two weeks by the Simply Red song , " If You Don 't Know Me by Now " and the next week by Martika 's " Toy Soldiers " . " Express Yourself " was present for a total of 16 weeks on the Hot 100 , and placed at number 55 on the year @-@ end chart . The song reached the top of the Dance Club Songs chart of Billboard , while on the Hot Adult Contemporary chart , it peaked outside the top @-@ ten , at number 12 . " Express Yourself " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in August 1989 , for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single across United States . In Canada , the song debuted at number 82 on the RPM Singles Chart and reached the top in its ninth week . It was present on the chart for 17 weeks and was the eighth best @-@ selling Canadian single for 1989 . 
 In Australia , " Express Yourself " debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at number 36 on June 4 , 1989 . After five weeks , the song reached a peak of number five on the chart , staying there for one week , before descending the chart . It was present for a total of 19 weeks on the chart , and was certified Gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies of the single . At the year @-@ end charts of ARIA , " Express Yourself " was the 28th best @-@ selling Australian single of 1989 . In New Zealand , the song debuted at number five on the RIANZ Singles Chart , and reaching a peak of number two after three weeks . It was present for a total of 12 weeks on the chart . 
 " Express Yourself " was released in the United Kingdom on June 3 , 1989 , and entered the UK Singles Chart at number ten , moving to its peak of number five the next week . " Express Yourself " was the 20th best @-@ selling song of 1989 in the UK , with the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) certifying it silver , for shipment of 200 @,@ 000 copies of the single . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold 209 @,@ 000 copies there . " Express Yourself " was Madonna 's sixth number one single on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles chart , reaching the top on July 1 , 1989 , and staying at number one for three weeks . In Belgium , " Express Yourself " debuted at number 16 on the Ultratop chart on June 10 , 1989 , and reached a peak of number three . In the Netherlands , " Express Yourself " debuted at number 27 on the Dutch Top 40 , and reached a peak of five on July 1 , 1989 . The song reached a peak of number three in Germany , where it remained for two weeks , before spending a total of 18 weeks on the chart . On the Swiss Singles Chart , " Express Yourself " was one of the highest debuting song on the issued dated June 11 , 1989 . After seven weeks , the song reached the top of the chart for one week , becoming Madonna 's third number @-@ one single there . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The music video was directed by David Fincher and filmed in April 1989 , at Culver Studios in Culver City , California . It was produced by Gregg Fienberg , under Propaganda Films , with editing by Scott Chestnut , principal photography by Mark Plummer , and Vance Lorenzini as the production designer . " Express Yourself " music video was inspired by the Fritz Lang classic film Metropolis ( 1927 ) , and featured an epigraph at the end of the video from the film : " Without the Heart , there can be no understanding between the hand and the mind " . The video marked the first appearance of the Shep Pettibone remix of the song . It had a total budget of $ 5 million ( $ 9 @.@ 54 million in 2016 dollars ) , which made it the most expensive music video in history at the time it was made , and currently the third most expensive of all time . " Express Yourself " had its world @-@ premiere on May 17 , 1989 , on MTV and was an MTV exclusive for three weeks , being aired every hour on the music channel . The concept of the video was to portray Madonna as a glamorous lady and chained masochist , with muscular men acting as her workers . In the end , she picks one of them — played by model Cameron <unk> — as her date . When Fincher explained this concept to Madonna , she was intrigued and decided to portray a masculine persona . She was dating actor Warren Beatty at that time , and asked him to play the part of a slave working at a factory ; Beatty politely refused , saying later that " Madonna wanted the video as a show case of her sexual prowess , I never wanted to be a part of it . " She then thought about Metropolis and of its scenes displaying factory workers and a city with tall skyscrapers . Fincher liked the concept and it became the main backdrop for the video . In Madonna ' Talking ' : Madonna in Her Own Words , she commented about the development of the video . 
 This one I had the most amount of input . I oversaw everything — the building of the sets , everyone 's costumes , I had meetings with make @-@ up and hair and the cinematographer , everybody . Casting , finding the right cat — just every aspect . Kind of like making a little movie . We basically sat down and just threw out all every idea we could possibly conceive of and of all the things we wanted . All the imagery we wanted — and I had a few set ideas , for instance the cat and the idea of Metropolis . I definitely wanted to have that influence , that look on all the men — the workers , diligently , methodically working away . 
 Madonna mentioned jokingly in a 1990 BBC Television interview on the program Omnibus , that the main theme of the video and the cat metaphor represented that " Pussy rules the world " . She added that the idea of the cat licking the milk and then pour it over , was the director 's . " It 's great but believe me I fought him on that . I didn 't want to do it . I thought it 's just so over the top and silly and kind of cliched , an art student or a film student 's kind of trick . I 'm glad that I gave in to him . " 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video opens with the view of a city populated with skyscrapers , intermingling railway lines and aero @-@ crafts . Steam blows out of the funnels of a factory as big machines are shown . Madonna , wearing black lingerie , appears on the back of a statue of an angry looking swan , and utters the line : " Come on girls , do you believe in love ? " This is followed by the chorus , showing the interiors of the factory where the workers slave at the machines , as rain pour incessantly on them . Amidst the smoke filled environment , the chiseled torso of the male workers are shown , as they strip off their shirts , with water splashing all around . Madonna is then shown in a light @-@ green gown , holding a black cat in her lap , looking across the factory from her sitting room of her penthouse office . As she sings the first verse , the workers perform choreographed dance routine inside the factory . Madonna lies down on a sofa and the cat escapes from her lap , as her singing reaches the owner of the factory , through a series of speakers . He becomes nervous hearing her voice and looks down to find one of the workers staring up and looking for the source of the voice . 
 With the beginning of the second verse , Madonna moves into her bedroom , wearing a very feminine lingerie looking outfit . She moves behind different white screens and dances in suggestive manner , her silhouette reflecting it from the other side of the screens . In the meantime the worker continues to think about Madonna 's voice and dreams of her eyes amidst smokes . He then sees Madonna standing atop a long flight of stairs inside the factory , wearing a pinstripe suit and displaying a monocle glass . She dances on a platform , holding her crotch sometimes , and briefly tears open her jacket to exposes her bra , as two men pull at levers beside the steps . In the meantime , the owner of the factory listens to live musicians in his room , with a remote control , as Madonna is shown lying naked on her bed , with one end of a chain attached to her neck , the other end going long down into the factory . As the owner leers at the musicians in the room , the worker is shown caressing Madonna 's cat , while looking up <unk> towards her room . Perhaps the owner in a suit is Madonna 's husband and she is trying to escape him . 
 As the final verse of the song begins , a soaked Madonna , wearing the same black lingerie , like a stalking cat , is shown crawling on the floor among her furniture , like under the table with lightning flashing , along with a brief scene through a clear globe held up by 3 male statues , the scene interspersed with Madonna sitting on a sofa and smoking . The worker ultimately gets up from his steel bed and , carrying Madonna 's cat , walks towards Madonna 's room as she reaches for a bowl of milk , and licks it like a cat . She pours it over her shoulder and it reaches the worker 's face , who travels up the building in an elevator , holding her cat , on a quest to return it . A boxing / wrestling match starts among the other workers of the factory , as a seemingly vulnerable Madonna , acting like a cat , is now shown sitting naked on her bed . The worker reaches her room , returns her cat , takes her into his arm , and makes love to her as the door closes behind them . The owner of the factory using the same monocle glass sees the empty position where the worker was and looks up at both the worker and Madonna , who are having sex . He seems to have lost control of the factory and Madonna with another man , but he doesn 't mind . The video ends with a last shot of the city @-@ line , with Madonna 's eyes above the sky , and over the city which may show that she had control all along , and the epigraph on top of a series of gears . It ends with a quote , " Without the heart , there can be no understanding between the hand and the mind " . 
 = = = Reception and analysis = = = 
 Authors Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández and Freya Jarman @-@ Ivens commented that " the video portrayed the deconstructive gender @-@ bending approach associated with free play and self @-@ reflexivity of images in postmodernism . " They had initially thought the video as a feminist approach to sexuality , leading them to say that " the video might also relate to several core political questions raised by feminism . " However , they deduced that the scenes showing Madonna in a seductive manner and chained to her bed do not portray women in an empowering position , but emphasizes the fact that women can be in control because of their sexual prowess . Jarman @-@ Ivens added that the epigraph establishes the status @-@ quo , with a clear distinction of the body ( workers , hand , labors ) and the mind ( elite , intellect capital ) . Unlike Metropolis , where the line denoted the binary oppositions of the labor class against the elitist , in the video Madonna did not distinguish between the two . Jarman @-@ Ivens noted that the video portrayed both men and women being looked at , actively or passively . The body and the hand are not separate there , instead the heart , hand and head are portrayed as a balance in everybody , male or female . Scholar Theodore <unk> also noted of the initial portrayal of female sexuality in the video , in his book , I Wanna Be Me : Rock Music and the Politics of Identity , and criticized the video for its portrayal of male domination . However , on close inspection , <unk> came to the conclusion that " Express Yourself " was a smart move for Madonna , as it actually portrayed women in a much stronger position . Author John Evan Seery wrote in his book Political Theory for Mortals , that " Madonna with her ' Express Yourself ' video splicing together images of machines with images of sex , ... represents the ultimate cyborg of late twentieth @-@ century America . " Allen Metz felt that the scenes of Madonna grabbing her crotch and dancing were reminiscent of " Michael Jackson 's androgynous imitation of phallic masculinity . " He went on to compliment the video for its gender @-@ bending depiction . 
 Michelle Gibson and Deborah Townsend Meem , authors of Femme / Butch , commended the video for showing a shift in power between the sexes , declaring that " Madonna assertively claimed all possible gender space like Marlene Dietrich . " Professor Carol Vernallis noted in her book , Experiencing Music Video that the diffused light around Madonna in the video was adopted to mimic the diffusion of sound and make the borders around Madonna appear soft , and her body spread outwards . In the book The 1980s , authors Bob Batchelor and Scott Stoddart called " Express Yourself " as one of Madonna 's most challenging videos . They noted the video for its " exploitation " of the male body and sexualizing them as an object of desire . The authors also added that the video " was a colorful homage to the term gaze , but Madonna is the bearer of it — not men . " Batchelor explained that the scenes of Madonna performing alone in her room and atop the stairs suggested that she was the object of the gaze , however it seemed to them that she was mocking the movement of the men below . " She controls the mind of the men below , with a form of siren 's song of female empowerment , signalling that the men do move in unison to her song " , Stoddart concluded . Elizabeth Edwards , one of the authors of Visual Sense : A Cultural Reader , explained that the shot of Madonna crawling on the floor , while another image of hers watches from a nearby sofa , illustrated the mutation that Madonna 's image was undergoing . According to her , Madonna was acting out self @-@ consciousness by " watching herself " . She concluded by saying , " ' Express Yourself ' gives its viewers a whole new series of image references to traditional American gendered and sexual icons — male and female — and a whole new level of irony . " Shari Benstock and Suzanne Ferriss , authors of On Fashion , deconstructed the video for its display of the artificiality of images of gender . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine reviewed the video in 2003 , and commented that the video " is the embodiment of ' queer chic ' , a bombastic masterpiece that heralds Madonna 's uncanny ability to use her consumer @-@ driven image to code her feminist politics . " 
 At the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards , " Express Yourself " was nominated in the categories of Best Female Video , Best Editing , Best Cinematography , Best Direction and Best Art Direction , winning the last three categories . Billboard also honored the video as the Best Music Video of the year , at their Music Video Awards for 1989 . The music video of " Express Yourself " is ranked at number one on Slant Magazine 's " 100 Greatest Music Videos " . It is also placed at number ten on both Rolling Stone 's " The 100 Top Music Videos " and MTV 's " 100 Greatest Videos Ever Made " , as well as number three on MuchMusic 's list of " Top 100 Videos of The Century " . David Dale from Sydney Morning Herald listed it as one of the Most Influential Videos of All Time , at number 18 . Time magazine listed it at number eight on their countdown of The 30 @-@ All Time Best Music Videos . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna 's first live performance of " Express Yourself " was at the 1989 MTV Video Music Awards . She started the performance by descending from a flight of stairs , wearing a pin @-@ striped suit and a monocle . Later she removed the coat to reveal her bustier , and together with her backup singers Niki Haris and Donna De Lory , performed a dance routine called voguing . Ian Inglis , author of Performance and Popular Music : History , Place and Time noted that the historical importance of Madonna 's performance at the Video Music Awards was due to the televisual venue . Inglis explained that since Madonna 's performance was striking primarily as a high @-@ energy , provocatively choreographed , dance production number , it went on to highlight the ' TV ' part of MTV , and in a way heralded her and the network as a cultural arbiter . 
 Madonna included the song in the set list of her Blond Ambition World Tour in 1990 , which featured a version based on the Non @-@ Stop Express remix of the song and included lyrics from " Everybody " during the introduction . The set was inspired by Metropolis and the themes were taken from the factory seen in the music video . It included a number of funnels billowing smoke , steel piping , cables hanging above and a flight of stairs in the middle . As the show started , the set was hurled onstage and Madonna 's male dancers , with bare torso , appeared behind the steel structures . They did a choreographed routine on the stage , and towards the end Madonna appeared atop the flight of stairs . She was dressed in a pin @-@ striped suit with holes cut in it , so that her brassiere pocked out of them . Underneath she wore a peach colored corset with a pointed conical bra , designed by Jean Paul Gaultier . She also held a monocle in her hand . Accompanied by her two female dancers dressed in a similar attire , Madonna did a straightforward vocal rendition of the track , and an elaborate choreography , which included voguing , humping , simulated masturbation and momentary storage of the performers ' microphone inside their bras . At one point Madonna opened the suit , to reveal the corset with the bra , and tassels hanging from its sides . Two different performances were taped and released on video , the Blond Ambition – Japan Tour 90 , taped in Yokohama , Japan , on April 27 , 1990 , and the Live ! – Blond Ambition World Tour 90 , taped in Nice , France , on August 5 , 1990 . It was also one of the performances included in the documentary , Madonna : Truth or Dare ( 1990 ) . 
 She also performed a disco @-@ styled version of the song during The Girlie Show World Tour in 1993 . The stage was decked in Mylar curtains and glittering disco balls . The performance began with a distorted voice claiming " I 'm gonna take you to a place you 've never been before " . Afterwards , Madonna descended from the ceiling on a giant disco ball , wearing a blond afro wig , 1970 's style <unk> and royal blue bell @-@ bottom pants . Then her two back @-@ up dancers appeared on the stage and the three women started singing the song together . The end of the performance was connected to the next song , " Deeper and Deeper " . According to Guilbert , Madonna was inspired by actress Marlene Dietrich in the 1932 film Blonde Venus for the performance . It was included on The Girlie Show – Live Down Under home video release , recorded on November 19 , 1993 , at Sydney , Australia . " Express Yourself " was included in the military segment of the Re @-@ Invention World Tour in 2004 , with the opening line altered to " Come on boys ! " . She and her dancers were dressed in military gear and performed a rifle choreography , with Madonna acting as a sergeant . As Drew <unk> from News Press noted , the song in its military version was talking about both personal love , as well as patriotic love . Jon Pareles of The New York Times commented that the song was contravened as cynical , when Madonna sang the line , " What you need is a big , strong hand / To lift you to your higher ground " , and raised a rifle above her head . Author Dirk Timmerman pointed out that " in the context of the show , with [ war @-@ induced ] performances like ' American Life ' and ' Imagine ' , it added to the anti @-@ war message of the tour . " In 2008 , during the Sticky & Sweet Tour , she performed " Express Yourself " as the request song in some of her shows , including the show at Madison Square Garden in New York . 
 In 2012 , she performed an excerpt of the song at the Super Bowl XLVI Halftime Show with Cee Lo Green and a large marching band . That same year , " Express Yourself " was included on the MDNA Tour where it was given a majorette theme and was the opening song of the show 's second segment titled Prophecy , where a mix of joyful songs that " bring people together " were performed . Madonna appeared onstage and sang the song dressed in a white majorette uniform with ruby @-@ red stripes and knee @-@ high white boots designed by Miu Miu , while her female back @-@ up dancers wore similar costumes in red . During the performance she also twirled a baton and walked around the stage leading a group of back @-@ up dancers who played the drums and acted the role of a marching band . Halfway through the song , Madonna sang the chorus of Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " , as the chord progression and melody of " Born This Way " was heavily compared to that of " Express Yourself " upon its release , many speculated that Madonna was " dissing " Gaga and the song . Towards the end of the performance Madonna also sang the chorus of her own song " She 's Not Me " from her eleventh studio album Hard Candy ( 2008 ) . Critics were positive towards the performance , Melissa Ruggieri from Access Atlanta felt that by singing the chorus of Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " while performing " Express <unk> " , Madonna was " proving how it swipes the same melody line , then twisted the knife in that perfectly Madonna way by adding the chorus of her own ' She 's Not Me ' " . The performance was included in the live album MDNA World Tour released on September 6 , 2013 but the " Born This Way " sample was not credited in the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Cover versions and usage in media = = 
 Kelly Clarkson performed " Express Yourself " on her first audition for the first season of singing television series American Idol . She went on to win the competition and built a successful music career . The 1999 compilation album , Virgin Voices : A Tribute To Madonna , Vol . 1 , features a cover version by Information Society . The Chipettes released a cover version of the song ( with two brief lines sung by Alvin and the Chipmunks ) for the 1991 album The Chipmunks Rock the House . In 2010 , the female leads of the Fox TV show Glee performed the song in the episode titled " The Power of Madonna " . When the fictional character Will Schuester observes a cheer leading group in the episode performing a routine with stilts to Madonna 's " Ray of Light " , he is inspired to set a Madonna @-@ themed assignment for the members of the fictional Glee club , New Directions . To this , the female members of the club perform " Express Yourself " , much to the uneasiness of the male members . This version was released on the soundtrack album Glee : The Music , The Power of Madonna , and reached number 132 on the UK Singles Chart . Nearly 30 years after the " Like a Prayer " controversy , " Express Yourself " was featured in a Pepsi commercial for Super Bowl 50 . Chad Stubbs , the VP marketing of Pepsi , explained the song choose , " It was within that album and era that we had worked with Madonna before . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 " Express Yourself " is noted both for its song and its accompanying music video , both of which are considered feminist odes to freedom . As author María José <unk> Aguilar wrote in her book Culture and Power , the release of the song was in context of the anti @-@ feminist or the " backlash " ideology dominant in the US , since the rise of the " New Right " in the 1980s and the government of Ronald Reagan and George H. W. Bush . Aguilar went on to explain that the 1980s and the 1990s were characterized by a conservative reaction against the ‘ excesses ’ of the 1960s and 70s . This reaction was channeled mainly by the media 's strong attacks against feminism , generally describing activists as " tortured people with hairy legs " , " radical , bitter , man @-@ hating , separatist and lesbian " , accompanied by messages advocating a feminization of women that turned them into beautiful ornamental objects , and tended to increase the cultural differences between the sexes . " Express Yourself " appeared as a refutation of some of these reactionary premises . The title , Aguilar noted , seemed to raise the question of the urgency of a feminine voice to develop and emerge — a concern that recalled the tradition of French feminists like Hélène <unk> and Luce <unk> . 
 The video stood out conspicuously to Aguilar for its chaotic texture through the rapid editing of the multiple shots that constituted it . The sudden and continuous changes of camera angles , scenes and the distance and mood seemed to produce an " apparently incoherent combination of images that offered no stable anchor to provide the whole with a definitive interpretation " , she added . Since chaos has traditionally been associated with the female ontogenetic principle as opposed to male principle of order , the video in turn came to be associated with duality between order / chaos , male / female , good / evil , light / dark etc . Aguilar also drew parallel between Metropolis and the music video . Madonna borrowed different phallic symbolism from the film , including the smoke @-@ billowing chimneys , the tall skyscrapers and the oppressive environment of industrial work . However , unlike Metropolis which portrayed repression of a rebellious proletariat , the chaotic nature of " Express Yourself " video showed freedom instead . Caryn James from The New York Times added that " asked about the video , [ Madonna ] made a distinction that any honest feminist would respect , however politically incorrect it may seem . ' I have chained myself ' , she said . ' There wasn 't a man that put that chain on me . ' You don 't have to buy Madonna 's next loopy bit of symbolism — ' I was chained to my desires ' — to believe the feminist subtext she finds in the video . ' I do everything by my own volition . I 'm in charge , O.K. ' Madonna in chains , though , is far removed from those unfortunate women who don 't know that they have options . " Madonna also complained about the feminist criticisms of her " crotch @-@ grabbing " , saying that " if male singers like Michael Jackson can get away with it , why can 't women ? " Theorist Douglas Kellner further asserted that the video was a feminist critique of male fighting and brutality , with images of the male workers engaged in a boxing match at the end . According to him , Madonna deliberately appropriated traditional feminine images in the beginning of the video , but contrasted them with her " crotch @-@ hugging " male poses near the end , and discordant images of women assuming the male position . As feminist author Susan Bordo pointed out , " it is the postmodern nature of the video that has most entranced academic critics , and its various ways of constituting identities that refuse stability , that remain fluid , that resist definition . " 
 " Express Yourself " is also notable for its influence on numerous music artists . Spice Girls member Melanie C said " Madonna was doing the girl power thing a long time before the Spice Girls ... ' Express Yourself ' is one of the routines that I know and I used to really like doing that one because it is where she shows her bra and holds her crotch . " In 2010 , singer Christina Aguilera paid tribute to " Express Yourself " with the music video of her single , " Not Myself Tonight " . She commented " One of my favorite videos ever is ' Express Yourself ' by Madonna which came across as really strong and empowering which I always try to incorporate through my expression of sexuality ... I love the direct reference I made to Madonna with the eye glass moment and the smoke and stairs . I was paying tribute to a very strong woman who has paved the way before . " James Montgomery from MTV deemed " Express Yourself " as the primary influence of Aguilera 's video with scenes like Aguilera displaying a monocle , standing atop a flight of stairs and crawling across the floor while pouring a black liquid over herself . Similarities were also noted between " Express Yourself " and singer Lady Gaga 's 2011 single " Born This Way " both in subject matter and composition . " I certainly think [ Gaga ] references me a lot in her work , " Madonna said in the ABC interview . " And sometimes I think it 's amusing and flattering and well @-@ done . When I heard [ ' Born This Way ' ] on the radio ... I said , ' that sounds very familiar . " Gaga herself addressed the comparisons on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , explaining that she had received an e @-@ mail from Madonna 's representatives , who had mentioned their support for " Born This Way " . CNN later reported that Madonna 's representatives were not aware that the singer , or her team , had sent Gaga an e @-@ mail regarding the situation . When accused of plagiarism by the media , Gaga addressed the comparisons to " Express Yourself " in an interview with NME by saying : " If you put the songs next to each other , side by side , the only similarities are the chord progression . It 's the same one that has been in disco music for the last 50 years . Just because I 'm the first fucking artist in 25 years to think of putting it on Top 40 radio , it doesn 't mean I 'm a plagiarist , it means I 'm fucking smart . Sorry . " 
 = = Track listing and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – songwriter , producer , vocals 
 Stephen Bray – songwriter , producer , remixer , arranger 
 Bob Rosa – engineering 
 Fred McFarlane – programming 
 Bob Ludwig – mastering 
 Bill Bottrell – mixing 
 Shep Pettibone – arranger , remixer 
 Herb Ritts – cover art photographer 
 Kama Logan – typography 
 Jeri Heiden – cover art designer 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Like a Prayer album liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Emirate of Crete = 
 The Emirate of Crete ( called <unk> or <unk> in Arabic ) was a Muslim state that existed on the Mediterranean island of Crete from the late 820s to the Byzantine reconquest of the island in 961 . Although the emirate recognized the suzerainty of the Abbasid Caliphate and maintained close ties with Tulunid Egypt , it was de facto independent . 
 A group of Andalusian exiles conquered Crete in c . 824 or in 827 / 828 , quickly establishing an independent state . Numerous attempts by the Byzantine Empire to recover the island failed disastrously , and for the approximately 135 years of its existence , the emirate was one of the major foes of Byzantium . Crete commanded the sea lanes of the Eastern Mediterranean and functioned as a forward base and haven for Muslim corsair fleets that ravaged the Byzantine @-@ controlled shores of the Aegean Sea . The emirate 's internal history is less well @-@ known , but all accounts point to considerable prosperity deriving not only from piracy but also from extensive trade and agriculture . The emirate was brought to an end by Nikephoros Phokas , who launched a huge campaign against it in 960 – 961 . 
 = = History = = 
 Crete had been the target of Muslim attacks since the first wave of the Muslim conquests in the mid @-@ 7th century . It had suffered a first raid in 654 and again in 674 / 675 , and parts of the island were temporarily occupied during the reign of the Umayyad Caliph al @-@ Walid I ( r . 705 – 715 ) . Nevertheless , the island was never conquered and despite occasional raids in the 8th century it remained securely in Byzantine hands ; Crete was too far from the Arab naval bases in the Levant for an effective expedition against it to be undertaken . 
 = = = Conquest of Crete = = = 
 At some point in the second half of the reign of Byzantine Emperor Michael II ( r . 820 – 829 ) , a group of Andalusian exiles landed on Crete and began its conquest . These exiles had a long history of wanderings behind them . They were the survivors of a failed revolt against the emir Al @-@ Hakam I of Córdoba in 818 . In the aftermath of its suppression , the citizens of the <unk> suburb of al @-@ <unk> were exiled en masse . Some settled in Fez in Morocco , but others , numbering over 10 @,@ 000 , took to piracy , probably joined by other Andalusians . Some of the latter group , under the leadership of Umar ibn Hafs ibn <unk> ibn Isa al <unk> , commonly known as Abu Hafs , landed in Alexandria and took control of the city until 827 , when they were besieged and expelled by the Abbasid general Abdullah ibn Tahir al @-@ Khurasani . The exact chronology of their landing in Crete is uncertain . Following the Muslim sources , it is usually dated to 827 or 828 , after the Andalusians ' expulsion from Alexandria . Byzantine sources however seem to contradict this , placing their landing soon after the suppression of the large revolt of Thomas the Slav ( 821 – 823 ) . Further considerations regarding the number and chronology of the Byzantine campaigns launched against the invaders and <unk> questions of the Byzantine generals that headed them have led other scholars like <unk> <unk> and Christos Makrypoulias to propose an earlier date , c . 824 . 
 Under the terms of their agreement with Ibn Tahir , the Andalusians and their families left Alexandria in 40 ships . Historian Warren Treadgold estimates them at some 12 @,@ 000 people , of whom about 3 @,@ 000 would be fighting men . According to Byzantine historians , the Andalusians were already familiar with Crete , having raided it in the past . They also claim that the Muslim landing was initially intended as a raid , and was transformed into a bid for conquest when Abu Hafs himself set fire to their ships . However , as the Andalusian exiles had brought their families along , this is probably later invention . The Andalusians ' landing @-@ place is also unknown ; some scholars think that it was at the north coast , at Suda Bay or near where their main city and fortress Chandax ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> , <unk> al @-@ <unk> , " Castle of the Moat " , modern Heraklion ) was later built , but others think that they most likely landed on the south coast of the island and then moved to the more densely populated interior and the northern coast . 
 As soon as Emperor Michael II learned of the Arab landing , and before the Andalusians had secured their control over the entire island , he reacted and sent successive expeditions to recover the island . Losses suffered during the revolt of Thomas the Slav hampered Byzantium 's ability to respond , however , and if the landing occurred in 827 / 828 , the diversion of ships and men to counter the gradual conquest of Sicily by the Tunisian Aghlabids also interfered . The first expedition , under <unk> , strategos of the Anatolic Theme , and Damian , Count of the Stable , was defeated in open battle , where Damian was killed . The next expedition was sent a year later and comprised 70 ships under the strategos of the Cibyrrhaeots Krateros . It was initially victorious , but the overconfident Byzantines were then routed in a night attack . Krateros managed to flee to Kos , but there he was captured by the Arabs and crucified . Makrypoulias suggests that these campaigns must have taken place before the Andalusians completed their construction of Chandax , where they transferred the capital from the inland site of Gortyn . 
 = = = The " pirate " emirate = = = 
 Abu Hafs repulsed the early Byzantine attacks and slowly consolidated control of the entire island . He recognized the suzerainty of the Abbasid Caliphate , but he ruled as a de facto independent prince . The conquest of the island was of major importance as it transformed the naval balance of power in the Eastern Mediterranean and opened the hitherto secure Aegean Sea littoral to frequent and devastating raids . 
 The Andalusians also occupied several of the Cyclades during these early years , but Michael II organized another large @-@ scale expedition , recruiting an entire new marine corps , the <unk> , and building new ships . Under the admiral Ooryphas , this fleet managed to evict the Arabs from the Aegean islands but failed to retake Crete . Michael II 's successor Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) sent an embassy to Abd ar @-@ Rahman II of Córdoba proposing a joint action against the Andalusian exiles , but beyond Abd ar @-@ Rahman giving his assent to any Byzantine action against Crete , this came to nothing . In October 829 , the Cretans destroyed an imperial fleet off Thasos , undoing much of the work of Ooryphas and opening the Aegean and its coasts to pillage . Later they attacked Euboea ( c . 835 – 840 ) , Lesbos ( 837 ) , and the coasts of the Thracesian Theme , where they destroyed the monastic centre of Mount <unk> . They were heavily defeated , however , by the local strategos , Constantine Kontomytes . 
 After the death of Theophilos in 842 , new measures to confront the Cretan threat were undertaken by the new Byzantine regime : in 843 a new maritime theme , that of the Aegean Sea , was established to better deal with the Arabs raids , and another expedition to recover Crete was launched under the personal leadership of the powerful logothetes and regent Theoktistos . Although it succeeded in occupying much of the island , Theoktistos had to abandon the army due to political intrigues in Constantinople , and the troops left behind were slaughtered by the Arabs . In an effort to weaken the Arabs in 853 , several Byzantine fleets engaged in coordinated operations in the Eastern Mediterranean , attacking the Egyptian naval base of Damietta and capturing weapons intended for Crete . Despite some Byzantine successes against the Arabs in the following years , the Cretans resumed their raids in the early 860s , attacking the Peloponnese , the Cyclades , and Athos . In 866 , the Byzantine Caesar Bardas assembled another large @-@ scale expeditionary force to subdue Crete , but his murder by Basil the Macedonian only two weeks after the fleet set sail from the capital spelled the end of the undertaking . 
 In the early 870s , the Cretan raids reached a new intensity : their fleets , often commanded by Byzantine renegades , ranged the Aegean and further afield , reaching the Dalmatian coasts . On one occasion in ca . 873 a Cretan fleet under the renegade Photios even penetrated into the Marmara Sea and unsuccessfully attacked <unk> ; the first time since the Second Arab Siege of Constantinople in 717 – 718 that a Muslim fleet had come so close to the Byzantine capital . On its return however , it suffered a heavy defeat at the hands of the new Byzantine admiral , Niketas Ooryphas , at the Battle of Kardia . Shortly after , Ooryphas once again defeated the Cretans at the Gulf of Corinth and took many prisoners , whom he tortured extensively in revenge for their raids . At about the same time , the Muslim fleet of Tarsus led by Yazaman al @-@ Khadim was destroyed in a raid against <unk> . These Byzantine victories apparently led to a temporary truce , and it appears that the Cretan emir <unk> ( Shu 'ayb ibn Umar ) was obliged to pay tribute to Byzantium for about a decade . 
 Raids resumed soon after , in which the Cretans were joined by North African and Syrian fleets . The Peloponnese in particular suffered considerably from their raids , but also Euboea and the Cyclades : the islands of Patmos , Karpathos and nearby <unk> came under Cretan control , and Cretan rule extended as far north as Aegina in the Saronic Gulf , and to <unk> and Cythera off the southern coast of the Peloponnese ; the great Cycladic island of Naxos , probably along with the neighbouring islands of Paros and <unk> , was forced to pay them the poll @-@ tax ( jizya ) . As the Muslim presence left generally few material or literary traces , the list of islands at one time controlled or occupied by them could well be longer . Nevertheless , the impact of this new wave of Arab raids was felt across the Aegean , where some islands were deserted altogether , and elsewhere coastal sites were abandoned for better protected inland locations . Athens may have been occupied in c . 896 – 902 , and in 904 , a Syrian fleet led by Leo of Tripoli sacked the Byzantine Empire 's second city , Thessalonica . The Arabs of Crete co @-@ operated closely with their Syrian counterparts , who often used Crete as a base or a stop @-@ over , as during Leo of Tripoli 's fleet return from Thessalonica , when many of the over 20 @,@ 000 <unk> captives were sold or gifted as slaves in Crete . Likewise , the Cretan emirate received strong support from the Tulunid governors of Egypt ( 868 – 905 ) , but their Ikhshidid successors neglected the aid to Crete . In 911 , another large @-@ scale expedition of well over 100 ships was launched against Crete , headed by the admiral Himerios , but it was forced to leave the island after a few months . On its return journey , Himerios ' fleet was destroyed in battle off Chios by the Syrian fleet . 
 = = = Byzantine reconquest = = = 
 Cretan piracy reached another high in the 930s and 940s , devastating southern Greece , Athos , and the western coasts of Asia Minor . As a result , Emperor Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) sent another expedition in 949 . This too was routed in a surprise attack , a defeat which Byzantine chroniclers ascribe to the incompetence and inexperience of its leader , the eunuch chamberlain Constantine Gongyles . Constantine VII did not give up , and during the last years of his reign he began preparing another expedition . It would be carried out under his successor , Romanos II ( r . 959 – 963 ) , who entrusted its leadership to the capable general Nikephoros Phokas . At the head of a huge fleet and army , Phokas sailed in June or July 960 , landed on the island , and defeated the initial Muslim resistance . A long siege of Chandax followed , which dragged over the winter into 961 , when the city was stormed on 6 March . 
 The city was pillaged , and its mosques and walls were torn down . Muslim inhabitants were either killed or carried off into slavery , while the island 's last emir Abd al @-@ Aziz ibn Shu 'ayb ( <unk> ) and his son al @-@ Numan ( Anemas ) were taken captive and brought to Constantinople , where Phokas celebrated a triumph . The island was converted into a Byzantine theme , and the remaining Muslims were converted to Christianity by missionaries like Nikon " the <unk> " . Among the converts was the prince Anemas , who entered Byzantine service and fell at Dorostolon , in the war of 970 – 971 against the Rus ' . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Arab period of Crete remains relatively obscure due to a paucity of surviving evidence regarding its internal history . Furthermore , other than a few place names recalling the presence of the Arabs , no major archaeological remains from the period survive , possibly due to deliberate Byzantine destruction after 961 . This has influenced the way the emirate is generally regarded : scholars , forced to rely mostly on Byzantine accounts , have traditionally viewed the Emirate of Crete through a Byzantine lens as a quintessential " corsair 's nest " , surviving on piracy and the slave trade . 
 The picture painted by the few and scattered references to the Cretan emirate from the Muslim world , on the other hand , is of an ordered state with a regular monetary economy and extensive trade links , and there is evidence that Chandax was a cultural centre of some importance . The survival of numerous gold , silver , and copper coins , of almost constant weight and composition , testifies to a strong economy and a high living standard among the population . The economy was strengthened by extensive trade with the rest of the Muslim world , especially with Egypt , and by a booming agriculture : the need to sustain an independent state , as well as access to the markets of the Muslim world , led to an intensification of cultivation . It is also possible that sugar cane was introduced to Crete at the time . 
 It is unclear what happened to the island 's Christians after the Muslim conquest ; the traditional view is that most were either converted or expelled . There is evidence from Muslim sources , however , for the continued survival of Christians on Crete , although according to the same sources the Muslims , whether descendants of the Andalusians , more recent migrants , or converts ( or any combination of these ) formed the majority . There is also some evidence of rival factions on the island , either Christian or Muslim , as when Theodosius the Deacon reports the " inhabitants of crags and caves " under their leader <unk> descending from the mountains during the siege of Chandax by Nikephoros Phokas . It seems that the population of the countryside was left relatively alone , while the Muslim element ( including native converts ) predominated in the towns . 
 = = List of emirs = = 
 The succession of the emirs of Crete has been established by Arab and Byzantine sources , but chiefly through their coinage . The dates of their reigns are therefore largely approximate : 
 = MediaCityUK = 
 MediaCityUK is a 200 @-@ acre ( 81 ha ) mixed @-@ use property development site on the banks of the Manchester Ship Canal in Salford and Trafford , Greater Manchester , England . The project is being developed by Peel Media , and its principal tenants are media organisations and the University of Salford . The land occupied by the development was part of the Port of Manchester and Manchester Docks . 
 The BBC signalled its intention to move jobs to Manchester in 2004 , and the Salford Quays site was chosen in 2006 . The Peel Group was granted planning permission to develop the site in 2007 , and construction of the development , with its own energy generation plant and communications network , began the same year . Based in Quay House , the principal tenant is the BBC , whose move marks a large @-@ scale decentralisation from London . ITV Granada completed the first phase of its move to MediaCityUK on 25 March 2013 , followed in two stages by the northern arm of ITV Studios : the second stage involved Coronation Street being moved to a new production facility on Trafford Wharf ( next to the Imperial War Museum North ) at the end of 2013 . The Studios on Broadway houses seven high @-@ definition studios , claimed to be the largest such facility in Europe . 
 MediaCityUK is to be developed in two phases . The 36 @-@ acre ( 15 ha ) first phase was completed in 2011 , and the second is dependent on its success . Metrolink , Greater Manchester 's light @-@ rail system , was extended to MediaCityUK with the opening of the MediaCityUK tram stop on 20 September 2010 and further extensions are planned . Road access was improved by the construction of Broadway Link Road . 
 = = Location = = 
 Salford Quays , at the eastern end of the Manchester Ship Canal on the site of the former Manchester Docks , became one of the first and largest urban regeneration projects in the United Kingdom after the closure of the dockyards in 1982 . It forms part of an area known as The Quays , a joint tourism initiative between Salford City Council and Trafford Borough Council , which also encompasses Trafford Wharf and Old Trafford , on the Manchester side of the ship canal . As well as Salford Quays , The Quays development includes The Lowry Arts Centre and the Imperial War Museum North . 
 A total of 200 acres ( 81 ha ) of land have been earmarked for the development of MediaCityUK . The first phase of MediaCityUK 's development was primarily focused on a 36 @-@ acre ( 15 ha ) site at Pier 9 of Salford Quays . In 2010 it was announced that an ITV production centre would be built on Trafford Wharf in the Metropolitan Borough of Trafford . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 2003 reports emerged that , as part of the plans for the renewal of its Royal Charter , the BBC was considering moving whole channels or strands of production from London to Manchester . Early discussions involved a plan where the BBC would move to a new media village proposed by Granada Television at its Bonded Warehouse site at Granada Studios in the city . 
 Proposals to relocate 1 @,@ 800 jobs to Manchester were unveiled by BBC Director General , Mark Thompson , in December 2004 . The BBC justified the move as its spending per head was low in northern England where it had low approval ratings and its facilities at New Broadcasting House in Manchester needed replacing . An initial list of 18 sites was narrowed to a short @-@ list of four during 2005 , two in Manchester – one at Quay Street , close to Granada Studios , and one on Whitworth Street and two in Salford – one close to the Manchester Arena and one at Pier 9 on Salford Quays . The site at Salford Quays was chosen in June 2006 and the move north was conditional on a satisfactory licence fee settlement from the government . 
 The chosen site was the last undeveloped site at Manchester Docks , an area that had been subject to considerable investment and was emerging as a tourist destination , residential and commercial centre . The vision of the developers Peel Group , Salford City Council , the Central Salford Urban Regeneration Company and the Northwest Regional Development Agency was to create a significant new media city capable of competing on a global scale with developments in Copenhagen and Singapore . 
 Salford City Council granted planning consent for an outline application for a multi @-@ use development on the site involving residential , retail and studio and office space in October 2006 and consent for a detailed planning application followed in May 2007 . In the same month the BBC Trust approved moving five London @-@ based departments to the development . The departments to be moved were Sport , Children 's , Learning , Future Media and Technology and Radio Five Live . 
 Construction started in 2007 with the site owner , Peel Group as developer and Bovis Lend Lease as contractor . The media facilities opened in stages from 2007 . The first facility being the Pie Factory , which was located in a refurbished bakery . It featured three large sound stages suitable for drama productions and commercials . In January 2011 Peel Media received planning permission to convert on @-@ site offices used by Bovis Lend Lease during the construction of the first phase into the Greenhouse . 
 The first trial show took place in November 2010 in Studio <unk> . The half @-@ hour test show featured a power failure and a fire drill , which involved a full evacuation of the audience and crew . The first programme filmed at MediaCityUK was Don 't Scare the Hare in February 2011 , and the first to transfer was A Question of Sport , the same month . BBC employees started transferring to the development in May 2011 , a process that took 36 weeks . BBC Director General Mark Thompson confirmed that up to a further 1 @,@ 000 jobs could be created or transferred to the site . In January 2012 the BBC was accused of not supporting the community by MP , Hazel Blears , after it was reported that only 26 of 680 jobs created at the development had gone to residents of Salford . 
 Channel 4 has expressed an interest in moving some activities to MediaCityUK . The BBC has stated that either BBC One or BBC Two could move to MediaCityUK by 2015 if the confirmed moves are successful . 
 = = Buildings and facilities = = 
 Traditional street names are not used in the development . The main thoroughfares are styled blue , white , pink , yellow , orange , purple and green where street furniture and coloured ambient lighting will be colour @-@ coded to match . A stylised map of the site has been devised . Landscape architects , <unk> regenerated the brownfield site to create public spaces . The focal point is a piazza and landscaped park , which stretches to the ship canal around which the buildings are located . The piazza 's two distinct areas , The Green and The Stage are capable of holding events for up to 6500 people . In front of The Studios there is a free @-@ standing big screen , which is viewable from the piazza . 
 The BBC occupy three buildings : Bridge House , Dock House , and Quay House , all designed by architects Wilkinson Eyre . With simple forms intended to harmonise with their waterfront settings , the buildings provide 450 @,@ 000 square feet ( 42 @,@ 000 m2 ) of accommodation with the BBC occupying 330 @,@ 000 square feet ( 31 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office space . 
 Quay House is the BBC 's 135 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 12 @,@ 500 m2 ) main building from where BBC Breakfast , Match of the Day , BBC Radio 5 Live , North West Tonight and BBC Radio Manchester are broadcast . 
 Bridge House is where Blue Peter , Mastermind , Dragons ' Den , CBBC , and BBC <unk> are produced . 
 Dock House contains the BBC 's Research & Development and Religion & Ethics departments . In November 2011 BBC Radio 6 Music teams moved from New Broadcasting House into Dock House , where some programmes for BBC Radio 4 are made . 
 The Orange Tower is an 11 @-@ storey building , designed by architects Sheppard Robson . It is a glazed structure with four types of cladding , including one made of folded aluminium in a diamond pattern . It houses departments from the University of Salford on three floors and on seven floors , staff from ITV Granada . 
 The Studios on Broadway , contains seven high @-@ definition studios , claimed by Peel Media to be the largest such facility in Europe . The largest studio has an area of 12 @,@ 500 square feet ( 1 @,@ 160 m2 ) , making it one of the biggest in western Europe . Fitting began in 2010 at a cost of £ 22 million , in time for the BBC 's move in summer 2011 . The seven studios vary in size ; the large studios are on the ground floor , and the smaller studios on the first floor . The larger of the two audio studios , sitting on hydraulic jacks to insulate it from noise generated in the surrounding studios , is dedicated to the BBC Philharmonic Orchestra . The studio block contains offices and the glass @-@ fronted , 16 @-@ storey Holiday Inn hotel . 
 The Pie Factory occupies the former <unk> factory , which after closing in 2006 , was converted by Peel Media into a TV , film and commercial production facility . The bakery 's facilities were renovated into three sound stages , <unk> and office space . It opened in 2007 and was the first working studio complex at MediaCityUK . 
 The Greenhouse designed by architects Stephenson Bell , is a refurbished three @-@ storey office block that has been converted into small , flexible office suites for small companies in the media and creative industries . 
 <unk> and <unk> are the residential elements of the development , providing 378 apartments in two tower blocks . <unk> is a 22 @-@ storey apartment building on the quayside and <unk> , another 22 @-@ storey building , is next to the studio facilities . 
 The opening swing footbridge at Salford Quays links MediaCityUK with Trafford Wharf on the southern bank of the ship canal . It was designed by Wilkinson Eyre in association with Gifford . The bridge 's main span is 213 feet ( 65 m ) when open and provides a 157 @-@ foot ( 48 m ) wide navigation channel accommodating ships ' superstructures up to 66 feet ( 20 m ) in height . The developers specified it to be " a unique and memorable landmark " . Its visibility is created by a curved bridge deck with an offset pivot mast and array of supporting cables in a fan or sail shape . It has seating benches and is lit at night . The bridge , constructed with funding from the Northwest Regional Development Agency , is the final link in a circular walking route connecting the development with The Lowry and Imperial War Museum North . It was officially opened by Rowan Williams and John <unk> , the Archbishops of Canterbury and York , and was opened to the public in May 2011 after landscaping works were completed . 
 The development is powered by a gas @-@ powered <unk> energy plant producing electricity for cooling and heating using water from the ship canal . It is more than twice as efficient as conventional grid electricity and helped the development gain BREEAM sustainable community status . The communications network is one of the most advanced in the world , with more than 20 million metres of fibre @-@ optic cable capable of delivering the internet speeds required for media production . 
 The architecture at MediaCity has been criticised by the editor of Building Design magazine Ellis Woodman , who describes it as " a crazed accumulation of development in which every aimlessly <unk> building sports at least three different cladding treatments . The overriding sense is one of extreme anxiety on the part of the architect . Quite how the BBC has stooped this low is hard to fathom . " The development was awarded the Carbuncle Cup by Building Design for the worst new building in 2011 . Owen Hatherley writing in The Guardian criticised the development as " an enclave , easily closed off from the life of the rest of the city " . 
 = = Tenants = = 
 = = = BBC = = = 
 Approximately 2 @,@ 300 BBC staff are employed at MediaCity . In July 2010 it was announced that the BBC Breakfast programme would move to Salford Quays . It is claimed that the development will create up to 10 @,@ 000 jobs and add £ 1bn to the regional economy over 5 years . In 2009 the BBC estimated that moving to Salford would cost nearly £ 1 billion spread over twenty years. but in May 2011 , Director General Mark Thompson claimed the cost of moving was much less . 
 BBC North is one of eight national business divisions of the BBC based here , that includes the following BBC departments , BBC Breakfast , CBBC , CBeebies , BBC Radio 5 Live , BBC Research , BBC Sport , BBC Learning and the BBC Philharmonic . BBC North West has also relocated to the site . 
 = = = ITV Granada = = = 
 ITV Granada was interested in relocating but negotiations with the developers , Peel Media , were abandoned in 2009 amid a financial dispute . After a change of management at ITV Granada , talks resumed in January 2010 and in December the decision to move to MediaCityUK was announced . A production facility was constructed on Trafford Wharf to house the Coronation Street sets that transferred from Granada Studios in 2013 . In March 2013 , Granada Reports was broadcast from MediaCityUK signifying the completion of the initial phase of its migration from the Granada Studios in Quay Street . 
 = = = Satellite Information Services = = = 
 Satellite Information Services ( SIS ) has occupied an office at The Pie Factory since 2006 and in 2010 formed a joint venture with Peel to manage the studios . In 2011 SIS announced it would move its headquarters from London and awarded a £ 3 million contract to S3 <unk> and SATCOM Technologies for the provision of a nine earth station broadcast teleport on Trafford Wharf . SIS announced the launch of its teleport in July 2012 and opened offices in the Blue Tower a month later . 
 = = = University of Salford = = = 
 The University of Salford moved its media @-@ related teaching and research to the MediaCityUK site in October 2011 . The move will controversially cost the university more than £ 2 @.@ 25 million in rent per annum until 2020 . 
 = = = Others = = = 
 There is a diverse mix of about 40 service companies , along with small companies offering ancillary services such as casting and camera hire , occupying The Pie Factory and The Greenhouse . <unk> Productions moved into offices in The Greenhouse in 2011 . In 2012 the Rugby Football League opened an office in The Greenhouse to facilitate the administration of the 2013 Rugby League World Cup . 
 In 2008 , Hope High School in Salford was taken over by Oasis Community Learning , an evangelical Christian organisation , and renamed Oasis Academy MediaCityUK ; its new premises in Salford Quays , on the edge of the MediaCity UK site , were completed in September 2012 . UTC @ MediaCityUK , a University Technical College backed by the University of Salford , The Lowry and the Aldridge Foundation , specialising in the creative , media and music industries opened in 2015 . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The MediaCityUK tram stop opened on 20 September 2010 , part of the Metrolink light @-@ rail system serving Greater Manchester . It lies at the end of a 360 @-@ metre ( 0 @.@ 22 mi ) spur from the Eccles Line , which was built as part of Phase 3 of the Metrolink expansion project . Trams run to Piccadilly via Harbour City and Cornbrook . 
 Vehicular access to the Quays has been improved by the construction of Broadway Link Road , which links the site to the M602 motorway at junction 2 , and by the provision of car parking . The high @-@ rise 2116 space multi @-@ storey car park was completed in August 2009 . It is a pre @-@ cast curved structure clad in a mixture of aluminium mesh panels and shaded aluminium tiles , comprising 11 floors of parking above the development 's energy centre and commercial units . 
 Stagecoach Manchester provides the high @-@ frequency " City Connect " bus service linking MediaCityUK to East Didsbury , Manchester city centre , Salford Central and Salford Crescent railway stations , the University of Salford and Salford Shopping Centre . 
 Footpaths and cycleways to Manchester city centre and 300 cycle racks encourage healthy and green ways of accessing the site . 
 = Thorium = 
 Thorium is a chemical element with symbol Th and atomic number 90 . A radioactive actinide metal , thorium is one of only two significantly radioactive elements that still occur naturally in large quantities as a primordial element ( the other being uranium ) . It was discovered in 1829 by the Norwegian priest and amateur mineralogist Morten Thrane Esmark and identified by the Swedish chemist Jöns Jacob Berzelius , who named it after Thor , the Norse god of thunder . 
 A thorium atom has 90 protons and therefore 90 electrons , of which four are valence electrons . Thorium metal is silvery and tarnishes black when exposed to air , forming the dioxide . Thorium is weakly radioactive : all its known isotopes are unstable . Thorium @-@ 232 , which has 142 neutrons , is the most stable isotope of thorium and accounts for nearly all natural thorium , with six other natural isotopes occurring only as trace radioisotopes . Thorium has the longest half @-@ life of all the significantly radioactive elements , 14 @.@ 05 billion years ; it decays very slowly through alpha decay to radium @-@ 228 , starting a decay chain named the thorium series that ends at stable lead @-@ 208 . Thorium is estimated to be about three to four times more abundant than uranium in the Earth 's crust , and is chiefly refined from monazite sands as a by @-@ product of extracting rare earth metals . 
 Thorium was once commonly used as the light source in gas mantles and as an alloying material , but these applications have declined due to concerns about its radioactivity . Thorium is still widely used as an alloying element in TIG welding electrodes ( at a rate of 1 % – 2 % mix with tungsten ) . It remains popular as a material in high @-@ end optics and scientific instrumentation ; thorium and uranium are the only significantly radioactive elements with major commercial applications that do not rely on their radioactivity . Thorium is predicted to be able to replace uranium as nuclear fuel in nuclear reactors , but only a few thorium reactors have yet been completed . 
 = = Bulk properties = = 
 Thorium is a soft , paramagnetic , bright silvery radioactive actinide metal . In the periodic table , it is located to the right of the actinide actinium , to the left of the actinide protactinium , and below the lanthanide cerium . Pure thorium is very ductile and , as normal for metals , can be cold @-@ rolled , <unk> , and drawn . 
 The properties of thorium vary widely depending on the amount of impurities in the sample used : the major impurity is usually thorium dioxide ( ThO2 ) . The purest thorium specimens usually contain about a tenth of a percent of the dioxide . Experimental measurements of its density give values between 11 @.@ 5 and 11 @.@ 66 g / cm3 : these are slightly lower than the theoretically expected value of 11 @.@ 724 g / cm3 calculated from thorium 's lattice parameters , perhaps due to microscopic voids forming in the metal when it is <unk> these values lie intermediate between those of its neighbours actinium ( 10 @.@ 07 g / cm3 ) and protactinium ( 15 @.@ 37 g / cm3 ) , showing the continuity of trends across the early actinides . 
 Thorium 's melting point of 1750 ° C is above both that of actinium ( 1227 ° C ) and that of protactinium ( approximately 1560 ° C ) . In the beginning of period 7 , from francium to thorium , the melting points of the elements increase ( following the trend in the other periods ) : this is because the number of delocalised electrons that each atom contributes increases from one in francium to four in thorium , and there is a greater attraction between these electrons and the metal ions as their charge increases from one in francium to four in thorium . After thorium , however , there is a new smooth trend downward in the melting points of the early actinides from thorium to plutonium where the number of f electrons increases from zero to six , due to the increasing hybridisation of the 5f and 6d orbitals and the formation of directional bonds in the metal . Among the actinides , thorium has the highest melting and boiling points and second @-@ lowest density ( second only to actinium ) . 
 Thorium has a bulk modulus of 54 GPa , comparable to those of tin and scandium . The hardness of thorium is similar to that of soft steel , so heated pure thorium can be rolled in sheets and pulled into wire . Nevertheless , while thorium is nearly half as dense as uranium and plutonium , it is harder than either of them . Thorium becomes superconductive below 1 @.@ 4 K. 
 Thorium can also form alloys with many other metals . With chromium and uranium , it forms eutectic mixtures , and thorium is completely miscible in both solid and liquid states with its lighter congener cerium . 
 = = Isotopes = = 
 Although every element up to bismuth ( element 83 ) has an isotope that is practically stable for all purposes ( " classically stable " ) , with the exceptions of technetium and promethium ( elements 43 and 61 ) , all elements from polonium ( element 84 ) onward are noticeably radioactive . Of these , thorium ( element 90 ) is the most stable , closely followed by uranium ( element 92 ) : the isotope 232Th has a half @-@ life of 14 @.@ 05 billion years , about three times the age of the earth , and even slightly longer than the generally accepted age of the universe ( about 13 @.@ 8 billion years ) . As such , 232Th still occurs naturally today : four @-@ fifths of the thorium present at Earth 's formation has survived to the present . Thorium and uranium are thus the most well @-@ studied of all the radioactive elements . 
 The heaviest three confirmed primordial nuclides , 232Th , 235U , and 238U , are the only isotopes beyond bismuth that have half @-@ lives measured in billions of years . Thus , they are the only such heavy isotopes to have survived since their production around ten billion years ago . Hence , thorium and uranium are the only important primordial radioactive elements . Even then , the half @-@ life of 232Th is only a billionth that of 209Bi , the last classically stable nuclide . 232Th is the only isotope of thorium occurring in significant quantities in nature today , and thus thorium is usually considered to be a <unk> element . The reason for the existence of this " island of relative stability " at thorium and uranium , where the longest @-@ lived isotopes have half @-@ lives of millions or billions of years , is because the most stable isotopes of these elements have closed nuclear shells ; nevertheless , since thorium and uranium have more protons than lead and bismuth , their nuclei are thus still susceptible to alpha decay because the strong nuclear force is not strong enough to overcome the electromagnetic repulsion between their protons . 
 232Th is the longest @-@ lived isotope in the 4n decay chain which includes isotopes with a mass number divisible by 4 ( hence the name : it is also called the thorium series after its progenitor ) . The chain begins with the alpha decay of 232Th to 228Ra , and terminates at stable 208Pb . ( 232Th very occasionally undergoes spontaneous fission rather than alpha decay , and has left evidence in doing so in its minerals . ) Because 232Th is so long @-@ lived , its daughters still exist in nature as radiogenic nuclides despite their much shorter half @-@ lives , the longest among them being the 5 @.@ 7 @-@ year half @-@ life of 228Ra , the immediate alpha daughter of 232Th . Any sample of thorium or its compounds contain traces of these daughters , which are isotopes of thallium , lead , bismuth , polonium , radon , radium , and actinium . As such , natural thorium samples can be chemically purified to extract its useful daughter nuclides , such as <unk> , which is used in nuclear medicine for cancer therapy . 
 Thirty radioisotopes have been characterised , which range in mass number from 209 to 238 . The most stable of them ( after 232Th ) are 230Th with a half @-@ life of 75 @,@ 380 years , 229Th with a half @-@ life of 7 @,@ 340 years , 228Th with a half @-@ life of 1 @.@ 92 years , <unk> with a half @-@ life of 24 @.@ 10 days , and 227Th with a half @-@ life of 18 @.@ 68 days : all of these isotopes occur in nature as trace radioisotopes due to their presence in the decay chains of 232Th , 235U , 238U , and 237Np ( produced in minute traces in nuclear reactions in uranium ores ) . All of the remaining thorium isotopes have half @-@ lives that are less than thirty days and the majority of these have half @-@ lives that are less than ten minutes . 
 In deep <unk> the isotope 230Th becomes significant enough that the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) reclassified thorium as a <unk> element in 2013 , as it can then make up to 0 @.@ 04 % of natural thorium , with 232Th being the remainder . The reason for this is that while its parent 238U is soluble in water , 230Th is insoluble and thus precipitates to form part of the sediment , and may be observed doing so . In fact , uranium ores with low thorium concentrations can be purified to produce gram @-@ sized thorium samples of which over a quarter is the 230Th isotope , since 230Th is one of the daughters of 238U . Thorium thus has a characteristic terrestrial isotopic composition , and so an atomic mass can be given , which is 232 @.@ <unk> ( 4 ) u . Thorium is one of only three significantly radioactive elements ( the others being protactinium and uranium ) that occur in large enough quantities on Earth for this to be possible . 
 Thorium also has three known nuclear isomers ( or metastable states ) , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . <unk> has the lowest known excitation energy of any isomer , measured to be ( 7 @.@ 6 ± 0 @.@ 5 ) eV . This is so low that when it undergoes isomeric transition , the emitted gamma radiation is in the ultraviolet range . 
 In the early history of the study of radioactivity , the different natural isotopes of thorium were given different names . In this scheme , 227Th was named <unk> ( <unk> ) , 228Th <unk> ( <unk> ) , 230Th ionium ( Io ) , 231Th uranium Y ( <unk> ) , 232Th thorium ( Th ) , and <unk> uranium X1 ( <unk> ) . This reflects that 227Th and 231Th occur in the decay chain of natural 235U ( the actinium series ) , 228Th occurs in the decay chain of 232Th ( the thorium series ) , and that 230Th occurs in the decay chain of 238U ( the uranium or radium series ) . The remaining natural thorium isotope , 229Th , occurs in minute traces as part of the decay chain of 237Np , the neptunium series , which is much less abundant than the other decay chains in nature and was hence discovered much later : therefore it does not have a historical name . When it was realised that all of these are isotopes of thorium , many of these names fell out of use , and " thorium " came to refer to all isotopes , not just 232Th . However , the name ionium is still encountered for 230Th in the context of ionium @-@ thorium dating . 
 Different isotopes of thorium behave identically chemically , but do have slightly differing physical properties : for example , the densities of isotopically pure 228Th , 229Th , 230Th , and 232Th in g / cm3 are respectively expected to be 11 @.@ 524 , 11 @.@ 575 , 11 @.@ 626 , and 11 @.@ 727 . ( The discrepancy between this and the previously mentioned theoretical value of 11 @.@ 724 is because this does not refer to isotopically pure thorium , but rather natural thorium , which as noted above is a mixture of mostly 232Th but also a little 230Th . ) The isotope 229Th is expected to be fissionable with a bare critical mass of <unk> kg , although with steel reflectors this value could drop to 994 kg . While 232Th is not fissionable , it is fertile as it can be converted to fissile 233U using neutron capture . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 A thorium atom has 90 electrons , of which four are valence electrons . Three atomic orbitals are theoretically available for the valence electrons to occupy : 5f , 6d , and 7s . Despite thorium 's position in the f @-@ block of the periodic table , it has an anomalous [ Rn ] <unk> electron configuration in the ground state , as the 5f and 6d subshells in the early actinides are very close in energy , even more so than the 4f and 5d subshells of the lanthanides : in fact , thorium 's 6d subshells are lower in energy than its 5f subshells , because its 5f subshells are not well @-@ shielded by the filled 6s and 6p subshells and are destabilised . Such unusual behaviour is due to relativistic effects , which are increasingly stronger near the bottom of the periodic table , specifically the relativistic spin – orbit interaction . The closeness in energy levels of the 5f , 6d , and 7s energy levels of thorium result in thorium almost always losing all four of its valence electrons and hence occurring in its highest possible oxidation state of + 4 . Therefore , thorium is much more similar to the transition metals zirconium and hafnium than to its true lanthanide congener cerium in its properties such as ionisation energies and redox potentials , and hence also in its chemistry . 
 Tetravalent thorium compounds are usually colourless or yellow , like those of silver or lead , as the Th4 + ion has no 5f or 6d electrons . Thorium and uranium are the most investigated of the radioactive elements because their radioactivity is slight enough to not pose major problems of handling and accessibility . 
 = = = Reactivity = = = 
 Thorium is a highly reactive and electropositive metal . Finely divided thorium metal presents a fire hazard due to its pyrophoricity and must therefore be handled carefully . When heated in air , thorium turnings ignite and burn brilliantly with a white light to produce the dioxide . In bulk , the reaction of pure thorium with air is slow , although corrosion may eventually occur after several months ; most thorium samples are however contaminated with varying degrees of the dioxide , which greatly accelerates corrosion . Such samples slowly tarnish in air , becoming grey and finally black at the surface . 
 At standard temperature and pressure , thorium is slowly attacked by water , but does not readily dissolve in most common acids , with the exception of hydrochloric acid , where it dissolves leaving behind a black insoluble residue , probably <unk> ( OH , Cl ) H. It dissolves in concentrated nitric acid containing a small amount of catalytic fluoride or fluorosilicate ions ; if these are not present , passivation can occur , similarly to uranium and plutonium . 
 = = = Inorganic compounds = = = 
 Most binary compounds of thorium with nonmetals may simply be prepared by heating the elements together . In air , thorium burns to form the simple dioxide , ThO2 , also called thoria or <unk> . Thoria , a refractory material , has the highest melting point ( 3390 ° C ) of all known oxides . It is somewhat hygroscopic and reacts readily with water and many gases , but dissolves easily in concentrated nitric acid in the presence of fluoride . When heated , it emits intense blue light through incandescence , which becomes white when mixed with its lighter homologue cerium dioxide ( <unk> , ceria ) : this is the basis for its previously common application in gas mantles . Several binary thorium chalcogenides and <unk> are also known with sulfur , selenium , and tellurium . 
 All four thorium tetrahalides are known , as are some low @-@ <unk> bromides and iodides : the tetrahalides are all 8 @-@ coordinated hygroscopic compounds that dissolve easily in polar solvents such as water . Additionally , many related polyhalide ions are also known . Thorium tetrafluoride has a monoclinic crystal structure and is isotypic with zirconium tetrafluoride and hafnium tetrafluoride , where the Th4 + ions are coordinated with F − ions in somewhat distorted square <unk> . The other tetrahalides instead have dodecahedral geometry . Lower iodides <unk> ( black ) and <unk> ( gold ) can also be prepared by reducing the tetraiodide with thorium metal : These do not contain Th ( III ) and Th ( II ) , but instead contain Th4 + and could be more clearly formulated as electride compounds . Many <unk> halides with the alkali metals , barium , thallium , and ammonium are known for thorium fluorides , chlorides , and bromides . For example , when treated with potassium fluoride and hydrofluoric acid , Th4 + forms the complex anion <unk> − 
 6 , which precipitates as an insoluble salt , <unk> . 
 Thorium borides , carbides , silicides , and nitrides are refractory materials , as are those of uranium and plutonium , and have thus received attention as possible nuclear fuels . All four heavier pnictogens ( phosphorus , arsenic , antimony , and bismuth ) also form binary thorium compounds . Thorium <unk> are also known . Thorium reacts with hydrogen to form the thorium hydrides <unk> and <unk> , the latter of which is superconducting below the transition temperature of 7 @.@ 5 – 8 K ; at standard temperature and pressure , it conducts electricity like a metal . However , they are thermally unstable and readily decompose upon exposure to air or moisture . 
 = = = Coordination compounds = = = 
 In acidic aqueous solution , thorium occurs as the <unk> aqua ion [ Th ( H2O ) 9 ] 4 + , which has tricapped trigonal prismatic molecular geometry : at pH < 3 , the solutions of thorium salts are dominated by this cation . The Th4 + ion is the largest of the <unk> actinide ions , and depending on the coordination number can have a radius between 0 @.@ 95 and 1 @.@ 14 Å . It is quite acidic due to its high charge , slightly stronger than sulfurous acid : thus it tends to undergo hydrolysis and polymerisation ( though to a lesser extent than Fe3 + ) , predominantly to [ Th2 ( OH ) 2 ] 6 + in solutions with pH 3 or below , but in more alkaline solution polymerisation continues until the gelatinous hydroxide Th ( OH ) 4 is formed and precipitates out ( though equilibrium may take weeks to be reached , because the polymerisation usually slows down significantly just before the precipitation ) . As a hard Lewis acid , Th4 + favours hard ligands with oxygen atoms as donors : complexes with sulfur atoms as donors are less stable and are more prone to hydrolysis . 
 Large coordination numbers are the rule for thorium due to its large size . Thorium nitrate pentahydrate was the first known example of coordination number 11 , the oxalate tetrahydrate has coordination number 10 , and the borohydride ( first prepared in the Manhattan Project ) has coordination number 14 . The distinctive ability of thorium salts is their high solubility , not only in water , but also in polar organic solvents . 
 Many other inorganic thorium compounds with polyatomic anions are known , such as the perchlorates , sulfates , sulfites , nitrates , carbonates , phosphates , <unk> , <unk> , and chromates , and their hydrated forms . They are important in thorium purification and the disposal of nuclear waste , but most of them have not yet been fully characterised , especially regarding their structural properties . For example , thorium nitrate is soluble in water and alcohols and is an important intermediate in the purification of thorium and its compounds . Thorium complexes with organic ligands , such as oxalate , citrate , and EDTA , are much stronger and tend to occur naturally in natural thorium @-@ containing waters in concentrations orders of magnitude higher than the inorganic complexes . 
 = = = <unk> compounds = = = 
 Most of the work on <unk> compounds has focused on the cyclopentadienyls and <unk> . Like many of the early and middle actinides ( up to americium , and also expected for curium ) , thorium forms the yellow cyclooctatetraenide complex Th ( C8H8 ) 2 , <unk> . It is isotypic with the better @-@ known analogous uranium compound , uranocene . It can be prepared by reacting <unk> with thorium tetrachloride in tetrahydrofuran ( THF ) at the temperature of dry ice , or by reacting thorium tetrafluoride with <unk> . It is an unstable compound in air and outright decomposes in water or at 190 ° C. Half @-@ sandwich compounds are also known , such as ( η8 @-@ C8H8 ) <unk> ( THF ) 2 , which has a piano @-@ stool structure and is made by reacting <unk> with thorium tetrachloride in tetrahydrofuran . 
 The simplest of the cyclopentadienyls are Th ( C5H5 ) 3 and Th ( C5H5 ) 4 : many derivatives are known . The former ( which has two forms , one purple and one green ) is a rare example of thorium in the formal + 3 oxidation state ; a formal + 2 oxidation state even occurs in a derivative . The chloride derivative [ Th ( C5H5 ) 3Cl ] is prepared by by heating thorium tetrachloride with limiting K ( C5H5 ) used ( other univalent metal cyclopentadienyls can also be used ) . The alkyl and aryl derivatives are prepared from the chloride derivative and have received attention due to the insight they give regarding the nature of the Th – C sigma bond . 
 Other <unk> compounds are not well @-@ studied . <unk> , Th ( <unk> ) , and <unk> , Th ( <unk> ) 4 , are known , but their structures have not yet been determined and they decompose slowly at room temperature . Thorium forms the <unk> trigonal prismatic anion [ Th ( CH3 ) 7 ] 3 − , <unk> , which forms the salt [ Li ( <unk> ) ] 3 [ <unk> ] ( <unk> = <unk> ) . Although one methyl group is only attached to the thorium atom ( Th – C distance 257 @.@ 1 pm ) and the other six connect the lithium and thorium atoms ( Th – C distances 265 @.@ 5 – 276 @.@ 5 pm ) they behave equivalently in solution . <unk> , Th ( CH3 ) 4 , is not known , but its adducts are stabilised by phosphine ligands . 
 = = Occurrence = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 232Th is a primordial nuclide , having existed in its current form for over ten billion years ; it was forged in the cores of dying stars through the r @-@ process and scattered across the galaxy by supernovae . The letter " r " stands for " rapid neutron capture " , and occurs in core @-@ collapse supernovae , where heavy seed nuclei such as 56Fe rapidly capture neutrons , running up against the neutron drip line , as neutrons are captured much faster than the resulting nuclides can beta decay back toward stability . Neutron capture is the only way for stars to synthesise elements beyond iron because of the increased Coulomb barriers that make interactions between charged particles difficult at high atomic numbers and the fact that fusion beyond 56Fe is endothermic . Because of the abrupt loss of stability past bismuth , the r @-@ process is the only process of stellar nucleosynthesis that can create isotopes of thorium and uranium , because all other processes are too slow and the intermediate nuclei alpha decay before they capture enough neutrons to reach these elements . 
 In the universe , thorium is among the rarest of the primordial elements : it achieves this position because not only because it is one of the two elements that can be produced only in the r @-@ process ( with the other one being uranium ) , but also because it has slowly been decaying away from the moment it formed . The only primordial elements rarer than thorium are thulium , lutetium , tantalum , and rhenium , the odd @-@ numbered elements just before the third peak of r @-@ process abundances around the heavy platinum group metals . However , on Earth , thorium is much more abundant : with an abundance of 8 @.@ 1 ppm in the Earth 's crust , it is one of the most abundant of the heavy elements , almost as abundant as lead ( 13 ppm ) and significantly more abundant than tin ( 2 @.@ 1 ppm ) . This is because thorium , being a <unk> , is likely to form oxide minerals that do not sink into the core , unlike most of the other heavy elements that are more abundantly produced by the r @-@ process . 
 = = = On Earth = = = 
 Natural thorium is essentially isotopically pure 232Th , which is the longest @-@ lived and most stable isotope of thorium , having a half @-@ life comparable to the age of the universe . Its radioactive decay produces a significant amount of the Earth 's internal heat ; the other major contributors are the shorter @-@ lived primordial nuclides , 235U , 238U , and 40K . The other natural thorium isotopes are much shorter @-@ lived ; of them , only 230Th is usually detectable , occurring in secular equilibrium with its parent 238U , and making up at most 0 @.@ 04 % of natural thorium . 
 On Earth , thorium is not a rare element as was previously thought , having a crustal abundance comparable to that of lead and molybdenum , twice that of arsenic , and thrice that of tin . However , thorium only occurs as a minor constituent of most minerals . Soil normally contains about 6 parts per million ( ppm ) of thorium . 
 In nature , thorium occurs in the + 4 oxidation state , together with uranium ( IV ) , zirconium ( IV ) , hafnium ( IV ) , and cerium ( IV ) , but also with scandium , yttrium , and the trivalent lanthanides which have similar ionic radii . Because of thorium 's radioactivity , minerals containing significant quantities of thorium are often <unk> , their crystal structure having been partially or totally destroyed by the alpha radiation produced in the radioactive decay of thorium . An extreme example is <unk> , ( Ca , Fe , Pb ) 2 ( Th , U ) <unk> , which almost never occurs in <unk> form due to thorium being an essential part of its chemical composition . 
 Monazite is the most important commercial source of thorium because it occurs in large deposits worldwide , principally in India , South Africa , Brazil , Australia , and Malaysia . It contains around 2 @.@ 5 % thorium on average , although some deposits may contain up to 20 % thorium . Monazite is a chemically unreactive phosphate mineral that is found as yellow or brown sand ; its low reactivity makes it difficult to extract thorium from it . <unk> can have 0 @.@ 1 – 2 % thorium and zircon up to 0 @.@ 4 % thorium . 
 Thorium dioxide occurs as the rare mineral <unk> , which usually contains up to 12 % ThO2 . However , due to its being isotypic with uranium dioxide , these two common actinide dioxides can form solid @-@ state solutions and the name of the mineral changes according to the ThO2 content . <unk> , or tetragonal thorium silicate ( <unk> ) , also has a high thorium content and is the mineral in which thorium was first discovered . In thorium silicate minerals , the Th4 + and SiO4 − 
 4 ions are often replaced with M3 + ( M = Sc , Y , <unk> ) and phosphate ( PO3 − 
 4 ) ions respectively . Because of the great insolubility of thorium dioxide , thorium does not usually spread quickly through the environment when released in significant quantities : however , the Th4 + ion is soluble , especially in acidic soils , and in such conditions the thorium concentration can reach 40 ppm . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1815 , the Swedish chemist Jöns Jakob Berzelius analysed an unusual sample of gadolinite from a copper mine in Falun , central Sweden . He noted impregnated traces of a white mineral , which he cautiously assumed to be an earth ( oxide in modern chemical nomenclature ) of an unknown element . ( By that time , Berzelius had already discovered two elements , cerium and selenium , but he had made a public mistake once , announcing a new element , <unk> , that turned out to be simply zinc oxide . ) Berzelius privately named the supposed tentative element " thorium " in 1817 and its supposed oxide " <unk> " after Thor , the Norse god of thunder . However , in 1824 , after more deposits of the same mineral in Vest @-@ Agder , Norway , were discovered , he retracted his findings , as the mineral in question proved to actually be an yttrium mineral , primarily composed of yttrium orthophosphate . As the yttrium in this mineral was initially mistaken as being a new element , the mineral was named <unk> by the French mineralogist François Sulpice <unk> as a rebuke of Berzelius , from the Greek words <unk> ( vain ) and <unk> ( honour ) . However , this became " xenotime " as a misprint from the beginning , blunting the criticism . This misspelt form was later explained as being from <unk> ( stranger to ) and <unk> ( honour ) , supposedly referencing the small , rare and easily overlooked crystals that xenotime occurs as . He determined that thorium was a very electropositive metal , that he placed ahead of cerium and behind zirconium in electropositivity . 
 In 1828 , Morten Thrane Esmark found a black mineral on <unk> island , Telemark county , Norway . He was a Norwegian priest and amateur mineralogist who studied the minerals in Telemark , where he served as vicar . He commonly sent the most interesting specimens , such as this one , to his father , Jens Esmark , a noted mineralogist and professor of mineralogy and geology at the University of Oslo . The elder Esmark determined that it was not any known mineral and sent a sample to Berzelius for examination . Berzelius determined that it contained a new element . He published his findings in 1829 , having isolated an impure sample for the first time by reducing <unk> with potassium metal . Berzelius reused the name of the previous supposed element discovery . Thus , he named the source mineral <unk> , which has the chemical composition ( Th , U ) SiO4 . Berzelius also made some initial characterisation of the new metal and its chemical compounds : he correctly determined that the thorium – oxygen mass ratio was 7 @.@ 5 ( its actual value is close to that , ~ 7 @.@ 3 ) , but he assumed the new element was divalent rather than tetravalent , and as such assumed that the atomic mass was 7 @.@ 5 times that of oxygen ( 120 amu ) , while it is actually 15 times as large . Berzelius , however , did not isolate the element in its metallic state ; for the first time , thorium was isolated in 1914 by D. Lely Jr. and L. Hamburger . They obtained 99 % pure thorium metal by reducing thorium chloride with sodium metal . A simpler method leading to even higher purity was discovered in 1927 by Marden and Rentschler , involving the reduction of thorium oxide with calcium when calcium chloride was present . 
 In Dmitri Mendeleev 's 1869 periodic table , thorium and the rare earth elements were placed outside the main body of the table , at the end of each vertical period after the alkaline earth metals . This reflected the belief at that time that thorium and the rare earth metals were divalent . With the later recognition that the rare earths were mostly trivalent and thorium was tetravalent , Mendeleev moved cerium and thorium to group IV in 1871 , which contained the modern carbon group ( group 14 ) , titanium group ( group 4 ) , cerium , and thorium , because their maximum oxidation state was + 4 . Cerium was soon removed from the main body of the table and placed in a separate lanthanide series , while thorium remained with group 4 as it had similar properties to its supposed lighter congeners in that group , such as titanium and zirconium . 
 Although thorium was discovered in 1828 , it had no applications until 1885 , when Carl Auer von Welsbach invented the gas mantle , which produces light from the incandescence of very hot thorium oxide , heated to extremely high temperatures by burning gaseous fuels . After 1885 , many applications were found for thorium and its compounds , such as in ceramics , carbon arc lamps , heat @-@ resistant crucibles , and as catalysts for industrial chemical reactions such as the oxidation of ammonia to nitric acid . In the 1990s , however , most of these applications that do not depend on thorium 's radioactivity declined quickly due to safety and environmental concerns . The reason for the great delay between the recognition of the health hazards of radioactivity and the phasing out of thorium was that no serviceable substitutes for thorium for these applications were known until the 1990s . 
 In the late 19th century onward , the atomic theory underwent significant improvements , which shaped the further history of thorium . Thorium was first observed to be radioactive in 1898 , independently , by the German chemist Gerhard Carl Schmidt and later that year , the Polish @-@ French physicist Marie Curie . It was the second element that was found to be radioactive , after the 1896 discovery of radioactivity in uranium by Henri Becquerel . Between 1900 and 1903 , Ernest Rutherford and Frederick Soddy showed how thorium decayed at a fixed rate over time into a series of other elements . This observation led to the identification of half @-@ life as one of the outcomes of the alpha particle experiments that led to their disintegration theory of radioactivity . The biological effect of radiation was discovered in 1903 ; the danger presented by radioactivity to health and environment was the reason thorium was phased out of use in applications that did not explicitly use the radioactivity . 
 In 1922 , Niels Bohr published a theoretical model of the atom and its electron orbitals , which soon gathered wide acceptance . The model indicated that the seventh row of the periodic table should also have f @-@ shells filling before the d @-@ shells that were filled in the transition elements , like the sixth row with the lanthanides preceding the 5d transition metals . Such a second extra @-@ long periodic table row , to accommodate known and undiscovered elements with an atomic weight greater than bismuth ( thorium , protactinium , and uranium , for example ) , had been postulated as far back as 1892 by Henry Bassett , who considered thorium and uranium to be members of a second series of rare earths , and predicted that more elements would be found within this series . Most investigators , however , considered on the basis of their chemical properties that these elements were analogous to the 5d transition elements hafnium , tantalum , and tungsten , and considered the existence of the lanthanides in the sixth row to be a one @-@ off fluke . The existence of a second inner transition series , in the form of the actinides , was not accepted until similarities with the electron structures of the lanthanides had been established . It was only with the discovery of the first transuranic elements , which from plutonium onward have dominant + 3 and + 4 oxidation states ( neptunium having + 4 and + 5 as dominant states and + 7 as an unstable state ) , that it was realised that the actinides were indeed filling f @-@ orbitals rather than d @-@ orbitals . Thus it was not until 1945 , after Glenn T. Seaborg and his team had discovered the transuranic elements americium and curium , that Seaborg realised that thorium was the second member of the actinide series and was filling an f @-@ block row , instead of being the heavier congener of hafnium and filling a fourth d @-@ block row . Today , thorium 's similarities to hafnium are still sometimes acknowledged by calling it a " pseudo group @-@ 4 element " . 
 = = Production = = 
 Thorium is extracted mostly from monazite : thorium diphosphate ( Th ( PO4 ) 2 ) is reacted with nitric acid , and the produced thorium nitrate treated with tributyl phosphate . Rare @-@ earth impurities are separated by increasing the pH in sulfate solution . 
 In another extraction method , monazite is decomposed with a 45 % aqueous solution of sodium hydroxide at 140 ° C. Mixed metal hydroxides are extracted first , filtered at 80 ° C , washed with water and dissolved with concentrated hydrochloric acid . Next , the acidic solution is neutralised with hydroxides to pH = 5 @.@ 8 that results in precipitation of thorium hydroxide ( Th ( OH ) 4 ) contaminated with ~ 3 % of rare @-@ earth hydroxides ; the remaining rare @-@ earth hydroxides remain in solution . Thorium hydroxide is dissolved in an inorganic acid and then purified from the rare earth elements . An efficient method is the dissolution of thorium hydroxide in nitric acid , because the resulting solution can be purified by extraction with organic solvents : 
 Th ( OH ) 4 + 4 HNO3 → Th ( NO3 ) 4 + 4 H2O 
 Metallic thorium is separated from the anhydrous oxide or chloride by reacting it with calcium in an inert atmosphere : 
 ThO2 + 2 Ca → 2 CaO + Th 
 Sometimes thorium is extracted by electrolysis of a fluoride in a mixture of sodium and potassium chloride at 700 – 800 ° C in a graphite crucible . Highly pure thorium can be extracted from its iodide with the crystal bar process . 
 Since thorium has few applications today , only a few hundred tonnes of it are produced each year , mostly as a by @-@ product of the production of uranium and the lanthanides ; half of this thorium produced is used in gas mantles . Nevertheless , production could easily be increased , and probably would be if thorium became used in large quantities as nuclear fuel . 
 = = Applications = = 
 = = = Nuclear = = = 
 Due to thorium 's radioactivity , the most important possible uses of thorium are in the thorium fuel cycle as a nuclear fuel and in radiometric dating . 
 = = = = Nuclear energy = = = = 
 In thermal breeder reactors , the fertile isotope 232Th is bombarded by slow neutrons , undergoing neutron capture to become <unk> , which undergoes two consecutive beta decays to become first 233Pa and then the fissile 233U : 
 232 
 90Th + n → 233 
 90Th + γ β- → 21 @.@ 8 min 233 
 91Pa β- → 27 @.@ 0 days 233 
 92U α → 1 @.@ 59 × 105 y 
 233U is fissile and hence can be used as a nuclear fuel in much the same way as the more @-@ commonly used 235U or 239Pu . When 233U undergoes nuclear fission , the neutrons emitted can strike further 232Th nuclei , restarting the cycle . This closely parallels the uranium fuel cycle in fast breeder reactors where 238U undergoes neutron capture to become 239U , beta decaying to first 239Np and then fissile 239Pu . The main advantage of the thorium fuel cycle is that thorium is more abundant than uranium and hence can satisfy world energy demands for longer . Furthermore , 232Th absorbs neutrons more readily than 238U , and not only does 233U have a higher probability of fission upon neutron capture than 235U or 239Pu , it also releases more neutrons upon fission on average . An added advantage 233U and 239Pu enjoy over all other fissile nuclei ( except the naturally occurring 235U ) is that they can be bred from neutron capture by the naturally @-@ occurring quantity isotopes 232Th and 238U . Thorium fuels also result in a safer and better @-@ performing reactor core because thoria has a higher melting point , higher thermal conductivity , and lower coefficient of thermal expansion than the now @-@ common fuel uranium dioxide ( UO2 ) : thoria is also more chemically stable as , unlike uranium dioxide , it does not further oxidise to <unk> octoxide ( U3O8 ) . 
 However , the main disadvantage is that it is difficult and dangerous to reprocess the used fuel because many of the daughters of 232Th and 233U are strong gamma emitters . Additionally , production of 233U always results in significant impurities of the very dangerous gamma emitter 232U , either from parasitic ( n , 2n ) reactions on 232Th , 233Pa , or 233U that result in the loss of a neutron , or from double neutron capture of 230Th , an impurity in natural 232Th : 
 230 
 90Th + n → 231 
 90Th + γ β- → 25 @.@ 5 h 231 
 91Pa α → 3 @.@ 28 × 104 y 
 231 
 91Pa + n → 232 
 91Pa + γ β- → 1 @.@ 3 d 232 
 92U α → 69 y 
 These impurities of 232U make 233U very easy to detect and very dangerous to work on , and the impracticality of their separation limits the possibilities of nuclear proliferation using 233U as the fissile material . Additionally , 233Pa has a relatively long half @-@ life of 27 days and a high cross section for neutron capture . Thus it is a neutron poison : instead of rapidly decaying to the useful 233U , a significant amount of 233Pa converts to 234U and consumes neutrons , degrading the reactor efficiency . To avoid this , 233Pa is extracted from the active zone of thorium molten salt reactors during their operation , so that it only decays to 233U . 
 A single neutron capture by 238U would produce transuranic waste , along with it fissile 239Pu , whereas five captures are generally necessary to do so from 232Th . 98 – 99 % of thorium @-@ cycle fuel nuclei would fission at either 233U or 235U , so fewer long @-@ lived transuranics are produced . Because of this , thorium is a potentially attractive alternative to uranium in mixed oxide ( MOX ) fuels to minimise the generation of transuranics and maximise the destruction of plutonium . A disadvantage of the thorium fuel cycle is the need to neutron @-@ irradiate and process natural 232Th before these advantages become real , and this requires more advanced technology than the presently used fuels based on uranium and plutonium ; nevertheless , advances are being made in this technology . Another common criticism centres around the low commercial viability of the thorium fuel cycle : some entities like the Nuclear Energy Agency go further and predict that the thorium cycle will never be commercially viable while uranium is available in abundance — a situation which Trevor Findlay predicts will persist " in the coming decades " . Furthermore , though the isotopes produced in the thorium fuel cycle are not transuranic , some of them are still very dangerous , such as 231Pa , which has a long half @-@ life of <unk> years and is a major contributor to the long term radiotoxicity of spent nuclear fuel . 
 In 1997 , the U.S. Energy Department underwrote research into thorium fuel , and research also was begun in 1996 by the International Atomic Energy Agency ( IAEA ) , to study the use of thorium reactors . Nuclear scientist Alvin <unk> of Tel Aviv University in Israel founded a consortium to develop thorium reactors , which included other companies : Raytheon Nuclear Inc . , Brookhaven National Laboratory and the Kurchatov Institute in Moscow . <unk> was chief scientist in the U.S. nuclear submarine program directed by Admiral Hyman Rickover and later headed the design team that built the USA 's first civilian nuclear power plant at Shippingport , Pennsylvania , which was a scaled @-@ up version of the first naval reactor . The third Shippingport core , initiated in 1977 , bred thorium . Even earlier examples of reactors using fuel with thorium exist , including the first core at the Indian Point Energy Center in 1962 . However , in most countries uranium was relatively abundant and hence research into thorium fuel waned for a while . A notable exception was India 's three @-@ stage nuclear power programme . Because India has one of the largest supplies of thorium in the world ( accounting for about 30 % of known thorium reserves ) , but does not have much uranium , India formulated a nuclear power programme based on the thorium fuel cycle with the goal of achieving energy independence . In the twenty @-@ first century thorium 's potential for improving proliferation resistance and waste characteristics led to renewed interest in the thorium fuel cycle . Currently , some countries such as India are developing technology for thorium nuclear reactors . 
 = = = = Radiometric dating = = = = 
 Two radiometric dating methods involve thorium isotopes : uranium @-@ thorium dating , involving the decay of 234U to 230Th ( ionium ) , and ionium @-@ thorium dating , which measures the ratio of 232Th to 230Th . These rely on the fact that 232Th is a primordial radioisotope , but 230Th only occurs as an intermediate decay product in the decay chain of 238U . Uranium @-@ thorium dating is a relatively short @-@ range process because of the short half @-@ lives of 234U and 230Th relative to the age of the Earth : it is also accompanied by a sister process involving the alpha decay of 235U into 231Th , which very quickly becomes the longer @-@ lived 231Pa , and this process is often used to check the results of uranium @-@ thorium dating . Uranium @-@ thorium dating is commonly used to determine the age of calcium carbonate materials such as <unk> or coral , because while uranium is rather soluble in water , thorium and protactinium are not , and so they are selectively precipitated into ocean @-@ floor sediments , from which their ratios are measured . The scheme has a range of several hundred thousand years . <unk> @-@ thorium dating is a related process , which exploits the insolubility of thorium ( both 232Th and 230Th ) and thus its presence in ocean sediments to date these sediments by measuring the ratio of 232Th to 230Th . Both of these dating methods assume that the proportion of 230Th to 232Th is a constant during the time period when the sediment layer was formed , that the sediment did not already contain thorium before contributions from the decay of uranium , and that the thorium cannot shift within the sediment layer . 
 = = = Non @-@ nuclear = = = 
 Many non @-@ nuclear applications of thorium are becoming obsolete due to environmental concerns largely stemming from the radioactivity of thorium and its decay products ; though these were known for a long time , the phasing out of thorium was greatly delayed because no serviceable substitutes were known until the 1990s . A notable exception is the use of thoria in gas tungsten arc welding ( GTAW ) to increase the high @-@ temperature strength of tungsten electrodes and improve arc stability . The electrodes labelled <unk> @-@ 1 contain 1 % thoria , while those labelled <unk> @-@ 2 contain 2 % . In electronic equipment , thorium coating of tungsten wire improves the electron emission of heated cathodes . 
 The melting point of thoria is 3300 ° C – the highest of all known oxides . Only a few elements ( including tungsten and carbon ) and a few compounds ( including tantalum carbide ) have higher melting points . This means that when heated to high temperatures , it does not melt , but merely glows with an intense blue light ; addition of cerium dioxide gives a bright white light . This property of thoria means that thoria and thorium nitrate are used in mantles of portable gas lights , including natural gas lamps , oil lamps and camping lights . A study in 1981 estimated that the dose from using a thorium mantle every weekend for a year would be 0 @.@ 3 – 0 @.@ 6 <unk> ( mrem ) , tiny in comparison to the normal annual dose of a few hundred <unk> : a person actually ingesting a mantle would receive a dose of 200 mrem ( 2 mSv ) . However , the radioactivity is a major concern for people involved with the manufacture of mantles , and an issue with contamination of soil around some former factory sites . Due to these concerns , some manufacturers have switched to other materials , such as yttrium , although these are usually either more expensive or less efficient . Other manufacturers continue to make thorium mantles , but moved their factories to developing countries . As recently as 2007 , some companies continued to manufacture and sell thorium mantles without giving adequate information about their radioactivity , with some even fraudulently claiming them to be non @-@ radioactive while in reality using large quantities of thorium , up to 259 milligrams per mantle . 
 Thoria is a material for heat @-@ resistant ceramics , as used in high @-@ temperature laboratory crucibles . When added to glass , it helps increase refractive index and decrease dispersion . Such glass finds application in high @-@ quality lenses for cameras and scientific instruments . The radiation from these lenses can darken them and turn them yellow over a period of years and degrade film , but the health risks are minimal . <unk> lenses may be restored to their original colourless state with lengthy exposure to intense ultraviolet radiation . 
 Thoria was used to control the grain size of tungsten metal used for spirals of electric lamps . <unk> tungsten elements are found in the filaments of vacuum tubes , e.g. magnetron found in microwave oven . Thorium is added because it lowers the effective work function with the result that the thoriated tungsten <unk> emits electrons at considerably lower temperatures . Thoria has been used as a catalyst in the conversion of ammonia to nitric acid , in petroleum cracking and in producing sulfuric acid . It is the active ingredient of Thorotrast , which was used as radiocontrast agent for X @-@ ray diagnostics because of thorium 's high opacity to X @-@ rays . This use has been abandoned due to its carcinogenic nature . 
 Thorium tetrafluoride is used as an <unk> material in multilayered optical coatings . It has excellent optical transparency in the range of 0 @.@ 35 – 12 µm , and its radiation is primarily due to alpha particles , which can be easily stopped by a thin cover layer of another material . Thorium tetrafluoride was also used in manufacturing carbon arc lamps , which provided high @-@ intensity illumination for movie projectors and search lights . 
 = = Precautions = = 
 As thorium occurs naturally , it exists in very small quantities almost everywhere on Earth : the average human contains about 100 micrograms of thorium and typically consumes three micrograms per day of thorium . This exposure is raised for people who live near uranium , phosphate , or tin processing factories , thorium deposits , radioactive waste disposal sites , and for those who work in uranium , thorium , tin , or phosphate mining or gas mantle production industries . Thorium is especially common in the Tamil Nadu coastal areas of India , where residents may be exposed to a naturally occurring radiation dose ten times higher than the worldwide average . When thorium is ingested , 99 @.@ 98 % does not remain in the body . Out of the thorium that does remain in the body , three quarters of it accumulates in the skeleton . While absorption through the skin is possible , it is not a likely means of thorium exposure . Powdered thorium metal is pyrophoric and often ignites spontaneously in air . 
 Natural thorium decays very slowly compared to many other radioactive materials , and the alpha radiation emitted cannot penetrate human skin . As a result , owning and handling small amounts of thorium , such as a gas mantle , is considered safe . However , exposure to an aerosol of thorium can lead to increased risk of cancers of the lung , pancreas , and blood , as lungs and other internal organs can be penetrated by alpha radiation . Exposure to thorium internally leads to increased risk of liver diseases . 
 Because 232Th is only mildly radioactive , but decays to more dangerous radionuclides such as radium and radon , emitting alpha and gamma radiation , a proper assessment of the radiological toxicity of 232Th must include the contribution of its daughters such as 228Ra , which are dangerous gamma emitters . There are concerns about the safety of thorium mantles , as the dangerous daughters of thorium have much lower melting points than thoria ( except of course 228Th , which is chemically identical to its parent 232Th ) , and they would be <unk> every time the mantle is heated for use . For example , during burning , significant fractions of the thorium daughters <unk> , 228Ra , <unk> , and <unk> are released in the first hour of use alone . Most of the radiation dose by a normal user arises from inhaling the radium , resulting in a radiation dose of up to 0 @.@ 2 <unk> per use , about a third of the dose sustained during a mammogram . If a mantle is ingested , however , 0 @.@ 4 % of the thorium and 90 % of its dangerous daughters are leached into the body . Some nuclear safety agencies make recommendations about their use , and have raised some safety concerns regarding their manufacture and disposal , because while the radiation dose from one mantle is not a serious problem , that from many mantles gathered together in factories or landfills is . 
 The chemical toxicity of thorium is low because thorium and its most common compounds ( mostly the dioxide ) are poorly soluble in water . Nevertheless , some thorium compounds are chemically moderately toxic . People who work with thorium compounds are at a risk of dermatitis . It can take as much as thirty years after the ingestion of thorium for symptoms to manifest themselves . 
 = Princess Alice of Battenberg = 
 Princess Alice of Battenberg , later Princess Andrew of Greece and Denmark ( Victoria Alice Elizabeth Julia Marie ; 25 February 1885 – 5 December 1969 ) , was the mother of Prince Philip , Duke of Edinburgh , and mother @-@ in @-@ law of Queen Elizabeth II . 
 A great @-@ granddaughter of Queen Victoria , she grew up in Germany , England and the Mediterranean . She was congenitally deaf . After marrying Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark in 1903 , she lived in Greece until the exile of most of the Greek royal family in 1917 . On returning to Greece a few years later , her husband was blamed in part for the defeat of Greece in the Greco @-@ Turkish War ( 1919 – 1922 ) , and the family were once again forced into exile until the restoration of the Greek monarchy in 1935 . 
 In 1930 , she was diagnosed with schizophrenia and committed to a sanatorium in Switzerland ; thereafter , she lived separately from her husband . After her recovery , she devoted most of her remaining years to charity work in Greece . She stayed in Athens during the Second World War , sheltering Jewish refugees , for which she is recognized as " Righteous Among the Nations " at Yad Vashem . After the war , she stayed in Greece and founded an Orthodox nursing order of nuns known as the Christian Sisterhood of Martha and Mary . 
 After the fall of King Constantine II of Greece and the imposition of military rule in Greece in 1967 , she was invited by her son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law to live at Buckingham Palace in London , where she died two years later . Her remains were transferred to the Mount of Olives in 1988 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Alice was born in the Tapestry Room at Windsor Castle in Berkshire in the presence of her great @-@ grandmother , Queen Victoria . She was the eldest child of Prince Louis of Battenberg and his wife Princess Victoria of Hesse and by Rhine . Her mother was the eldest daughter of Princess Alice , Grand Duchess of Hesse , the second daughter of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . Her father was the eldest son of Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine through his morganatic marriage to Julia von Hauke , Princess of Battenberg . Her three younger siblings , Louise , George , and Louis , later became Queen of Sweden , 2nd Marquess of Milford Haven , and Earl Mountbatten of Burma , respectively . 
 She was christened Victoria Alice Elizabeth Julia Marie in Darmstadt on 25 April 1885 . She had six godparents : her three surviving grandparents the Grand Duke of Hesse , Prince Alexander of Hesse and by Rhine , and Julia , Princess of Battenberg ; her aunts Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna of Russia and Princess Marie of Erbach @-@ Schönberg ; and her great @-@ grandmother Queen Victoria . 
 Alice spent her childhood between Darmstadt , London , Jugenheim , and Malta ( where her naval officer father was occasionally stationed ) . Her mother noticed that she was slow in learning to talk , and became concerned by her indistinct pronunciation . Eventually , she was diagnosed with congenital deafness after her grandmother identified the problem and took her to see an ear specialist . With encouragement from her mother , Alice learned to both lip @-@ read and speak in English and German . Educated privately , she studied French , and later , after her engagement , she learned Greek . Her early years were spent in the company of her royal relatives , and she was a bridesmaid at the marriage of George , Duke of York ( later King George V ) and Mary of Teck in 1893 . A few weeks before her sixteenth birthday she attended the funeral of Queen Victoria in St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , and shortly afterward she was confirmed in the Anglican faith . 
 = = Marriage = = 
 Princess Alice met and fell in love with Prince Andrew of Greece and Denmark ( known as Andrea within the family ) , the fourth son of King George I and Queen Olga of Greece , at King Edward VII 's London coronation in 1902 . They married in a civil ceremony on 6 October 1903 at Darmstadt . The following day , there were two religious marriage ceremonies ; one Lutheran in the Evangelical Castle Church , and one Greek Orthodox in the Russian Chapel on the <unk> . She adopted the style of her husband , becoming " Princess Andrew " . The bride and groom were closely related to the ruling houses of Great Britain , Germany , Russia , Denmark , and Greece ; their wedding was one of the great gatherings of the descendants of Queen Victoria and Christian IX of Denmark held before World War I. 
 Prince and Princess Andrew had five children : 
 Princess Margarita of Greece and Denmark ( 18 April 1905 – 24 April 1981 ) , who married Gottfried , Prince of Hohenlohe @-@ Langenburg ( 24 March 1897 – 11 May 1960 ) ; 
 Princess Theodora of Greece and Denmark ( 30 May 1906 – 16 October 1969 ) , who married Prince Berthold , Margrave of Baden ( 24 February 1906 – 27 October 1963 ) ; 
 Princess Cecilie of Greece and Denmark ( 22 June 1911 – 16 November 1937 ) , who married Georg Donatus , Hereditary Grand Duke of Hesse ( 8 November 1906 – 16 November 1937 ) ; 
 Princess Sophie of Greece and Denmark ( 26 June 1914 – 24 November 2001 ) , who married firstly Prince Christoph of Hesse ( 14 May 1901 – 7 October 1943 ) and secondly Prince George William of Hanover ( 25 March 1915 – 8 January 2006 ) ; and 
 Prince Philip of Greece and Denmark ( born 10 June 1921 ) , who married Queen Elizabeth II . 
 All of Prince and Princess Andrew 's children later had children of their own . 
 After their marriage , Prince Andrew continued his career in the military and Princess Andrew became involved in charity work . In 1908 , she visited Russia for the wedding of Grand Duchess Marie of Russia and Prince William of Sweden . While there , she talked with her aunt , Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna , who was formulating plans for the foundation of a religious order of nurses . Princess Andrew attended the laying of the foundation stone for her aunt 's new church . Later in the year , the Grand Duchess began giving away all her possessions in preparation for a more spiritual life . On their return to Greece , Prince and Princess Andrew found the political situation worsening , as the Athens government had refused to support the Cretan parliament , which had called for the union of Crete ( still nominally part of the Ottoman Empire ) with the Greek mainland . A group of dissatisfied officers formed a Greek nationalist Military League that eventually led to Prince Andrew 's resignation from the army and the rise to power of Eleftherios Venizelos . 
 = = Successive life crises = = 
 With the advent of the Balkan Wars , Prince Andrew was reinstated in the army and Princess Andrew acted as a nurse , assisting at operations and setting up field hospitals , work for which King George V awarded her the Royal Red Cross in 1913 . During World War I , her brother @-@ in @-@ law , King Constantine of Greece , followed a neutrality policy despite the democratically elected government of Venizelos supporting the Allies . Princess Andrew and her children were forced to shelter in the palace cellars during the French bombardment of Athens on 1 December 1916 . By June 1917 , the King 's neutrality policy had become so untenable that she and other members of the Greek royal family were forced into exile when her brother @-@ in @-@ law abdicated . For the next few years most of the Greek royal family lived in Switzerland . 
 The global war effectively ended much of the political power of Europe 's dynasties . The naval career of her father , Prince Louis of Battenberg , had collapsed at the beginning of the war in the face of anti @-@ German sentiment in Britain . At the request of King George V , he relinquished the Hessian title Prince of Battenberg and the style of Serene Highness on 14 July 1917 , and anglicized the family name to Mountbatten . The following day , the King created him Marquess of Milford Haven in the peerage of the United Kingdom . The following year , two of her aunts , Alix , Tsarina of Russia , and Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna were murdered by Bolsheviks after the Russian revolution . At the end of the war the Russian , German and Austro @-@ Hungarian empires had fallen , and Princess Andrew 's uncle , Ernest Louis , Grand Duke of Hesse , was deposed . 
 On King Constantine 's restoration in 1920 , they briefly returned to Greece , taking up residence at Mon Repos on Corfu . But after the defeat of the Hellenic Army in the Greco @-@ Turkish War , a Revolutionary Committee under the leadership of Colonels Nikolaos <unk> and Stylianos Gonatas seized power and forced King Constantine into exile once again . Prince Andrew , who had served as commander of the Second Army Corps during the war , was arrested . Several former ministers and generals arrested at the same time were shot , and British diplomats assumed that Prince Andrew was also in mortal danger . After a show trial he was sentenced to banishment , and Prince and Princess Andrew and their children fled Greece aboard a British cruiser , HMS Calypso , under the protection of the British naval attaché , Commander Gerald Talbot . 
 = = Illness = = 
 The family settled in a small house loaned to them by Princess George of Greece at Saint @-@ Cloud , on the outskirts of Paris , where Princess Andrew helped in a charity shop for Greek refugees . She became deeply religious , and on 20 October 1928 entered the Greek Orthodox Church . That winter , she translated her husband 's defence of his actions during the Greco @-@ Turkish War into English . Soon afterward , she began claiming that she was receiving divine messages , and that she had healing powers . In 1930 , after suffering a severe nervous breakdown , Princess Andrew was diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia , first by Thomas Ross , a psychiatrist who specialised in shell @-@ shock , and subsequently by Sir Maurice Craig , who treated the future King George VI before he had speech therapy . The diagnosis was confirmed at Dr Ernst Simmel 's sanatorium at Tegel , Berlin . She was forcibly removed from her family and placed in Dr Ludwig Binswanger 's sanatorium in Kreuzlingen , Switzerland . It was a famous and well @-@ respected institution with several celebrity patients , including Vaslav Nijinsky , the ballet dancer and choreographer , who was there at the same time as Princess Andrew . Binswanger also diagnosed schizophrenia . Both he and Simmel consulted Sigmund Freud who believed that the princess 's delusions were the result of sexual frustration . He recommended " X @-@ raying her ovaries in order to kill off her libido . " Princess Andrew protested her sanity and repeatedly tried to leave the asylum . 
 During Princess Andrew 's long convalescence , she and Prince Andrew drifted apart , her daughters all married German princes in 1930 and 1931 ( she did not attend any of the weddings ) , and Prince Philip went to England to stay with his uncles , Lord Louis Mountbatten and George Mountbatten , 2nd Marquess of Milford Haven , and his grandmother , the Dowager Marchioness of Milford Haven . 
 Princess Andrew remained at Kreuzlingen for two years , but after a brief stay at a clinic in <unk> , was released and began an itinerant , incognito existence in Central Europe . She maintained contact with her mother , but broke off ties to the rest of her family until the end of 1936 . In 1937 , her daughter Cécile , son @-@ in @-@ law and two of her grandchildren were killed in an air accident at Ostend ; she and Prince Andrew met for the first time in six years at the funeral ( Prince Philip , Lord Louis Mountbatten and Hermann Göring also attended ) . She resumed contact with her family , and in 1938 returned to Athens alone to work with the poor , living in a two @-@ bedroomed flat near the <unk> Museum . 
 = = World War II = = 
 During World War II , Princess Andrew was in the difficult situation of having sons @-@ in @-@ law fighting on the German side and a son in the British Royal Navy . Her cousin , Prince Victor zu Erbach @-@ Schönberg , was the German ambassador in Greece until the occupation of Athens by Axis forces in April 1941 . She and her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Princess Nicholas of Greece ( the mother of Princess Marina , Duchess of Kent ) , lived in Athens for the duration of the war , while most of the Greek royal family remained in exile in South Africa . She moved out of her small flat and into her brother @-@ in @-@ law George 's three @-@ storey house in the centre of Athens . She worked for the Red Cross , helped organize soup kitchens for the starving populace and flew to Sweden to bring back medical supplies on the pretext of visiting her sister , Louise , who was married to the Crown Prince . She organized two shelters for orphaned and stray children , and a nursing circuit for poor neighbourhoods . 
 The occupying forces apparently presumed Princess Andrew was pro @-@ German , as one of her sons @-@ in @-@ law , Prince Christoph of Hesse , was a member of the NSDAP and the Waffen @-@ SS , and another , Berthold , Margrave of Baden , had been invalided out of the German army in 1940 after an injury in France . Nonetheless , when visited by a German general who asked her , " Is there anything I can do for you ? " , she replied , " You can take your troops out of my country . " 
 After the fall of Italian dictator Benito Mussolini in September 1943 , the German Army occupied Athens , where a minority of Greek Jews had sought refuge . The majority ( about 60 @,@ 000 out of a total population of 75 @,@ 000 ) were deported to Nazi concentration camps , where all but 2 @,@ 000 died . During this period , Princess Andrew hid Jewish widow Rachel Cohen and two of her five children , who sought to evade the Gestapo and deportation to the death camps . Rachel 's husband , <unk> Cohen , had aided King George I of Greece in 1913 . In return , King George had offered him any service that he could perform , should Cohen ever need it . Cohen 's son remembered this during the Nazi threat , and appealed to Princess Andrew , who with Princess Nicholas was one of only two remaining members of the royal family left in Greece . She honoured the promise and saved the Cohen family . 
 When Athens was liberated in October 1944 , Harold Macmillan visited Princess Andrew and described her as " living in humble , not to say somewhat squalid conditions " . In a letter to her son , she admitted that in the last week before liberation she had had no food except bread and butter , and no meat for several months . By early December the situation in Athens had far from improved ; Communist guerillas ( <unk> ) were fighting the British for control of the capital . As the fighting continued , Princess Andrew was informed that her husband had died , just as hopes of a post @-@ war reunion of the couple were rising . They had not seen each other since 1939 . During the fighting , to the dismay of the British , she insisted on walking the streets distributing rations to policemen and children in contravention of the curfew order . When told that she might have been shot by a stray bullet , she replied " they tell me that you don 't hear the shot that kills you and in any case I am deaf . So , why worry about that ? " 
 = = Widowhood = = 
 Princess Andrew returned to Great Britain in April 1947 to attend the November wedding of her only son , Philip , to Princess Elizabeth , the elder daughter and heir presumptive of King George VI . She had some of her remaining jewels used in Princess Elizabeth 's engagement ring . On the day of the wedding , her son was created Duke of Edinburgh by George VI . For the wedding ceremony , Princess Andrew sat at the head of her family on the north side of Westminster Abbey , opposite the King , Queen Elizabeth and Queen Mary . It was decided not to invite Princess Andrew 's daughters to the wedding because of anti @-@ German sentiment in Britain following World War II . 
 In January 1949 , the princess founded a nursing order of Greek Orthodox nuns , the Christian Sisterhood of Martha and Mary , modelled after the convent that her aunt , the martyr Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna , had founded in Russia in 1909 . She trained on the Greek island of Tinos , established a home for the order in a hamlet north of Athens , and undertook two tours of the United States in 1950 and 1952 in an effort to raise funds . Her mother was baffled by her actions , " What can you say of a nun who smokes and plays <unk> ? " , she said . After her daughter @-@ in @-@ law became Queen of the Commonwealth realms in 1952 , Princess Andrew attended the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in June 1953 wearing a two @-@ tone grey dress and <unk> in the style of her nun 's habit . However , the order eventually failed through a lack of suitable applicants . 
 In 1960 , she visited India at the invitation of <unk> Amrit Kaur , who had been impressed by Princess Andrew 's interest in Indian religious thought , and for her own spiritual quest . The trip was cut short when she unexpectedly took ill , and her sister @-@ in @-@ law , Edwina Mountbatten , who happened to be passing through Delhi on her own tour , had to smooth things with the Indian hosts who were taken aback at Princess Andrew 's sudden change of plans . She later claimed she had had an out @-@ of @-@ body experience . Edwina continued her own tour , and died the following month . 
 Increasingly deaf and in failing health , Princess Andrew left Greece for the last time following the 21 April 1967 Colonels ' Coup . Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh invited Princess Andrew to reside permanently at Buckingham Palace in London . King Constantine II of Greece and Queen Anne @-@ Marie went into exile that December after a failed royalist counter @-@ coup . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 Despite suggestions of senility in later life , Princess Andrew remained lucid but physically frail . She died at Buckingham Palace on 5 December 1969 . She left no possessions , having given everything away . Initially her remains were placed in the Royal Crypt in St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle , but before she died she had expressed her wish to be buried at the Convent of Saint Mary Magdalene in Gethsemane on the Mount of Olives in Jerusalem ( near her aunt Grand Duchess Elizabeth Fyodorovna , a Russian Orthodox saint ) . When her daughter , Princess George of Hanover , complained that it would be too far away for them to visit her grave , Princess Andrew jested , " Nonsense , there 's a perfectly good bus service ! " Her wish was realized on 3 August 1988 when her remains were transferred to her final resting place in a crypt below the church . 
 On 31 October 1994 Princess Andrew 's two surviving children , the Duke of Edinburgh and Princess George of Hanover , went to Yad Vashem ( the Holocaust Memorial ) in Jerusalem to witness a ceremony honouring her as " Righteous Among the Nations " for having hidden the Cohens in her house in Athens during the Second World War . Prince Philip said of his mother 's sheltering of persecuted Jews , " I suspect that it never occurred to her that her action was in any way special . She was a person with a deep religious faith , and she would have considered it to be a perfectly natural human reaction to fellow beings in distress . " In 2010 the Princess was posthumously named a Hero of the Holocaust by the British Government . 
 = = Titles , styles , and honours = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 25 February 1885 – 6 October 1903 : Her Serene Highness Princess Alice of Battenberg 
 6 October 1903 – 5 December 1969 : Her Royal Highness Princess Andrew of Greece and Denmark 
 From 1949 until her death , she was sometimes known as Mother Superior Alice @-@ Elizabeth 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Dame Grand Cross of the Order of Saints Olga and Sophia ( 1903 ) 
 Royal Red Cross ( 1913 ) 
 Posthumous : 
 Righteous Among the Nations ( 1993 ) 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Action of 16 October 1799 = 
 The Action of 16 October 1799 was a minor naval engagement during the French Revolutionary Wars between a squadron of British Royal Navy frigates and two frigates of the Spanish Navy close to the Spanish naval port of Vigo in Galicia . The Spanish ships were a treasure convoy , carrying silver specie and luxury trade goods across the Atlantic Ocean from the colonies of New Spain to Spain . <unk> by British frigate HMS Naiad enforcing the blockade of Vigo late on the 15 October , the Spanish ships were in the last stages of their journey . Turning to flee from Naiad , the Spanish soon found themselves surrounded as more British frigates closed in . 
 Although they separated their ships in an effort to split their opponents , the Spanish captains were unable to escape : Thetis was captured after a short engagement with HMS Ethalion on the morning of 16 October , while Santa Brigada almost reached safety , only being caught on the morning of 17 October in the approaches to the safe harbour at Muros . After a short engagement amid the rocks she was also captured by an overwhelming British force . Both captured ships were taken to Britain , where their combined cargoes were transported with great fanfare to the Bank of England . The eventual value of their cargo was assessed as at least £ 618 @,@ 040 , resulting in one of the largest hauls of prize money ever awarded . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1796 , following the secret terms of the Treaty of San Ildefonso , the Kingdom of Spain suddenly reversed its position in the French Revolutionary Wars turning from an enemy of the French Republic into an ally . The Spanish declaration of war on Great Britain forced the British Mediterranean Fleet to abandon the Mediterranean Sea entirely , retreating to ports at Gibraltar and Lisbon . This force now concentrated against the Spanish Navy , most of which was stationed at the main fleet base of Cádiz in Southern Spain . A British blockade fleet won a significant victory over the Spanish at the Battle of Cape St Vincent in February 1797 , dissuading the Spanish fleet from playing a significant role in the ongoing war . 
 Other Spanish ports were also blockaded with the intention of limiting Spanish trade and movement and intercepting treasure convoys from the colonies of New Spain and South America . Vast quantities of gold , silver and valuable trade goods crossed the Atlantic in regular armed frigate convoys . To intercept and seize these shipments the Royal Navy dispatched their own frigates to patrol the Spanish coast . To encourage their sailors , the Royal Navy distributed prize money to the value of the ships and material captured and the seizure of a Spanish treasure fleet could yield spectacular amounts of money : particularly large sums had been captured during previous wars in 1656 , 1744 and 1762 , but during the first three years of conflict between Great Britain and Spain only one treasure convoy had been intercepted , near Cádiz at the Action of 26 April 1797 , and on that occasion the treasure was smuggled ashore before the convoy was seized . 
 = = Pursuit = = 
 On 21 August 1799 , a convoy of two 34 @-@ gun frigates , Thetis under Captain Don Juan de Mendoza and Santa Brigada under Captain Don Antonio Pillon , sailed from Vera Cruz in New Spain with a cargo that included cochineal , indigo dye , cocoa and sugar but which principally consisted of more than two million silver Spanish dollars . The passage across the Atlantic was uneventful and by the afternoon of 15 October the convoy , under orders to make any Spanish port , was nearing its destination at Vigo , a fortified port city in Galicia just south of Cape Finisterre at the most northwestern point of Spain . The ports of Northern Spain were blockaded by British frigates sailing independently , crossing the approaches in search of enemy shipping and it was one such ship , the 38 @-@ gun HMS Naiad under Captain William Pierrepont , that sighted the Spanish convoy in position 41 ° 01 ′ N 12 ° 35 ′ W at 20 : 00 on 15 October . Turning away to the southeast , the Spanish ships then made all sail northeast in search of a safe harbour , with Pierrepont in pursuit . 
 At 03 : 30 on 16 October , another sail was spotted to the southwest , rapidly revealed to be a second British frigate , the 38 @-@ gun HMS Ethalion under Captain James Young . Ethalion joined the chase and at dawn two more sails were sighted , the 32 @-@ gun HMS Alcmene under Captain Henry Digby to the west and 32 @-@ gun HMS Triton under Captain John Gore to the north . With four British frigates now in full pursuit , the Spanish captains sought to split their enemy and divided , at which Pierrepont directed Ethalion , the closest British ship , to pursue the faster Thetis . Young complied , firing long @-@ range shot in Santa Brigada 's direction at 09 : 00 , driving Pillon 's ship further from his companion . 
 = = Battle = = 
 As Naiad , Triton and Alcmene streamed past in pursuit of Santa Brigada , Young focused his attention on Thetis , coming within range at 11 : 30 . Mendoza , seeing that battle was inevitable , bore up across Ethalion 's bows in an effort to rake Young 's ship . Young turned in order to thwart the manoeuvre and fired two rapid broadsides into Thetis , which responded in kind . For an hour the frigates exchanged running fire until Mendoza , realising escape was impossible , surrendered . Thetis had lost one man killed and nine wounded in the exchange while Ethalion had suffered no casualties . 
