 = = = Pop rock = = = 
 The term pop has been used since the early 20th century to refer to popular music in general , but from the mid @-@ 1950s it began to be used for a distinct genre , aimed at a youth market , often characterized as a softer alternative to rock and roll . In the aftermath of the British Invasion , from about 1967 , it was increasingly used in opposition to the term rock music , to describe a form that was more commercial , ephemeral and accessible . In contrast rock music was seen as focusing on extended works , particularly albums , was often associated with particular sub @-@ cultures ( like the counterculture of the 1960s ) , placed an emphasis on artistic values and " authenticity " , stressed live performance and instrumental or vocal virtuosity and was often seen as encapsulating progressive developments rather than simply reflecting existing trends . 
 Nevertheless , much pop and rock music has been very similar in sound , instrumentation and even lyrical content . The terms " pop @-@ rock " and " power pop " have been used to describe more commercially successful music that uses elements from , or the form of , rock music . Pop @-@ rock has been defined as an " upbeat variety of rock music represented by artists such as Elton John , Paul McCartney , the Everly Brothers , Rod Stewart , Chicago , and Peter Frampton . " The term power pop was coined by Pete Townshend of the Who in 1966 , but not much used until it was applied to bands like Badfinger in the 1970s , who proved some of the most commercially successful of the period . 
 = = = Blues rock = = = 
 Although the first impact of the British Invasion on American popular music was through beat and R & B based acts , the impetus was soon taken up by a second wave of bands that drew their inspiration more directly from American blues , including the Rolling Stones and the Yardbirds . British blues musicians of the late 1950s and early 1960s had been inspired by the acoustic playing of figures such as Lead Belly , who was a major influence on the Skiffle craze , and Robert Johnson . Increasingly they adopted a loud amplified sound , often centered on the electric guitar , based on the Chicago blues , particularly after the tour of Britain by Muddy Waters in 1958 , which prompted Cyril Davies and guitarist Alexis Korner to form the band Blues Incorporated . The band involved and inspired many of the figures of the subsequent British blues boom , including members of the Rolling Stones and Cream , combining blues standards and forms with rock instrumentation and emphasis . 
 The other key focus for British blues was around John Mayall who formed the Bluesbreakers , whose members included Eric Clapton ( after his departure from The Yardbirds ) and later Peter Green . Particularly significant was the release of Blues Breakers with Eric Clapton ( Beano ) album ( 1966 ) , considered one of the seminal British blues recordings and the sound of which was much emulated in both Britain and the United States . Eric Clapton went on to form supergroups Cream , Blind Faith and Derek and the Dominos , followed by an extensive solo career that helped bring blues rock into the mainstream . Green , along with the <unk> 's rhythm section Mick Fleetwood and John McVie , formed Peter Green 's Fleetwood Mac , who enjoyed some of the greatest commercial success in the genre . In the late 1960s Jeff Beck , also an alumnus of the Yardbirds , moved blues rock in the direction of heavy rock with his band , the Jeff Beck Group . The last Yardbirds guitarist was Jimmy Page , who went on to form The New Yardbirds which rapidly became Led Zeppelin . Many of the songs on their first three albums , and occasionally later in their careers , were expansions on traditional blues songs . 
 In America , blues rock had been pioneered in the early 1960s by guitarist Lonnie Mack , but the genre began to take off in the mid @-@ 1960s as acts developed a sound similar to British blues musicians . Key acts included Paul Butterfield ( whose band acted like Mayall 's Bluesbreakers in Britain as a starting point for many successful musicians ) , Canned Heat , the early Jefferson Airplane , Janis Joplin , Johnny Winter , the J. Geils Band and Jimi Hendrix with his power trios , the Jimi Hendrix Experience and Band of Gypsys , whose guitar virtuosity and showmanship would be among the most emulated of the decade . Blues rock bands from the southern states , like the Allman Brothers Band , Lynyrd Skynyrd , and ZZ Top , incorporated country elements into their style to produce distinctive Southern rock . 
 Early blues rock bands often emulated jazz , playing long , involved improvisations , which would later be a major element of progressive rock . From about 1967 bands like Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience had moved away from purely blues @-@ based music into psychedelia . By the 1970s , blues rock had become heavier and more riff @-@ based , exemplified by the work of Led Zeppelin and Deep Purple , and the lines between blues rock and hard rock " were barely visible " , as bands began recording rock @-@ style albums . The genre was continued in the 1970s by figures such as George Thorogood and Pat Travers , but , particularly on the British scene ( except perhaps for the advent of groups such as Status Quo and Foghat who moved towards a form of high energy and repetitive boogie rock ) , bands became focused on heavy metal innovation , and blues rock began to slip out of the mainstream . 
 = = = Folk rock = = = 
 By the 1960s , the scene that had developed out of the American folk music revival had grown to a major movement , utilising traditional music and new compositions in a traditional style , usually on acoustic instruments . In America the genre was pioneered by figures such as Woody Guthrie and Pete Seeger and often identified with progressive or labor politics . In the early sixties figures such as Joan Baez and Bob Dylan had come to the fore in this movement as singer @-@ songwriters . Dylan had begun to reach a mainstream audience with hits including " Blowin ' in the Wind " ( 1963 ) and " Masters of War " ( 1963 ) , which brought " protest songs " to a wider public , but , although beginning to influence each other , rock and folk music had remained largely separate genres , often with mutually exclusive audiences . 
 Early attempts to combine elements of folk and rock included the Animals ' " House of the Rising Sun " ( 1964 ) , which was the first commercially successful folk song to be recorded with rock and roll instrumentation and the Beatles " I 'm a Loser " ( 1964 ) , arguably the first Beatles song to be influenced directly by Dylan . The folk rock movement is usually thought to have taken off with The Byrds ' recording of Dylan 's " Mr. Tambourine Man " which topped the charts in 1965 . With members who had been part of the cafe @-@ based folk scene in Los Angeles , the Byrds adopted rock instrumentation , including drums and 12 @-@ string Rickenbacker guitars , which became a major element in the sound of the genre . Later that year Dylan adopted electric instruments , much to the outrage of many folk purists , with his " Like a Rolling Stone " becoming a US hit single . Folk rock particularly took off in California , where it led acts like The Mamas & the Papas and Crosby , Stills and Nash to move to electric instrumentation , and in New York , where it spawned performers including The Lovin ' Spoonful and Simon and Garfunkel , with the latter 's acoustic " The Sounds of Silence " ( 1965 ) being remixed with rock instruments to be the first of many hits . 
 These acts directly influenced British performers like Donovan and Fairport Convention . In 1969 Fairport Convention abandoned their mixture of American covers and Dylan @-@ influenced songs to play traditional English folk music on electric instruments . This electric folk was taken up by bands including Pentangle , Steeleye Span and The Albion Band , which in turn prompted Irish groups like Horslips and Scottish acts like the <unk> Band , Spencer 's Feat and later Five Hand Reel , to use their traditional music to create a brand of Celtic rock in the early 1970s . 
 Folk rock reached its peak of commercial popularity in the period 1967 – 68 , before many acts moved off in a variety of directions , including Dylan and the Byrds , who began to develop country rock . However , the hybridization of folk and rock has been seen as having a major influence on the development of rock music , bringing in elements of psychedelia , and helping to develop the ideas of the singer @-@ songwriter , the protest song and concepts of " authenticity " . 
 = = = Psychedelic rock = = = 
 Psychedelic music 's LSD @-@ inspired vibe began in the folk scene , with the New York @-@ based Holy Modal Rounders using the term in their 1964 recording of " Hesitation Blues " . The first group to advertise themselves as psychedelic rock were the 13th Floor Elevators from Texas , at the end of 1965 ; producing an album that made their direction clear , with The Psychedelic Sounds of the 13th Floor Elevators the following year . The Beatles introduced many of the major elements of the psychedelic sound to audiences in this period , with " I Feel Fine " using guitar feedback ; in late 1965 the Rubber Soul album included the use of a sitar on " Norwegian Wood " and they employed backmasking on their 1966 single B @-@ side " Rain " and other tracks that appeared on their Revolver album later that year . 
 Psychedelic rock particularly took off in California 's emerging music scene as groups followed the Byrds from folk to folk rock from 1965 . The psychedelic life style had already developed in San Francisco and particularly prominent products of the scene were the Grateful Dead , Country Joe and the Fish , the Great Society and Jefferson Airplane . The Byrds rapidly progressed from purely folk rock in 1966 with their single " Eight Miles High " , widely taken to be a reference to drug use . In Britain , an influential band in the genre were The Yardbirds , who , with Jeff Beck as their guitarist , increasingly moved into psychedelic territory , adding up @-@ tempo improvised " rave ups " , Gregorian chant and world music influences to songs including " Still I 'm Sad " ( 1965 ) and " Over Under Sideways Down " ( 1966 ) . From 1966 the UK underground scene based in North London supported new acts including Pink Floyd , Traffic and Soft Machine . The same year saw Donovan 's folk @-@ influenced hit album Sunshine Superman , considered one of the first psychedelic pop records , as well as the débuts of blues rock bands Cream and the Jimi Hendrix Experience , whose extended guitar @-@ heavy jams became a key feature of psychedelia . 
 Psychedelic rock reached its apogee in the last years of the decade . 1967 saw the Beatles release their definitive psychedelic statement in Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , including the controversial track " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and the Rolling Stones responded later that year with Their Satanic Majesties Request . Pink Floyd produced what is usually seen as their best psychedelic work The Piper at the Gates of Dawn . In America the Summer of Love was prefaced by the Human Be @-@ In event and reached its peak at the Monterey Pop Festival , the latter helping to make major American stars of Jimi Hendrix and the Who , whose single " I Can See for Miles " delved into psychedelic territory . Key recordings included Jefferson Airplane 's Surrealistic Pillow and the Doors ' Strange Days . These trends climaxed in the 1969 Woodstock festival , which saw performances by most of the major psychedelic acts , but by the end of the decade psychedelic rock was in retreat . Brian Wilson of the Beach Boys , Brian Jones of the Rolling Stones , Peter Green of Fleetwood Mac and Syd Barrett of Pink Floyd were early " acid casualties " , the Jimi Hendrix Experience and Cream broke up before the end of the decade and many surviving acts moved away from psychedelia into more back @-@ to @-@ basics " roots rock " , the wider experimentation of progressive rock , or riff @-@ laden heavy rock . 
 = = Progression = = 
 = = = Roots rock = = = 
 Roots rock is the term now used to describe a move away from what some saw as the excesses of the psychedelic scene , to a more basic form of rock and roll that incorporated its original influences , particularly country and folk music , leading to the creation of country rock and Southern rock . In 1966 Bob Dylan went to Nashville to record the album Blonde on Blonde . This , and subsequent more clearly country @-@ influenced albums , have been seen as creating the genre of country folk , a route pursued by a number of largely acoustic folk musicians . Other acts that followed the back @-@ to @-@ basics trend were the Canadian group the Band and the California @-@ based Creedence Clearwater Revival , both of which mixed basic rock and roll with folk , country and blues , to be among the most successful and influential bands of the late 1960s . The same movement saw the beginning of the recording careers of Californian solo artists like Ry Cooder , Bonnie Raitt and Lowell George , and influenced the work of established performers such as the Rolling Stones ' Beggar 's Banquet ( 1968 ) and the Beatles ' Let It Be ( 1970 ) . 
 In 1968 Gram Parsons recorded Safe at Home with the International Submarine Band , arguably the first true country rock album . Later that year he joined the Byrds for Sweetheart of the Rodeo ( 1968 ) , generally considered one of the most influential recordings in the genre . The Byrds continued in the same vein , but Parsons left to be joined by another ex @-@ Byrds member Chris Hillman in forming the Flying Burrito Brothers who helped establish the respectability and parameters of the genre , before Parsons departed to pursue a solo career . Bands in California that adopted country rock included Hearts and Flowers , Poco , New Riders of the Purple Sage , the Beau Brummels , and the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band . Some performers also enjoyed a renaissance by adopting country sounds , including : the Everly Brothers ; one @-@ time teen idol Rick Nelson who became the frontman for the Stone Canyon Band ; former <unk> Mike Nesmith who formed the First National Band ; and Neil Young . The <unk> were , unusually , a country act , who moved towards rock music . The greatest commercial success for country rock came in the 1970s , with artists including the Doobie Brothers , Emmylou Harris , Linda Ronstadt and the Eagles ( made up of members of the <unk> , Poco , and Stone Canyon Band ) , who emerged as one of the most successful rock acts of all time , producing albums that included Hotel California ( 1976 ) . 
 The founders of Southern rock are usually thought to be the Allman Brothers Band , who developed a distinctive sound , largely derived from blues rock , but incorporating elements of boogie , soul , and country in the early 1970s . The most successful act to follow them were Lynyrd Skynyrd , who helped establish the " Good ol ' boy " image of the subgenre and the general shape of 1970s ' guitar rock . Their successors included the fusion / progressive instrumentalists Dixie Dregs , the more country @-@ influenced Outlaws , jazz @-@ leaning Wet Willie and ( incorporating elements of R & B and gospel ) the Ozark Mountain Daredevils . After the loss of original members of the Allmans and Lynyrd Skynyrd , the genre began to fade in popularity in the late 1970s , but was sustained the 1980s with acts like .38 Special , Molly Hatchet and the Marshall Tucker Band . 
 = = = Progressive rock = = = 
 Progressive rock , a term sometimes used interchangeably with art rock , moved beyond established musical formulas by experimenting with different instruments , song types , and forms . From the mid @-@ 1960s the Left Banke , the Beatles , the Rolling Stones and the Beach Boys , had pioneered the inclusion of harpsichords , wind , and string sections on their recordings to produce a form of Baroque rock and can be heard in singles like Procol Harum 's " A Whiter Shade of Pale " ( 1967 ) , with its Bach @-@ inspired introduction . The Moody Blues used a full orchestra on their album Days of Future Passed ( 1967 ) and subsequently created orchestral sounds with synthesisers . Classical orchestration , keyboards and synthesisers were a frequent addition to the established rock format of guitars , bass and drums in subsequent progressive rock . 
 Instrumentals were common , while songs with lyrics were sometimes conceptual , abstract , or based in fantasy and science fiction . The Pretty Things ' SF Sorrow ( 1968 ) , the Who 's Tommy ( 1969 ) and the Kinks ' Arthur ( Or the Decline and Fall of the British Empire ) ( 1969 ) introduced the format of rock operas and opened the door to concept albums , often telling an epic story or tackling a grand overarching theme . King Crimson 's 1969 début album , In the Court of the Crimson King , which mixed powerful guitar riffs and mellotron , with jazz and symphonic music , is often taken as the key recording in progressive rock , helping the widespread adoption of the genre in the early 1970s among existing blues @-@ rock and psychedelic bands , as well as newly formed acts . 
 The vibrant Canterbury scene saw acts following Soft Machine from psychedelia , through jazz influences , toward more expansive hard rock , including Caravan , Hatfield and the North , Gong , and National Health . Greater commercial success was enjoyed by Pink Floyd , who also moved away from psychedelia after the departure of Syd Barrett in 1968 , with The Dark Side of the Moon ( 1973 ) , seen as a masterpiece of the genre , becoming one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . There was an emphasis on instrumental virtuosity , with Yes showcasing the skills of both guitarist Steve Howe and keyboard player Rick Wakeman , while Emerson , Lake & Palmer were a supergroup who produced some of the genre 's most technically demanding work . Jethro Tull and Genesis both pursued very different , but distinctly English , brands of music . Renaissance , formed in 1969 by ex @-@ Yardbirds Jim McCarty and Keith Relf , evolved into a high @-@ concept band featuring the three @-@ octave voice of Annie Haslam . Most British bands depended on a relatively small cult following , but a handful , including Pink Floyd , Genesis and Jethro Tull , managed to produce top ten singles at home and break the American market . 
 The American brand of progressive rock varied from the eclectic and innovative Frank Zappa , Captain Beefheart and Blood , Sweat & Tears , to more pop rock orientated bands like Boston , Foreigner , Kansas , Journey and Styx . These , beside British bands Supertramp and ELO , all demonstrated a prog rock influence and while ranking among the most commercially successful acts of the 1970s , issuing in the era of pomp or arena rock , which would last until the costs of complex shows ( often with theatrical staging and special effects ) , would be replaced by more economical rock festivals as major live venues in the 1990s . 
 The instrumental strand of the genre resulted in albums like Mike Oldfield 's Tubular Bells ( 1973 ) , the first record , and worldwide hit , for the Virgin Records label , which became a mainstay of the genre . Instrumental rock was particularly significant in continental Europe , allowing bands like Kraftwerk , Tangerine Dream , Can , and Faust to circumvent the language barrier . Their synthesiser @-@ heavy " krautrock " , along with the work of Brian Eno ( for a time the keyboard player with Roxy Music ) , would be a major influence on subsequent electronic rock . With the advent of punk rock and technological changes in the late 1970s , progressive rock was increasingly dismissed as pretentious and overblown . Many bands broke up , but some , including Genesis , ELP , Yes , and Pink Floyd , regularly scored top ten albums with successful accompanying worldwide tours . Some bands which emerged in the aftermath of punk , such as Siouxsie and the Banshees , Ultravox , and Simple Minds , showed the influence of progressive rock , as well as their more usually recognized punk influences . 
 = = = Jazz rock = = = 
 In the late 1960s jazz rock emerged as a distinct subgenre out of the blues rock , psychedelic and progressive rock scenes , mixing the power of rock with the musical complexity and improvisational elements of jazz . AllMusic states that the term jazz @-@ rock " may refer to the loudest , wildest , most electrified fusion bands from the jazz camp , but most often it describes performers coming from the rock side of the equation . " Jazz rock " ... generally grew out of the most artistically ambitious rock subgenres of the late ' 60s and early ' 70s " , including the singer / songwriter movement . Many early US rock and roll musicians had begun in jazz and carried some of these elements into the new music . In Britain the subgenre of blues rock , and many of its leading figures , like Ginger Baker and Jack Bruce of the Eric Clapton @-@ fronted band Cream , had emerged from the British jazz scene . Often highlighted as the first true jazz @-@ rock recording is the only album by the relatively obscure New York @-@ based the Free Spirits with Out of Sight and Sound ( 1966 ) . The first group of bands to self @-@ consciously use the label were R & B oriented white rock bands that made use of jazzy horn sections , like Electric Flag , Blood , Sweat & Tears and Chicago , to become some of the most commercially successful acts of the later 1960s and early 1970s . 
 British acts to emerge in the same period from the blues scene , to make use of the tonal and improvisational aspects of jazz , included Nucleus and the Graham Bond and John Mayall spin @-@ off Colosseum . From the psychedelic rock and the Canterbury scenes came Soft Machine , who , it has been suggested , produced one of the artistically successfully fusions of the two genres . Perhaps the most critically acclaimed fusion came from the jazz side of the equation , with Miles Davis , particularly influenced by the work of Hendrix , incorporating rock instrumentation into his sound for the album Bitches Brew ( 1970 ) . It was a major influence on subsequent rock @-@ influenced jazz artists , including Herbie Hancock , Chick Corea and Weather Report . The genre began to fade in the late 1970s , as a mellower form of fusion began to take its audience , but acts like Steely Dan , Frank Zappa and Joni Mitchell recorded significant jazz @-@ influenced albums in this period , and it has continued to be a major influence on rock music . 
 = = = Glam rock = = = 
 Glam rock emerged from the English psychedelic and art rock scenes of the late 1960s and can be seen as both an extension of and reaction against those trends . Musically diverse , varying between the simple rock and roll revivalism of figures like Alvin Stardust to the complex art rock of Roxy Music , and can be seen as much as a fashion as a musical subgenre . Visually it was a mesh of various styles , ranging from 1930s Hollywood glamor , through 1950s pin @-@ up sex appeal , pre @-@ war Cabaret theatrics , Victorian literary and symbolist styles , science fiction , to ancient and occult mysticism and mythology ; manifesting itself in outrageous clothes , makeup , hairstyles , and platform @-@ soled boots . Glam is most noted for its sexual and gender ambiguity and representations of androgyny , beside extensive use of theatrics . It was prefigured by the showmanship and gender @-@ identity manipulation of American acts such as the Cockettes and Alice Cooper . 
 The origins of glam rock are associated with Marc Bolan , who had renamed his folk duo to T. Rex and taken up electric instruments by the end of the 1960s . Often cited as the moment of inception is his appearance on the UK TV programme Top of the Pops in December 1970 wearing glitter , to perform what would be his first number 1 single " Ride a White Swan " . From 1971 , already a minor star , David Bowie developed his Ziggy Stardust persona , incorporating elements of professional make up , mime and performance into his act . These performers were soon followed in the style by acts including Roxy Music , Sweet , Slade , Mott the Hoople , Mud and Alvin Stardust . While highly successful in the single charts in the UK , very few of these musicians were able to make a serious impact in the United States ; Bowie was the major exception becoming an international superstar and prompting the adoption of glam styles among acts like Lou Reed , Iggy Pop , New York Dolls and Jobriath , often known as " glitter rock " and with a darker lyrical content than their British counterparts . In the UK the term glitter rock was most often used to refer to the extreme version of glam pursued by Gary Glitter and his support musicians the Glitter Band , who between them achieved eighteen top ten singles in the UK between 1972 and 1976 . A second wave of glam rock acts , including Suzi Quatro , Roy Wood 's Wizzard and Sparks , dominated the British single charts from about 1974 to 1976 . Existing acts , some not usually considered central to the genre , also adopted glam styles , including Rod Stewart , Elton John , Queen and , for a time , even the Rolling Stones . It was also a direct influence on acts that rose to prominence later , including Kiss and Adam Ant , and less directly on the formation of gothic rock and glam metal as well as on punk rock , which helped end the fashion for glam from about 1976 . Glam has since enjoyed sporadic modest revivals through bands such as Chainsaw Kittens , the Darkness and in R n ' B crossover act Prince . 
 = = = Soft rock , hard rock and early heavy metal = = = 
 From the late 1960s it became common to divide mainstream rock music into soft and hard rock . Soft rock was often derived from folk rock , using acoustic instruments and putting more emphasis on melody and harmonies . Major artists included Carole King , Cat Stevens and James Taylor . It reached its commercial peak in the mid- to late 1970s with acts like Billy Joel , America and the reformed Fleetwood Mac , whose Rumours ( 1977 ) was the best @-@ selling album of the decade . In contrast , hard rock was more often derived from blues @-@ rock and was played louder and with more intensity . It often emphasised the electric guitar , both as a rhythm instrument using simple repetitive riffs and as a solo lead instrument , and was more likely to be used with distortion and other effects . Key acts included British Invasion bands like the Who and the Kinks , as well as psychedelic era performers like Cream , Jimi Hendrix and the Jeff Beck Group . Hard rock @-@ influenced bands that enjoyed international success in the later 1970s included Queen , Thin Lizzy , Aerosmith and AC / DC . 
 From the late 1960s the term " heavy metal " began to be used to describe some hard rock played with even more volume and intensity , first as an adjective and by the early 1970s as a noun . The term was first used in music in Steppenwolf 's " Born to Be Wild " ( 1967 ) and began to be associated with pioneer bands like San Francisco 's Blue Cheer and Michigan 's Grand Funk Railroad . By 1970 three key British bands had developed the characteristic sounds and styles which would help shape the subgenre . Led Zeppelin added elements of fantasy to their riff laden blues @-@ rock , Deep Purple brought in symphonic and medieval interests from their progressive rock phase and Black Sabbath introduced facets of the gothic and modal harmony , helping to produce a " darker " sound . These elements were taken up by a " second generation " of heavy metal bands into the late 1970s , including : Judas Priest , UFO , Motörhead and Rainbow from Britain ; Kiss , Ted Nugent , and Blue Öyster Cult from the US ; Rush from Canada and Scorpions from Germany , all marking the expansion in popularity of the subgenre . Despite a lack of airplay and very little presence on the singles charts , late @-@ 1970s heavy metal built a considerable following , particularly among adolescent working @-@ class males in North America and Europe . 
 = = = Christian rock = = = 
 Rock , mostly the heavy metal genre , has been criticized by some Christian leaders , who have condemned it as immoral , anti @-@ Christian and even demonic . However , Christian rock began to develop in the late 1960s , particularly out of the Jesus movement beginning in Southern California , and emerged as a subgenre in the 1970s with artists like Larry Norman , usually seen as the first major " star " of Christian rock . The genre has been particularly popular in the United States . Many Christian rock performers have ties to the contemporary Christian music scene , while other bands and artists are closely linked to independent music . Since the 1980s Christian rock performers have gained mainstream success , including figures such as the American gospel @-@ to @-@ pop crossover artist Amy Grant and the British singer Cliff Richard . While these artists were largely acceptable in Christian communities the adoption of heavy rock and glam metal styles by bands like Petra and Stryper , who achieved considerable mainstream success in the 1980s , was more controversial . From the 1990s there were increasing numbers of acts who attempted to avoid the Christian band label , preferring to be seen as groups who were also Christians , including P.O.D and Collective Soul . 
 = = Punk era = = 
 = = = Punk rock = = = 
 Punk rock was developed between 1974 and 1976 in the United States and the United Kingdom . Rooted in garage rock and other forms of what is now known as protopunk music , punk rock bands eschewed the perceived excesses of mainstream 1970s rock . They created fast , hard @-@ edged music , typically with short songs , stripped @-@ down instrumentation , and often political , anti @-@ establishment lyrics . Punk embraces a DIY ( do it yourself ) ethic , with many bands self @-@ producing their recordings and distributing them through informal channels . 
 By late 1976 , acts such as the Ramones and Patti Smith , in New York City , and the Sex Pistols and the Clash , in London , were recognized as the vanguard of a new musical movement . The following year saw punk rock spreading around the world . Punk quickly , though briefly , became a major cultural phenomenon in the United Kingdom . For the most part , punk took root in local scenes that tended to reject association with the mainstream . An associated punk subculture emerged , expressing youthful rebellion and characterized by distinctive clothing styles and a variety of anti @-@ authoritarian ideologies . 
 By the beginning of the 1980s , faster , more aggressive styles such as hardcore and Oi ! had become the predominant mode of punk rock . This has resulted in several evolved strains of hardcore punk , such as D @-@ beat ( a distortion @-@ heavy subgenre influenced by the UK band Discharge ) , anarcho @-@ punk ( such as Crass ) , grindcore ( such as Napalm Death ) , and crust punk . Musicians identifying with or inspired by punk also pursued a broad range of other variations , giving rise to New wave , post @-@ punk and the alternative rock movement . 
 = = = New wave = = = 
 Although punk rock was a significant social and musical phenomenon , it achieved less in the way of record sales ( being distributed by small specialty labels such as Stiff Records ) , or American radio airplay ( as the radio scene continued to be dominated by mainstream formats such as disco and album @-@ oriented rock ) . Punk rock had attracted devotees from the art and collegiate world and soon bands sporting a more literate , arty approach , such as Talking Heads and Devo began to infiltrate the punk scene ; in some quarters the description " new wave " began to be used to differentiate these less overtly punk bands . Record executives , who had been mostly mystified by the punk movement , recognized the potential of the more accessible new wave acts and began aggressively signing and marketing any band that could claim a remote connection to punk or new wave . Many of these bands , such as the Cars and the Go @-@ Go 's can be seen as pop bands marketed as new wave ; other existing acts , including the Police , the Pretenders and Elvis Costello , used the new wave movement as the springboard for relatively long and critically successful careers , while " skinny tie " bands exemplified by the Knack , or the photogenic Blondie , began as punk acts and moved into more commercial territory . 
 Between 1979 and 1985 , influenced by Kraftwerk , Yellow Magic Orchestra , David Bowie and Gary Numan , British new wave went in the direction of such New Romantics as Spandau Ballet , Ultravox , Japan , Duran Duran , A Flock of Seagulls , Culture Club , Talk Talk and the Eurythmics , sometimes using the synthesizer to replace all other instruments . This period coincided with the rise of MTV and led to a great deal of exposure for this brand of synthpop , creating what has been characterised as a second British Invasion . Some more traditional rock bands adapted to the video age and profited from MTV 's airplay , most obviously Dire Straits , whose " Money for Nothing " gently poked fun at the station , despite the fact that it had helped make them international stars , but in general , guitar @-@ oriented rock was commercially eclipsed . 
 = = = Post @-@ punk = = = 
 If hardcore most directly pursued the stripped down aesthetic of punk , and new wave came to represent its commercial wing , post @-@ punk emerged in the later 1970s and early 1980s as its more artistic and challenging side . Major influences beside punk bands were the Velvet Underground , the Who , Frank Zappa and Captain Beefheart , and the New York @-@ based no wave scene which placed an emphasis on performance , including bands such as James Chance and the <unk> , DNA and Sonic Youth . Early contributors to the genre included the US bands Pere Ubu , Devo , the Residents and Talking Heads . 
 The first wave of British post @-@ punk included Gang of Four , Siouxsie and the Banshees and Joy Division , who placed less emphasis on art than their US counterparts and more on the dark emotional qualities of their music . Bands like Siouxsie and the Banshees , Bauhaus , the Cure , and the Sisters of Mercy , moved increasingly in this direction to found Gothic rock , which had become the basis of a major sub @-@ culture by the early 1980s . Similar emotional territory was pursued by Australian acts like the Birthday Party and Nick Cave . Members of Bauhaus and Joy Division explored new stylistic territory as Love and Rockets and New Order respectively . Another early post @-@ punk movement was the industrial music developed by British bands Throbbing Gristle and Cabaret Voltaire , and New York @-@ based Suicide , using a variety of electronic and sampling techniques that emulated the sound of industrial production and which would develop into a variety of forms of post @-@ industrial music in the 1980s . 
 The second generation of British post @-@ punk bands that broke through in the early 1980s , including the Fall , the Pop Group , the Mekons , Echo and the Bunnymen and the Teardrop Explodes , tended to move away from dark sonic landscapes . Arguably the most successful band to emerge from post @-@ punk was Ireland 's U2 , who incorporated elements of religious imagery together with political commentary into their often anthemic music , and by the late 1980s had become one of the biggest bands in the world . Although many post @-@ punk bands continued to record and perform , it declined as a movement in the mid @-@ 1980s as acts disbanded or moved off to explore other musical areas , but it has continued to influence the development of rock music and has been seen as a major element in the creation of the alternative rock movement . 
 = = = New waves and genres in heavy metal = = = 
 Although many established bands continued to perform and record , heavy metal suffered a hiatus in the face of the punk movement in the mid @-@ 1970s . Part of the reaction saw the popularity of bands like Motörhead , who had adopted a punk sensibility , and Judas Priest , who created a stripped down sound , largely removing the remaining elements of blues music , from their 1978 album Stained Class . This change of direction was compared to punk and in the late 1970s became known as the new wave of British heavy metal ( NWOBHM ) . During this era , almost all heavy metal performers were male , with the exception of the all @-@ female band Girlschool from the UK . These bands were soon followed by acts including Iron Maiden , Vardis , Diamond Head , Saxon , Def Leppard and Venom , many of which began to enjoy considerable success in the US . In the same period Eddie Van Halen established himself as a metal guitar virtuoso after his band 's self @-@ titled 1978 album . Randy Rhoads and Yngwie Malmsteen also became established virtuosos , associated with what would be known as the neoclassical metal style . 
 Inspired by NWOBHM and Van Halen 's success , a metal scene began to develop in Southern California from the late 1970s , based on the clubs of L.A. ' s Sunset Strip and including such bands as Quiet Riot , Ratt , Mötley Crüe , and W.A.S.P. , who , along with similarly styled acts such as New York 's Twisted Sister , incorporated the theatrics ( and sometimes makeup ) of glam rock acts like Alice Cooper and Kiss . The lyrics of these glam metal bands characteristically emphasized hedonism and wild behavior and musically were distinguished by rapid @-@ fire shred guitar solos , anthemic choruses , and a relatively melodic , pop @-@ oriented approach . The most commercially significant release of the era being Slippery When Wet ( 1986 ) by Bon Jovi from New Jersey , selling over 12 million copies in the US alone . The album has been credited with widening the audience for the subgenre , particularly by appealing to women as well as the traditional male dominated audience , and opening the door to MTV and commercial success for other bands at the end of the decade . By the mid @-@ 1980s bands were beginning to emerge from the L.A. scene that pursued a less glam image and a rawer sound , particularly Guns N ' Roses , breaking through with the chart @-@ topping Appetite for Destruction ( 1987 ) , and Jane 's Addiction , who emerged with their major label debut Nothing 's Shocking , the following year . 
 In the late 1980s metal fragmented into several subgenres , including thrash metal , which developed in the US from the style known as speed metal , under the influence of hardcore punk , with low @-@ register guitar riffs typically overlaid by shredding leads . Lyrics often expressed nihilistic views or deal with social issues using visceral , gory language . It was popularised by the " Big Four of Thrash " : Metallica , Anthrax , Megadeth , and Slayer . Death metal developed out of thrash , particularly influenced by the bands Venom and Slayer . Florida 's Death and the Bay Area 's Possessed emphasized lyrical elements of blasphemy , diabolism and millenarianism , with vocals usually delivered as guttural " death growls , " high @-@ pitched screaming , complemented by downtuned , highly distorted guitars and extremely fast double bass percussion . Black metal , again influenced by Venom and pioneered by Denmark 's Mercyful Fate , Switzerland 's Hellhammer and Celtic Frost , and Sweden 's Bathory , had many similarities in sound to death metal , but was often intentionally lo @-@ fi in production and placed greater emphasis on satanic and pagan themes . Bathory were particularly important in inspiring the further subgenres of Viking metal and folk metal . Power metal emerged in Europe in the late 1980s as a reaction to the harshness of death and black metal and was established by Germany 's Helloween , who combined a melodic approach with thrash 's speed and energy . England 's DragonForce and Florida 's Iced Earth have a sound indebted to NWOBHM , while acts such as Florida 's Kamelot , Finland 's Nightwish , Italy 's Rhapsody of Fire , and Russia 's Catharsis feature a keyboard @-@ based " symphonic " sound , sometimes employing orchestras and opera singers . In contrast to other subgenres doom metal , influenced by Gothic rock , slowed down the music , with bands like England 's Pagan Altar and Witchfinder General and the United States ' Pentagram , Saint Vitus and Trouble , emphasizing melody , down @-@ tuned guitars , a ' thicker ' or ' heavier ' sound and a sepulchral mood . American bands such as Queensrÿche and Dream Theater pioneered an often instrumentally challenging fusion of NWOBHM and progressive rock called progressive metal , with bands such as Symphony X combining aspects of power metal and classical music with the style , while Sweden 's Opeth developed a unique style indebted to both death metal and atmospheric 1970s prog rock . 
 = = = Heartland rock = = = 
 American working @-@ class oriented heartland rock , characterized by a straightforward musical style , and a concern with the lives of ordinary , blue @-@ collar American people , developed in the second half of the 1970s . The term heartland rock was first used to describe Midwestern arena rock groups like Kansas , REO Speedwagon and Styx , but which came to be associated with a more socially concerned form of roots rock more directly influenced by folk , country and rock and roll . It has been seen as an American Midwest and Rust Belt counterpart to West Coast country rock and the Southern rock of the American South . Led by figures who had initially been identified with punk and New Wave , it was most strongly influenced by acts such as Bob Dylan , the Byrds , Creedence Clearwater Revival and Van Morrison , and the basic rock of 1960s garage and the Rolling Stones . 
 <unk> by the commercial success of singer songwriters Bruce Springsteen , Bob Seger , and Tom Petty , along with less widely known acts such as Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes and Joe <unk> and the <unk> , it was partly a reaction to post @-@ industrial urban decline in the East and Mid @-@ West , often dwelling on issues of social disintegration and isolation , beside a form of good @-@ time rock and roll revivalism . The genre reached its commercial , artistic and influential peak in the mid @-@ 1980s , with Springsteen 's Born in the USA ( 1984 ) , topping the charts worldwide and spawning a series of top ten singles , together with the arrival of artists including John Mellencamp , Steve Earle and more gentle singer / songwriters such as Bruce Hornsby . It can also be heard as an influence on artists as diverse as Billy Joel , Kid Rock and the Killers . 
 Heartland rock faded away as a recognized genre by the early 1990s , as rock music in general , and blue collar and white working class themes in particular , lost influence with younger audiences , and as heartland 's artists turned to more personal works . Many heartland rock artists continue to record today with critical and commercial success , most notably Bruce Springsteen , Tom Petty and John Mellencamp , although their works have become more personal and experimental and no longer fit easily into a single genre . Newer artists whose music would perhaps have been labelled heartland rock had it been released in the 1970s or 1980s , such as Missouri 's Bottle Rockets and Illinois ' Uncle Tupelo , often find themselves labeled alt @-@ country . 
 = = = Emergence of alternative rock = = = 
 The term alternative rock was coined in the early 1980s to describe rock artists who did not fit into the mainstream genres of the time . Bands dubbed " alternative " had no unified style , but were all seen as distinct from mainstream music . Alternative bands were linked by their collective debt to punk rock , through hardcore , New Wave or the post @-@ punk movements . Important alternative rock bands of the 1980s in the US included R.E.M. , Hüsker Dü , Jane 's Addiction , Sonic Youth , and the Pixies , and in the UK the Cure , New Order , the Jesus and Mary Chain , and the Smiths . Artists were largely confined to independent record labels , building an extensive underground music scene based on college radio , fanzines , touring , and word @-@ of @-@ mouth . They rejected the dominant synthpop of the early 1980s , marking a return to group @-@ based guitar rock . 
 Few of these early bands achieved mainstream success , although exceptions to this rule include R.E.M. , the Smiths , and the Cure . Despite a general lack of spectacular album sales , the original alternative rock bands exerted a considerable influence on the generation of musicians who came of age in the 1980s and ended up breaking through to mainstream success in the 1990s . Styles of alternative rock in the U.S. during the 1980s included jangle pop , associated with the early recordings of R.E.M. , which incorporated the ringing guitars of mid @-@ 1960s pop and rock , and college rock , used to describe alternative bands that began in the college circuit and college radio , including acts such as 10 @,@ 000 Maniacs and the Feelies . In the UK Gothic rock was dominant in the early 1980s , but by the end of the decade indie or dream pop like Primal Scream , <unk> , Half Man Half Biscuit and the Wedding Present , and what were dubbed shoegaze bands like My Bloody Valentine , Ride , Lush , Chapterhouse , and the Boo Radleys . Particularly vibrant was the Madchester scene , produced such bands as Happy Mondays , the Inspiral Carpets , and Stone Roses . The next decade would see the success of grunge in the United States and Britpop in the United Kingdom , bringing alternative rock into the mainstream . 
 = = Alternative = = 
 = = = Grunge = = = 
 Disaffected by commercialized and highly produced pop and rock in the mid @-@ 1980s , bands in Washington state ( particularly in the Seattle area ) formed a new style of rock which sharply contrasted with the mainstream music of the time . The developing genre came to be known as " grunge " , a term descriptive of the dirty sound of the music and the unkempt appearance of most musicians , who actively rebelled against the over @-@ groomed images of other artists . Grunge fused elements of hardcore punk and heavy metal into a single sound , and made heavy use of guitar distortion , fuzz and feedback . The lyrics were typically apathetic and angst @-@ filled , and often concerned themes such as social alienation and entrapment , although it was also known for its dark humor and parodies of commercial rock . 
 Bands such as Green River , Soundgarden , the Melvins and Skin Yard pioneered the genre , with Mudhoney becoming the most successful by the end of the decade . Grunge remained largely a local phenomenon until 1991 , when Nirvana 's album Nevermind became a huge success because of its song " Smells Like Teen Spirit " . Nevermind was more melodic than its predecessors , by signing to Geffen Records the band was one of the first to employ traditional corporate promotion and marketing mechanisms such as an MTV video , in store displays and the use of radio " consultants " who promoted airplay at major mainstream rock stations . During 1991 and 1992 , other grunge albums such as Pearl Jam 's Ten , Soundgarden 's Badmotorfinger and Alice in Chains ' Dirt , along with the Temple of the Dog album featuring members of Pearl Jam and Soundgarden , became among the 100 top @-@ selling albums . Major record labels signed most of the remaining grunge bands in Seattle , while a second influx of acts moved to the city in the hope of success . However , with the death of Kurt Cobain and the subsequent break @-@ up of Nirvana in 1994 , touring problems for Pearl Jam and the departure of Alice in Chains ' lead singer Layne Staley in 1996 , the genre began to decline , partly to be overshadowed by Britpop and more commercial sounding post @-@ grunge . 
 = = = Britpop = = = 
 Britpop emerged from the British alternative rock scene of the early 1990s and was characterised by bands particularly influenced by British guitar music of the 1960s and 1970s . The Smiths were a major influence , as were bands of the Madchester scene , which had dissolved in the early 1990s . The movement has been seen partly as a reaction against various U.S. based , musical and cultural trends in the late 1980s and early 1990s , particularly the grunge phenomenon and as a reassertion of a British rock identity . Britpop was varied in style , but often used catchy tunes and hooks , beside lyrics with particularly British concerns and the adoption of the iconography of the 1960s British Invasion , including the symbols of British identity previously utilised by the mods . It was launched around 1992 with releases by groups such as Suede and Blur , who were soon joined by others including Oasis , Pulp , Supergrass and Elastica , who produced a series of top ten albums and singles . For a while the contest between Blur and Oasis was built by the popular press into " The Battle of Britpop " , initially won by Blur , but with Oasis achieving greater long @-@ term and international success , directly influencing a third generation of Britpop bands , including The Boo Radleys , Ocean Colour Scene and Cast . Britpop groups brought British alternative rock into the mainstream and formed the backbone of a larger British cultural movement known as Cool Britannia . Although its more popular bands , particularly Blur and Oasis , were able to spread their commercial success overseas , especially to the United States , the movement had largely fallen apart by the end of the decade . 
 = = = Post @-@ grunge = = = 
 The term post @-@ grunge was coined for the generation of bands that followed the emergence into the mainstream and subsequent hiatus of the Seattle grunge bands . Post @-@ grunge bands emulated their attitudes and music , but with a more radio @-@ friendly commercially oriented sound . Often they worked through the major labels and came to incorporate diverse influences from jangle pop , pop @-@ punk , alternative metal or hard rock . The term post @-@ grunge originally was meant to be pejorative , suggesting that they were simply musically derivative , or a cynical response to an " authentic " rock movement . Originally , grunge bands that emerged when grunge was mainstream and were suspected of emulating the grunge sound were <unk> labelled as post @-@ grunge . From 1994 , former Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl 's new band , the Foo Fighters , helped popularize the genre and define its parameters . 
 Although male bands predominated post @-@ grunge , female solo artist Alanis Morissette 's 1995 album Jagged Little Pill , labelled as post @-@ grunge , also became a multi @-@ platinum hit . Post @-@ grunge morphed during the late 1990s as post @-@ grunge bands like Creed and Nickelback emerged . Bands like Creed and Nickelback took post @-@ grunge into the 21st century with considerable commercial success , abandoning most of the angst and anger of the original movement for more conventional anthems , narratives and romantic songs , and were followed in this vein by newer acts including Shinedown , Seether , 3 Doors Down and Puddle of Mudd . 
 = = = Pop punk = = = 
 The origins of 1990s pop punk can be seen in the more song @-@ oriented bands of the 1970s punk movement like the Buzzcocks and the Clash , commercially successful New Wave acts such as the Jam and the Undertones , and the more hardcore @-@ influenced elements of alternative rock in the 1980s . Pop @-@ punk tends to use power @-@ pop melodies and chord changes with speedy punk tempos and loud guitars . Punk music provided the inspiration for some California @-@ based bands on independent labels in the early 1990s , including Rancid , Pennywise , Weezer and Green Day . In 1994 Green Day moved to a major label and produced the album Dookie , which found a new , largely teenage , audience and proved a surprise diamond @-@ selling success , leading to a series of hit singles , including two number ones in the US . They were soon followed by the eponymous début from Weezer , which spawned three top ten singles in the US . This success opened the door for the multi @-@ platinum sales of metallic punk band the Offspring with Smash ( 1994 ) . This first wave of pop punk reached its commercial peak with Green Day 's Nimrod ( 1997 ) and The Offspring 's Americana ( 1998 ) . 
 A second wave of pop punk was spearheaded by Blink @-@ 182 , with their breakthrough album Enema of the State ( 1999 ) , followed by bands such as Good Charlotte , Bowling for Soup and Sum 41 , who made use of humour in their videos and had a more radio @-@ friendly tone to their music , while retaining the speed , some of the attitude and even the look of 1970s punk . Later pop @-@ punk bands , including Simple Plan , the All @-@ American Rejects and Fall Out Boy , had a sound that has been described as closer to 1980s hardcore , while still achieving commercial success . 
 = = = Indie rock = = = 
 In the 1980s the terms indie rock and alternative rock were used interchangeably . By the mid @-@ 1990s , as elements of the movement began to attract mainstream interest , particularly grunge and then Britpop , post @-@ grunge and pop @-@ punk , the term alternative began to lose its meaning . Those bands following the less commercial contours of the scene were increasingly referred to by the label indie . They characteristically attempted to retain control of their careers by releasing albums on their own or small independent labels , while relying on touring , word @-@ of @-@ mouth , and airplay on independent or college radio stations for promotion . Linked by an ethos more than a musical approach , the indie rock movement encompassed a wide range of styles , from hard @-@ edged , grunge @-@ influenced bands like the Cranberries and Superchunk , through do @-@ it @-@ yourself experimental bands like Pavement , to punk @-@ folk singers such as Ani DiFranco . It has been noted that indie rock has a relatively high proportion of female artists compared with preceding rock genres , a tendency exemplified by the development of feminist @-@ informed Riot Grrrl music . Many countries have developed an extensive local indie scene , flourishing with bands with enough popularity to survive inside the respective country , but virtually unknown outside them . 
 By the end of the 1990s many recognisable subgenres , most with their origins in the late 1980s alternative movement , were included under the umbrella of indie . Lo @-@ fi eschewed polished recording techniques for a D.I.Y. ethos and was spearheaded by Beck , Sebadoh and Pavement . The work of Talk Talk and Slint helped inspire both post rock , an experimental style influenced by jazz and electronic music , pioneered by Bark Psychosis and taken up by acts such as Tortoise , Stereolab , and Laika , as well as leading to more dense and complex , guitar @-@ based math rock , developed by acts like <unk> and Chavez . Space rock looked back to progressive roots , with drone heavy and minimalist acts like Spacemen 3 , the two bands created out of its split , Spectrum and <unk> , and later groups including Flying Saucer Attack , Godspeed You ! Black Emperor and <unk> . In contrast , <unk> emphasised pain and suffering through melodic use of acoustic and electronic instrumentation in the music of bands like American Music Club and Red House Painters , while the revival of Baroque pop reacted against lo @-@ fi and experimental music by placing an emphasis on melody and classical instrumentation , with artists like Arcade Fire , Belle and Sebastian and Rufus <unk> . 
 = = = Alternative metal , rap rock and nu metal = = = 
 Alternative metal emerged from the hardcore scene of alternative rock in the US in the later 1980s , but gained a wider audience after grunge broke into the mainstream in the early 1990s . Early alternative metal bands mixed a wide variety of genres with hardcore and heavy metal sensibilities , with acts like Jane 's Addiction and Primus utilizing progressive rock , Soundgarden and Corrosion of Conformity using garage punk , the Jesus Lizard and Helmet mixing noise rock , Ministry and Nine Inch Nails influenced by industrial music , Monster Magnet moving into psychedelia , Pantera , Sepultura and White Zombie creating groove metal , while Biohazard and Faith No More turned to hip hop and rap . 
 Hip hop had gained attention from rock acts in the early 1980s , including The Clash with " The Magnificent Seven " ( 1980 ) and Blondie with " Rapture " ( 1980 ) . Early crossover acts included Run DMC and the Beastie Boys . Detroit rapper Esham became known for his " acid rap " style , which fused rapping with a sound that was often based in rock and heavy metal . Rappers who sampled rock songs included Ice @-@ T , The Fat Boys , LL Cool J , Public Enemy and Whodini . The mixing of thrash metal and rap was pioneered by Anthrax on their 1987 comedy @-@ influenced single " I 'm the Man " . 
 In 1990 , Faith No More broke into the mainstream with their single " Epic " , often seen as the first truly successful combination of heavy metal with rap . This paved the way for the success of existing bands like 24 @-@ 7 <unk> and Living Colour , and new acts including Rage Against the Machine and Red Hot Chili Peppers , who all fused rock and hip hop among other influences . Among the first wave of performers to gain mainstream success as rap rock were 311 , Bloodhound Gang , and Kid Rock . A more metallic sound - nu metal - was pursued by bands including Limp Bizkit , Korn and Slipknot . Later in the decade this style , which contained a mix of grunge , punk , metal , rap and turntable scratching , spawned a wave of successful bands like Linkin Park , P.O.D. and Staind , who were often classified as rap metal or nu metal , the first of which are the best @-@ selling band of the genre . 
 In 2001 , nu metal reached its peak with albums like Staind 's Break the Cycle , P.O.D 's Satellite , Slipknot 's Iowa and Linkin Park 's Hybrid Theory . New bands also emerged like Disturbed , Godsmack and Papa Roach , whose major label début <unk> became a platinum hit . Korn 's long awaited fifth album Untouchables , and Papa Roach 's second album <unk> , did not sell as well as their previous releases , while nu metal bands were played more infrequently on rock radio stations and MTV began focusing on pop punk and emo . Since then , many bands have changed to a more conventional hard rock , heavy metal , or electronic music sound . 
 = = = Post @-@ Britpop = = = 
 From about 1997 , as dissatisfaction grew with the concept of Cool Britannia , and Britpop as a movement began to dissolve , emerging bands began to avoid the Britpop label while still producing music derived from it . Many of these bands tended to mix elements of British traditional rock ( or British trad rock ) , particularly the Beatles , Rolling Stones and Small Faces , with American influences , including post @-@ grunge . Drawn from across the United Kingdom ( with several important bands emerging from the north of England , Scotland , Wales and Northern Ireland ) , the themes of their music tended to be less parochially centered on British , English and London life and more introspective than had been the case with Britpop at its height . This , beside a greater willingness to engage with the American press and fans , may have helped some of them in achieving international success . 
 Post Britpop bands have been seen as presenting the image of the rock star as an ordinary person and their increasingly melodic music was criticised for being bland or derivative . Post Britpop bands like the Verve with Urban Hymns ( 1997 ) , Radiohead from OK Computer ( 1997 ) , Travis from The Man Who ( 1999 ) , Stereophonics from Performance and Cocktails ( 1999 ) , Feeder from Echo Park ( 2001 ) and particularly Coldplay from their debut album Parachutes ( 2000 ) , achieved much wider international success than most of the Britpop groups that had preceded them , and were some of the most commercially successful acts of the late 1990s and early 2000s , arguably providing a launchpad for the subsequent garage rock or post @-@ punk revival , which has also been seen as a reaction to their introspective brand of rock . 
 = = 2000s – present = = 
 = = = Post @-@ hardcore and emo = = = 
 Post @-@ hardcore developed in the US , particularly in the Chicago and Washington , D.C areas , in the early to mid @-@ 1980s , with bands that were inspired by the do @-@ it @-@ yourself ethics and guitar @-@ heavy music of hardcore punk , but influenced by post @-@ punk , adopting longer song formats , more complex musical structures and sometimes more melodic vocal styles . Existing bands that moved on from hardcore included Fugazi . From the late 1980s they were followed by bands including Quicksand , Girls Against Boys and The Jesus Lizard . Bands that formed in the 1990s included Thursday , Thrice , Finch , and Poison the Well . 
 Emo also emerged from the hardcore scene in 1980s Washington , D.C. , initially as " emocore " , used as a term to describe bands who favored expressive vocals over the more common abrasive , barking style . The style was pioneered by bands Rites of Spring and Embrace , the last formed by Ian MacKaye , whose Dischord Records became a major centre for the emerging D.C. emo scene , releasing work by Rites of Spring , Dag Nasty , Nation of Ulysses and Fugazi . Fugazi emerged as the definitive early emo band , gaining a fanbase among alternative rock followers , not least for their overtly anti @-@ commercial stance . The early emo scene operated as an underground , with short @-@ lived bands releasing small @-@ run vinyl records on tiny independent labels . The mid @-@ 1990s sound of emo was defined by bands like Jawbreaker and Sunny Day Real Estate who incorporated elements of grunge and more melodic rock . Only after the breakthrough of grunge and pop punk into the mainstream did emo come to wider attention with the success of Weezer 's Pinkerton ( 1996 ) album , which utilised pop punk . Late 1990s bands drew on the work of Fugazi , <unk> , Jawbreaker and Weezer , including The Promise Ring , The Get Up Kids , Braid , Texas Is the Reason , Joan of Arc , Jets to Brazil and most successfully Jimmy Eat World , and by the end of the millennium it was one of the more popular indie styles in the US . 
 Emo broke into mainstream culture in the early 2000s with the platinum @-@ selling success of Jimmy Eat World 's Bleed American ( 2001 ) and Dashboard Confessional 's The Places You Have Come to Fear the Most ( 2003 ) . The new emo had a much more mainstream sound than in the 1990s and a far greater appeal amongst adolescents than its earlier incarnations . At the same time , use of the term emo expanded beyond the musical genre , becoming associated with fashion , a hairstyle and any music that expressed emotion . The term emo has been applied by critics and journalists to a variety of artists , including multi @-@ platinum acts such as Fall Out Boy and My Chemical Romance and disparate groups such as Paramore and Panic at the Disco , even when they protest the label . By 2003 post @-@ hardcore bands had also caught the attention of major labels and began to enjoy mainstream success in the album charts . A number of these bands were seen as a more aggressive offshoot of emo and given the often vague label of screamo . Around this time , a new wave of post @-@ hardcore bands began to emerge onto the scene that incorporated more pop punk and alternative rock styles into their music , including The Used , Hawthorne Heights , Senses Fail , From First to Last and Emery and Canadian bands Silverstein and Alexisonfire . British bands like Funeral For A Friend , The Blackout and Enter Shikari also made headway . 
 = = = Garage rock / post @-@ punk revival = = = 
 In the early 2000s , a new group of bands that played a stripped down and back @-@ to @-@ basics version of guitar rock , emerged into the mainstream . They were variously characterised as part of a garage rock , post @-@ punk or new wave revival . Because the bands came from across the globe , cited diverse influences ( from traditional blues , through New Wave to grunge ) , and adopted differing styles of dress , their unity as a genre has been disputed . There had been attempts to revive garage rock and elements of punk in the 1980s and 1990s and by 2000 scenes had grown up in several countries . The Detroit rock scene included the Von Bondies , Electric Six , the Dirtbombs and the Detroit Cobras and that of New York Radio 4 , Yeah Yeah Yeahs and the Rapture . Elsewhere , other lesser @-@ known acts such as Billy Childish and the Buff Medways from Britain , the ( International ) Noise Conspiracy from Sweden , the 5 @.@ 6 @.@ 7 @.@ 8 's from Japan , and the <unk> from Memphis enjoyed underground , regional or national success . 
 The commercial breakthrough from these scenes was led by four bands : the Strokes , who emerged from the New York club scene with their début album Is This It ( 2001 ) ; the White Stripes , from Detroit , with their third album White Blood Cells ( 2001 ) ; the Hives from Sweden after their compilation album Your New Favourite Band ( 2001 ) ; and the Vines from Australia with Highly Evolved ( 2002 ) . They were christened by the media as the " The " bands , and dubbed " The saviours of rock ' n ' roll " , leading to accusations of hype . A second wave of bands that gained international recognition due to the movement included Black Rebel Motorcycle Club , the Killers , Interpol and Kings of Leon from the US , the Libertines , Arctic Monkeys , Bloc Party , Editors , Franz Ferdinand and Placebo from the UK , Jet from Australia and the Datsuns and the D4 from New Zealand . 
 = = = Contemporary heavy metal , metalcore and retro @-@ metal = = = 
 By the new millennium Scandinavia had emerged as one of the areas producing innovative and successful bands , while Belgium , Holland and especially Germany were the most significant markets . Established continental metal bands placed multiple albums in the top 20 of the German charts between 2003 and 2008 included Finnish band Children of Bodom , Norwegian act Dimmu Borgir , Germany 's Blind Guardian and Sweden 's HammerFall . 
 Metalcore , originally an American hybrid of thrash metal and hardcore punk , emerged as a commercial force in the mid @-@ 2000s . It was rooted in the crossover thrash style developed two decades earlier by bands such as Suicidal Tendencies , Dirty Rotten Imbeciles , and Stormtroopers of Death and remained an underground phenomenon through the 1990s ; early bands include Earth Crisis , Converge , Hatebreed and Shai Hulud . Killswitch Engage 's The End of Heartache and Shadows Fall 's The War Within to debut at number 21 and number 20 , respectively , on the Billboard album chart . Bullet for My Valentine , from Wales , broke into the top 5 in both the U.S. and British charts with Scream Aim Fire ( 2008 ) . Metalcore bands have received prominent slots at Ozzfest and the Download Festival . Lamb of God , with a related blend of metal styles , reached number 2 on the Billboard charts in 2009 with Wrath . 
 The success of these bands and others such as Trivium , who have released both metalcore and straight @-@ ahead thrash albums , and Mastodon , who played in a progressive / sludge style , inspired claims of a metal revival in the United States , dubbed by some critics the " New Wave of American Heavy Metal " . Its roots have been traced to the music of acts like Pantera , Biohazard and Machine Head , drawing on New York hardcore , thrash metal and punk , helping to inspire a move away from the nu metal of the early 2000s and a return to riffs and guitar solos . 
 By the early 2010s , metalcore was evolving to more frequently incorporate synthesizers and elements from genres beyond rock and metal . The album Reckless & Relentless by British band Asking Alexandria ( which sold 31 @,@ 000 copies in its first week ) , and The Devil Wears Prada 's 2011 album Dead Throne ( which sold 32 @,@ 400 in its first week ) reached up to number 9 and 10 , respectively , on the Billboard 200 chart . In 2013 , British band Bring Me the Horizon released their fourth studio album Sempiternal to critical acclaim . The album debuted at number 3 on the UK Album Chart and at number 1 in Australia . The album sold 27 @,@ 522 copies in the US , and charted at number 11 on the US Billboard Chart , making it their highest charting release in America until their follow @-@ up album That 's the Spirit debuted at No. 2 in 2015 . 
 The term " retro @-@ metal " has been applied to such bands as Texas @-@ based the Sword , California 's High on Fire , Sweden 's Witchcraft , and Australia 's Wolfmother . The Sword 's Age of Winters ( 2006 ) drew heavily on the work of Black Sabbath and Pentagram , while Witchcraft added elements of folk rock and psychedelic rock , and Wolfmother 's self @-@ titled 2005 debut album combined elements of the sounds of Deep Purple and Led Zeppelin . 
 = = = Digital electronic rock = = = 
 In the 2000s , as computer technology became more accessible and music software advanced , it became possible to create high quality music using little more than a single laptop computer . This resulted in a massive increase in the amount of home @-@ produced electronic music available to the general public via the expanding internet , and new forms of performance such as <unk> and live coding . These techniques also began to be used by existing bands , as with industrial rock act Nine Inch Nails ' album Year Zero ( 2007 ) , and by developing genres that mixed rock with digital techniques and sounds , including indie electronic , electroclash , dance @-@ punk and new rave . 
 Indie electronic , which had begun in the early 1990s with bands like Stereolab and Disco Inferno , took off in the new millennium as the new digital technology developed , with acts including Broadcast from the UK , Justice from France , Lali Puna from Germany and The Postal Service , and Ratatat from the US , mixing a variety of indie sounds with electronic music , largely produced on small independent labels . The electroclash subgenre began in New York at the end of the 1990s , combining synth pop , techno , punk and performance art . It was pioneered by I @-@ F with their track " Space Invaders Are Smoking Grass " ( 1998 ) , and pursued by artists including Felix da Housecat , Peaches , Chicks on Speed , and Ladytron . It gained international attention at the beginning of the new millennium and spread to scenes in London and Berlin , but rapidly faded as a recognisable genre . Dance @-@ punk , mixing post @-@ punk sounds with disco and funk , had developed in the 1980s , but it was revived among some bands of the garage rock / post @-@ punk revival in the early years of the new millennium , particularly among New York acts such as Liars , The Rapture and Radio 4 , joined by dance @-@ oriented acts who adopted rock sounds such as Out Hud . In Britain the combination of indie with dance @-@ punk was dubbed new rave in publicity for Klaxons and the term was picked up and applied by the NME to bands including Trash Fashion , New Young Pony Club , Hadouken ! , Late of the Pier , Test <unk> and <unk> , forming a scene with a similar visual aesthetic to earlier rave music . 
 Renewed interest in electronic music and nostalgia for the 1980s led to the beginnings of a synthpop revival , with acts including Adult and Fischerspooner . In 2003 @-@ 4 it began to move into the mainstream with Ladytron , the Postal Service , Cut Copy , the Bravery and , with most commercial success , The Killers all producing records that incorporated vintage synthesizer sounds and styles which contrasted with the dominant sounds of post @-@ grunge and nu @-@ metal . The style was picked up by a large number of performers , particularly female solo artists , leading the British and other media to proclaim a new era of the female electropop star . Artists named included British acts Little Boots , La Roux and Ladyhawke . Male acts that emerged in the same period included Calvin Harris , Frankmusik , Hurts , Kaskade , LMFAO , and Owl City , whose single " Fireflies " ( 2009 ) reached the top of the Billboard chart . 
 = = Social impact = = 
 Different subgenres of rock were adopted by , and became central to , the identity of a large number of sub @-@ cultures . In the 1950s and 1960s , respectively , British youths adopted the Teddy Boy and Rocker subcultures , which revolved around US rock and roll . The counterculture of the 1960s was closely associated with psychedelic rock . The mid @-@ 1970s punk subculture began in the US , but it was given a distinctive look by British designer Vivienne Westwood , a look which spread worldwide . Out of the punk scene , the Goth and Emo subcultures grew , both of which presented distinctive visual styles . 
 When an international rock culture developed , it supplanted cinema as the major sources of fashion influence . Paradoxically , followers of rock music have often mistrusted the world of fashion , which has been seen as elevating image above substance . Rock fashions have been seen as combining elements of different cultures and periods , as well as expressing divergent views on sexuality and gender , and rock music in general has been noted and criticised for facilitating greater sexual freedom . Rock has also been associated with various forms of drug use , including the amphetamines taken by mods in the early to mid @-@ 1960s , through the LSD , mescaline , hashish and other hallucinogenic drugs linked with psychedelic rock in the late 1960s and early 1970s ; and sometimes to cannabis , cocaine and heroin , all of which have been eulogised in song . 
 Rock has been credited with changing attitudes to race by opening up African @-@ American culture to white audiences ; but at the same time , rock has been accused of appropriating and exploiting that culture . While rock music has absorbed many influences and introduced Western audiences to different musical traditions , the global spread of rock music has been interpreted as a form of cultural imperialism . Rock music inherited the folk tradition of protest song , making political statements on subjects such as war , religion , poverty , civil rights , justice and the environment . Political activism reached a mainstream peak with the " Do They Know It 's Christmas ? " single ( 1984 ) and Live Aid concert for Ethiopia in 1985 , which , while successfully raising awareness of world poverty and funds for aid , have also been criticised ( along with similar events ) , for providing a stage for self @-@ aggrandisement and increased profits for the rock stars involved . 
 Since its early development rock music has been associated with rebellion against social and political norms , most obviously in early rock and roll 's rejection of an adult @-@ dominated culture , the counterculture 's rejection of consumerism and conformity and punk 's rejection of all forms of social convention , however , it can also be seen as providing a means of commercial exploitation of such ideas and of diverting youth away from political action . 
 = = = Role of women = = = 
 Professional women instrumentalists are uncommon in rock genres such as heavy metal . According to Schaap and <unk> , " playing in a band is largely a male homosocial activity , that is , learning to play in a band is largely a peer @-@ based ... experience , shaped by existing sex @-@ segregated friendship networks . They note that rock music " is often defined as a form of male rebellion vis @-@ à @-@ vis female bedroom culture " . In popular music , there has been a gendered " distinction between public ( male ) and private ( female ) participation " in music . " several scholars have argued that men exclude women from bands or from the bands ' rehearsals , recordings , performances , and other social activities " . " Women are mainly regarded as passive and private consumers of allegedly slick , prefabricated – hence , inferior – pop music ... , excluding them from participating as high status rock musicians " . One of the reasons that there are rarely mixed gender bands is that " bands operate as tight @-@ knit units in which homosocial solidarity – social bonds between people of the same sex ... – plays a crucial role " . In the 1960s rock music scene , " singing was sometimes an acceptable pastime for a girl , but playing an instrument ... simply wasn 't done " . 
 " The rebellion of rock music was largely a male rebellion ; the women — often , in the 1950s and ' 60s , girls in their teens — in rock usually sang songs as personæ utterly dependent on their macho boyfriends ... " . Philip Auslander says that " Although there were many women in rock by the late 1960s , most performed only as singers , a traditionally feminine position in popular music " . Though some women played instruments in American all @-@ female garage rock bands , none of these bands achieved more than regional success . So they " did not provide viable templates for women 's on @-@ going participation in rock " . In relation to the gender composition of heavy metal bands , it has been said that " [ h ] eavy metal performers are almost exclusively male " " ... at least until the mid @-@ 1980s " apart from " ... exceptions such as Girlschool " . However , " ... now [ in the 2010s ] maybe more than ever – strong metal women have put up their dukes and got down to it " , " <unk> [ ing ] out a considerable place for [ them ] selves . " When Suzi Quatro emerged in 1973 , " no other prominent female musician worked in rock simultaneously as a singer , instrumentalist , songwriter , and bandleader " . According to Auslander , she was " kicking down the male door in rock and roll and proving that a female musician ... and this is a point I am extremely concerned about ... could play as well if not better than the boys " . 
 An all @-@ female band is a musical group in genres such as rock and blues which is exclusively composed of female musicians . This is distinct from a girl group , in which the female members are solely vocalists , though this terminology is not universally followed . 
 = Gyromitra esculenta = 
 Gyromitra esculenta / <unk> <unk> , <unk> / , is an ascomycete fungus from the genus Gyromitra , widely distributed across Europe and North America . It normally fruits in sandy soils under coniferous trees in spring and early summer . The fruiting body , or mushroom , is an irregular brain @-@ shaped cap dark brown in colour that can reach 10 cm ( 4 in ) high and 15 cm ( 6 in ) wide , perched on a stout white stipe up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) high . 
 Although potentially fatal if eaten raw , Gyromitra esculenta is a popular delicacy in Scandinavia , Eastern Europe , and the upper Great Lakes region of North America . Although popular in some districts of the eastern Pyrenees , it is prohibited from sale to the public in Spain . It may be sold fresh in Finland , but it must be accompanied by warnings and instructions on correct preparation . 
 Although it is still commonly parboiled before preparation , evidence suggests that even this procedure may not make Gyromitra esculenta entirely safe for consumption , thus raising concerns of risk even when prepared properly . When consumed , the principal active agent , gyromitrin , is hydrolyzed into the toxic compound monomethylhydrazine ( MMH ) . The toxin affects the liver , central nervous system , and sometimes the kidneys . Symptoms of poisoning involve vomiting and diarrhea several hours after consumption , followed by dizziness , lethargy and headache . Severe cases may lead to delirium , coma and death after 5 – 7 days . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 The fungus was first described in 1800 , by mycologist Christian Hendrik Persoon , as Helvella esculenta , and gained its current accepted binomial name when the Swedish mycologist Elias Magnus Fries placed it in the genus Gyromitra in 1849 . The genus name is derived from the Greek terms gyros / <unk> " round " and mitra / <unk> " headband " . Its specific epithet is derived from the Latin esculentus , " edible " . 
 It is known by a variety of common descriptive names such as " brain mushroom , " " turban fungus , " elephant ears , or " beefsteak mushroom / morel , " although beefsteak mushroom can also refer to the much less toxic Fistulina hepatica . Dating from the 19th century , the German term <unk> is a result of the older <unk> , itself from the 18th century Low German <unk> , aligning with the similar sounding ( and similar looking ) <unk> . 
 Gyromitra esculenta is a member of a group of fungi known as " false morels " , so named for their resemblance to the highly regarded true morels of the genus Morchella . The grouping includes other species of the genus Gyromitra , such as G. infula ( elfin saddle ) , G. caroliniana and G. gigas ( snow morel ) . While some of these species contain little to no gyromitrin , many guidebooks recommend treating them all as poisonous , since their similar appearance and significant intraspecific variation can make reliable identification difficult . 
 The more distantly related ascomycete mushrooms of the genus Verpa , such as V. bohemica and V. conica , are also known as false morels , early morels or thimble morels ; like the Gyromitra , they are eaten by some and considered poisonous by others . 
 The genus Gyromitra had been classically considered part of the family Helvellaceae , along with the similar @-@ looking elfin saddles of the genus Helvella . Analysis of the ribosomal DNA of many of the Pezizales showed Gyromitra esculenta and the other false morels to be only distantly related to the other members of the Helvellaceae and instead most closely related to the genus Discina , forming a clade which also contains <unk> and <unk> . Thus the four genera are now included in the family <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Resembling a brain , the irregularly shaped cap may be up to 10 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) high and 15 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) wide . Initially smooth , it becomes progressively more wrinkled as it grows and ages . The cap colour may be various shades of reddish- , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , dark or sometimes golden @-@ brown . Specimens from California may have more reddish @-@ brown caps . Attached to the cap at several points , the stipe is 3 – 6 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 2 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) high and 2 – 3 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide . Gyromitra esculenta has a solid stipe whereas those of true morels ( Morchella spp . ) are hollow . The smell can be pleasant and has been described as fruity , and the fungus is mild @-@ tasting . The spore print is whitish , with transparent spores that are elliptical and 17 – 22 μm in length . 
 Gyromitra esculenta resembles the various species of true morel , although the latter are more symmetric and look more like pitted gray , tan , or brown sponges . Its cap is generally darker and larger . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Gyromitra esculenta grows on sandy soil in Temperate coniferous forest and occasionally in deciduous woodlands . Among conifers it is mostly found under pines ( Pinus spp . ) , but also sometimes under aspen ( Populus spp . ) . The hunting period is from April to July , earlier than for other species , and the fungus may even sprout up with the melting snow . It can be abundant in some years and rare in others . The mushroom is more commonly found in places where ground has been disturbed , such as openings , rivulets , washes , timber clearings , plowed openings , forest fire clearings , and roadsides . Enthusiasts in Finland have been reported burying newspaper inoculated with the fungus in the ground in autumn and returning the following spring to collect mushrooms . 
 Although more abundant in montane and northern coniferous woodlands such as the Sierra Nevada and the Cascade Range in northwestern North America , Gyromitra esculenta is found widely across the continent , as far south as Mexico . It is also common in Central Europe , less abundant in the east , and more in montane areas than lowlands . It has been recorded from Northern Ireland , from <unk> Province in Western Turkey , and from the vicinity of <unk> in the Antalya Province of Turkey 's southern coast . 
 = = Toxicity = = 
 Toxic reactions have been known for at least a hundred years . Experts speculated the reaction was more of an allergic one specific to the consumer , or a misidentification , rather than innate toxicity of the fungus , due to the wide range in effects seen . Some would suffer severely or perish while others exhibited no symptoms after eating similar amounts of mushrooms from the same dish . Yet others would be poisoned after eating Gyromitra esculenta for many years without ill @-@ effects . However , the fungus is now widely recognized as potentially deadly . 
 Gyromitra esculenta contains levels of the poison gyromitrin that vary locally among populations ; although these mushrooms are only rarely involved in poisonings in either North America or western Europe , intoxications are seen frequently in eastern Europe and Scandinavia . A 1971 Polish study reported at the time that the species accounted for up to 23 % of mushroom fatalities each year . Death rates have dropped since the mid @-@ twentieth century ; in Sweden poisoning is common , though life @-@ threatening poisonings have not been detected and there was no fatality reported over the 50 years from 1952 to 2002 . Gyromitra poisonings are rare in Spain , due to the widespread practice of drying the mushrooms before preparation and consumption , but has a mortality rate of about 25 % . 
 A lethal dose of gyromitrin has been estimated to be 10 – 30 mg / kg for children and 20 – 50 mg / kg in adults . These doses correspond to around 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 6 kilograms ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 3 lb ) and 0 @.@ 4 – 1 kilogram ( 0 @.@ 9 – 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of fresh mushroom respectively . However , individual responses may vary and people who have ingested similar amounts may develop anything from minimal to severe toxicity . Evidence suggests that children are more severely affected ; it is unclear whether this is due to a larger weight consumed per body mass ratio or to differences in enzyme and metabolic activity . Although the amount of gyromitrin present can be significantly reduced through parboiling , there is evidence that repeated consumption can increase risk of toxicity . 
 = = = Geographical variation = = = 
 Populations of Gyromitra esculenta appear to vary geographically in their toxicity . A French study has shown that mushrooms collected at higher altitudes have lower concentrations of toxin than those from lower elevations , and there is some evidence that fungi west of the Rocky Mountains in North America contain less toxin than those to the east . However , poisonings in the west have been reported , although less frequently than in Europe . 
 = = = Biochemistry = = = 
 The identity of the toxic constituents eluded researchers until 1968 , when acetaldehyde N @-@ methyl @-@ N @-@ <unk> , better known as gyromitrin , was isolated . <unk> is a volatile water @-@ soluble hydrazine compound hydrolyzed in the body into monomethylhydrazine ( MMH ) . Other N @-@ methyl @-@ N @-@ <unk> derivatives have been isolated in subsequent research , although they are present in smaller amounts . These other compounds would also produce monomethylhydrazine when hydrolyzed , although it remains unclear how much each contributes to the false morel 's toxicity . 
 The toxins react with pyridoxal @-@ 5 @-@ phosphate — the activated form of pyridoxine — and form a <unk> . This reduces production of the neurotransmitter GABA via decreased activity of glutamic acid decarboxylase , producing the neurological symptoms . MMH also causes oxidative stress leading to methemoglobinemia . Additionally during the metabolism of MMH , N @-@ methyl @-@ N @-@ <unk> is produced ; this then undergoes cytochrome P450 regulated oxidative metabolism which via reactive <unk> intermediates leads to formation of methyl radicals which lead to liver necrosis . Inhibition of diamine oxidase ( <unk> ) elevates histamine levels resulting in headaches , nausea , vomiting , and abdominal pain . 
 = = = Symptoms = = = 
 The symptoms of poisoning are typically gastrointestinal and neurological . Symptoms occur within 6 – 12 hours of consumption , although cases of more severe poisoning may present sooner — as little as 2 hours after ingestion . Initial symptoms are gastrointestinal , with sudden onset of nausea , vomiting , and watery diarrhea which may be bloodstained . Dehydration may develop if the vomiting or diarrhea is severe . Dizziness , lethargy , vertigo , tremor , ataxia , nystagmus , and headaches develop soon after ; fever often occurs , a distinctive feature which does not develop after poisoning by other types of mushrooms . In most cases of poisoning , symptoms do not progress from these initial symptoms , and patients recover after 2 – 6 days of illness . 
 In some cases there may be an asymptomatic phase following the initial symptoms which is then followed by more significant toxicity including kidney damage , liver damage , and neurological dysfunction including seizures and coma . These signs usually develop within 1 – 3 days in serious cases . The patient develops jaundice and the liver and spleen become enlarged , in some cases blood sugar levels will rise ( hyperglycemia ) and then fall ( hypoglycemia ) and liver toxicity is seen . Additionally intravascular hemolysis causes destruction of red blood cells resulting in increase in free hemoglobin and hemoglobinuria which can lead to renal toxicity or renal failure . <unk> may also occur in some cases . This is where higher than normal levels of methemoglobin , which is a form of hemoglobin that can not carry oxygen , are found in the blood . It causes the patient to become short of breath and <unk> . Cases of severe poisoning may progress to a terminal neurological phase , with delirium , muscle fasciculations and seizures , and mydriasis progressing to coma , circulatory collapse , and respiratory arrest . Death may occur from five to seven days after consumption . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Treatment is mainly supportive ; gastric decontamination with activated charcoal may be beneficial if medical attention is sought within a few hours of consumption . However , symptoms often take longer than this to develop , and patients do not usually present for treatment until many hours after ingestion , thus limiting its effectiveness . Patients with severe vomiting or diarrhea can be rehydrated with intravenous fluids . Monitoring of biochemical parameters such as methemoglobin levels , electrolytes , liver and kidney function , urinalysis , and complete blood count is undertaken and any abnormalities are corrected . Dialysis can be used if kidney function is impaired or the kidneys are failing . Hemolysis may require a blood transfusion to replace the lost red blood cells , while methemoglobinemia is treated with intravenous methylene blue . 
 <unk> , also known as vitamin B6 , can be used to counteract the inhibition by MMH on the pyridoxine @-@ dependent step in the synthesis of the neurotransmitter GABA . Thus GABA synthesis can continue and symptoms are relieved . <unk> , which is only useful for the neurological symptoms and does not decrease hepatic toxicity , is given at a dose of 25 mg / kg ; this can be repeated up to a maximum total of 15 to 30 g daily if symptoms do not improve . Benzodiazepines are given to control seizures ; as they also modulate GABA receptors they may potentially increase the effect of pyridoxine . Additionally MMH inhibits the chemical transformation of folic acid into its active form , <unk> acid , this can be treated by <unk> acid given at 20 – 200 mg daily . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> , as well as its precursors <unk> and gyromitrin and raw Gyromitra esculenta , have been shown to be carcinogenic in experimental animals . Although Gyromitra esculenta has not been observed to cause cancer in humans , it is possible there is a carcinogenic risk for people who ingest these types of mushrooms . The toxins may be cumulative and even small amounts may have a carcinogenic effect . At least 11 different <unk> have been isolated from Gyromitra esculenta , and it is not known if the potential carcinogens can be completely removed by parboiling . 
 = = Consumption = = 
 Despite its recognized toxicity , Gyromitra esculenta is marketed and consumed in several countries or states in Europe and North America . It was previously consumed in Germany , with fungi picked in and exported from Poland ; more recently , however , Germany and Switzerland discouraged consumption by prohibiting its sale . Similarly in Sweden , the Swedish National Food Administration warns it is not fit for human consumption , and restricts purchase of fresh mushrooms to restaurants alone . The mushroom is still highly regarded and consumed in Bulgaria , being sold in markets and picked for export there . In some countries such as Spain , especially in the eastern Pyrenees , they are traditionally considered a delicacy , and many people report consuming them for many years with no ill effects . Despite this , the false morel is listed as hazardous in official mushroom lists published by the Catalan Government and sale to the public is prohibited throughout Spain . Outside of Europe , Gyromitra esculenta is consumed in the Great Lakes region and some western states in the United States . 
 Selling and purchasing fresh false morels is legal in Finland , where it is highly regarded . However , the mushrooms are required by law to be accompanied with a warning that they are poisonous and legally prescribed preparation instructions . False morels are also sold prepared and canned , in which case they are ready to be used . Official figures from the Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry report a total amount of false morels sold in Finland of 21 @.@ 9 tonnes in 2006 and 32 @.@ 7 tonnes , noted as being above average , in 2007 . In 2002 , the Finnish Food Safety Authority estimated annual consumption of false morels to be hundreds of tonnes in plentiful years . In Finnish cuisine , false morels may be cooked in an omelette , or gently sautéed in butter in a saucepan , flour and milk added to make a <unk> sauce , or pie filling . Alternatively , more fluid can be added for a false morel soup . Typical condiments added for flavour include parsley , chives , dill and black pepper . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 In 2015 , Swedish chef Paul Svensson caused a controversy when he prepared a dish with Gyromitra esculenta in a TV show . Mushroom expert Monica Svensson criticized him for including it , because of the mushroom 's carcinogenic substances and the risk that inexperienced people might misinterpret the recipe and omit the steps that reduce the toxicity level . She also expressed criticism to Per <unk> for similar reasons . Paul Svensson said that he wasn 't aware of the carcinogenic effects and apologized afterwards , and he promised to remove the mushroom from his dishes . 
 = = = Preparation = = = 
 Most of the gyromitrin must be removed to render false morels edible . The recommended procedure involves either first drying and then boiling the mushrooms , or boiling the fresh mushrooms directly . To prepare fresh mushroom it is recommended that they are cut into small pieces and parboiled twice in copious amounts of water , at least three parts water to one part chopped mushrooms , for at least five minutes , after each boiling the mushroom should be rinsed thoroughly in clean water . Each round of parboiling reduces the gyromitrin contents to a tenth . The gyromitrin is leached into the water where it will remain , therefore the parboiling water must be discarded and replaced with fresh water after each round of boiling . Drying the mushrooms can also reduce the concentration of gyromitrin ; ten days of open air desiccation leads to the loss of 90 % of gyromitrin . However it is still recommended that the mushroom be boiled after drying . 
 MMH boils at 87 @.@ 5 ° C ( 190 ° F ) and thus readily vaporizes into the air when water containing fresh false morels is boiled . Poorly ventilated spaces allow vapor to accumulate , resulting in gyromitrin poisoning . If boiling the mushrooms indoors , care should be taken to ensure adequate ventilation , and , if symptoms of gyromitrin poisoning appear , immediately seek fresh air . Even after boiling , small amounts of gyromitrin remain in the mushrooms . Given the possibility of accumulation of toxins , repeated consumption is not recommended . 
 = = = Prospects for cultivation = = = 
 Strains with much lower concentrations of gyromitrin have been discovered , and the fungus has been successfully grown to fruiting in culture . Thus there is scope for future research into cultivation of safer strains . 
 = Diego Costa = 
 Diego da Silva Costa ( Spanish : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] , Portuguese : [ <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; born 7 October 1988 ) , is a professional footballer who plays as a striker for English club Chelsea and the Spain national team . He has been described by pundits as a talented striker whose main attributes are his physicality , goalscoring and ability to keep possession . Costa has been criticised and punished for several confrontations with opponents . 
 He began his career with Braga and Penafiel in Portugal , and was signed by Atlético Madrid in 2007 . He was loaned back to Braga , and then to Celta de Vigo and Albacete before being sold to Real Valladolid in 2009 . He returned to Atlético the following season and went on to play a key role in their attack , scoring 27 goals as they won the league title in 2014 , and then joined Chelsea for £ 32 million . He scored 21 goals in his first season in England , winning the Premier League and League Cup . 
 Costa is originally Brazilian and was naturalized through residence in his seven years in Spanish football . Internationally , Costa played twice for Brazil in 2013 , but later declared his desire to represent Spain , having been granted Spanish citizenship in September 2013 . He made his debut for his adopted nation in March 2014 , and represented them at the 2014 FIFA World Cup . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Costa was born in Lagarto , Sergipe , Brazil , to parents José de Jesus and <unk> . His father named him in honour of Argentine footballer Diego Maradona despite the rivalry between the two nations , and he has an elder brother named Jair after Brazilian player Jairzinho . Despite regularly playing street football , Costa did not believe as a child that he would turn professional , in part due to the remote location of his hometown . He has since set up a football academy in his hometown , where he pays all the costs . Costa is a fan of Palmeiras . 
 Costa trialled unsuccessfully at his hometown team Atlético Clube <unk> . At age 15 , he left Sergipe and moved to São Paulo , to work in the store of his uncle <unk> . Although he was never a professional , <unk> had connections in football and recommended his nephew to Barcelona Esportiva <unk> , a team from <unk> in the south of the city set up as an alternative to drugs and gangs for youth of the favelas . Before joining this team , he had never been coached in football . He turned professional at the club , earning around £ 100 per month , and competed in the under @-@ 18 Taça de São Paulo despite a four @-@ month ban for slapping an opponent and dissent towards the referee . Although he was sent off in the first game of the tournament , he attracted the attention of renowned Portuguese agent Jorge Mendes , who offered him a contract at Braga . Costa 's father was apprehensive of sending his son to Europe , and suggested he instead sign for nearby Associação <unk> São Caetano , but he was adamant that he would take the opportunity . 
 Jair played on the same team as Diego , and was a slimmer , more technically able player , but had less focus ; the two were often not fielded at the same time in order to prevent arguments . He never turned professional , but had a three @-@ month trial at Basque club Salvatierra . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Costa signed for his first European club in February 2006 , Portugal 's Braga . He initially struggled with loneliness and the comparatively cold weather of northern Portugal . Out of action due to the club 's lack of a youth team , he was loaned that summer to Penafiel in the second division , managed by former Portugal international Rui Bento , who desired the " rough diamond . " 
 Through his negotiations with Spain 's Atlético Madrid , Mendes arranged Costa 's transfer for € 1 @.@ 5 million and 50 % of the player 's rights in December 2006 , but he remained on loan at Braga until the end of the season . Atlético defeated interest from Porto and <unk> de Huelva for Costa 's signature , with director Jesús García Pitarch admitting that it was a risk to pay so much for an inexperienced player . After five goals in 13 games for Penafiel , he was recalled to Braga in January 2007 . On 23 February , he came on in the 71st minute for Zé Carlos and scored his first goal for the team , a last @-@ minute goal for a 1 – 0 win at Parma to advance 2 – 0 on aggregate to the Last 16 of the UEFA Cup . His season ended after seven games due to a metatarsal injury which ruled him out for six months . 
 Costa was presented by Atlético President Enrique Cerezo on 10 July 2007 as " the new Kaká . " While scout Javier Hernández wished for him to return to fitness in the club 's reserves , García Pitarch instead suggested loaning Costa out immediately . He made his debut on 11 August in the Ciudad de Vigo tournament against Celta de Vigo , replacing Simão at half @-@ time in a penalty shootout victory . 
 = = = Celta Vigo = = = 
 Later that month , Costa and Mario Suárez were loaned to Segunda División Celta for the season , and he became a regular in the team , managed by former Ballon d 'Or winner Hristo Stoichkov . In his seventh league match , he scored his first goal in Spanish football in a dominant home victory over Xerez ; after scoring , he showboated , causing a brawl which resulted in him being sent off . Costa was subsequently rested from Celta 's away game at the same opposition . The event drew the wrath of Stoichkov , who unexpectedly left his position . Towards the middle of the season , he was involved in two further controversies : he struck Málaga defender <unk> in the head , causing an injury which required medical stitches , and was sent off against Sevilla Atlético for diving and dissent , leaving his team to fight for a draw without him . The loyal strike partner of Quincy Owusu @-@ <unk> despite the pair not sharing a common language , he was dropped for Cypriot Ioannis <unk> . On 23 March 2008 , Costa scored both Celta goals in a 2 – 1 win at Numancia , the latter after a long dribble ; but later on in the campaign , he was sent off against Tenerife at Balaídos , after which Celta went from winning 2 – 0 to drawing 2 – 2 . The team barely avoided relegation , and Costa earned a reputation for being a disruptive influence . 
 = = = Albacete = = = 
 Despite earning a poor reputation for his conduct , Costa attracted interest from Salamanca , <unk> de Tarragona and Málaga after his loan at Celta ; García Pitarch ruled out any approach from the latter , fearing how Costa would behave on the Costa del Sol . After attending Atlético 's pre @-@ season tour of Mexico , he signed on loan for Albacete , also of Segunda División , on 22 August 2008 , signing a contract which would have a lower fee depending on how many games he played . He initially threatened to terminate his deal with the Castile @-@ La Mancha team , on account of the quality of his teammates and the city 's lack of a beach . Nine days after signing , he scored a late winner in a 2 – 1 victory over Sevilla 's reserves at the Estadio Carlos Belmonte . The <unk> <unk> suffered with financial problems during Costa 's loan , with him threatening to strike unless their non @-@ playing staff were paid in full . He was dropped to the bench by manager Juan Ignacio Martínez for the home game against Real Sociedad on 13 December as punishment for an argument with goalkeeper Jonathan , but came on as a substitute to score another late winner . 
 Costa was known for misbehaviour on and off the pitch while at Albacete . He was sent off away to Tenerife , after which he slandered the referee 's mother and confronted his opponents . He pulled practical jokes on his teammates and employers , earning him the moniker " that fucking Brazilian " . However , he was a central figure as they avoided relegation , assisting twice in a 3 – 0 win at high @-@ flying Rayo Vallecano on 2 May 2009 , despite missing a penalty . 
 = = = Valladolid = = = 
 In the summer of 2009 , Costa was desired by FC Barcelona for their reserve team , an approach which Atlético rejected , citing that he remained in their plans . However , frustrated by his lack of opportunities , a now overweight Costa argued with his management and attempted to negotiate a move to Brazil 's Esporte Clube Vitória . 
 On 8 July 2009 Costa was sold to Real Valladolid as part of the deal that sent goalkeeper Sergio <unk> in the opposite direction , with the transfer including a € 1 million buy @-@ back option that could be activated by Atlético at the end of the season . García Pitarch confessed that there was a verbal agreement that Costa would definitely return at the end of the campaign , and that the deal had been made to look permanent in order to give Costa more commitment to his new club . 
 Initially , Costa had competition up front from fellow new signings Alberto Bueno and <unk> , signed from Real Madrid and Manchester United respectively ; he eventually forged a friendship with the latter , a fellow <unk> . He started strong for the Castile and León side , scoring six times in his first 12 games , but only found the net once in the following 5 ½ months as the campaign eventually ended in relegation from La Liga . He was sent off in a goalless draw against RCD Espanyol on 24 March 2010 for a stamp on <unk> <unk> in the first half . 
 = = = Atlético Madrid = = = 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 season = = = = 
 In June 2010 , Costa returned to the <unk> , initially as a backup to Sergio Agüero and Diego Forlán – Atlético also paid an undisclosed sum to Braga to buy all the residual 30 % economic rights ( the former also had to pay in excess of € 833 @,@ 000 in agent 's fees to <unk> ) . He was an unused substitute as Atlético won the 2010 UEFA Super Cup on 27 August . 
 On 26 September , with the injured Agüero on the substitutes bench , Costa scored the game 's only goal at home against Real Zaragoza . On 3 April of the following year , already as a starter after manager Quique Flores demoted Forlán from his position , he netted all of his team 's goals in a 3 – 2 win at Osasuna . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 season = = = = 
 In July 2011 , during Atlético 's pre @-@ season , Costa suffered a serious knee injury , going on to miss the majority of the season . The injury prevented him from passing a medical at Turkish club Beşiktaş J.K. , having already agreed to transfer to them . On 23 January 2012 , Costa was loaned to fellow league club Rayo Vallecano until June ; he scored four goals in his first three appearances , including two in a 5 – 3 away win against Levante , eventually finishing his loan spell with ten goals from 16 games . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 season = = = = 
 For the second time in his career , Costa was an unused substitute as Atlético won the UEFA Super Cup on 1 September 2012 . 
 In December 2012 , Costa was involved in several on @-@ field altercations in two separate matches . The first was in a 0 – 2 local derby loss against Real Madrid where he avoided disciplinary action after spitting incidents between him and Sergio Ramos . He was sent off in the following game at Viktoria Plzeň in the Europa League for headbutting opponent David <unk> , and was handed a four @-@ match ban by UEFA . This , however , did not deter coach Diego Simeone from continuing to start him , and he responded by netting three goals in two home contests , against Deportivo de La Coruña in the league ( 6 – 0 ) and Getafe in the season 's Copa del Rey ( 3 – 0 ) . 
 After the Spanish Cup semi @-@ finals against Sevilla , Costa took his goal tally in the competition to seven in as many matches , having scored three times in the tie : in the first leg he netted two penalties in a 2 – 1 win and , in the second at the Ramón Sánchez Pizjuán , scored one after an individual effort and assisted Radamel Falcao in the other , also being involved in situations which resulted in two opposing players – Gary <unk> and Geoffrey <unk> – being sent off in the 2 – 2 draw . 
 Costa scored Atlético 's equalising goal in the Copa del Rey Final clash against city @-@ rivals Real Madrid on 17 May 2013 , contributing to the 2 – 1 triumph – the first in 25 games in a streak stretching back to 1999 – and the tenth win in the tournament , confirmed by Miranda 's extra @-@ time header . He and opponent Cristiano Ronaldo had gone into the match as joint top scorers in the tournament , and thus Costa 's eighth goal made him the top scorer . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 season = = = = 
 In August 2013 , Costa was heavily linked with a move to Liverpool , who allegedly matched his release clause of € 25 million and offered him three times his salary at Atlético . However , he chose to stay at the club and renewed his contract until 2018 , while also doubling his wages ; a few days after this in the first match of the new season on 19 August , he scored a brace in a 3 – 1 win at Sevilla . 
 On 24 September Costa netted both goals in a 2 – 1 home triumph over Osasuna , to help his team stay level on points with league leaders Barcelona through six games . Four days later , in the Madrid derby , he scored the only goal of the game to record a second win over Real at the Santiago Bernabéu in under five months . For his performances , he was crowned the inaugural La Liga Player of the Month for September 2013 . By his 25th birthday on 7 October , he had scored ten goals in eight league matches , equalling his tally from the previous season . All of those matches were won by Atlético , setting a new record for the best start to a season . On 23 November 2013 , Costa scored an overhead volley from a cross by Gabi in a win over Getafe ; the goal was nominated for the FIFA Puskás Award . 
 On 22 October 2013 Costa marked his UEFA Champions League début with two goals against FK Austria Wien , the first coming after a fine individual effort in an eventual 3 – 0 group stage away win . On 19 February of the following year , in the first knockout round 's first leg , he scored the game 's only goal at Milan , netting seven minutes from time after a corner kick from Gabi ; he added a further two in the second match , helping to a 4 – 1 victory that put Atlético into the quarter @-@ finals for the first time in 17 years . 
 On 30 April 2014 , Costa won and converted a penalty in the second leg of the Champions League semi @-@ final against Chelsea , as Atlético won 3 – 1 at Stamford Bridge and advanced to the final of the competition for the first time since 1974 . He finished the league season with 27 league goals to become the third highest scorer , and the team won the title for the first time since 1996 , but he was substituted after 16 minutes of the last match of the season against Barcelona due to a hamstring injury . Atlético sought to cure this injury before the upcoming Champions League final against Real Madrid by sending him to Belgrade for treatment with a horse placenta , and he was included in the starting line @-@ up for the decisive match . However , he left the pitch after eight minutes in an eventual 1 – 4 loss ; manager Diego Simeone later admitted a personal mistake in selecting the player to start the final despite his recent injury . Costa scored 8 goals during the Champions League campaign , equalling the record held by <unk> since 1959 for most in a season by an Atlético player , and in his entire career was in the top 10 Atlético players by goal average . At the season 's LFP Awards , he was nominated for the league 's Best Forward , losing out to Cristiano Ronaldo . 
 = = = Chelsea = = = 
 Having completed his medical in June , Chelsea announced on 1 July 2014 that they had agreed to meet the £ 32 million buy @-@ out clause in Costa 's contract . On 15 July , Chelsea confirmed the completion of the signing of Costa , who signed a five @-@ year contract on a salary of £ 150 @,@ 000 a week . Costa said : " I am very happy to sign for Chelsea . Everybody knows it is a big club in a very competitive league , and I am very excited to get started in England with a fantastic coach and team @-@ mates . Having played against Chelsea last season I know the high quality of the squad I am joining " . Following the departure of former Chelsea striker Demba Ba , Costa inherited his number 19 shirt , the same number he wore at the 2014 World Cup for Spain and previously at Atlético . 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 season = = = = 
 Costa scored on his Chelsea debut on 27 July , running onto a through ball from Cesc Fàbregas in a 2 – 1 friendly win against Slovene club Olimpija . Costa then scored his second goal of pre @-@ season in a 2 – 0 friendly win against Fenerbahçe on 8 August , described by the Daily Mail as a " <unk> . " He ended his pre @-@ season with two goals in his first match at Stamford Bridge , a 2 – 0 friendly win against Real Sociedad , on 12 August . 
 His first competitive match was Chelsea 's first game of the league season , away to Burnley on 18 August , scoring the team 's equaliser in a 3 – 1 victory . Costa also scored in his second league game , opening a 2 – 0 home win over Leicester City . He scored in his third consecutive match on 30 August , netting the first and last goals of a 6 – 3 win at Everton , the first goal coming after 35 seconds . Costa was given the Premier League Player of the Month award for August 2014 . He completed his first Premier League hat @-@ trick in his fourth game of the season against Swansea City as Chelsea continued their perfect start to the season with a 4 – 2 win . With seven , Costa holds the record for most goals in his first four Premier League matches , surpassing the tally of six by both Sergio Agüero and Micky Quinn . In spite of his form at the start of the season , Costa had been suffering from a recurring hamstring problem which limited his participation in training ; manager José Mourinho said that it would not heal until mid @-@ November . 
 Costa scored his tenth goal of the league season to give Chelsea a 2 – 1 win away to Liverpool on 8 November , preserving their unbeaten start to the campaign . On 17 January 2015 , he scored twice in the first half as Chelsea won 5 – 0 away at Swansea . Later that month , Costa was charged by the FA in relation to a stamp on <unk> Can during Chelsea 's win over Liverpool in the League Cup semi @-@ finals , and was given a three @-@ match ban . Costa won his first trophy for Chelsea on 1 March , as they defeated Tottenham Hotspur 2 – 0 to win the League Cup Final at Wembley Stadium . In the 56th minute , his shot was deflected in by Kyle Walker for the second goal of the game . Initially the goal was given as a Walker own goal , but Costa was later awarded the goal . 
 On 26 April , Costa was chosen of one of two forwards for the season 's PFA Team of the Year , alongside Tottenham 's Harry Kane . Five of Costa 's Chelsea teammates were also in the selection . Due to injury , he was due to miss the remainder of the season , in which Chelsea won the league title with a 1 – 0 home win over Crystal Palace on 3 May . However , he featured in their last match of the season on the 24th , replacing the injured Didier Drogba after half an hour against Sunderland . Seven minutes later , he scored his 20th goal of the league campaign , an equalising penalty in an eventual 3 – 1 home win . 
 With reports speculating that Costa wanting to leave Chelsea , Costa affirmed on 2 June 2015 after Chelsea 's post @-@ season tour that he had no desire to leave London , saying , " It 's always a bit more difficult in the first season for adaptation , but I have no reason to leave this place , I love it , the fans love me , and I want to stay . It ’ s really good to come in the first season [ to Chelsea ] and win two things [ the Premier League and the League Cup titles ] . Next year I ’ ll be ready to come back and , hopefully , win a couple more trophies . " 
 = = = = 2015 – 16 season = = = = 
 Due to injury , Costa missed the 2015 FA Community Shield , which Chelsea lost 1 – 0 to rivals Arsenal . On 23 August , he scored his first goal of the campaign in a 2 – 3 win at West Bromwich Albion , which was Chelsea 's first victory of the campaign , set up by international teammate Pedro . He scored his first Champions League goal for the team on 16 September , a volley from a Cesc Fàbregas ball in a 4 – 0 win over Maccabi Tel Aviv . 
 Three days later , Costa was involved in controversy in a 2 – 0 home win over Arsenal ; he repeatedly slapped Laurent Koscielny and chest @-@ bumped him to the ground , and then confronted Gabriel , who allegedly tried to kick him and was sent off , though footage from ESPN Brazil later showed that little to no contact actually took place . He escaped any punishment at the time . His conduct was deemed " disgusting " by visiting manager Arsène Wenger , and teammate Kurt Zouma initially reacted by saying " Diego likes to cheat a lot , " but later clarified that he meant that " Diego is a player who puts pressure on his opponents . " As a consequence , on 21 September , he was charged with violent conduct by The Football Association ( FA ) , and the following day he was given a three @-@ match suspension . Gabriel 's red card was also rescinded , although he was given a 1 @-@ match ban and £ 10 @,@ 000 fine for improper conduct after failing to leave the pitch immediately . After this incident , the Daily Express wrote that Costa was " named as [ the ] Premier League 's dirtiest player . " 
 Costa returned from the ban on 17 October , when he scored and forced an Alan Hutton own goal in a 2 – 0 home win over Aston Villa . After a 1 – 0 defeat at Stoke City on 7 November , a Britannia Stadium steward made an allegation of assault against Costa , which was resolved without further action . Also that month , Costa was again involved in a skirmish with Liverpool 's Martin Škrtel , where he appeared to dig his boot into the Slovak defender 's chest . , but escaped punishment by the FA . On 29 November , Costa was an unused substitute in a match against Tottenham and threw his bib on the floor when Ruben Loftus @-@ Cheek was sent on at his expense . Mourinho told the media that " For me his behaviour is normal . A top player on the bench will not be happy " . 
 Costa , Oscar and Fàbregas were targeted by Chelsea supporters as the players whose poor form led to the dismissal of popular manager Mourinho in December 2015 . He scored twice in the first game under interim replacement Guus Hiddink , a 2 – 2 home draw against Watford . Costa , who played in a protective mask after breaking his nose in training , improved his form under the Dutchman , scoring seven times in his first eight games under the new management . 
 On 12 March 2016 , Costa received his first red card in a Chelsea shirt near the end their 2 – 0 FA Cup quarter @-@ final defeat to Everton for confronting opponent Gareth Barry . Footage appeared to show Costa biting Barry during that confrontation after clashing heads . Earlier in the match , Costa appeared to spit in the direction of the referee after he was yellow carded for a clash with Barry . Later , both Costa and Barry denied that the bite occurred . Costa 's two @-@ match ban was extended to three , and he was fined £ 20 @,@ 000 . On 2 May , as Chelsea drew 2 – 2 against Tottenham to deny them the title , Costa was gouged in the eyes by Mousa Dembélé during a mass brawl ; the Belgian received a retrospective six @-@ match ban . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 On 5 March 2013 , Costa was called up by Brazilian national team coach Luiz Felipe Scolari for friendlies with Italy in Geneva and Russia in London , both taking place late in that month . He made his debut in the first match on 21 March , replacing Fred midway through the second half of the 2 – 2 draw . Four days later at Stamford Bridge , he replaced Kaká for the last 12 minutes of a 1 – 1 draw with Russia . 
 = = = Request to change teams = = = 
 In September 2013 , the Royal Spanish Football Federation made an official request to FIFA for permission to call up Costa for the Spanish national team . He had been granted Spanish nationality in July . FIFA regulations currently permit players with more than one nationality to represent a second country if , like Costa , he had only represented his first country in friendly matches . 
 On 29 October 2013 , Costa declared that he wished to play international football for Spain , sending a letter to the Brazilian Football Confederation ( CBF ) . Following the news , Scolari commented , " A Brazilian player who refuses to wear the shirt of the Brazilian national team and compete in a World Cup in your country is automatically withdrawn . He is turning his back on a dream of millions , to represent our national team , the five @-@ time champions in a World Cup in Brazil . " 
 The CBF judicial director , Carlos Eugênio Lopes , said : 
 " It 's obvious that the reason he made that choice was financial . The chairman ( of the CBF , José Maria Marin ) authorised me to open a legal action at the Justice Ministry requesting that he loses his Brazilian citizenship , which Diego Costa has rejected ... The chairman told me that Costa has proved he 's not fit to be part of the Scolari family , that he would contaminate the family because he 's not committed to Brazil , but to Spain . He rejected his Brazilian citizenship . Marin has asked me to study the situation deeply in order to keep him from ever playing for Spain . He told me that , from now on , Costa is ' persona non grata ' at the national team and that the players themselves wouldn 't welcome him because of that episode " . 
 = = = Spain = = = 
 On 28 February 2014 , Spain manager Vicente del Bosque included Costa in the squad for a friendly against Italy , but he was an unused substitute . He finally made his début on 5 March , playing the full 90 minutes at his club ground the Vicente Calderón Stadium as the hosts won 1 – 0 . 
 Costa was named in Spain 's 30 @-@ man provisional squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup , as well as the final list which was named on 31 May . He returned from the injury which had ended his club season by starting in a warm @-@ up game against El Salvador , winning a penalty in a 2 – 0 victory . In the first match of the tournament , against the Netherlands , he again won a penalty , conceded by Stefan de <unk> and converted by Xabi Alonso for a 1 – 0 lead but in an eventual 1 – 5 defeat ; he was booed by Brazilian fans during the match , to which he reacted by saying " I have confirmed that Spain is my country and the Spanish people are behind me , the criticism of my decision does not affect me " . Costa then started in a 0 – 2 loss to Chile making little impact as he was substituted for Fernando Torres for the second consecutive match , and Spain were eliminated . He was an unused substitute in the team 's third match , a 3 – 0 defeat of Australia . 
 Costa scored his first goal for Spain with the third in a 4 – 0 UEFA Euro 2016 qualifying win away to Luxembourg on 12 October 2014 . He did not feature again for Spain until 5 September 2015 , when he was fouled by Slovakia goalkeeper <unk> <unk> for a penalty , which Andrés Iniesta converted for a 2 – 0 qualifying win at the Estadio Carlos <unk> in Oviedo . He was booed when he was substituted for Paco <unk> later in the match . Del Bosque defended Costa from criticism , saying that he performed well against the Slovak defence . However , he was not included in the final squad for the tournament . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Friends and family recalled how Costa 's style of play changed little over time , with his father stating how as a child , Costa would be furious whenever his team lost . Atlético scout Javier Hernández , on watching 17 @-@ year @-@ old Costa play for Penafiel , was impressed by the young forward 's determination and power , although found it evident that he was not observing a healthy lifestyle . Costa 's Penafiel manager Rui Bento , who was at Sporting CP when Cristiano Ronaldo broke into the team , rated Costa in the same calibre as the Portuguese winger . According to Atlético Director Jesús García Pitarch , Costa ranks as one of the best signings of his career , alongside Mohamed Sissoko , Miranda and Ricardo Oliveira . 
 While on loan at Celta , Costa drew comparisons to their former Egyptian striker Mido , who was also known for his temper . During his spell at Albacete , Costa was nicknamed after bullfighter <unk> Romero and the Tasmanian devil . His manager Juan Ignacio Martínez conceded that Costa played as a model professional for 89 minutes per match , with only one minute per match being his downfall . Costa refers to José Luis <unk> as his greatest manager because of his <unk> " tough love , " respecting his talents while keeping strict discipline , once sending Costa to work in a vineyard as a punishment . 
 Earlier in his Atlético Madrid career , Costa 's physical play was used in support of Radamel Falcao , thus ensuring a lower goalscoring rate . After Falcao was sold in 2013 , the attack was restructured around Costa by manager Diego Simeone . Simeone , who like Costa was known for his competitiveness and aggression , found ways to enhance his discipline while retaining his determination . 
 Ahead of his competitive debut for Chelsea in August 2014 , BBC Sport pundit Robbie Savage described Costa as " the missing piece in the jigsaw " for the " clear favourites " who " could end up winning the title by five or six points . " He explained that Chelsea 's defence was already the strongest in the league , but a poorer rate of shot @-@ to @-@ goal conversion had cost them the title . He praised Costa 's stature and physical style of play which " suits the Premier League down to the ground " in the same role that Didier Drogba previously played at Chelsea , an opinion also voiced by the league 's top scorer of all time , Alan Shearer . Costa has also been attributed with a greater ability to keep possession of the ball than any Chelsea striker since Drogba first left the club in 2012 . 
 = = = Controversies = = = 
 Costa has been the source of much controversy in his career due to confrontations with opponents , and has received multiple violent conduct charges from the English Football Association . Opposing managers have also opined that Costa himself intends to provoke his opponents . Danny Murphy of Match of the Day has stated that Costa is targeted by players who " wind him up , " but he " remains calm , " and is justified to taunt opponents who taunt him . Pat Nevin , a former Chelsea winger , believes that Costa 's style of play is likely to cause himself " a few injuries . " In August 2014 , he was criticised by Everton manager Roberto Martínez for taunting Everton 's Séamus Coleman following his own goal , and stated Costa needed " to understand the ethics " of the Premier League . In October 2014 , he clashed with Slovakia 's Martin Škrtel in a Euro 2016 qualifier . 
 In January 2015 , following two stamp incidents involving Costa and Liverpool players for which Costa received a three @-@ match ban by the FA , Liverpool manager Brendan Rodgers stated that he thought Costa had fouled his players when " he could easily have hurdled over the player " and " there ’ s no need to do it . " Costa described his style of play as " strong but noble " , and refuted allegations that he deliberately aims to injure opponents . 
 In late 2015 , Costa was the subject of scrutiny for his comparatively poor start to his second season at Chelsea and his low scoring rate for Spain . Daily Mail writer Adam <unk> credited this to consistent injuries and transfer speculation , concluding that , " The whole perception of the 26 @-@ year @-@ old has switched in a matter of months from appreciation at his deadly abilities in front of goal to derision at the fighting , profligacy and now diving that has crept into his game . " French newspaper L 'Equipe named Costa as the most hated footballer in December 2015 , based on his provocative and violent behaviour . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 7 May 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of match played 13 November 2015 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results show Spain 's goal tally first 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Atlético Madrid 
 La Liga : 2013 – 14 
 UEFA Super Cup : 2010 , 2012 
 Copa del Rey : 2012 – 13 
 UEFA Champions League : Runner @-@ up 2013 – 14 
 Supercopa de España : Runner @-@ up 2013 
 Chelsea 
 League Cup : 2014 – 15 
 Premier League : 2014 – 15 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Copa del Rey : Top scorer 2012 – 13 
 La Liga Player of the Month : September 2013 
 La Liga Team of the Season : 2013 – 14 
 Trofeo EFE : 2013 – 14 
 UEFA Champions League Team of the Season : 2013 – 14 
 Premier League Player of the Month : August 2014 
 PFA Team of the Year : 2014 – 15 
 = Red Barn Murder = 
 The Red Barn Murder was a notorious murder committed in Polstead , Suffolk , England , in 1827 . A young woman , Maria Marten , was shot dead by her lover , William Corder . The two had arranged to meet at the Red Barn , a local landmark , before eloping to Ipswich . Maria was never heard from again . Corder fled the scene and , although he sent Marten 's family letters claiming she was in good health , her body was later discovered buried in the barn after her stepmother spoke of having dreamt about the murder . 
 Corder was tracked down in London , where he had married and started a new life . He was brought back to Suffolk , and after a well @-@ publicised trial , found guilty of murder . He was hanged in Bury St Edmunds in 1828 ; a huge crowd witnessed Corder 's execution . The story provoked numerous articles in the newspapers , and songs and plays . The village where the crime had taken place became a tourist attraction and the barn was stripped by souvenir hunters . The plays and ballads remained popular throughout the next century and continue to be performed today . 
 = = Murder = = 
 Maria Marten ( born 24 July 1801 ) was the daughter of Thomas Marten , a <unk> from Polstead , Suffolk . In March 1826 , when she was 24 , she formed a relationship with the 22 @-@ year @-@ old William Corder ( born 1803 ) . Marten was an attractive woman and relationships with men from the neighbourhood had already resulted in two children . One , the child of William 's older brother Thomas , died as an infant , but the other , Thomas Henry , was still alive at the time Marten met Corder . Although Thomas Henry 's father wanted nothing more to do with Marten after the birth , he occasionally sent money to provide for the child . 
 William Corder was the son of a local farmer , and had a reputation as something of a fraudster and a ladies ' man . He was known as " <unk> " at school because of his sly manner . He had fraudulently sold his father 's pigs , and , although his father had settled the matter without involving the law , Corder had not changed his behaviour . He later obtained money by passing a forged cheque for £ 93 and he had helped a local thief , Samuel " Beauty " Smith , steal a pig from a neighbouring village . When Smith was questioned by the local constable over the theft , he made a prophetic statement concerning Corder : " I 'll be damned if he will not be hung some of these days " . Corder had been sent to London in disgrace after his fraudulent sale of the pigs , but he was recalled to Polstead when his brother Thomas drowned attempting to cross a frozen pond . His father and three brothers all died within 18 months of each other and only William remained to run the farm with his mother . 
 Although Corder wished to keep his relationship with Marten secret , she gave birth to their child in 1827 , at the age of 25 , and was apparently keen that she and Corder should marry . The child died ( later reports suggested that it may have been murdered ) , but Corder apparently still intended to marry Marten . That summer , in the presence of her stepmother , Ann Marten , he suggested that she meet him at the Red Barn , from where he proposed that they elope to Ipswich . Corder claimed that he had heard rumours that the parish officers were going to prosecute Maria for having bastard children . He initially suggested they elope on the Wednesday evening , but later decided to delay until the Thursday evening . On Thursday he was again delayed : his brother falling ill is mentioned as the reason in some sources , although most claim all his brothers were dead by this time . The next day , Friday , 18 May 1827 , he appeared at the Martens ' cottage during the day , and according to Ann Marten , told Maria that they must leave at once , as he had heard that the local constable had obtained a warrant to prosecute her ( no warrant had been obtained , but it is not known if Corder was lying or was mistaken ) . Maria was worried that she could not leave in broad daylight , but Corder told her she should dress in men 's clothing so as to avert suspicion , and he would carry her things to the barn where she could meet him and change before they continued on to Ipswich . 
 Shortly after Corder left the house , Maria set out to meet him at the Red Barn , which was situated on Barnfield Hill , about half a mile from the Martens ' cottage . This was the last time she was seen alive . Corder also disappeared , but later turned up and claimed that Marten was in Ipswich , Great Yarmouth , or some other place nearby , and that he could not yet bring her back as his wife for fear of provoking the anger of his friends and relatives . The pressure on Corder to produce his wife eventually forced him to leave the area . He wrote letters to Marten 's family claiming they were married and living on the Isle of Wight , and gave various excuses for her lack of communication : she was unwell , had hurt her hand , or that the letter must have been lost . 
 Suspicion continued to grow , and Maria 's stepmother began talking of dreams that Maria had been murdered and buried in the Red Barn . On 19 April 1828 , she persuaded her husband to go to the Red Barn and dig in one of the grain storage bins . He quickly uncovered the remains of his daughter buried in a sack . She was badly decomposed , but still identifiable . An inquest was carried out at the Cock Inn ( which still stands today ) at Polstead , where Maria was formally identified by her sister Ann from some physical characteristics : her hair and some clothing were recognizable and a tooth she was known to be missing was also missing from the jawbone of the corpse . Evidence was uncovered to implicate Corder in the crime : his green handkerchief was discovered around the body 's neck . 
 = = Capture = = 
 Corder was easily discovered ; Mr Ayres , the constable in Polstead , was able to obtain his old address from a friend , and with the assistance of James Lea , an officer of the London police force who would later lead the investigation into " Spring @-@ heeled Jack " , he tracked Corder to a ladies ' boarding house , <unk> Grove House , in Brentford . Corder was running the boarding house with his new wife , Mary Moore , whom he had met through a newspaper advertisement that he had placed in The Times ( which had received more than 100 replies ) . Flanders says he had placed advertisements in the Morning Herald and The Sunday Times detailing the text of this advertisement . He received more than 40 replies from the Morning Herald and 53 from The Sunday Times that he never picked up . These letters were subsequently published by George Foster in 1828 . 
 Lea managed to gain entry under the pretext that he wished to board his daughter there , and surprised Corder in the parlour . Thomas Hardy noted the Dorset County Chronicle 's report of his capture : 
 … in parlour with 4 ladies at breakfast , in dressing gown & had a watch before him by which he was ' <unk> ' the boiling of some eggs . 
 Lea took him to one side and informed him of the charges ; Corder denied all knowledge of both Maria and the crime . A search of the house uncovered a pair of pistols supposedly bought on the day of the murder ; some letters from a Mr Gardener , which may have contained warnings about the discovery of the crime ; and a passport from the French ambassador , evidence which suggested Corder may have been preparing to flee . 
 = = Trial = = 
 Corder was taken back to Suffolk where he was tried at Shire Hall , Bury St Edmunds . The trial started on 7 August 1828 , having been put back several days because of the interest the case had generated . The hotels in Bury St Edmunds began to fill up from as early as 21 July and , because of the large numbers that wanted to view the trial , admittance to the court was by ticket only . Despite this the judge and court officials still had to push their way bodily through the crowds that had gathered around the door to gain entry to the court room . 
 The judge , Chief Baron Alexander , was unhappy with the coverage given to the case by the press " to the manifest detriment of the prisoner at the bar " . The Times , nevertheless , congratulated the public for showing good sense in aligning themselves against Corder . 
 Corder entered a plea of not guilty . The exact cause of death could not be established . It was thought that a sharp instrument , possibly Corder 's short sword , had been plunged into Marten 's eye socket , but this wound could also have been caused by her father 's spade when he was exhuming the body . <unk> could not be ruled out as Corder 's handkerchief had been discovered around her neck , and , to add to the confusion , the wounds to her body suggested she had been shot . The indictment charged Corder with " … murdering Maria Marten , by feloniously and wilfully shooting her with a pistol through the body , and likewise stabbing her with a dagger . " To avoid any chance of a mistrial , he was indicted on nine charges , including one of forgery . 
 Ann Marten was called to give evidence of the events of the day of Maria 's disappearance and her later dreams . Thomas Marten then told the court how he had dug up his daughter , and George Marten , Maria 's 10 @-@ year @-@ old brother , revealed that he had seen Corder with a loaded pistol before the alleged murder and later had seen him walking from the barn with a pickaxe . Lea gave evidence concerning Corder 's arrest and the objects found during the search of his house . The prosecution suggested that Corder had never wanted to marry Maria , but that her knowledge of some of his criminal dealings had given her a hold over him , and that his theft previously of the money sent by her child 's father had been a source of tension between them . 
 Corder then gave his own version of the events . He admitted to being in the barn with Maria , but said he had left after they argued . He claimed that , while he was walking away , he heard a pistol shot and , running back to the barn , found Maria dead with one of his pistols beside her . He pleaded with the jury to give him the benefit of the doubt , but after they retired , it took them only 35 minutes to return with a guilty verdict . Baron Alexander sentenced him to hang and afterwards be dissected : 
 That you be taken back to the prison from whence you came , and that you be taken from thence , on Monday next , to a place of Execution , and that you there be hanged by the Neck until you are Dead ; and that your body shall afterwards be dissected and <unk> ; and may the Lord God Almighty , of his infinite goodness , have mercy on your soul ! 
 Corder spent the next three days in prison agonising over whether to confess to the crime and make a clean breast of his sins before God . After several meetings with the prison chaplain , entreaties from his wife , and pleas from both his warder and John Orridge , the governor of the prison , he finally confessed . He strongly denied stabbing Maria , claiming instead he had accidentally shot her in the eye after they argued while she was changing out of her disguise . 
 = = Execution and dissection = = 
 On 11 August 1828 , Corder was taken to the gallows in Bury St Edmunds , apparently too weak to stand without support . He was hanged shortly before noon in front of a huge crowd ; one newspaper claimed there were 7 @,@ 000 spectators , another as many as 20 @,@ 000 . At the prompting of the prison governor , just before the hood was drawn over his head , he said : 
 I am guilty ; my sentence is just ; I deserve my fate ; and , may God have mercy on my soul . 
 After an hour , his body was cut down by John Foxton , the hangman , who , according to his rights , claimed Corder 's trousers and stockings . The body was taken back to the courtroom at Shire Hall , where it was slit open along the abdomen to expose the muscles . The crowds were allowed to file past until six o 'clock when the doors were shut . According to the Norwich and Bury Post , over 5 @,@ 000 people queued to see the body . 
 The following day , the dissection and post @-@ mortem were carried out in front of an audience of students from Cambridge University and physicians . A battery was attached to Corder 's limbs to demonstrate the contraction of the muscles , the sternum was opened and the internal organs examined . There was some discussion as to whether the cause of death was suffocation ; but , since it was reported that Corder 's chest was seen to rise and fall for several minutes after he had dropped , it was thought probable that pressure on the spinal cord had killed him . Reports circulated around Bury St Edmunds that a " galvanic battery " had been brought from Cambridge , and it is likely that at this point the group experimented with galvanism on the body . Since the skeleton was to be reassembled after the dissection , it was not possible to examine the brain , so instead the surgeons contented themselves with a <unk> examination of the skull . 
 Corder 's skull was asserted to be profoundly developed in the areas of " secretiveness , acquisitiveness , destructiveness , <unk> , and <unk> " with little evidence of " benevolence or veneration " . The bust of Corder held by Moyse 's Hall Museum in Bury St Edmunds is an original made by Child of Bungay , as a tool for the study of Corder 's phrenology . The skeleton was reassembled , exhibited , and used as a teaching aid in the West Suffolk Hospital . 
 Several copies of his death mask were made and a replica of one is still held at Moyse 's Hall Museum . Artefacts from the trial , some of which were in Corder 's possession , are also held at the museum . Another replica death mask is kept in the dungeons of Norwich Castle . Corder 's skin was tanned by the surgeon George Creed , and used to bind an account of the murder . 
 Corder 's skeleton was put on display in the Hunterian Museum in the Royal College of Surgeons of England , where it hung beside that of Jonathan Wild . In 2004 , Corder 's bones were removed from display and cremated . 
 = = Rumours = = 
 After the trial , doubts were raised about both the story of the stepmother 's dreams and the fate of Maria and William 's child . The stepmother was only a year older than Maria , and it was suggested that she and Corder had been having an affair , and the two had planned the murder to dispose of Maria so that it could continue without hindrance . Since her dreams had started only a few days after Corder married Moore , it was suggested that jealousy was the motive for revealing the body 's resting place and that the dreams were a simple subterfuge . 
 Further rumours circulated about the death of Corder and Marten 's child . Both claimed that they had taken their dead child to be buried in Sudbury , but no records of this could be discovered and no trace of the burial site of the child was ever found . In his written confession , Corder admitted that on the day of the murder he and Marten had argued over the possibility of the burial site being discovered . 
 Donald McCormick wrote The Red Barn Mystery ( 1967 ) which brought out a connection between Corder and the forger and poisoner Thomas Griffiths Wainewright when Corder was in London , and that an actress Caroline Palmer , who was appearing frequently in the melodrama based on the case and researching the murder , concluded that Corder may have not killed Maria and that a local gypsy woman might have been the killer . However , McCormick 's research on other police- and crime @-@ related stories has been brought into question and this information has not been generally accepted . 
 = = Popular interest = = 
 The case had all the elements to ignite a fervent popular interest : the wicked squire and the poor girl , the iconic murder scene , the supernatural element of the stepmother 's prophetic dreams , the detective work by Ayres and Lea ( who later became the detective Pharos Lee in stage versions of the events ) and Corder 's new life which was the result of a lonely hearts advertisement . As a consequence , the case created its own small industry . 
 Plays were being performed while Corder was still awaiting trial and , after the execution , an anonymous author published a melodramatic version of the murder — a precursor of the Newgate novels — which quickly became a best @-@ seller . Along with the story of Jack Sheppard and other highwaymen , thieves and murderers , the Red Barn Murder was a popular subject for penny <unk> , cheap plays performed for the entertainment of the lower classes in the gin @-@ soaked atmosphere of the back rooms of public houses . After the execution , James Catnach managed to sell over a million broadsides ( sensationalist single sheet newspapers ) . Catnach 's sheets gave details of Corder 's confession and the execution , and included a sentimental ballad supposedly penned by Corder himself , but more likely to have been the work of Catnach or somebody in his employ . It was one of at least five ballads about the crime that appeared directly following the execution . 
 Owing to the excitement around the trial and the public demand for entertainments based on the murder , many different versions of the events were set down and distributed , making it hard for modern readers to discern fact from melodramatic embellishment . Good records of the trial exist from the official records , and the best record of the events surrounding the case is generally considered to be that of James Curtis , a journalist who spent time with Corder and two weeks in Polstead interviewing those concerned . Curtis was apparently so connected with the case that , when asked to produce a picture of the accused man , an artist for one of the newspapers drew a likeness of him rather than Corder . 
 Pieces of the rope which was used to hang Corder sold for a guinea each . Part of Corder 's scalp with an ear still attached was displayed in a shop in Oxford Street . A lock of Maria 's hair sold for two guineas . Polstead became a tourist venue with visitors travelling from as far afield as Ireland ; Curtis estimated that 200 @,@ 000 people visited Polstead in 1828 alone . The Red Barn and the Martens ' cottage excited particular interest . The barn was stripped for souvenirs , down to the planks being removed from the sides , broken up and sold as toothpicks . It was planned to be demolished after the trial , but it was left standing and eventually burnt down in 1842 . Even Maria 's gravestone in the churchyard of St Mary 's , Polstead , was eventually chipped away to nothing by souvenir hunters ; only a sign on the shed now marks the approximate place where it stood , although her name is given to Marten 's Lane in the village . Pottery models and sketches were sold and songs composed , including one quoted in the Vaughan Williams opera Hugh the Drover and Five Variants of Dives and Lazarus . 
 Corder 's skeleton was put on display in a glass case in the West Suffolk Hospital , and apparently rigged with a mechanism that made its arm point to the collection box when approached . Eventually , the skull was replaced by Dr John Kilner , who wanted to add Corder 's skull to his extensive collection of Red Barn memorabilia . After a series of unfortunate events , Kilner became convinced the skull was cursed and handed it on to his friend Hopkins . Further disasters plagued both men and they finally paid for the skull to be given a Christian burial in an attempt to lift the supposed curse . 
 Interest in the case did not quickly fade . Maria Marten ; or The Murder in the Red Barn , which existed in various anonymous versions , was a sensational hit throughout the mid 19th century and may have been the most performed play of this time ; Victorian fairground <unk> were forced to add extra apertures to their viewers when exhibiting their shows of the murder to cope with the demand . The plays of the Victorian era tended to portray Corder as a cold @-@ blooded monster and Maria as the innocent he preyed upon ; her reputation and her children by other fathers were airbrushed out , and Corder was made into an older man . Charles Dickens published an account of the murder in his magazine All The Year Round after initially rejecting it because he felt the story to be too well known and the account of the stepmother 's dreams rather far @-@ fetched . 
 Although diminished , the fascination continued into the 20th century with five film versions , including the 1935 Maria Marten or Murder in the Red Barn , starring Tod Slaughter , which was only released in the US after some scenes were cut , and a 1980 BBC drama , Maria Marten , with Pippa Guard in the title role . A fictionalised account of the murder was produced in 1953 for the CBS radio series Crime Classics . In 1991 , a melodramatic stage version , with some political and folk @-@ tale elements , was written by Christopher Bond . 
 Original dialogue as scripted , was taken from the Victorian melodrama The Murder in the Red Barn and used in the first episode of The Wireless Theatre Company 's The Legend Of <unk> 'd Jack , and was performed by Matthew Woodcock and Neil Frost . It was released in late 2013 . 
 Songs were issued on broadside ballads and subsequently versions were collected by various early folk song collectors including Ralph Vaughan Williams and Cecil Sharp . The Full English archive includes these among the eight versions they record which also includes a broadside ballad from the <unk> collection . The Voice of the People volume 3 : O 'er his grave the grass grew green - Tragic Ballads has a version from an Oxfordshire singer Freda Palmer recorded in 1972 . 
 The crime has inspired a number of contemporary musicians . No Roses by the Albion Country Band , released in 1971 , included the traditional song " Murder of Maria Marten " . More recently , Kathryn Roberts and Sean Lakeman 's " The Red Barn " on the 2004 album 2 has referred to the murder . A song " Maria Marten " is included on the 2006 folk album White Swans Black Ravens by Daniel <unk> and Andrew Guy . In December 2011 , the song " Red Barn " was released by Essex folk group The Owl Service . Tom Waits recorded an original song , " Murder in the Red Barn " for his 1992 album Bone Machine . The lyrics make no direct reference to the events of the Red Barn Murder , but critical writings about Waits have tended to assume that the song was , at least , inspired by them . 
 In 2013 the murder featured in the second episode of the BBC One series A Very British Murder : A National Obsession , presented by Lucy Worsley . An accompanying book was also published . 
 In 2015 , Peter Maggs published the book Murder in the Red Barn , which suggested that Donald McCormick had manufactured evidence in his 1967 book on the case , and that a number of subsequent authors had repeated his spurious claims . Credible explanations were offered for Ann Marten 's dreams and Corder 's denial that he stabbed Maria . 
 = Jena Six = 
 The Jena Six were six black teenagers in Jena , Louisiana convicted in the 2006 beating of Justin Barker , a white student at the local Jena High School , which they also attended . Barker was injured on December 4 , 2006 by the members of the Jena Six , and received treatment at an emergency room . While the case was pending , it was often cited by some media commentators as an example of racial injustice in the United States . Some commentators believed that the defendants had been charged initially with too @-@ serious offenses and had been treated unfairly . 
 A number of events had taken place in and around Jena in the months before the Barker assault , which the media have associated with an alleged escalation of local racial tensions . These events included the hanging of rope nooses from a tree in the high school courtyard , two violent confrontations between white and black youths , and the destruction by fire of the main building of Jena High School . Extensive news coverage related to the Jena Six often reported these events as linked . Federal and parish attorneys concluded from their investigations that assessment was inaccurate for some of the events ; for instance , the burning of the high school was an attempt to destroy grade records . 
 Six students ( Robert Bailey , then aged 17 ; Mychal Bell , then 16 ; Carwin Jones , then 18 ; Bryant Purvis , then 17 ; Jesse Ray Beard , then 14 ; and Theo Shaw , then 17 ) were arrested in the assault of Barker . Mychal Bell was initially convicted as an adult of aggravated battery and conspiracy to commit aggravated battery . His convictions were overturned on the grounds that he should have been tried as a juvenile . Before a retrial in juvenile court , Bell pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of simple battery . The other five defendants later pleaded " no contest " to the same offense , and were convicted . 
 The Jena Six case sparked protests by persons who considered the arrests and subsequent charges , initially attempted second @-@ degree murder ( though later reduced ) , as excessive and racially discriminatory . The protesters asserted that white Jena youths involved in similar incidents were treated more leniently . On September 20 , 2007 , between 15 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 protesters marched on Jena in what was described as the " largest civil rights demonstration in years " . Related protests were held in other US cities on the same day . Subsequent reactions included songs alluding to the Jena Six , numerous editorials and opinion columns , and congressional hearings . 
 = = Background to the assault = = 
 At Jena High School , about 10 % of students are black and roughly 90 % are white , reflecting the population of the town of Jena , which has about 3 @,@ 000 people . Some early reporting indicated that students of different races seldom sat together , for instance in the cafeteria , although this has been disputed . According to early reports of the school environment , black students when outside typically sat on bleachers near the auditorium , while white students sat under a large tree in the center of the school courtyard , referred to as the " white tree " or " prep tree " . According to some of the school 's teachers and administrators , the tree in question was not a " white tree , " and students of all races had sat under it at one time or another . 
 At a school assembly held on August 31 , 2006 , a black male freshman asked the principal whether he could sit under the tree . According to Donald Washington , United States Attorney for the Western District of Louisiana , the principal said the question was posed in a " jocular fashion " . The principal told the students they could " sit wherever they wanted " . According to some reports , the freshman and his friends sat under the tree . 
 = = = Noose hanging = = = 
 The following morning , students and staff discovered rope nooses hanging from the tree ; reports differ as to whether there were two or three nooses . A black teacher described seeing both white and black students " playing with [ the nooses ] , pulling on them , jump @-@ swinging from them , and putting their heads through them " that same day . Craig Franklin , assistant editor of The Jena Times , said the nooses were hung as a prank by three students directed at white members of the school rodeo team . The school 's investigating committee had concluded that " the three young teens had no knowledge that nooses symbolize the terrible legacy of the lynchings of countless blacks in American history . " The names of those who hung the nooses were not publicly disclosed . 
 = = = Repercussions = = = 
 The school disciplinary process that followed is unclear . It was reported that the principal learned that three white students were responsible and recommended expulsion , that the board of education overruled his recommendation , and that school superintendent Roy Breithaupt agreed with the overruling . It was initially reported that the punishment was reduced to three days of in @-@ school suspension . Under the district 's Crisis Management Policy Procedures , the three students were isolated at an alternative school " for about a month " , spent two weeks on in @-@ school suspension , served Saturday detentions , had to attend Discipline Court , were referred to Families in Need of Services , and had to have an evaluation before they were able to return to school . 
 The school superintendent was quoted as saying , " Adolescents play pranks . I don 't think it was a threat against anybody . " Black residents of Jena have said that this comment stoked racial tensions leading to subsequent events . 
 According to US Attorney Donald Washington , the Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) investigators found that the hanging of the nooses " had all the markings of a hate crime " . But , it could not be prosecuted as such since juveniles are rarely prosecuted in the federal system , and this offense did not meet departmental standards for charges to be brought . La Salle Parish District Attorney J. Reed Walters stated that Washington had found no federal statute under which the teens could be prosecuted , just as he had found no applicable state statute . Walters opined : " The people that [ hung the nooses ] should be ashamed of what they unleashed on this town . " 
 The school treated the incident seriously and called police to the school in the days after the noose incident . The principal called an assembly on September 6 , 2006 . The Jena Police Department asked Parish Attorney Walters to attend and speak at the assembly . Already pressed for time due to a case under preparation , Walters felt that the students were not paying proper attention to him . He warned them , " I can be your best friend or your worst enemy . With the stroke of a pen I can make life miserable for you or ruin your life . So I want you to call me before you do something stupid . " Though black students say Walters was looking at them when he made the comments , Walters and school board member Billy Fowler , also present , deny it . Walters said that he was irritated at " two or three girls , white girls , [ who ] were chit @-@ chatting on their cellphones or playing with their cellphones " . 
 = = = School arson , fight , and confrontation = = = 
 On November 30 , 2006 , the main building of the high school was destroyed by arson . Although it would be many months before the perpetrators were known , the news media later widely cited the fire as a racially charged event leading up to the assault on Barker . On December 28 , 2007 , LaSalle Parish Sheriff @-@ elect Scott Franklin announced that an investigation had shown that the fire was set in an effort to destroy grade records in the building and to close the school for a time . Six male suspects ( three juveniles and three adults ) had been arrested , and two more adult males were being sought . They were racially diverse . Franklin indicated that the fire was not racially motivated , and had no connection to the Jena Six . Two of the arson defendants pleaded guilty , and were sentenced to ten years in prison , with restitution ordered in the amount of $ 10 million . 
 On December 1 , 2006 , a private party was held at the Jena Fair Barn . Bailey and four other black youths tried to enter the party at about 11 : 00 p.m. According to U.S. Attorney Washington , they were told by a woman that no one was allowed inside without an invitation . The youths persisted , stating that some friends were already at the party . A white male , who was not a student , moved in front of the woman and a fight ensued . After the fight broke up , the woman told both the white male and the black students to leave the party . Once outside , the black students were involved in another fight with a group of white males who were not students . Justin Sloan , a white male , was charged with battery for his role in the fight and was put on probation . Bailey later said that one of the white males broke a beer bottle over his head , but there are no records of Bailey receiving medical treatment . 
 The following day , an incident occurred at the Gotta Go convenience store , outside Jena in unincorporated LaSalle Parish , between Matt Windham and three black youths , including Bailey . Law enforcement reported that their accounts contradicted each other . Windham alleged that Bailey and his friends chased him , that he ran to get his gun , and that the students wrestled it away from him . According to the black students , as they left the convenience store , they were confronted by Windham with a shotgun . They said they wrestled the gun away from him and fled the scene . Bailey was charged with disturbing the peace , second @-@ degree robbery , and theft of a firearm . 
 = = Attack on Barker = = 
 On December 4 , 2006 , 17 @-@ year @-@ old Justin Barker , a white Jena High School student , was punched , kicked , and stomped on while at school by a group of black students . They first said that he had made a racist joke ; some changed their account and said their actions were in response to the three nooses . Superintendent Breithaupt described the battery as a " premeditated ambush and attack by six students against one . The victim attacked was beaten and kicked into a state of bloody unconsciousness . " Barker was released from a local emergency room after three hours of treatment and observation for a concussion and an eye that had swollen shut . The emergency physician 's record shows that he also had injuries to his face , ears , and hand . He attended his school 's class ring ceremony and dance that evening . He later testified , " I waited 11 years to go to it . I wasn 't going to let that get in my way . " He left the dance early due to pain . During the trial , Barker testified that his face was badly swollen after the attack and that he suffered a loss of vision in one eye for three weeks . He said that he had suffered recurring headaches and forgetfulness since the attack . 
 US Attorney Washington states he does not believe the noose incident and the beatings were related . Walters likewise said that he believes there is no linkage between the noose incident and the beating . " When this case was brought to me and during our investigation and during the trial , there was no such linkage ever suggested . This compact story line has only been suggested after the fact . " Although Washington believes that both the noose hangings and the Barker battery were symptoms of racial tension , he has also said that there was no apparent lingering anger among students at the school after the nooses were found . 
 = = Criminal cases = = 
 Law enforcement arrested six students , eventually dubbed the " Jena Six " , who were accused in the attack on Barker . Five of them ( Robert Bailey , Jr . , then 17 ; Mychal Bell , then 16 ; Carwin Jones , then 18 ; Bryant Purvis , then 17 ; and Theo Shaw , then 17 ) were charged with attempted murder . The sixth student , Jesse Ray Beard ( also known as Jesse Rae Beard ) , was charged as a juvenile . Walters charged Mychal Bell as an adult , although he was only 16 , because of his previous criminal record and because Walters believed Bell initiated the attack . 
 = = = Mychal Bell proceedings = = = 
 District Judge J. P. Mauffray , Jr. presided over Bell 's trial . On the first day of trial , June 26 , 2007 , Walters reduced the charges to aggravated second @-@ degree battery and conspiracy to commit aggravated second @-@ degree battery . The charge of aggravated battery requires the use of a " dangerous weapon " , and Walters argued that the tennis shoes worn by Bell while allegedly kicking Barker were dangerous weapons . A number of witnesses testified that they saw Bell strike Barker , while other witnesses were unsure Bell was involved at all . 
 Before the trial began , public defender Blane Williams had urged Bell to accept a plea bargain . At trial he rested the defense case without calling any witnesses or offering any evidence . The six members of Bell 's jury were all white . The 150 @-@ person jury pool included black citizens , who make up 10 percent of the parish 's population , but none of the 50 potential jurors who showed up was black . Williams did not challenge the composition of the jury pool . 
 The jury found Bell guilty , and he faced the possibility of up to 22 years in prison . The judge scheduled sentencing for September 20 , 2007 . Bell 's new defense attorneys , Louis Scott and Carol Powell @-@ Lexing , requested a new trial on the grounds that Bell should not have been tried as an adult . A request to lower Bell 's $ 90 @,@ 000 bond was denied on August 24 , 2007 , due to his juvenile record . Bell had been put on probation for a battery that occurred December 25 , 2005 . While on probation , he was convicted of another battery charge and two charges of criminal damage to property . One of the battery charges was reportedly for punching a 17 @-@ year @-@ old girl in the face . The media had initially reported that Bell had no prior criminal record . On September 4 , 2007 , Judge Mauffray vacated the conspiracy conviction on the grounds that Bell should have been tried as a juvenile , but he let the battery conviction stand . Bell appealed his conviction , principally on the ground that he had been improperly tried as an adult . On September 14 , 2007 , Louisiana 's Third Circuit Court of Appeals overturned Bell 's battery conviction , agreeing that this remaining charge was not among those for which a juvenile may be tried as an adult . 
 Following the appellate ruling , on September 21 , 2007 , Judge Mauffray denied the request for Bell to be eligible for bail pending possible further appeal . On September 26 , Parish Attorney Walters announced that the prosecution would not appeal the appellate ruling , but would try Bell as a juvenile . Bell was released on $ 45 @,@ 000 bond , subject to electronic monitoring and under the supervision of a probation officer . 
 On October 11 , 2007 , Mauffray found that Bell had violated the terms of his probation for previous convictions . The judge sentenced Bell to 18 months in a juvenile facility on two counts of simple battery and two counts of criminal destruction of property , and Bell was taken into custody . According to Walters , the matter was unrelated to the assault on Barker , and it had not been referred to during the Barker proceedings . The defense filed a motion to dismiss the Barker charges on the ground that retrying Bell would amount to double jeopardy . On November 8 , 2007 , Mauffray denied the motion . 
 Bell 's retrial in the Barker assault was scheduled for December 6 . Three days before the trial began , he pleaded guilty to a reduced charge of battery , and was sentenced to 18 months in a juvenile facility , with credit for time served . He agreed to testify against any of the other assault defendants at trial . All appeals were dropped as part of the plea agreement . 
 = = = Remaining defendants = = = 
 On September 4 , 2007 , charges against Carwin Jones and Theo Shaw were reduced to aggravated second @-@ degree battery and conspiracy , as were those of Robert Bailey , Jr. on September 10 . Bryant Purvis was arraigned on reduced charges of aggravated battery and conspiracy to commit aggravated battery on November 7 , 2007 , and pleaded not guilty . Because Louisiana law considers seventeen @-@ year @-@ olds to be adults for purposes of criminal culpability , the charges for these four were unaffected by the appellate ruling overturning Bell 's conviction . 
 Proceedings were on hold for some time pending resolution of various motions to require Mauffray to recuse himself . On July 31 , 2008 , Mauffray was removed from the cases by Judge Thomas Yeager for making questionable comments about the defendants . The Louisiana Supreme Court assigned Judge Yeager to hear the five remaining cases by order signed August 4 , 2008 . Walters appealed the recusal order , but his appeal was dismissed on March 4 , 2009 , as moot , or no longer relevant , as Mauffray had left the bench at the end of 2008 . 
 On June 26 , 2009 , the remaining five defendants entered pleas of " no contest " to a charge of simple battery . The court found them guilty as charged , and sentenced each to a fine of $ 500 ( waived as regards Shaw due to the time he spent in jail ) , $ 500 to be paid as court costs , restitution to be paid to the Barker family ( with whom the defendants were ordered to have no contact ) , and seven days of unsupervised probation . The defendants ' lawyers read a statement apologizing to the Barker family and to the town . Addressing the rumors that the attack had been provoked by Barker using a racial epithet , they said on behalf of the defendants : 
 To be clear , not one of us heard Justin use any slur or say anything that justified Mychal Bell attacking Justin nor did any of us see Justin do anything that would cause Mychal to react . 
 Yeager , who presided over the plea and sentencing , also ordered the youths to avoid criminal activity , and not to disavow the statement made on their behalf in court . On June 26 , it was announced that the civil case by Barker against the Jena Six members had been settled on undisclosed terms . His civil case against the school board was pending . 
 = = Media coverage = = 
 = = = News coverage = = = 
 Initially , the Jena Six were largely ignored by the United States national media , though covered locally and within Louisiana . Both The Jena Times and The Town Talk ( a regional newspaper published in Alexandria , Louisiana ) covered the story from its inception . A number of African @-@ American bloggers also covered the story before there was mainstream national press coverage . The first piece on the case to be published by an outside source ran on May 9 , 2007 , in Left Turn , a small alternative news magazine . The first mainstream US print media outlet to cover the matter was the Chicago Tribune , whose Southwest Bureau Chief , Howard Witt , wrote a piece covering the story on May 20 . Witt had received a summary of the situation from Alan Bean , a Texas minister who had founded the advocacy group Friends of Justice . The group sent its document to other reporters and bloggers . In it Bean demanded that outside authorities , not those in LaSalle Parish , deal with the case , and that no incarceration of the defendants occur . Britain 's The Observer also featured an article on the case on May 20 . 
 A segment on a BBC program This World followed on May 24 . The case began to receive more extensive national media coverage in July 2007 , with CNN interviewing Jena residents and parents of those involved . Given the racial history of the Deep South , many news reports from Jena evoked the Civil Rights Movement , referred to historic lynching , or Jim Crow . Some sources have pointed out inaccurate reporting by the media . The Associated Press published an article noting the various reporting errors that have been made , including whether the tree was a " white tree " , the number of nooses , and the discipline given to the noose @-@ hanging students . Based on this , MTV posted a retraction for incorrect information that it had reported on the case from other news sources . 
 = = = Columnists and editorials = = = 
 Many major editorial pages and columnists have been sympathetic to the supporters of the Jena Six . They have used the case to discuss broader trends of racism in the US criminal justice system and to call for a renewed civil rights movement . Most editorials were published around the time of the Jena rally . The New York Post , in a September 23 , 2007 , editorial , stated " it 's impossible to examine the case of the so @-@ called Jena Six without concluding that these black teens have been the victims of a miscarriage of justice , with a clearly racial double standard at work . " Byron Williams , writing on the Huffington Post , was one of several to cite the Urban League 's 2005 finding that the average black male convicted of aggravated assault serves 48 months in prison , one @-@ third longer than a comparable white man . The 2005 report also found that a black male who is arrested is three times more likely to go to jail than a white male arrested for the same crime . Citing the same statistics , syndicated columnist Clarence Page wrote that " The best legacy for the Jena March 6 would be a new movement , dedicated this time to the reduction and elimination of unequal justice wherever it appears . I don 't care who leads it , but it shouldn 't be for blacks only . " Writing in the New York Times , Professor Orlando Patterson of Harvard University used the case to highlight the use of the prison system as a means of " controlling young black men " , which is one factor in a broader " crisis in relations between men and women of all classes and , as a result , the catastrophic state of black family life " . 
 Other columnists have argued that inaccuracies in the media coverage unfairly tarnish the town and have led to a national overreaction , part of the tendency in the 24 @-@ hour news cycle . Dallas Morning News columnist Heather MacDonald , while condemning the noose hangings as a " despicable provocation " , said that " the media , the ( race ) advocates and pandering politicians have erupted in an outpouring of seeming joy at the alleged proof that America remains a racist country . " In a column in the Kansas City Star , Jason Whitlock drew attention to what he called factual inaccuracies in reporting of the story . He focused on the piece circulated by Bean to news outlets , " Bean 's story is framed — by his own admission — as an indictment of the criminal justice system and the people in power in Jena and , therefore , the story is unfairly biased . " Craig Franklin , assistant editor of The Jena Times , who says that he is the only writer to have covered this story from its inception , wrote in The Christian Science Monitor , " I have never before witnessed such a disgrace in professional journalism . Myths replaced facts ... the truth about Jena will eventually be known . " 
 = = Public response = = 
 The case provoked reactions that the charges against the Jena Six were disproportionate and racially motivated . Supporters of the Jena Six circulated online petitions , raised money for legal defense , and held a demonstration in Jena on September 20 , 2007 . This event attracted thousands marching in protest . 
 = = = Rallies = = = 
 Rallies in support of the Jena Six were held in Jena on September 20 , 2007 , the date upon which Bell was scheduled for sentencing . An estimated 15 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 demonstrators attended the rally that day , severely overtaxing the facilities of the small town . Protesters took buses from such distant cities as Los Angeles and Washington , DC . Because of the congestion on the roads leading to Jena , many protesters left their vehicles and continued into town on foot . Attendees included civil rights activists Jesse Jackson , Al Sharpton , and Martin Luther King III , and rappers Mos Def and Salt @-@ n @-@ Pepa . Rapper @-@ actor Ice Cube attended and financially supported the rally . Darryl Hunt , an African American who was wrongfully convicted of the rape and murder of a young white newspaper reporter in 1984 , was scheduled as a keynote speaker . The demonstrators were addressed by Darryl Matthews , General President of Alpha Phi Alpha fraternity , who said , " It is sobering to know that in 2007 Martin Luther King 's dream of equal treatment , respect , fairness and opportunity is still not realized . " 
 = = = Artistic tributes = = = 
 Several songs have been produced in response to the Jena Six case . John Mellencamp released a song and video called " Jena " , with lyrics such as " Jena , take your nooses down " which gained considerable media attention , and which Mellencamp described as a " condemnation of racism . " The video juxtaposes images of Jena , the high school , and the tree with video from the 1960s , including civil rights marchers and police beatings . Video of John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King speaking and an image of a black man in shackles are also included in the video . The song and video led to Jena 's mayor , Murphy R. McMillan , issuing a statement rebutting the accusations he believed were expressed and implied in the video . An episode of the Salt @-@ N @-@ Pepa Show on VH1 was filmed at the Jena rally . <unk> Armah released a song called " Jena 6 " . 
 = = = Other reactions = = = 
 Many online petitions have circulated calling for various actions in response to the Jena Six case . Online advocacy group Color of Change , which had previously advocated for victims of Hurricane Katrina , called for District Attorney Walters to drop all charges and for Governor Kathleen Blanco to investigate his conduct . Color of Change raised more than $ 212 @,@ 000 for the Jena Six legal defense , largely through online donations . While the NAACP provided a link to the fund through its website , initially , the donation link on the NAACP Jena Six support page steered potential donors to the generic NAACP donation page , with no way to designate funds for the Jena Six . Black bloggers objected , and several days later , the link was altered to reach the defense fund . 
 The Southern Poverty Law Center represented Beard , hired local defense counsel to represent Bailey , and helped coordinate the overall defense strategy . 
 In the months following the Jena Six rally , controversy arose about accounting and dispersal of the legal defense funds . Questions about the money were first sparked by photos posted on Robert Bailey 's former MySpace account , which show him with quantities of hundred dollar bills stuffed in his mouth . The controversy expanded when radio host Michael <unk> accused Color of Change of being " shady " with their use of the funds . Color of Change responded to the accusations by posting links to canceled checks on their web site . In his November 10 report , Chicago Tribune correspondent Howard Witt noted that Color of Change was the only national civil rights group to be fully transparent with their use of the funds . But Witt raised broader questions about the funds , which totaled more than half a million dollars . He reported that attorneys for Bell claimed that they have yet to receive any money from him , and that the six families had refused to publicly account for the donations . 
 On September 22 , 2007 , the FBI opened an investigation of a white supremacist website that listed the addresses of five of the Jena Six and the telephone numbers of some of their families " in case anyone wants to deliver justice " . An FBI spokeswoman said the agency believed that the website " essentially called for their lynching " . Civil rights advocate Al Sharpton has said that some of the families have continuously received threatening and harassing phone calls . 
 = = Later developments = = 
 On September 25 , 2007 , Representative John Conyers ( D ) , Chairman of the House Judiciary Committee , announced that he would hold congressional hearings on what he described as " the miscarriages of justice that have occurred in Jena , Louisiana , " with the goal of pressuring the United States Department of Justice into taking action . The hearing took place on October 16 , 2007 ; Washington and Sharpton , among others , testified . Walters was invited to testify but declined . Most Republican members of the committee declined to attend . Representative Sheila Jackson Lee ( D @-@ Texas ) said to Washington and other Justice Department officials , " Shame on you .... As a parent , I 'm on the verge of tears , " and said , " I want to know what you 're going to do to get Mychal Bell out of jail ! " US Attorney Washington responded that the federal government had a limited role to play in the matter . 
 Representative Lee and other members of the Congressional Black Caucus called upon outgoing Louisiana Governor Blanco to pardon the Jena Six on December 19 , 2007 , stating that " we believe Mychal Bell and the Jena 6 have paid a sufficient debt to society for any transgressions they may have committed . " Blanco 's office responded that she cannot grant pardons without a recommendation from the state Pardon Board , and no meeting of that body was scheduled during her remaining term of office . Walters commented that Representative Lee 's " passion for racial equality is admirable , but her grasp of the facts is not . " He indicated that the attack on Barker was not just a schoolyard fight " but rather an unprovoked , unforeseen assault on a young man who had nothing to do with the hanging of the nooses . " Governor Blanco 's term of office ended without any pardons being granted . 
 On July 31 , 2007 , the school had the controversial tree cut down . School Board member Fowler said , " There 's nothing positive about that old tree . It 's all negative . And I 'm serving on the new School Board , and we 're wanting to start fresh on some things . " According to Fowler , the tree would have had to have been cut down to make way for the rebuilding of the school after the fire . Others thought that taking down the tree was not an effective way to address any problems of racism in Jena . " Cutting down that beautiful tree won 't solve the problem at hand , " said <unk> Bailey , Robert Bailey 's mother . " It still happened . " The remains of the building have been cleared , and a bid accepted for the reconstruction . 
 Jones and Purvis attended the BET Hip Hop Awards in Atlanta on October 13 , 2007 , and were invited to present the award for Video of the Year . When the two defendants came out on stage , they were greeted by a standing ovation . Emcee Katt Williams joked , " They don 't look so tough , do they ? " The two members delivered speeches thanking family , friends , the " Hip @-@ Hop Nation " , and those who came to Jena . 
 Justin Barker and his parents filed a civil suit on November 29 , 2007 , against the parents of those accused of beating him , the adult members of the Jena Six ( as of the time of the attack ) , an additional student named Malcolm Shaw , and the LaSalle Parish School Board . Barker 's medical bills from his emergency room visit totaled more than $ 5 @,@ 000 . The lawsuit alleges that the LaSalle Parish School Board inadequately supervised students and failed to maintain discipline . The Barkers also allege that the school board did not implement a plan to " discourage the dangerous activity of threatening and attacking other students while in possession of actual knowledge of said threats and prior attacks while the students are on school grounds " . 
 The case was on hold pending resolution of the criminal cases . When the Barkers ' attorney learned that Jesse Ray Beard was using defense funds ( which might be garnished under a civil suit ) to pay for private school , he decided to push ahead with the case . Following a motion by Bell 's civil attorney to recuse Mauffray in the civil case , proceedings were put on hold again pending appointment of a judge to hear that recusal motion . Mauffray subsequently retired . On March 16 , 2009 , Judge Ronald <unk> was assigned to hear the civil case . On June 26 , 2009 , Judge <unk> approved a settlement of Barker 's claims against the Jena Six , though the claim against the school board remained pending . 
 = = Members ' subsequent activities = = 
 In February 2007 , Jesse Ray Beard was charged , and subsequently convicted and sentenced for simple battery , simple criminal damage to property less than $ 500 , and simple assault . He received a suspended sentence of incarceration , and was placed on house arrest . On July 9 , 2008 , Beard , by then aged 17 , was released from house arrest so that he could attend a summer program and football camp in New York . It was revealed at a hearing on that date that Beard had been recommended for expulsion for thirteen disciplinary actions , but that the recommendation had been overturned . In New York , he stayed with a local attorney and worked as an intern in the attorney 's office , while taking summer courses to prepare him for junior year . He was required to return to Jena by August 11 . On August 6 , attorney Yeager terminated Beard 's probation ( he remains under the conditions of his bail release in the Barker incident ) so he could attend the Canterbury School in Connecticut . Half of the $ 39 @,@ 900 annual tuition was paid for with Jena Six defense fund money . At Canterbury , Beard played on the basketball , baseball , and football teams and graduated in 2010 . Beard attended Hofstra University in New York , where he earned an academic scholarship and played on the lacrosse team . 
 Bryant Purvis , aged 19 , was arrested on February 7 , 2008 , for an assault causing bodily injury on a fellow high school student in Texas , where he now resides . Purvis was placed on probation for a year and required to do community service . He enrolled at Ranger College , a junior college , attending on a basketball scholarship . In 2011 , Purvis transferred to Grambling State University and played basketball there . 
 Corwin Jones was arrested on May 10 , 2008 , at the age of 19 in LaSalle Parish on a charge of misdemeanor simple battery . The Sheriff 's Department alleges that three days earlier , Jones had struck a man from behind as several people , including Jones , came toward the man and his friends , with Jones ' companions carrying baseball bats . Jones denied fault , saying that the incident was caused by a fight the previous day in which Jones says he was not involved , that he had been harassed and intimidated , and " that the incident that day ' struck a nerve and I reacted ' . " Jones had previously been arrested on January 24 , 2008 , on a trespass @-@ related charge . According to his father , Jones received his diploma from Jena High School because he had completed his school work before his arrest . He moved out of Jena and was working in a hotel . 
 On May 10 , Mychal Bell was stopped in Olla , Louisiana , for speeding and not having proper vehicle insurance while on a weekend pass from his sentence . Bell was not supposed to leave Monroe , Louisiana , during the pass . The vehicle was towed due to the lack of insurance . In an interview televised on CNN on August 24 , 2008 , Bell admitted to having struck Barker in 2006 and described Jena as " a real racist town " . On August 27 , 2008 , the Louisiana High School Athletic Association turned down Bell 's request for an extra year of athletic eligibility . Marcus Jones , Bell 's father , blamed Bell 's attorney at the time of the plea agreement for the denial . " If it weren 't for his attorney , Mychal would be able to play football , " Jones said . " They coerced him into taking that plea agreement . If he wouldn 't have taken that plea , he wouldn 't be in the position he 's in now . " 
 After the hearing , Jones allegedly spat in the face of his son 's attorney , Carol Powell @-@ Lexing , and supposedly pushed her to the floor . Jones denied assaulting Powell @-@ Lexing , saying he would never get into a physical fight with a woman . Jones was charged with assault . Despite the alleged assault , Powell @-@ Lexing continued as part of Bell 's defense team . 
 On December 24 , 2008 , Mychal Bell was arrested and charged with shoplifting , resisting arrest , and simple assault . According to police , Bell was caught as he and another male attempted to steal $ 370 worth of clothing from Dillard 's department store . While being arrested , he reportedly resisted a security guard and off @-@ duty police officer . He was released on $ 1 @,@ 300 bond . On December 29 , 2008 , Bell shot himself in the chest with a .22 @-@ caliber pistol in a failed attempt at suicide , telling police that he was tired of all the media attention . Since the hospital in Monroe was unable to stop his internal bleeding , Bell was transferred to a hospital in Shreveport for specialist care . Powell @-@ Lexing denied that Bell had tried to kill himself , saying that the gun went off while Bell was attempting to clean it . On January 15 , 2009 , CNN featured an interview with Bell ; he said that he had obtained a gun out of despair following the shoplifting arrest , first tried to shoot himself in the head , but the gun misfired , and that he then shot himself in the chest . Bell said he had returned to school and still hopes to receive a college football scholarship . As the shoplifting and related charges were Bell 's first as an adult , he was eligible for a diversion program ; the charges were dismissed in early 2010 . Bell enrolled at Southern University in 2009 . In 2011 , Bell played in two games with the Southern Jaguars football team . 
 On May 22 , 2010 , Mychal Bell was arrested and charged with simple battery after an incident at a Jena barber shop . According to the arresting officers , after being read his Miranda rights , Bell told them that he attacked the man for " running his mouth " . Bell said he punched the victim in the face , put him in a headlock and rammed his head into a table . On Dec. 13 , 2014 , according to a tweet , Mychal Bell graduated from Southern University with a bachelor 's degree in education interdisciplinary studies . 
 Robert Bailey attended high school at Shaw High School in Columbus , Georgia , where he was granted an extra year 's eligibility to play football . 
 Theo Shaw was able to attend classes at another high school and have his credits transferred to Jena . He received a Jena High School diploma although he took part in the graduation ceremony at the other school . He is currently attending the University of Washington School of Law , having received the prestigious honor of a full scholarship as a Gates Public Service Law Scholar . 
 = World Fantasy Award = 
 The World Fantasy Awards are a set of awards given each year for the best fantasy fiction published during the previous calendar year . Organized and overseen by the World Fantasy Convention , the awards are given each year at the eponymous annual convention as the central focus of the event . They were first given in 1975 , at the first World Fantasy Convention , and have been awarded annually since . Over the years that the award has been given , the categories presented have changed ; currently World Fantasy Awards are given in five written categories , one category for artists , and four special categories for individuals to honor their general work in the field of fantasy . 
 The awards have been described by book critics such as The Guardian as a " prestigious fantasy prize " , and one of the three most prestigious speculative fiction awards , along with the Hugo and Nebula Awards ( which cover both fantasy and science fiction ) . World Fantasy Award nominees and winners are decided by attendees of the convention and a panel of judges , typically made up of fantasy authors . Winners receive a small trophy ; through the 2015 awards it was a bust of H. P. Lovecraft designed by cartoonist Gahan Wilson . The bust was retired following that year amid complaints about Lovecraft 's history of racism ; no replacement has yet been announced . The 2015 awards were presented at the 41st World Fantasy Convention in Saratoga Springs , New York , on November 8 , 2015 , and the 2016 awards will be presented at the 42nd World Fantasy Convention in Columbus , Ohio , on October 30 , 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 The World Fantasy Awards were established at the first World Fantasy Convention , an annual convention of professionals , collectors , and others interested in the field of fantasy , in 1975 . Winners were presented with a trophy in the form of a bust of an elongated caricature of H. P. Lovecraft designed by cartoonist Gahan Wilson , nicknamed the " Howard " , which matched the theme of the first convention , " The Lovecraft Circle " . As stated by Wilson in First World Fantasy Awards : An Anthology of the Fantastic , " The point of the awards was , is , and hopefully shall be to give a visible , potentially usable , sign of appreciation to writers working in the area of fantastic literature , an area too often distinguished by low financial remuneration and indifference " . 
 At the start of the awards in 1975 , seven categories were presented : Best Novel , Best Short Fiction , Best Collection , Best Artist , Special Award — Professional , Special Award — Non @-@ professional , and Life Achievement . Only a few categories have changed since then , and no changes have been made to the rules . 1978 saw the addition of the Convention Award , a special award given for general contributions to the genre , and the only award not given every year since the beginning . The Short Fiction award was split into Short Story and Novella awards in 1982 , and in 1988 the multi @-@ author anthologies , previously eligible for the Collection award , were split into their own Best Anthology category . No changes have been made since . 
 Winners were presented with the H. P. Lovecraft bust through the 2015 awards ; at that ceremony the presenters announced that future ceremonies will no longer use the trophy . Although controversy had arisen in recent years over Lovecraft 's history of racism , no explicit reason was given for the change and no replacement has been announced . 
 = = Administration = = 
 World Fantasy Award nominees and winners are decided by judges and attendees of the World Fantasy Convention . A ballot is posted in June for attendees of the current and previous two conferences to determine two of the finalists , with the two most @-@ nominated selected , and a panel of five judges adds three or more nominees before voting on the overall winner . The panel of judges is typically made up of fantasy authors , as well as other fantasy professionals and is chosen each year by the World Fantasy Awards Administration , which has the power to break ties if the judges are deadlocked . The awards administration is a subgroup of the World Fantasy Convention Board , which selects sites for upcoming World Fantasy Conventions . Both the board and the judges panel are largely made up of professionals in the field of fantasy . The judges for the 2014 awards , for example , were authors Andy Duncan , <unk> Johnson , Oliver Johnson , and Liz Williams , and editor John <unk> . 
 The nominees are announced in July , and final results are presented at the World Fantasy Convention around the end of October . The Life Achievement and Convention Awards do not list nominees , and instead have the winner announced along with the other categories ' nominees . The Life Achievement winner is decided by the judges panel , while the Convention award winner , not given every year , is selected by the convention organizers . The World Fantasy Convention itself is a multi @-@ day event with several hundred attendees taking place in a different city each year , usually in the United States but sometimes in Canada or the United Kingdom . In addition to the awards ceremony , the conventions include an art show , a dealer 's room , autograph receptions , and numerous panels and discussions . 
 = = Categories = = 
 The World Fantasy Awards are split into ten categories , including both awards for written works and for professionals in the field . Eligibility requirements are loosely defined : works must have been published in the prior calendar year , and professionals must still be living . All types of fantasy works are accepted , regardless of subgenre or style , though whether a given work is considered to be fantasy is left up to the discretion of the nominators and judges . 
 Across all categories , Ellen Datlow has both the most nominations and most wins of any nominee , with ten wins out of 42 nominations , primarily for her anthologies . She is followed by Terri Windling with 9 out of 30 and Stephen Jones with 3 out of 28 , both also mainly for editing anthologies . Jeffrey Ford has the highest number of wins after Datlow and Windling with 6 out of 14 nominations , and is tied for the highest number of fiction awards with Stephen King at four . 
 = = Recognition = = 
 The awards have been described by book critics such as The Guardian as a " prestigious fantasy prize " , and one of the three most prestigious speculative fiction awards , along with the Hugo and Nebula Awards ( which cover both fantasy and science fiction ) . In 2010 multiple winner George R. R. Martin described winning the Hugo , Nebula , and " the prestigious World Fantasy Award " as the " triple crown " . Others have also noted the award 's prestige in the field , such as <unk> Publications and 2014 Best Anthology winner Gardner Dozois . Stephen Jones of the Best New Horror series has said that winning the anthology award for their first volume in 1991 helped " establish the series among readers and some publishers " in multiple countries . Winners such as <unk> <unk> — Best Novel in 2011 — have described the award as " one of my greatest honors as a writer " . Editor and bookseller Rick Klaw in 2007 , however , noted that the consensus at the time " in the bookselling community " was that winning the novel category did not have any effect on sales and did not help keep the book in print , with 57 percent of prior winners out of print , compared to 23 percent of Hugo Award winners from the same time period . 
 Two anthologies have been drawn from the World Fantasy Award winners : First World Fantasy Awards : An Anthology of the Fantastic in 1977 , edited by Gahan Wilson and covering stories from the initial award year , and The World Fantasy Awards : Volume Two in 1980 , edited by Stuart David Schiff and Fritz Leiber . 
 = = Controversies = = 
 = = = Graphic novels = = = 
 At the 1991 awards , graphic novel The Sandman issue # 19 " A Midsummer 's Night Dream " , scripted by Neil Gaiman and illustrated by Charles Vess , won the award for Best Short Story . A common rumor afterwards was that the rules were subsequently changed to prevent another graphic novel from winning . The awards administration later clarified that comics and graphic novels were not intended to be eligible for that category , which did not require a rule change : " Comics are eligible in the Special Award Professional category . We never made a change in the rules . " No person has won or been nominated for the Special Award Professional category for their work on a comic or graphic novel either before or since the controversy . 
 = = = H. P. Lovecraft bust = = = 
 A minor controversy about the trophy occurred in 1984 , when Donald <unk> refused his Life Achievement award as he felt the award bust was a demeaning caricature of Lovecraft , whom he had known personally . <unk> 's rejected trophy was later recycled and given to another award winner . 
 A larger controversy surrounding the bust began in the 2010s , when several authors began to object to using the author H. P. Lovecraft as the symbol of the awards , given his outspoken racism . Winners <unk> and China Miéville noted in 2011 that they disliked being honored by a bust of a man who would have found many of the winners and nominees distasteful because of their race . Several authors and editors argued for the trophy to be changed , including a petition by author Daniel José Older in 2014 , an editorial by The New York Review of Science Fiction editor Kevin J. Maroney arguing that it should be changed " as a courtesy to generations of writers whom the <unk> hopes to honor " , and 2014 Best Novel winner Sofia <unk> 's acceptance speech . 
 In September 2014 , the administrators of the World Fantasy Award announced they were " in discussion " about the future of the award trophy . In November 2015 , at the 2015 awards , they announced that the Lovecraft bust would no longer be used beginning the following year . <unk> Cruz , associate editor of the The Atlantic , defended the decision , stating that " Lovecraft 's removal is about more than just the writer himself ; it 's not an indictment of his entire oeuvre " . Lovecraft scholar S. T. Joshi , however , expressed anger at the decision , and returned his two World Fantasy Awards and urged a boycott of the convention . 
 = Food waste in the United Kingdom = 
 Food waste in the United Kingdom is a subject of environmental , economic and social concern that has received widespread media coverage and been met with varying responses from government . Since 1915 , food waste has been identified as a considerable problem and has been the subject of ongoing media attention , intensifying with the launch of the " Love Food , Hate Waste " campaign in 2007 . Food waste has been discussed in newspaper articles , news reports and television programmes , which have increased awareness of it as a public issue . To tackle waste issues , encompassing food waste , the government @-@ funded " Waste & Resources Action Programme " ( WRAP ) was created in 2000 . 
 A significant proportion of food waste is produced by the domestic household , which , in 2007 , created 6 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 tonnes of food waste . Potatoes , bread slices and apples are respectively the most wasted foods by quantity , while salads are thrown away in the greatest proportion . A majority of wasted food is avoidable , with the rest being divided almost equally by foods which are unavoidable ( e.g. tea bags ) and unavoidable due to preference ( e.g. bread crusts ) or cooking type ( e.g. potato skins ) . 
 Reducing the amount of food waste has been deemed critical if the UK is to meet international targets on climate change , limiting greenhouse gas emissions , and meet obligations under the European Landfill Directive to reduce biodegradable waste going to landfill . Equally great emphasis has been placed on the reduction of food waste , across all developed countries , as a means of ending the global food crisis that leaves millions worldwide starving and impoverished . In the context of the 2007 – 2008 world food price crisis , food waste was discussed at the 34th G8 summit in Hokkaidō , Japan . UK prime minister Gordon Brown said of the issue " We must do more to deal with unnecessary demand , such as by all of us doing more to cut our food waste " . 
 In June 2009 , then Environment Secretary Hilary Benn announced the government 's " War on waste " , a programme aimed at reducing Britain 's food waste . The proposed plans under the scheme included : scrapping best before and limiting sell by labels on food , creating new food packaging sizes , constructing more " on @-@ the @-@ go " recycling points and unveiling five flagship anaerobic digestion plants . Two years after its launch , the " Love Food , Hate Waste " campaign was claiming it had already prevented 137 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste and , through the help it had given to over two million households , had made savings of £ 300 million . 
 = = History = = 
 Food waste was identified as a problem in the UK as early as World War I. Combating food waste was one of the initial goals of the Women 's Institutes ( WI ) , set up in 1915 , and remains a subject of their campaigns . Rationing was adopted during World War I , although it was voluntary , from February 1917 ; it was only between December 1917 and February 1918 that rationing began , in stages , to be made compulsory . As well , there is no evidence to suggest that by 1918 fines were imposed on either individuals or businesses for wasting food . Meanwhile , in the USA ( where shortages were hardly comparable ) , legislators considered laws restricting the distribution of food in order to cut waste , breaches of which might be punishable by fines or imprisonment . 
 During World War II , rationing was imposed almost immediately . Restrictions were immediately more stringent than in the Great War as with effect from 8 January 1940 ration books were issued and most foods were subject to ration . By August 1940 , legislation was passed that made the wasting of food a <unk> offence . Posters encouraged kitchen waste to be used for feeding animals , primarily swine but also poultry . 
 Many of the methods suggested by current campaigns to prevent food waste have taken inspiration from those of World War II . Despite this , it remains debatable whether the waste campaigns and rationing , during and post WWII , achieved any long @-@ term change in people 's attitudes towards waste ; WRAP 's report on domestic household waste found older people to waste as much avoidable waste as younger people . Further , as early as 1980 , only twenty five years after all foods were " de @-@ rationed " , a journal article published that year found significant levels of waste at home , in restaurants and in sectors of the food industry . However , the rising amount of food waste could also be attributed to a change of lifestyle , for instance the buying of produce which has a shorter shelf life , which would involuntarily lead to more food being thrown away . 
 By the late 1990s , things had worsened , and the food manufacturing sector was estimated to be generating over 8 million tonnes of food waste annually . A documentary in 1998 revealed tonnes of edible food being discarded at a Tesco store , provoking a renewed response on the issue of food waste . In 2000 , the government created the Waste & Resources Action Programme ( WRAP ) , a government @-@ funded , not @-@ for @-@ profit company that advises on how to reduce waste and use resources efficiently . In 2007 , WRAP launched the " Love Food , Hate Waste " campaign and returned food waste to the forefront of the news and public agenda . Two years later , the " Love Food , Hate Waste " campaign claimed to have prevented 137 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste being sent to landfill and saved £ 300 million . 
 In 2005 , facing " limited information about the amounts and types of food waste produced " , WRAP launched a " major research programme " which would lead to the publishing of " The food we waste report " on 8 May 2008 . Believed at the time to be " the first of its kind in the world " , the report interviewed 2175 householders and collected waste from <unk> of them . 
 Since the developments of 2007 @-@ 8 , food waste has continued to be a subject of attention , discussed in almost every major UK newspaper , often with issues such as climate change and famine in African nations . To reduce the impact of the aforementioned , food waste has been among the topics of discussion at recent International Summits ; food waste was debated during the 34th G8 summit in Hokkaidō , Japan , as part of the discussion on the 2007 – 2008 world food price crisis . 
 In June 2009 , Environment Secretary Hilary Benn announced the " War on waste " , new government plans aimed at reducing Britain 's food waste . Planned is the removal of " best before " labels and the limiting of " sell by " labels on foods . New food packaging sizes are planned to be introduced , coming as EU rules on packaging sizes are lifted and people are increasingly living alone . Five flagship anaerobic digestion plants that will demonstrate " cutting @-@ edge technology " are to be built before the end of March 2011 ; they will together receive a grant of £ 10 million from WRAP 's " Anaerobic Digestion Demonstration Programme " . Liz Goodwin , WRAP Chief Executive Officer , said of the five projects : " These projects are truly ground @-@ breaking . Between them , they demonstrate how anaerobic digestion can help the UK efficiently meet the challenges of reducing carbon emissions and improving sustainable food production . " 
 = = Impact = = 
 Food waste puts a large burden on the finances of each household and local councils in the UK ; wasted food is estimated to cost each British household £ 250 – £ 400 per year , accumulating to £ 15 @,@ 000 – £ 24 @,@ 000 over a lifetime . This comes from the total purchasing cost of the food against what is thrown away uneaten . Additionally , households pay for the collection and disposal of food waste by their local council in the form of council tax . For councils , the cost of food waste comes from its collection and disposal as a part of the waste stream ; this is especially an issue for councils that run separate food waste collections . 
 Food waste is generally considered to have a damaging effect on the environment ; a reduction in food waste is considered critical if the UK is to meet obligations under the European Landfill Directive to reduce biodegradable waste going to landfill and favourable considering international targets on climate change , limiting greenhouse gas emissions . When disposed of in landfill , food waste releases methane , a relatively damaging greenhouse gas , and leachate , a toxin capable of considerable groundwater pollution . The food supply chain accounts for a fifth of UK carbon emissions ; the production , storage and transportation of food to homes requires large amounts of energy . The effects of stopping food waste that can potentially be prevented has been likened to removing one in five cars from UK roads . 
 Internationally , food waste 's effect on the environment has been an issue . Ireland is facing fines of millions of euros if the amount of biodegradable waste it sends to landfill does not fall below the maximum quantity set by the European Union 's Landfill Directive . By 2010 , the same directive will impose fines of £ 40m a year across England , rising to £ <unk> by 2013 , if its own targets on biodegradable municipal waste are not met ; the amount of biodegradable municipal waste being sent to landfill in 2010 must be 75 % of that sent in 1995 , by 2013 it must be 50 % and by 2020 it must be 35 % . 
 In the context of the 2007 – 2008 world food price crisis and potential food shortages , food waste is an important and impacting issue . The United Nations Environment Programme ( UNEP ) identified food waste as being a critical problem , a view shared by a Cabinet Office report on food ; it said that doing nothing to solve it would lead to severe food shortages , which may trigger food price climbs of up to 50 % . With a third of food purchased in the UK never eaten , the country was singled out in the report . UNEP Executive Director Achim Steiner said that : " Over half of the food produced today is either lost , wasted or discarded as a result of inefficiency in the human @-@ managed food chain . There is evidence within the report [ The Environmental Food crises : Environment 's role in averting future food crises ] that the world could feed the entire projected population growth alone by becoming more efficient while also ensuring the survival of wild animals , birds and fish on this planet . " 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Prevention = = = 
 To reduce the food waste produced ( often unintentionally or unavoidably , due to lifestyle ) by consumers , advisory campaigns and articles have put forward varying advice and suggestions . The following strategies : planning before food shopping , understanding food date labels and using leftovers in other meals , are universally agreed to be effective in preventing food waste . 
 Planning , before food shopping , and knowing what purchases are necessary is among ways of reducing food waste ; buy one , get one free ( <unk> ) offers have been criticised for encouraging customers to purchase food items that are eventually thrown away ; as part of its own campaign on food waste , supermarket retailer Morrisons is to offer “ One Free to Freeze ” as a replacement for <unk> , with hopes that these promotions will encourage customers to plan ahead . 
 Understanding food storage and food date labels is an important , but currently problematic , measure ; in 2008 , research by the Food Standards Agency ( FSA ) showed that food dates were poorly understood by consumers ; only 36 per cent of people interpreted a best before date as a use by date and only 55 per cent correctly interpreted use by dates . Food date labels are planned to undergo radical changes as part of the " War on waste " . 
 Leftover foods can and are encouraged to be used in other meals ; currently this is not widely undertaken due to a " lack of confidence " . Specialist cookbooks and waste campaigns include recipes which are designed to incorporate typical leftovers and require minimal cooking skill . 
 Sectors of the food industry ( manufacturing and retail ) have pledged to reduce the amount of food they directly waste , and additionally what they cause households to waste indirectly . This is planned to happen through a combination of : effective labeling , pack size range , storage advice and packaging that extends the duration of food freshness . The latest initiative in May 2009 , rather than a new policy , is seen as an expansion to ongoing attempts to reduce the wider food packaging . The aim is to cut UK household food waste by 155 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 2 @.@ 5 % of total waste ) before the end of 2010 by helping UK households prevent food going to waste . 
 " Food charities " , the most widely known being " <unk> " , distribute surplus food from the food industry among disadvantaged people in the communities . As of 2006 , three of the ' Big Five ' supermarkets – Marks & Spencer , Sainsbury 's and Tesco – are working with <unk> and similar charities to reduce the amount of waste they produce going to landfill . 
 = = = Collection = = = 
 The majority of UK authorities ( some have varying or specific policy ) collect food waste together with municipal waste ; estimates made in 2007 put the amount of food waste collected separately , for either composting or anaerobic digestion , at only 2 % of what is available . Where food waste is collected separately , it is usually incorporated into an existing garden waste collection . If applicable , separate collections for garden and food waste typically run on intervening fortnightly weeks to those of municipal waste and share infrastructure and transport . 
 It has been suggested that given its proportion of the waste stream and the lack of distinct collections , food waste is not currently being targeted appropriately . However proposals by the European Union , which would require local authorities to provide separate collection of food and garden waste , have been met with opposition ; critics of the proposals argue that local authorities understand the specific needs of the areas they serve , and that they should decide waste policy . Advocates of the proposals say that it will ensure energy is not wasted in sorting biodegradable waste from other materials . 
 Figures from WRAP revealed the most efficient method of collecting food waste to be separate collections , followed by mixed green and food waste on a weekly basis . A mixed fortnightly collection was shown to be the worst performing . This was considered confirmation of earlier suspicions that , if carried out correctly , separate collections can result in less wastage of biodegradable waste . A widespread pilot scheme for separate food waste collection , involving nineteen English local authorities , achieved success and ' high levels of satisfaction ' from households . 
 One option for separating food waste at source is the in @-@ sink food @-@ waste <unk> ( FWD ) . It was invented in 1928 and is used in 50 % of households in the USA , 34 % in New Zealand , 20 % in Australia and increasingly in some European countries , notably Sweden . A FWD has no blades or knives , it has a grind chamber , the floor of which is a spinning disc with lugs spin the waste against the perforated wall of the chamber , particles exit when they are small <unk> measured particle size distribution and found 98 % < 2mm . They also measured <unk> and found the ground waste would be carried / resuspended easily in conventionally designed <unk> estimated the Global Warming Potentials ( 100 year ) of options for food waste management were landfill + 740 <unk> / t food waste , incineration + 13 , centralised composting <unk> and that anaerobic digestion was about <unk> <unk> / t food waste whether it was kerbside collected and transported by truck or FWD to sewer to AD at a wastewater treatment works . In a follow @-@ up paper , analysed data from <unk> , Sweden comparing the time when there were no FWD with the present when 50 % of households have FWD . This study verified laboratory etc. work published earlier by other workers . They found there was no increase in wastewater treatment works ' cost , nor the volume of wastewater but that there was a 46 % increase in biogas . 
 = = = Disposal = = = 
 Food waste remains primarily disposed to landfill ( 54 per cent of total municipal waste was disposed of in this way in 2007 / 8 ) , although year @-@ on @-@ year the amount being sent to landfill is decreasing . 
 <unk> , the purposeful biodegradation of organic matter by microorganisms , is among the most simple ways of treating food waste and thereby preventing it being sent to landfill . Since all biodegradable materials will eventually oxidise to become compost , the process can be undertaken at home with no running costs , although equipment can accelerate the process . Most components of food waste are <unk> and will be broken down in a compost , however some exceptions will not ( e.g. cooked foods and feces ) and can attract vermin . The effectiveness of composting food waste depends on the available space ( or storage capacity in the case of a compost bin ) and the method of composting . Unlike in landfill , where it is mixed with other ( non @-@ biodegradable ) materials , food waste decomposing in a compost does not release harmful gases . Similarly to compost created from other waste sources , composted food waste can be used to return nutrients to the soil if spread on the garden ( see uses of compost ) . 
 Anaerobic digestion ( AD ) , the breaking down of biodegradable material by microorganisms in the absence of oxygen , is recognised as an effective method of waste disposal , with the potential to address the food waste problem nationally . AD technology has a small environmental impact , producing less greenhouse gas emissions than composting . However , although the process is well established in the water industry , it is less so within the waste sector . Despite this , the AD industry is being ( and planned to be further ) expanded by local councils and retailers to deal with food waste ; several local authorities in the UK are planning to build anaerobic digestion plants , with the largest , to be located in Selby , due to operate from 2010 . Supermarket chains Tesco and Sainsbury 's are both adopting AD technology to dispose of their waste , while Tesco 's head of waste and recycling said : " As renewable energy technologies now become mainstream , there is no excuse for sending waste to landfill that could actually be put to positive use . " AD technology remains an experimental field though , and there is potential for advancements to increase efficiency . In July 2014 Sainsbury 's began powering one of its stores using anaerobic digestion . 
 <unk> waste has traditionally been viewed as a method with the main purpose being the destruction of the waste involved . Recovering the energy generated from this process has become of greater importance , and all incineration facilities in England now operate as energy @-@ from @-@ waste plants ( with many operating as combined heat and power facilities ) . Critics question the safety of the pollutants emitted during the process and argue that , as incinerators require constant levels of waste to operate , it encourages more waste . However , the levels of emissions from the incinerating process has been greatly reduced by developments in technology and legislation . 
 = 2005 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 2005 Giro d 'Italia was the 88th edition of the Giro d 'Italia , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . The Giro began in Reggio Calabria with a 1 @.@ 15 km ( 0 @.@ 7 mi ) prologue . The race came to a close with a 119 km ( 73 @.@ 9 mi ) mass @-@ start road stage that stretched from <unk> con Cassano to Milan . Twenty two teams entered the race that was won by the Italian Paolo Savoldelli of the Discovery Channel team . Second and third were the Italian Gilberto Simoni and Venezuelan José Rujano . 
 Five riders led the race over eight occasions before Savoldelli gained the lead after the Giro 's thirteenth stage . The Giro was first led by Australian Brett Lancaster , who won the race 's opening prologue . He lost the lead the next day to Paolo Bettini , who gained the race lead three separate times before Savoldelli took over . Ivan Basso was the leader of the race for two days , before he lost the lead to Savoldelli who then held that lead until the race 's conclusion . 
 Having previously won the general classification in 2002 , Savoldelli became the nineteenth rider to repeat as winner of the Giro d 'Italia . Amongst the other classifications that the race awarded , Paolo Bettini of the Quick @-@ Step – Innergetic team won the points classification , Selle Italia Colombia rider José Rujano won the mountains classification , and Italian Stefano Zanini won the intergiro classification . Liquigas – Bianchi finished as the winners of the Trofeo Fast Team classification , ranking each of the twenty @-@ two teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . The other team classification , the Trofeo Super Team classification , where the teams ' riders are awarded points for placing within the top twenty in each stage and the points are then totaled for each team was won by <unk> – Lotto . 
 = = Teams = = 
 Twenty @-@ two teams were invited by the race organizers to participate in the 2005 edition of the Giro d 'Italia . Twenty of the teams were UCI ProTour teams , while <unk> Panaria @-@ Navigare and Colombia @-@ Selle Italia were wild card teams invited by the organizers . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 198 cyclists . From the riders that began the race , 153 made it to the finish in Milan . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 2005 Giro d 'Italia was unveiled by race director Angelo Zomegnan on 23 January 2005 in Milan . It contained three time trial events , all of which were individual . The organizers divided the remaining eighteen stages into three categories : flat stages , medium mountain stages , and mountain stages . Ten of the stages were declared flat stages . Of the eight stages remaining , three stages were designated medium mountain stages and five were ranked as mountain stages . In the stages containing categorized climbs , four had summit finishes : stage 11 , to <unk> Alto ; stage 13 , to <unk> ; stage 17 , to Colle di Tenda ; and stage 19 , to Sestriere . The organizers chose to include one rest day . When compared to the previous year 's race , the race was 23 @.@ 25 km ( 14 mi ) longer , contained one less rest day , and one more individual time trial event . In addition , both races contained a prologue to open the race . 
 The fifteenth was originally intended to be 205 km ( 127 mi ) and to start in Livigno . However , due to very poor weather conditions the start was moved to Villa di Tirano , and the stage was shortened to 154 km ( 96 mi ) . The route originally had the riders crossing the Forcola di Livigno , a mountain located 10 km ( 6 mi ) outside of the original start in Livigno , but due to the bad weather at the base and top of the climb the organizers were forced to exclude the pass . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began with a 1 @.@ 15 km ( 0 @.@ 7 mi ) prologue that navigated through the streets of Reggio Calabria . The event was won by Australian Brett Lancaster who won by a .289 second margin over the second placed rider Matteo Tosatto . After the last competing rider took the course , famed sprinter Mario Cipollini took the course for a final farewell after announcing his retirement ten days beforehand . The Giro 's first stage came down to an uphill , bunch sprint that Paolo Bettini managed to win . Along with the stage victory , Bettini took the overall lead of the race . The second stage ended in another sprint finish , which Robbie McEwen won and also saw him take the race lead . Stage 3 saw a breakaway go the distance as a group of fifty riders broke free about 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) from the finish . Liquigas @-@ Bianchi 's Danilo Di Luca lunged ahead of Damiano Cunego to win the stage , while the race lead fell back into Bettini 's hands . The fourth stage closed with a sprint finish that Italian Paolo Bettini won . However , Bettini was later disqualified after the judges saw that he caused fellow sprinter Baden Cooke to fall , which gave the stage victory to second @-@ place finisher Luca <unk> . 
 The seventh stage saw a breakaway succeed again , as Liberty Seguros @-@ Würth rider Koldo Gil took the downhill stage win . Danilo Di Luca regained the lead of the race as the time gaps widened due to the climb that was placed shortly before the finish . Stage eight was a 45 km ( 28 mi ) individual time trial that was won by American David Zabriskie . Di Luca managed to place tenth overall and maintain the race leader 's pink jersey , while the general classification contenders Ivan Basso and Paolo Savoldelli gained valuable seconds over Di Luca . Alessandro Petacchi won the next stage by means of a bunch sprint , while the general classification remained largely unaltered . Stage 10 took place after a rest day . The stage again came down to a bunch sprint that was won by Australian Robbie McEwen , who captured his second stage win of the Giro . 
 Stage 11 was the first big mountain stage of the 2005 Giro d 'Italia and it began with a breakaway that was eventually swept after the first climb of the day . Ivan Basso attacked with 26 km ( 16 mi ) remaining in the stage and only Paolo Savoldelli was able to keep pace with him . The two raced to the top of the <unk> Alto and Savoldelli won the sprint to the line , while Basso claimed the race lead . The twelfth stage of the race was downhill after the lone categorized climb of the Passo san Pellegrino . The stage ultimately came down to a field sprint , which Alessandro Petacchi won . The Giro 's thirteenth stage saw a breakaway succeed as Colombian Iván Parra beat out his fellow breakaway members for the stage win . Paolo Savoldelli claimed the overall lead after Ivan Basso lost over a minute as he was suffering from a gastric problem . The next stage , stage 14 , contained the Cima Coppi of the 2005 Giro d 'Italia , the Passo dello Stelvio , along with other climbs of lesser severity . Iván Parra struck again by winning the stage by almost two minutes over the second @-@ place finisher . Ivan Basso lost even more time due to his illness , while general classification contenders Danilo Di Luca and Gilberto Simoni gained valuable seconds over the race leader Paolo Savoldelli . 
 The fifteenth stage 's start was moved from Livigno to Villa di Tirano and the route was shortened by 51 km ( 32 mi ) due to poor weather conditions on the stage 's first scheduled mountain pass , the Forcola di Livigno . With the exclusion of the uphill earlier portion of the stage , the route was relatively flat which led to the stage ending in a bunch sprint that Fassa Bortolo 's Alessandro Petacchi won . After the second rest day , the riders began stage sixteen of the Giro . A breakaway containing eighteen men got away from the peloton and managed to stay away for the length of the stage . Christophe Le Mével out @-@ sprinted his fellow breakaway members to win the stage and earn his first professional victory . The race 's seventeenth stage contained a summit finish on the Colle di Tenda . While on the final climb of the day , the race was headed by a lead group that contained the race leader Paolo Savoldelli and general classification favorites Ivan Basso and José Rujano . Basso managed to slip away with 6 km ( 4 mi ) left to go in the climb and win the stage . 
 Stage 18 was an individual time trial that stretched 34 km ( 21 mi ) <unk> to Turin . Team CSC 's Ivan Basso won the stage by nine seconds over Russian Vladimir <unk> . The penultimate stage of the Giro featured a summit finish on the fabled Sestriere . The race leader Paolo Savoldelli was in trouble throughout the stage and his lead was in jeopardy . However , on the final climb of the Sestriere he received aid from two riders and made it to the finish two minutes after the stage winner José Rujano . Savoldelli 's lead shrank to twenty @-@ eight seconds over the second placed rider Gilberto Simoni . The twentieth and final stage of the 2005 Giro d 'Italia came ended with a bunch sprint in the streets of Milan . Italian Alessandro Petacchi edged out Erik Zabel and Robert Förster to win the stage . Savoldelli won his second Giro d 'Italia after crossing the finish in 24th place on the stage . 
 Success in stages was limited to ten of the competing teams , six of which achieved multiple stage victories , while five individual riders won multiple stages . The riders that won more than once were Robbie McEwen in stages 2 , 6 , 10 , Danilo di Luca in stages 3 and 5 , Alessandro Petacchi in stages 9 , 12 , 15 , and 20 , and Iván Parra in stages 13 and 14 , and Ivan Basso in stages 17 and 18 . <unk> Panaria – Navigare won two stages , with Brett Lancaster in the prologue and Luca <unk> in stage 4 . <unk> – Lotto won three stages with Robbie McEwen . Liquigas – Bianchi won two stages with Danilo di Luca . Team CSC won three stages , with David Zabriskie in the stage 8 time trial and two stages with Ivan Basso . Fassa Bortolo won four stages with Alessandro Petacchi . Colombia – Selle Italia won three stages , with Iván Parra in two stages and José Rujano in stage 19 . Quick @-@ Step – Innergetic , Liberty Seguros – Würth , Discovery Channel , and Crédit Agricole each won one stage at the Giro d 'Italia . Quick Step @-@ Innergetic 's Paolo Bettini won stage 1 by out @-@ sprinting the rest of the field . Liberty Seguros @-@ Würth rider Koldo Gil won stage 7 by means of a long breakaway . Discovery Channel 's Paolo Savoldelli won stage 11 through a last second attack , as did Crédit Agricole rider Christophe Le Mével in stage 16 . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Four different jerseys were worn during the 2005 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered as the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this Giro was the Passo dello Stelvio . The first rider to cross the Stelvio was Selle Italia Colombia 's José Rujano . The intergiro classification was marked by a blue jersey . The calculation for the intergiro is similar to that of the general classification , in each stage there is a midway point that the riders pass through a point and where their time is stopped . As the race goes on , their times compiled and the person with the lowest time is the leader of the intergiro classification and wears the blue jersey . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 There were also two classification for the teams . The classification was the Trofeo Fast Team . In this classification , the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added ; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time ; the Trofeo Super Team was a team points classification , with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points ( 20 for first place , 19 for second place and so on , down to a single point for 20th ) for their team . 
 The rows in the following table correspond to the jerseys awarded after that stage was run . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = Minor classifications = = = 
 Other less well @-@ known classifications , whose leaders did not receive a special jersey , were awarded during the Giro . Other awards included the Combativity classification , which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints , mountain passes and stage finishes . Venezuelan José Rujano won the most combative classification . The Azzurri d 'Italia classification was based on finishing order , but points were awarded only to the top three finishers in each stage . Alessandro Petacchi won the Azzurri d 'Italia classification . The Trofeo Fuga Piaggio classification rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field , each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear . The classification was won by Sven <unk> . Teams were given penalty points for minor technical infringements . Fassa Bortolo and T @-@ Mobile Team were most successful in avoiding penalties , and so shared leadership of the Fair Play classification . 
 = Easter Road = 
 Easter Road is a football stadium located in the Leith area of Edinburgh , Scotland , which is the home ground of Scottish Championship club Hibernian ( Hibs ) . The stadium currently has an all @-@ seated capacity of 20 @,@ 421 , which makes it the fifth @-@ largest football stadium in Scotland . Easter Road is also known by Hibs fans as " The Holy Ground " or " The Leith San Siro " . The venue has also been used to stage international matches , Scottish League Cup semi @-@ finals and was briefly the home ground of the Edinburgh professional rugby union team . 
 Hibs first played at the present site of Easter Road in 1893 . The ground holds the record attendance for a Scottish match outside Glasgow , when 65 @,@ 860 attended an Edinburgh derby on 2 January 1950 . The size of the terracing was greatly reduced in the 1980s . After the publication of the Taylor Report , Hibs considered leaving Easter Road and moving to a different site ( Straiton , near Loanhead was mooted ) , but these plans were abandoned in 1994 . Redevelopment of the stadium began in 1995 and was completed in 2010 . The Easter Road pitch had a pronounced slope until it was removed at the end of the 1999 – 00 season . 
 = = History = = 
 Hibernian played its first match on the Meadows , on 25 December 1875 . The club first moved to the Easter Road area in 1880 , to a ground known as Hibernian Park . This location had the advantage of being equidistant between their two main sources of support , the Irish immigrant communities in the port of Leith and the Old Town of Edinburgh . When Hibs suffered financial difficulties in the early 1890s , the lease on Hibernian Park expired and developers started building what would become Bothwell Street . The club was reformed in 1892 and a lease on a piece of land called Drum Park was secured . The site had restricted access from Easter Road , a pronounced slope and was in close proximity to Bank Park , the home of Leith Athletic . There was a sense of continuity from the previous ground , however , and the supporters were keen to get started again . The first match at Easter Road was played on 4 February 1893 , a friendly against Clyde . 
 Easter Road staged its first Scottish League match when Hibs joined the league in 1893 . Hibs were only renting Easter Road , which Edinburgh city planners had designated for future development . This meant the club were unwilling to develop the ground and looked for alternatives . Hibs considered relocating to Aberdeen in 1902 , a year before Aberdeen F.C. was formed by a merger of three local clubs . In 1909 , work began on a potential new ground in the <unk> area of <unk> , but the North British Railway company won a court order allowing them to build a railway line over the ground . No line was ever built , but Hibs ' interest in moving to the site was thwarted . The long @-@ term future of Easter Road was only secured in 1922 , when the club agreed a 25 @-@ year lease on the ground . Two years later , three banks of terraces were raised , while a main stand seating 4 @,@ 480 people was built on the west side of the ground . The redeveloped stadium had a capacity of 45 @,@ 000 . The pitch was also moved 40 yards to the east , providing space for the main stand . The slope was reduced to approximately 6 feet as part of this work . 
 Hibs enjoyed great success in the period immediately after the end of the Second World War , winning three league championships between 1948 and 1952 . A record attendance of 65 @,@ 860 was set by an Edinburgh derby against Hearts played on 2 January 1950 . This is also a record for any football match played in Edinburgh . As the fans had been tightly packed on the terraces to achieve this record attendance , the size of the East Terrace was increased further . The club even drew up plans to expand the overall capacity to nearly 100 @,@ 000 . This would have been done by raising each end terrace to the same height as the east side , but these plans were never realised . 
 Hibs were one of the first clubs to install corner floodlight pylons , rather than the roof @-@ mounted lights used at Ibrox . The Easter Road floodlights were installed by a local company , Miller & Stables , who would construct similar leaning gantries in many other Scottish grounds . They were first used for an Edinburgh derby played on 18 October 1954 . A roof was put over the North Terrace in 1960 , but the ground was largely unchanged through the 1960s and 1970s . The capacity was reduced in 1975 to 30 @,@ 000 , due to the regulations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act . Hibs became the first club in Scotland to install undersoil heating , in 1980 . Benches were installed in the North Terrace in 1982 , but this was only because they were cheaper than replacing the terrace crush barriers . Soon afterwards , Hibs chairman Kenny Waugh admitted that the stadium was a " mess " . 
 The height of the East Terrace was greatly reduced and a roof was erected in the mid @-@ 1980s . This work reduced the capacity to 27 @,@ 000 . Hibs was taken over by a consortium led by David Duff in 1987 . The new regime spent approximately £ 1 million on executive boxes and refurbishments , but their policy of diversifying the business into property and public houses crippled the club financially when there was an economic downturn in the late 1980s . Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer attempted a takeover of Hibs in June 1990 , with the intention of merging the two major Edinburgh football clubs . The Hibs fans protested against this and Mercer was prevented from gaining the 75 % shareholding that was needed to close Hibs . 
 Sir Tom Farmer took control of Hibs in 1991 , but the club was still faced with the need to develop a stadium that would meet the requirements of the Taylor Report . Hibs entered talks with Edinburgh District Council about sharing a new stadium with Hearts , but the proposed site of <unk> was in the wrong part of the city for Hibs . The club was more interested in the possibility of playing at Meadowbank Stadium , only a few hundred yards from Easter Road , but there were planning difficulties with adapting Meadowbank into a large football stadium . The reorganisation of the club after Farmer took control meant that there was no real pressure to move , as he also owned Easter Road . The Hibs board made an assessment , however , that the ground could not be renovated in a cost @-@ effective fashion before the August 1994 deadline set by the Taylor Report . Hibs proposed in January 1992 to sell Easter Road and move to a site owned by Farmer in Straiton . Hibs also invited Hearts to share this stadium , as their proposal for a site in Millerhill had been rejected by planners . Those plans were scaled down in 1993 when Lothian Regional Council refused to allow the rest of the Straiton site to be used for commercial development . The Hibs board continued to back the Straiton proposal and they insisted the installation of bucket seats in the uncovered South Terrace was merely to comply with the Taylor Report deadline . This measure also reduced the capacity of Easter Road to 13 @,@ 500 . 
 Later in 1994 , however , the Straiton proposals were abandoned and Easter Road underwent major redevelopment in 1995 . Stands behind each goal were built at a cost of £ 8 million , increasing the capacity to 16 @,@ 531 . The ground was made all seated by the installation of bucket seats in the East Terrace during 1995 . Views of the pitch from this stand were somewhat restricted by supporting pillars . The Easter Road slope , which meant that the north end of the pitch was 6 feet lower than the south , was removed at the end of the 1999 – 00 season . The West Stand was built in 2001 to replace the ageing main stand , increasing capacity to 17 @,@ 500 . 
 Despite this development work , a move to a shared stadium in Straiton was again proposed in 2003 . Hibs hoped that selling the Easter Road site would allow them to clear their debts and reduce costs . Club director Rod Petrie commented that any decision would be based on financial grounds and after consultation with the fanbase , as the club were not being forced to move . Farmer expressed support for further redeveloping Easter Road , if it could be part of a viable business plan . During the consultation , Farmer said that his main priority was ensuring the club 's survival and denied that any deal had been concluded . The consultation found that the fans were largely opposed to the Straiton proposal , which the club eventually abandoned . To remove part of the debt , the club sold some land to the east of the stadium that had previously been used for car parking . Selling players , including Steven Whittaker , Scott Brown , Kevin Thomson and Steven Fletcher , also funded these debts and further work . 
 The club first obtained planning permission to replace the East Stand in 1999 , and this was renewed in 2005 . Hibs started a consultation with supporters on its redevelopment in 2007 . The development was put on hold until sufficient cash resources were obtained to finance the project . The consultation process found that a single tier stand would be most popular with the fans . Petrie announced at the 2009 annual general meeting that the club would enter negotiations with contractors to establish the cost of rebuilding the stand . After these negotiations were concluded , Hibs announced in February 2010 that work would immediately begin on a new East Stand , increasing capacity to 20 @,@ 421 . Demolition of the old stand began in early March , and the stand was opened a month ahead of schedule in August 2010 . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 Easter Road is an all @-@ seated stadium , split into four geographic sections , known as the Famous Five ( formerly North ) , East , South and West Stands . The Famous Five and South Stands are the oldest part of the present stadium , built in 1995 . Each stand has two tiers , a cantilevered roof and a capacity of nearly 4 @,@ 000 . To keep within the boundaries of the site , the upper deck of each stand angles toward the centre . When the stands were built , the Famous Five Stand was above pitch level and the South Stand was below , but this was corrected when the natural slope was removed . Each stand also stretched beyond the east touchline , which was corrected by widening the pitch when the East Stand was rebuilt . Between the two tiers of the Famous Five Stand there are function suites and lounges . Before the stands were rebuilt in the 1990s , the north and south ends of Easter Road were known as the Cowshed and Dunbar End respectively . The southern end was called the Dunbar End because there was a lemonade factory named Dunbar 's located behind it . 
 The West Stand , which initially had a capacity of 6 @,@ 500 , was built in 2001 . A reception area , club offices , media centre , banqueting suites , hospitality area and changing rooms are located in the West Stand . The capacity of the West Stand was reduced slightly when the new East Stand was constructed in 2010 , as the pitch was widened during this development . The East Stand , which is the newest part of the stadium , was built in 2010 . It is the only stand that is not split into two tiers and has a capacity of 6 @,@ 400 . The decision to build the East Stand as a single tier was taken to maintain the character of the old terrace , which had been a simple viewing area without many facilities . 
 = = Other uses = = 
 = = = Other football matches = = = 
 Kirkcaldy club Raith Rovers used Easter Road as a home venue once , for the home leg of a UEFA Cup tie against Bayern Munich in 1995 . The match was moved from Rovers ' normal home ground of Stark 's Park due to Easter Road 's greater capacity . Easter Road has sometimes played host to Scottish League Cup semi @-@ final matches , such as in the 1996 , 1998 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , 2013 and 2014 competitions . Team managers Terry Butcher and Gus MacPherson have objected to playing semi @-@ finals at Easter Road , on the grounds that their players should have the chance to play at Hampden Park , or that playing against Hearts in Edinburgh gives them a form of home advantage . The 2014 Scottish Challenge Cup Final between Raith Rovers and Rangers was hosted at Easter Road . 
 Scotland have played five full international matches at Easter Road . These have been friendly matches against less attractive opposition where a relatively small crowd was expected , and it has therefore been unnecessary to play the match at Hampden Park . The Scotland under @-@ 21 team has also sometimes played matches at Easter Road , such as when Scotland played Iceland in the 2011 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship qualification play @-@ offs . The most recent full international played at the stadium was a friendly match between Scotland and Qatar in June 2015 . One full international was played at Easter Road that did not involve Scotland , a friendly match between South Korea and Ghana that was played in advance of the 2006 World Cup . 
 = = = = Full internationals = = = = 
 Seven full international football matches have been played at Easter Road , all of them since 1998 . 
 = = = Other sports = = = 
 Easter Road was briefly the home ground for Edinburgh Rugby , a professional rugby union team , in the late 1990s . Heineken Cup matches against Ebbw Vale and Toulouse were played at the ground during the 1998 – 99 season , with attendances of a few thousand . Edinburgh again expressed interest in using Easter Road in both 2004 and 2006 , but this was opposed by Hibs manager Tony Mowbray , who was concerned that playing rugby would damage the pitch . The Scottish Rugby Union ( SRU ) included Easter Road in a bid for Edinburgh to host the Heineken Cup and European Challenge Cup finals in 2014 . In June 2015 , the SRU chief executive indicated that trial matches could be played at Easter Road with a view to Edinburgh Rugby moving there for a longer term . It has since been announced that the team will move to <unk> from January 2017 . 
 One of the hospitality suites within the stadium staged an amateur boxing show on 15 November 2009 . 
 = = = Uses other than sport = = = 
 Elton John performed Easter Road 's first rock concert on 25 June 2005 . The international headquarters of the Homeless World Cup is based in the South Stand of the stadium . 
 = = Transport = = 
 Edinburgh Waverley railway station , the main station in Edinburgh , is approximately 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the stadium ; the walk between the two sites takes approximately 20 minutes . There was a railway halt immediately beside the ground , part of the Edinburgh , Leith and Newhaven Railway , which was opened in 1950 and closed in 1967 . The Edinburgh Trams system was to have served the stadium by the McDonald Road tram stop on Leith Walk , but this part of the line was cancelled in June 2011 due to delays and cost overruns . Easter Road is served by several Lothian Buses routes . Services 7 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 14 , 16 , 22 , 25 and 49 run down Leith Walk ; services 1 and 35 run down Easter Road itself ; services 4 , 5 , 15 , 19 , 26 , 34 and 44 run along London Road and routes 34 and 49 serve <unk> Road . Several First Scotland East routes also serve the area . Visitors to the ground travelling by car can park in the surrounding streets . 
 = The Boat Race 1968 = 
 The 114th Boat Race took place on 30 March 1968 . Held annually , the event is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race , umpired by Harold Rickett , was won by Cambridge by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths . Goldie won the reserve race and Cambridge won the Women 's Boat Race . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities , followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having won the previous year 's race by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ quarter lengths . Cambridge , however , held the overall lead with 61 victories to Oxford 's 51 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 The first Women 's Boat Race took place in 1927 , but did not become an annual fixture until the 1960s . Up until 2014 , the contest was conducted as part of the Henley Boat Races , but as of the 2015 race , it is held on the River Thames , on the same day as the men 's main and reserve races . The reserve race , contested between Oxford 's Isis boat and Cambridge 's Goldie boat has been held since 1965 . It usually takes place on the Tideway , prior to the main Boat Race . 
 Oxford were coached by Jumbo Edwards and Ronnie Howard , while Cambridge were overseen by a team including Lou Barry , Donald Legget , Mike Muir @-@ Smith ( who was in the Tideway Scullers School first eight ) , Derek Drury and A. V. Cooke . As a result of television contracts and to avoid a clash with the Grand National , the scheduled start time for the race was pushed back to <unk> , some forty minutes after the " best of the tide " . The umpire was Harold Rickett who rowed for Cambridge in the 1930 , 1931 and 1932 races , and who had represented Great Britain in the 1932 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 7 @.@ 5 lb ( 85 @.@ 7 kg ) , 6 @.@ 25 pounds ( 2 @.@ 8 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained five Blues , including the future Oxford University Boat Club coach Daniel Topolski , and Martin Kennard who was rowing in his third Boat Race . Cambridge saw four Blues return , with their boat club president Patrick Delafield making his third appearance in the event . While Cambridge 's crew contained no registered overseas competitors , Oxford 's John Bockstoce and Bill Fink were both from the United States . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station . The race commenced at <unk> , in a " slight drizzle " . After a fast start , Cambridge took a half @-@ length lead by Fulham . Rounding the Middlesex bend , Oxford drew back into contention and the crews were level at the Mile Post in a time of 4 minutes 4 seconds . On the approach to Harrods Furniture Depository , Painter , the Dark Blue cox , steered his boat so close to the Surrey shore that Douglas Calder , writing in The Times , suggested " if the crews had gone any farther over they would have been practically on the towpath " . After being warned twice by the umpire for steering too close to their opponents , and taking a small lead , Oxford were made to concede to the Light Blues , and Cambridge rallied . Despite rough water through Crabtree Reach , Cambridge pushed on at Hammersmith Bridge and opened an eight @-@ second lead by the time the crews reached Chiswick Steps . By Barnes Bridge they had extended their lead to twelve seconds , and passed the finishing post three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths ahead in a time of 18 minutes 22 seconds . It was the Light Blues ' first victory in four years . Their cox remarked " I think we could have won on a foul if I had forced a collision at Harrods . However , we did not want to win this way if we could help it . I decided to give Oxford enough rope to hang themselves ... " 
 Cambridge 's Goldie won the fourth running of the reserve race , defeating Oxford 's Isis by five @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in at time of 18 minutes 44 seconds . In the 23rd Women 's Boat Race , Cambridge won , taking their sixth consecutive victory . 
 = Typhoon Ophelia = 
 Typhoon Ophelia was a long @-@ lived and powerful tropical cyclone that had devastating impacts on the small atoll of Ulithi in the Caroline Islands . Forming as a tropical depression on November 21 , 1960 near Enewetak Atoll , the incipient cyclone struggled to develop . Moving haphazardly along an s @-@ shaped track over the western Pacific Ocean , it degenerated into a disturbance two days later . By November 27 , the system reorganized and was classified a tropical depression for a second time well to the southeast of Guam . Moving slowly west @-@ southwest , it steadily intensified into a tropical storm later that day and further into a typhoon on November 29 as it gained a steady westward track . The following day , the eye of Ophelia passed directly over Ulithi atoll with winds estimated at 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . 
 Turning gradually to the north , the typhoon attained peak winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) on December 1 . Maintaining strength as a powerful system for several days , the storm remained over open waters . By December 4 , it began to weaken as upper @-@ level winds became unfavorable and forced the cyclone to move northeast . Passing Japan well to the southeast that day , its large circulation brought increased winds to the Tokyo area and heavy rain and snow to parts of the nation . Ophelia soon underwent an extratropical transition as it raced over the open Pacific , completing this structural change by December 6 . Its remnants later crossed the International Dateline and dissipated over the Gulf of Alaska on December 10 . 
 Ophelia devastated much of Ulithi during its passage , damaging or destroying most structures and killing two people . Agriculture across the area was decimated and geographic changes to coastlines were noted . In Ophelia 's wake , dramatic societal changes in the <unk> culture arose . Traditional values were abandoned in favor of more western ones , with younger individuals attaining a notable increase in power . The local King was disposed of shortly after the storm and a total change in authority took place . In addition to the severe impact in Ulithi , the typhoon was blamed for the deaths of five fishermen when their vessel collided with a coral reef . The name Ophelia was later retired , though unusually its removal was due to its meteorological significance due to its long track and prolonged time as a significant typhoon rather than for loss of life or damage . 
 = = Meteorologist history = = 
 On November 21 , 1960 , the formation of a small low @-@ pressure area was noted following a shift in surface winds on Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall Islands . Slowly developing , the low organized into a tropical depression by 1200 UTC , the 24th of the season . At this time , it was situated 270 km ( 165 mi ) southwest of Enewetak Atoll . Though classified a depression , maximum sustained winds were only estimated at 35 km / h ( 25 mph ) . For unknown reasons , the system soon became diffuse and abruptly shifted direction to the east @-@ southeast . Concurrently the cyclone lost its identity as a tropical cyclone and the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) discontinued advisories on it by 0600 UTC on November 24 . The remnant disturbance subsequently doubled back to the west , bypassing the islands of Pohnpei and Chuuk before re @-@ intensifying . 
 A circulation began redeveloping on November 26 and at 0000 UTC the next day , the JTWC reclassified the system as a tropical depression ; the rejuvenated depression was situated 465 km ( 290 mi ) southeast of Guam at this time . Over the next two days , the storm drifted west @-@ southwest at an average speed of 3 km / h ( 2 mph ) . Roughly 18 hours after regeneration , the depression attained tropical storm status and was assigned the name Ophelia . Initially , Ophelia was forecast to turn northward and impact the Mariana Islands but it ultimately followed a " sinusoidal pattern " path west . Steady intensification took place through November 30 , with Ophelia attaining typhoon status at 0000 UTC on November 29 . By 0800 UTC on November 29 , a 24 km ( 15 mi ) wide eye formed over the storm 's center and its central pressure had fallen to 982 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 00 inHg ) , as measured by a United States Navy weather reconnaissance aircraft . Within 24 hours of this it attained winds in excess of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , ranking it as a Category 3 @-@ equivalent typhoon on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . During the intensification process , its forward speed greatly increased to 32 km / h ( 20 mph ) . At 0300 UTC on November 30 , the eye of Ophelia passed directly over the small atoll of Ulithi in the Caroline Islands ; Ulithi Atoll was the only island or land mass over which the eye of the storm passed while warnings were being issued . Sustained winds there reached 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) while a barometer measured a minimum atmospheric pressure of 939 @.@ 4 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 744 inHg ) . Thereafter , Ophelia acquired a more northerly component to its track . 
 The typhoon attained winds of 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) while situated roughly halfway between the Philippines and the Mariana Islands at 0600 UTC on December 1 . Later that day the storm had turned due north and weakened slightly . Maintaining an intensity between 220 and 230 km / h ( 140 and 145 mph ) , Ophelia traveled north toward Japan for two days. around 0600 UTC on December 2 , reconnaissance measured a pressure of 928 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 41 inHg ) within the now 40 km ( 25 mi ) wide eye of Ophelia . The Japan Meteorological Agency estimated the pressure to have been slightly lower , reporting a minimum of 925 mb ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 32 inHg ) . Additionally , the China Meteorological Administration assessed Ophelia to have been a stronger system , with winds of 270 km / h ( 165 mph ) . On December 4 , strong upper @-@ level westerlies forced the typhoon northeast and prompted dramatic acceleration . The typhoon 's eye soon dissolved as the cyclone 's structure waned . Moving at an exceptionally fast 98 km / h ( 61 mph ) , with a maximum forward speed of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , Ophelia began transitioning into an extratropical cyclone on December 5 and completed the transformation the following day as winds dropped below typhoon @-@ force . The briskly moving system crossed the International Dateline later on December 6 along an easterly track before turning north on December 8 south of Alaska . The system subsequently dissipated over the Gulf of Alaska on December 10 . 
 Throughout its tropical phase , Ophelia tracked along a path roughly 8 @,@ 050 km ( 5 @,@ 000 mi ) long . 
 = = Impact = = 
 On November 30 , Guam residents were given the all @-@ clear after previously expecting potential impacts from the typhoon , as the storm remained south of the island . Ships in the area were warned to avoid the system , however . The Japanese Maritime Safety Agency reported that two vessels were " in trouble " due to the storm on December 1 . A 200 ton ship was driven off @-@ course and collided with a coral reef . Of the 17 crew , 5 were killed in the incident while the other 12 were later rescued by the United States Navy on December 4 and brought to Midway Island . Winds up to 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) were reported on Yap ; however , the storm 's effects there are unknown . On December 2 , storm warnings were raised for the Philippines as Ophelia was forecast to track toward the nation ; however following the storm 's northward turn these advisories were discontinued the following day . The weakening typhoon later bypassed Japan well to the southeast on December 4 . Its outer bands brought heavy rain and snow . Sustained winds in Tokyo Bay reached 47 km / h ( 29 mph ) and gusted to 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . 
 In the wake of the storm , the name Ophelia was retired from usage . For unknown reasons it was not replaced with any particular name , making it one of two storms in the basin to not have a replacement , although Ora took Ophelia 's place in 1963 . The reason behind Ophelia 's removal is unique among Pacific typhoons . Normally , names are stricken from usage due to loss of life and / or damage ; however , Ophelia was deemed meteorologically significant for its long track and significant intensity for a prolonged duration . 
 = = = Ulithi = = = 
 On December 1 , the eye of Typhoon Ophelia passed directly over the small atoll of Ulithi , which has a total land area of 4 @.@ 6 km2 ( 1 @.@ 8 mi2 ) . The atoll comprises multiple islands , the largest islet being no more than 1 @.@ 6 km ( 1 mi ) long and even shorter width @-@ wise . It was regarded as the worst storm to hit the atoll since 1907 when similarly violent typhoon devastated the area . At the time of the storm , an estimated 450 people lived on the island and 16 members of the United States Coast Guard were stationed there . Residents and coast guard members were first alerted of the storm on November 21 when it was near Enewetak Atoll ; however no action was taken . It was not until November 28 when Ophelia began intensifying that precautions were taken . By this time , winds had already begun increasing and the commanding officer ordered that all equipment , personal gear , and emergency rations were to be taken into a concrete shelter . Natives were not entirely prepared for the typhoon , with two villages receiving no word of its approach . Three villages that were informed were not given the necessary urgency of the typhoon and did not expect the severity of damage the occurred . A Trust Territory vessel , the MV Errol , was anchored in the lagoon but left without warning nearby natives on November 29 . 
 Striking as a Category 4 @-@ equivalent typhoon , Ophelia produced devastating winds across the atoll . Winds estimated at 260 km / h ( 161 mph ) battered Ulithi , reportedly destroying every structure except for the concrete coast guard station . The station itself was badly affected , however , with its walls damaged and windows blown out . Nearby Falalop Airfield had 91 m ( 300 ft ) of its runway swept away . An anemometer on the coast guard station measured a peak velocity of 137 km / h ( 85 mph ) ; however , later analysis of the device revealed that it was broken and revolving slower than it should . It is estimated that winds were most likely on the order of 230 to 250 km / h ( 145 to 155 mph ) . Most structures across Ulithi were constructed after World War II and had tin roofs . Natives sought refuge in these structures and in many instances were forced to abandon them as they fell apart during the storm . 
 On Falalop Island , the seawall erected during World War II was entirely destroyed and allowed storm surge to inundate the island ; however , at no point was the entire island under water . Initially , Falalop was left under 1 @.@ 2 m ( 4 ft ) of water , though by the time the eye moved over this had decreased to 0 @.@ 6 m ( 2 ft ) . Along the south shore , waves reached 1 @.@ 8 m ( 6 ft ) and caused moderate beach erosion . Sand from the coastline was found up to 215 m ( 700 ft ) inland , filling many taro pits in the island 's interior . Along the south shore , two children were killed when their home collapsed , pinning them underneath debris , and water later inundated the area and drowned them . Elsewhere on the island , three people sustained minor injuries . <unk> Island experienced most of its flooding as the backside of Ophelia moved through . The island was shortened by 45 m ( 150 ft ) to the north and southern beaches experienced varying degrees of erosion . <unk> Island , located at the northern end of the atoll 's lagoon , saw the deposition of large boulders and cobblestone along its north shore which covered an area 30 to 45 m ( 100 to 150 ft ) wide . Flying debris resulted in one injury on both <unk> and <unk> . To the west , <unk> Island saw an increase in land area by 60 m ( 200 ft ) as sand was pushed from other areas . 
 Across Ulithi , 29 homes were destroyed , 64 were damaged , and the remaining 33 were intact . Of the 79 non @-@ residential structures , only 4 were left standing . All four schools and medical buildings were destroyed , with nearly all medical supplies being washed away . Agriculture saw extensive losses with nearly the entire taro crop devastated and more than 75 % of the food crop was ruined . Roughly 23 % of the coconut trees were destroyed and 45 % were damaged . It took approximately two years for the coconut crop to return to normal . Banana and breadfruit trees were temporarily useless , though they were in recoverable statuses . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In the months and years after the typhoon , natives in Ulithi were examined for increased levels of stress . Unexpectedly , only a handful of people reported symptoms of posttraumatic stress disorder , with the majority seemingly unfazed by Ophelia . There was some talk among residents of leaving Ulithi and moving to nearby islands such as Yap , Palau , Saipan , or even the Philippines ; however , mentions of this diminished relatively quickly . The devastation to the island 's infrastructure hastened a previously gradual change in buildings . Reconstruction efforts had entirely abandoned traditional Ulithi building styles in favor of more modern ones . The survival of concrete buildings prompted an overall desire among people to construct all buildings with concrete . Alongside the infrastructural overhaul , a shift in dietary changes to a more western style occurred . 
 Further social changes brought about by the presence of American military personnel were exemplified in the storm 's wake . The use of currency as a means for obtaining goods was first seen in Ulithi in 1956 , four years before the typhoon . However , despite the total destruction of markets by Ophelia they were quickly rebuilt , depicting the quick entrenchment of currency in native culture . The reconstruction also accelerated a desire for new goods from trading . Store owners requested a wider range of material to have in stock than seen previously . From a societal standpoint , Ophelia prompted great advances in the <unk> culture . Women , previously limited to agriculture , housework , and eventually shopping , were found to be doing heavy work ( i.e. carpentry , chopping , digging , and lifting ) in the immediate wake of the typhoon . A shift in government took place as well , with authority of King <unk> waning to greater power among younger individuals . <unk> also displayed great ineptitude during the storm and was subsequently disposed of as King following Ophelia 's passage . The changes in authority occurred due to spontaneous leadership during the storm by the younger persons in order to protect others . Prior to the typhoon , younger members of tribes never spoke during council meetings ; however , by 1961 they made their presence known in such meetings . 
 = Tanner Glass = 
 Tanner Glass ( born November 29 , 1983 ) is a Canadian professional ice hockey winger who plays for the New York Rangers of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . During the 2012 NHL Lockout , he played for HC ’ 05 Banská Bystrica in the Slovak Extraliga . Known as a physical player , he has previously played in the NHL for the Pittsburgh Penguins , Winnipeg Jets , Vancouver Canucks , and Florida Panthers . 
 Glass played junior hockey in the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) for two seasons with the Penticton Panthers and Nanaimo Clippers , earning All @-@ Star Team honours in 2003 . Going on to the college ranks with the Dartmouth Big Green for four seasons , he helped his club to two third @-@ place finishes in the ECAC Hockey Conference and served as team captain in his senior year . Selected 265th overall by the Florida Panthers in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft , he turned professional in 2007 with the team 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Rochester Americans . For the next two seasons , he split time between the NHL and AHL before signing with the Canucks in July 2009 as an unrestricted free agent . He solidified his role as a fourth @-@ line forward on the team and helped them to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , where they lost to the Boston Bruins . In July 2011 , he left the Canucks for the Winnipeg Jets via free agency . The following year he signed with the Penguins as a free agent . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Amateur = = = 
 Born in Regina , Saskatchewan , Glass played midget with the Yorkton <unk> of the Saskatchewan Midget Hockey League ( <unk> ) . In 2001 – 02 , he began a two @-@ year career of Junior A in the British Columbia Hockey League ( BCHL ) . Playing his rookie season with the Penticton Panthers , he recorded 11 goals and 39 points over 57 games . The following season , he was traded to the Nanaimo Clippers after 32 games with Penticton . He finished his second junior season with 23 goals and 62 points over 50 games , split between Penticton and Nanaimo . In addition to appearing in the 2003 BCHL All @-@ Star Game , Glass received end @-@ of @-@ season BCHL All @-@ Star Team honours . In the off @-@ season , he was selected 265th overall in the 2003 NHL Entry Draft by the Florida Panthers . 
 Following his draft , he joined the college hockey ranks with the Dartmouth Big Green of the ECAC Hockey Conference . He missed 8 games in his freshman year due to mononucleosis , finishing with 11 points over 26 games . He helped the Big Green to the third @-@ place game of the ECAC playoffs , where they lost to the Colgate Raiders . The following season , he improved to 15 points in 33 games . Prior to his junior year , he was named an alternate captain for the Big Green , going on to score a college career @-@ high 12 goals and 28 points over 33 games . Glass made his second appearance in the ECAC 's third @-@ place game , winning 3 – 2 against Colgate . Captaining the team as a senior in 2006 – 07 , Glass matched his career @-@ high 28 points and helped Dartmouth to the third @-@ place game once more . He finished his college career losing to the St. Lawrence Saints . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 Still unsigned by the Panthers at the end of his college career , Glass received an amateur tryout contract from Florida 's American Hockey League ( AHL ) affiliate , the Rochester Americans , on March 21 , 2007 . He notched his first professional point , an assist , against the Syracuse Crunch four days later . Playing the final four games of the 2006 – 07 AHL season , he finished with one assist in his initial stint with the Americans . After signing his first NHL contract with the Panthers in August 2007 , Glass split the 2007 – 08 season between Rochester and Florida . He began the campaign in the AHL , scoring his first professional goal against goaltender Jaroslav <unk> in a game against the Hamilton Bulldogs on October 12 , 2007 . The following month , he received his first NHL call @-@ up and earned just over a minute of ice time in his NHL debut against the Carolina Hurricanes , a 4 – 3 loss on November 12 , 2007 . After being sent back down within eight days , Glass earned two more call @-@ ups over the course of the season . On January 22 , 2008 , he scored his first NHL goal against Ray Emery in a 5 – 3 win against the Ottawa Senators . Playing 41 games in his rookie NHL season , he notched a goal and an assist , while also recording 11 points in 43 AHL games . 
 Beginning the 2008 – 09 season in the AHL for the second consecutive year , Glass was appointed as an alternate captain for the Americans . After appearing in 44 AHL games ( 4 goals and 13 points ) and 3 NHL games ( no points ) , he sustained a season @-@ ending injury on February 7 , 2009 . Not receiving a qualifying offer from the Panthers , Glass became an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season . On the first day of free agency , he was signed by the Vancouver Canucks to a one @-@ year , two @-@ way deal worth the league @-@ minimum $ 500 @,@ 000 at the NHL level . 
 With early injuries to Canucks forwards during training camp , Glass made the lineup for the start of the season as the thirteenth forward . He scored his first goal with the Canucks on November 1 , 2009 , in a 3 – 0 win against the Colorado Avalanche . He recorded 11 points over 67 games in 2009 – 10 . In the off @-@ season , Glass filed for arbitration , looking for a one @-@ way contract to ensure an NHL salary . He was re @-@ signed on July 12 , 2010 , to a one @-@ year contract worth $ 625 @,@ 000 . 
 Until suffering an upper @-@ body injury during practice in early March 2011 , Glass was the lone staple on the Canucks ' fourth line , playing with a rotation of wingers and centers . Glass missed nine games with the injury , returning in early April . He finished the regular season with 3 goals and 10 points over 73 games , helping the Canucks win the Presidents ' Trophy as the team with the league 's best record . With the top seed in the Western Conference , the Canucks eliminated the Chicago Blackhawks , Nashville Predators and San Jose Sharks en route to the 2011 Stanley Cup Finals , where they lost in seven games to the Boston Bruins . Over 20 post @-@ season games , Glass recorded no points and 18 penalty minutes . 
 Set to become an unrestricted free agent in the off @-@ season , Glass expressed a desire to return to the Canucks , but he was not re @-@ signed . On July 1 , 2011 , he agreed to a one @-@ year contract worth $ 750 @,@ 000 with the Winnipeg Jets . 
 Playing on the Jets ' third line with Jim Slater and Chris Thorburn , Glass set career highs in goals , assists and points in his first season with Winnipeg . On July 1 , 2012 , he signed a 2 @-@ year contract with the Pittsburgh Penguins , worth $ 1 @,@ 100 @,@ 000 per year . 
 On July 1 , 2014 , Glass signed as a free agent with the New York Rangers on a three @-@ year contract worth $ 1 @.@ 45 million per year . 
 Glass underwhelmed in 2014 @-@ 15 , with 6 points in 66 games , and after a poor start to the 2015 @-@ 16 season , Glass was put on waivers and assigned to the Hartford Wolf Pack . 
 Glass was then recalled by the Rangers on December 14 after Jarret Stoll was waived , and has remained in the Rangers ' lineup since then . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Glass has established himself as primarily a fourth @-@ line forward in the NHL . His work ethic makes him effective at blocking shots . A physical and aggressive player , he is also known to be a fighter . He has also been identified as a leader on his teams , serving as an alternate captain Rochester in the AHL , as well as a captain with Dartmouth during his college career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Glass was born in Regina , Saskatchewan , to Fred and Cathy Glass . He has a brother , Darnell , and a sister , Shayna . Growing up in nearby Craven , Saskatchewan , he graduated from Lumsden High School . An honour roll student , Glass also played on several athletic high school teams . He won provincial championships in baseball and hockey , as well bronze medals in the 200 metre and 4x100 metre relay track events . In July 2011 , Glass married Emily Tracy in Seattle , Washington ; the couple has one child . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 = Samuel Shute = 
 Samuel Shute ( January 12 , 1662 – April 15 , 1742 ) was an English military officer and royal governor of the provinces of Massachusetts and New Hampshire . After serving in the Nine Years ' War and the War of the Spanish Succession , he was appointed by King George I as governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire in 1716 . His tenure was marked by virulent disagreements with the Massachusetts assembly on a variety of issues , and by poorly conducted diplomacy with respect to the Native American Wabanaki Confederacy of northern New England that led to Dummer 's War ( 1722 – 1725 ) . 
 Although Shute was partly responsible for the breakdown in negotiations with the Wabanakis , he returned to England in early 1723 to procure resolutions to his ongoing disagreements with the Massachusetts assembly , leaving conduct of the war to Lieutenant Governor William Dummer . His protests resulted in the issuance in 1725 of the Explanatory Charter , essentially confirming his position in the disputes with the assembly . He did not return to New England , being replaced as governor in 1728 by William Burnet , and refused to be considered for reappointment after Burnet 's sudden death in 1729 . 
 Thomas Hutchinson ( Massachusetts royal governor in the early 1770s ) , in his history of Massachusetts , described Shute 's tenure as governor as the most contentious since the Antinomian Controversy of the 1630s . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Samuel Shute was born in London , England on January 12 , 1662 . He was the eldest of six children of Benjamin Shute , a London merchant . His mother , identified in sources as Elizabeth , Patience , or Mary , was the daughter of Joseph Caryl , a dissenting Presbyterian clergyman . His brother John , afterward Lord Barrington , became an influential member of parliament , political leader of religious Dissenters , and confidant of King George I. Shute was educated by Rev. Charles Morton , who afterward emigrated to New England . Shute then attended the University of Leyden in Holland and subsequently entered the English army , serving under William III . 
 In the War of the Spanish Succession Shute served in the campaigns of the Duke of Marlborough in the 3rd Dragoon Guards . He was a captain of that cavalry regiment when he was wounded at the 1704 Battle of Blenheim ; by the end of the war he had a full promotion to lieutenant @-@ colonel and a brevet promotion to colonel . Upon the accession of King George I in 1714 , Colonel Elizeus Burges was commissioned as governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire . Massachusetts agents Jeremiah Dummer and Jonathan Belcher , representing opponents of a land bank proposal that Burges had promised to support , bribed him £ 1 @,@ 000 to resign before he left England . Dummer and Belcher were then instrumental in promoting Shute as an alternative to Burges , believing among other things that he was likely to be well received in New England because he was from a prominent Dissenting family . 
 = = Governor of Massachusetts and New Hampshire = = 
 Shute arrived in Boston on October 4 , 1716 , where he began a difficult and contentious tenure in office . He signaled his partisanship by first taking up residence with Paul Dudley , son of the last @-@ appointed governor Joseph Dudley and a land bank opponent , rather than Acting Governor William Tailer . 
 = = = New Hampshire = = = 
 Shute 's administration of New Hampshire was not as troublesome as that of Massachusetts , but issues began early . Lieutenant Governor George Vaughan , who had been acting as governor for a year before Shute 's arrival , insisted on claiming full authority to act when Shute was not present in that province . Against direct orders from Shute , Vaughan , in Shute 's absence , dissolved the assembly and dismissed councillor Samuel Penhallow . In September 1717 Shute , with the concurrence of his council , suspended Vaughan , recalled the assembly , and reinstated Penhallow . Vaughan was afterward formally replaced as lieutenant governor by John Wentworth . 
 One positive event connected with the administration of Governor Shute was the resettlement of a large number of Scotch emigrants from the north of Ireland . In early 1718 Reverend William Boyd arrived from Ulster to petition for land on behalf of a number of Presbyterian families seeking to emigrate . Shute favorably received the emissary , and several ships with migrants arrived in August 1718 . They eventually settled in New Hampshire , where they founded the town of Londonderry . This was the beginning of a major wave of Scotch @-@ Irish migration to both New Hampshire and Massachusetts . 
 Shute also made other grants of townships in land that is part of the modern state of New Hampshire . However , much of southwestern New Hampshire was at the time disputed between the two provinces Shute governed , and grants he made in that area went to Massachusetts interests . This upset a number of New Hampshire politicians , notably Lieutenant Governor Wentworth . Wentworth used discontent over these grants , combined with competing ones that he issued himself under New Hampshire authority , to build a power base that would eventually ( after his death ) successfully lobby for the separation of the governorships . 
 = = = Disputes with Massachusetts assembly = = = 
 Shute engaged in a wide array of disputes with the Massachusetts General Court ( the provincial assembly ) concerning the royal prerogative and other issues . During his administration the assembly successfully expanded its authority at the expense of the governor 's , which permanently affected relations between later governors and the assembly until independence . Currency was a major issue which divided the province politically : a large populist faction supported the inflationary issuance of paper currency , while two economically powerful groups supported competing proposals for dealing with the currency problem . The faction that had secured Burges ' appointment supported a private land bank proposal that would issue bills secured by private property , while the Dudleys and their supporters , who backed Shute , favored the idea of paper that was backed by gold . 
 A major opponent representing the popular factions in the province was Elisha Cooke , Jr . , a politician and major landowner in Maine , which was then part of Massachusetts . Cooke 's opposition was rooted in disagreements on the currency , and the matter of logging in the Maine territory . During the Dudley administration logging interests had widely flouted the 1711 White Pine Act , British Parliamentary legislation that reserved large trees on ungranted public lands for the government 's use as ship masts . Shute sought to crack down on this behavior , earning the enmity of Cooke and others . Cooke 's early challenges to the law were legal in nature , but rapidly became political . In 1718 Cooke was nominated to serve on the Governor 's Council by the assembly , but Shute vetoed the choice . The assembly then appointed Cooke to be its speaker in 1720 . This began a constitutional argument about the governor 's powers , for Shute refused to accept Cooke 's appointment , claiming it was within his authority to veto it . The assembly , for its part , refused to appoint anyone else , and the following year seated a different speaker before Shute was given notice of his election . 
 Shute 's disagreements with the assembly also extended to its ability to adjourn for short periods of time . The assembly could only formally be called into session and adjourned by the governor , and provided one means by which the governor could control the assembly ; Shute took issue with a temporary adjournment of six days . This dispute combined with his refusal to approve Cooke 's appointment prompted the assembly to become strongly opposed to Shute on virtually all actions . This recalcitrance extended to a denial of any attempts on the part of the governor to fund the improvement of defenses on the province 's northern and eastern frontiers , where there were ongoing difficulties with the Wabanaki Confederacy . 
 On of Shute 's more notorious controversies concerned the assembly 's refusal to grant him a regular salary . This was a frequent source of dispute , and it spilled over into other matters : Shute 's veto of Cooke 's appointment in 1719 resulted in a reduction of his salary grant . The salary issue would continue to be a regular source of disagreement between the provincial assembly and the governor until the Belcher administration of the 1730s . Shute attempted to impose press censorship after Cooke partisans published pamphlets harshly criticizing his policies , but the assembly refused to pass the proposed legislation , effectively legitimizing freedom of the press in the province . Boston 's conservative religious establishment also expressed reservations over his attendance at Anglican church services , as well as his sometimes ostentatious and loud parties . 
 = = = Indian policy = = = 
 When the War of the Spanish Succession ended in 1713 , its North American theater ( where it was known as Queen Anne 's War ) came to an uneasy end . The Treaty of Utrecht that ended the war did not acknowledge any Native American claims , and contained ambiguous language concerning the French cession of Acadia . The contested areas of northern New England included present @-@ day Nova Scotia , New Brunswick , and eastern Maine . Joseph Dudley had in 1713 negotiated an end to hostilities with the tribes in Massachusetts and New Hampshire , but the written form of the Treaty of Portsmouth differed in content from the orally negotiated agreements , and its terms were being violated by British settlements encroaching on Abenaki lands on Maine 's coasts and rivers . Furthermore , neighboring Nova Scotia 's Mi 'kmaq had not signed any treaties . Both France and Britain claimed the claimed suzerainty over the tribes inhabiting the contested area . The tribes , loosely organized into the Wabanaki Confederacy , asserted their own sovereignty and ownership of much of the disputed area . 
 In a meeting at <unk> , Maine in 1717 Shute and representatives of some of the Wabanakis attempted to reach some agreement concerning colonial encroachment on Native lands and the establishment of provincially operated trading posts . The Kennebec sachem ( chief ) <unk> objected not only to the establishment of settlements on their lands , but also the construction of forts , and claimed sovereign control of those lands . Shute , who often rudely interrupted <unk> , bluntly reasserted British claims to the territory . The Wabanakis were willing to accede to existing illegal settlements if a proper boundary was delineated beyond which settlement would not be allowed ; Shute responded " We desire only what is our own , and that we will have . " This ambiguous response , and the treaty that was ultimately agreed , did not satisfy the Wabanakis . 
 Over the next several years settlers continued to encroach on Wabanaki lands east of the Kennebec River , including the construction of block house fortifications on the east side of the Kennebec River . The Wabanakis responded by raiding livestock . Canso , Nova Scotia , a settlement disputed by all three parties but fortified by Nova Scotia and primarily occupied by Massachusetts fishermen , was also a flashpoint for conflict . After receiving complaints of harassment and raids from Canso @-@ based fishermen in 1718 , Shute dispatched a Royal Navy frigate to the area , which seized French ships and goods . Tensions there were further raised when Canso was attacked in 1720 by the Mi 'kmaq . 
 At a conference in 1720 the Wabanakis agreed to pay 400 fur pelts as restitution for property damage done in Maine , leaving four hostages as surety until the pelts were delivered . Shute also protested the presence of the French Jesuit priest Sebastian Rale , who lived among the Kennebec in central Maine , demanding that he be removed . In July 1721 the Wabanakis delivered half the furs , demanded the return of their hostages , and refused to hand over Rale ( who accompanied them to the meeting site ) . Massachusetts made no official response , and raids soon resumed . 
 The Wabanakis then went to extraordinary lengths to produce a written document reasserting their sovereign claims to disputed areas , delineating the areas they claimed , and threatening violence if their territory was violated . Shute dismissed the letter as " insolent and menacing " , and sent militia forces to <unk> . He also asserted , based on Rale 's influence , that the Wabanaki claims were part of a French intrigue to further French claims to the disputed areas . Following up on this idea , he sent a militia expedition to capture Rale in January 1722 . The force reached the Kennebec village at Norridgewock where Rale was based , but the priest escaped . The militia recovered a strongbox containing his papers ( including communications with French authorities ) , which Shute used to reinforce the claims of French involvement . Shute reiterated British claims of sovereignty over the disputed areas in letters to the Lords of Trade and to Governor General Philippe de Rigaud Vaudreuil of New France . Vaudreuil in response pointed out that although France claimed sovereignty over the area , the Wabanakis maintained ownership , and suggested that Shute misunderstood the way in which ideas of European and Native American ownership interacted . 
 The raid on Norridgewock and the fortification of the Maine coast brought a predictable response : the Wabanakis went to war , raiding British settlements on the Maine coast in 1722 and seizing shipping vessels off Nova Scotia . On July 25 , 1722 , Shute formally declared war on the Wabanakis , marking a formal start to the conflict often referred to as Dummer 's War , since Lieutenant Governor William Dummer would end up conducting the Massachusetts involvement in the war . 
 = = = Decision to leave = = = 
 Under the leadership of Cooke and others of the " country party " , the assembly investigated the province 's expenditures . Finding that some payments of militia had been made fraudulently , the assembly was able to introducing spending bills that very precisely delineated how public funds could be spent ; this represented an increase the assembly 's power at the expense of the governor . The assembly further encroached on the governor 's authority by establishing a committee to oversee the activities of the militia in December 1722 . With the Indian war looming , Shute saw this as a serious threat to his power , and decided that only by returning to London would he be able to correct the situation . Not long after Christmas 1722 Shute sailed for England . 
 = = Later years and legacy = = 
 Upon his arrival in London , Shute presented his many issues to the Privy Council . His opponents were represented by Jeremiah Dummer and Elisha Cooke , the former having long served as colonial agent in London , and the latter being chosen by the assembly to put forward its case . Shute 's arguments were accepted by the council , and only the diplomacy of Dummer convinced the council not to revoke the colonial charter . In 1725 the council issued an explanatory colonial charter confirming Shute 's position on the adjournment issue and the approval of the house speaker , which the provincial assembly reluctantly accepted the following year . Shute was preparing to return to Massachusetts in 1727 when King George I died . This brought about a change of administration in London and a reshuffling of colonial governorships . The Massachusetts and New Hampshire governorships were given to William Burnet , then the governor of New York and New Jersey , and Shute was given a pension . Burnet 's brief administration was dominated by an extended attempt by the governor to secure an annual salary . The sudden death of Burnet in 1729 again opened the Massachusetts and New Hampshire seats . Shute was apparently considered again for the post , but demurred , implicitly offering his support instead to Jonathan Belcher , who was actively seeking the post . 
 Shute , who never married , died in England on Apr. 10 , 1743 . <unk> , Massachusetts is named in his honor . 
 = Artifact ( film ) = 
 Artifact is a 2012 American documentary film . It was directed by Jared Leto under the pseudonym of Bartholomew Cubbins , and produced by Leto and Emma Ludbrook . Artifact chronicles the modern music business as it charts the legal dispute between Leto 's rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars and record label EMI , which filed a $ 30 million breach of contract lawsuit against them in 2008 , after the band tried to exit its contract over a royalties dispute . Thirty Seconds to Mars is shown working with producer Flood to create the 2009 album This Is War , meeting with lawyers between recording sessions . 
 Artifact had its world premiere at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival where it received the People 's Choice Award for Best Documentary . Critics praised the examination of the state of the modern music industry and its focus on the relationship between artists and record companies . The film received a limited theatrical release beginning November 23 , 2013 , before being released digitally on December 3 , 2013 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The film follows rock band Thirty Seconds to Mars as they first learn of and then begin to fight a $ 30 million lawsuit brought by record label EMI . At the time , they had been writing songs in preparation for the follow @-@ up to their 2005 album A Beautiful Lie . For the bulk of the film , the band , consisting of Jared Leto , his brother Shannon Leto , and Tomo Miličević , is shown working with producers Flood and Steve Lillywhite to create what would eventually become This Is War . Between recording sessions , they meet with lawyers to negotiate for the band 's survival . 
 Beyond the band 's specific legal issues and insight into the making of the new album , the film also examines the state of the modern music industry as a whole , focusing on the complex relationships between major labels and their artists . Other musicians give their first @-@ hand accounts of their own experiences in the business . The logistics and economics of how a record company works are explained by music industry insiders , including former EMI employees , music producers and music journalists . They trace the impact of the growing American economic recession on the industry , wherein many companies were taken over by larger groups who thought they could save them . In this instance , Terra Firma Capital Partners sought to rescue EMI despite having little experience in music management . 
 Meanwhile , Thirty Seconds to Mars are also shown struggling with larger questions of art , money , and integrity . Vignettes in this vein include " people talking about everything from love , art , war , the state of the music industry , and the world . " Participants include Irving Azoff , Bob <unk> , technologist Daniel Ek ( founder of music streaming service Spotify ) , Bob Ezrin , Neil Strauss , as well as musicians Chester Bennington , Brandon Boyd , and Serj Tankian . Daniel Levitin , neuroscientist and author of the popular science book This Is Your Brain On Music , also appears , as do the Leto brothers ' mother Constance and a family friend . 
 = = Background = = 
 Despite selling millions of albums , Thirty Seconds to Mars found themselves more than a million dollars in debt to EMI , the parent label of Virgin Records , to which the band was signed at the time . The band also said that they had made no profit from the album sales . In reaction to this , in August 2008 , the band attempted to sign with a new label after completing the A Beautiful Lie tour . This in turn prompted EMI to file a lawsuit stating that the band had failed to produce three of the five records they were obligated to deliver under their 1999 contract . Thirty Seconds to Mars responded to the suit by stating that under California law , where the group is based and had originally signed its deal ( which Virgin had entered into with the by @-@ then @-@ defunct Immortal Records ) , one cannot be bound to a contract for more than seven years . The band had been contracted for nine years , so they decided to exercise their legal right to terminate " our old , out @-@ of @-@ date contract , which , according to the law , is null and void . " 
 In a statement , an EMI spokesperson maintained that the label had been forced to take procedural , legal steps in order to protect their investment and rights during contract renegotiations initiated by the band and management . However , Thirty Seconds to Mars also expressed dissatisfaction with the then @-@ recent Terra Firma takeover of EMI , as most of the employees the band had worked with were fired as a result of a major restructuring under TF chairman Guy Hands . The band were among several of the label 's artists , unhappy with the transition , who quickly tried to terminate their contracts ; the list also included The Rolling Stones and Paul McCartney . Former EMI executives gave interviews describing how the sale resulted in massive upheaval and staff cuts . 
 After nearly a year of legal battles , Thirty Seconds To Mars announced on April 28 , 2009 , that the suit had been settled . The suit was resolved following a defence based on a contract case involving actress Olivia de Havilland decades before . Jared Leto explained , " The California Appeals Court ruled that no service contract in California is valid after seven years , and it became known as the De Havilland Law after she used it to get out of her contract with Warner Bros. " Thirty Seconds to Mars then signed a new contract with EMI . Leto said that the band had " resolved our differences with EMI " and the decision had been made because of " the willingness and enthusiasm by EMI to address our major concerns and issues , [ and ] the opportunity to return to work with a team so committed and passionate about Thirty Seconds to Mars . " After the suit 's resolution , Nick Gatfield , EMI Music 's president of A & R labels for North America and the United Kingdom , stated , " We are thrilled to have set aside our differences and signed a new agreement with Thirty Seconds to Mars . Our relationship has been extremely rewarding and successful , and we 're eager to move forward and put our global team to work . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Artifact was made on a limited budget provided by Leto and producing partner Emma Ludbrook through the production company Sisyphus Corporation . It was shot digitally and filmed in various parts of Los Angeles , California , beginning with the advent of Thirty Seconds to Mars ' legal struggles in August 2008 . Four camera operators taped more than 3 @,@ 000 hours of raw footage involving the band , ending in 2009 with the lawsuit 's resolution and the subsequent release of their new album . The footage included real @-@ life recording sessions and legal meetings . The final film was produced by Ludbrook and Leto , who also made his directorial debut under his longtime pseudonym Bartholomew Cubbins . Shelby Siegel served as supervising editor . The film 's soundtrack features songs by Thirty Seconds to Mars , with additional music provided by Cliff Martinez and Maya Arulpragasam . 
 Given the band 's successful use of the De Havilland Law , Leto contacted actress Olivia de Havilland , but she declined to participate on @-@ camera , although she did agree to meet with him . 
 The film was initially planned as a documentary about Thirty Seconds to Mars ' creative process while recording their next album , but upon the advent of the lawsuit , was retooled as a documentary about making that album in the face of a legal battle that might prevent it from being released . Leto described the film as " a really special , DIY project . " He explained , " We all shared a part of our lives that we 've never shared on @-@ screen before , a very intimate and personal part of our lives . We take you ... inside the studio , and in our hearts , and in our minds , to share how difficult this point is in our lives — just battling this massive corporation , and fighting for what we believe in . " Upon the film 's release , Leto told Rolling Stone that " I hope that artists and audiences watch this film and get a greater understanding of how things work [ in the record industry ] , because understanding is the beginning of change . " 
 = = Release = = 
 Artifact premiered at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival on September 15 . It was later screened on November 8 , 2012 at the opening night of the DOC NYC , a New York City documentary festival . In November 2012 , it was announced that The Works International had picked up international sales for the film . On November 26 , 2012 , Artifact received the Audience Award at the 22nd Gotham Independent Film Awards . On March 13 , 2013 , the film was screened at the South by Southwest . It also appeared at the Melbourne International Film Festival on August 9 , 2013 . Thirty Seconds to Mars held a special screening of Artifact on August 31 , 2013 on the online platform VyRT . 
 The film was released on DVD in September 2013 through VyRT . It received a worldwide theatrical release beginning November 23 , 2013 . <unk> released the film to digital retailers and video on demand services on December 3 , 2013 . At the end of 2013 , Artifact was included among the iTunes Movies Indie Hits of 2013 . In February 2014 , BBC Worldwide picked up international television rights to distribute the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Upon its premiere at the 2012 Toronto International Film Festival , Artifact was favorably received by critics and audiences for its look inside the state of the modern recording industry . It received a standing ovation and won the People 's Choice Award for Best Documentary . Jason <unk> , writing for Twitch Film , described Artifact as an interesting film " asking a number of important questions about the commerce of art , and does so in an engaging way . " Film critic Kenji Lloyd awarded Artifact five stars out of five and called it " one of the greatest music documentaries ever made , and an important documentary for our times . " He felt that the film " gives an honest , frank , and inside look at the antiquated system that bands are faced with when they 're attached to a major label . " Allan Tong of Filmmaker wrote that Leto " does a fine job ( with his editors ) of weaving the lawsuit with interviews from rock journalists and former EMI executives . " Samantha Stott from The New Transmission felt that " Artifact is one of the most honest pieces of work about the industry to have ever been made . It is a real credit to everyone involved and that shared their opinions , views and insights . " 
 Ann Hornaday from The Washington Post praised the film , describing it as enlightening and engaging . Francesca McCaffery of BlackBook commented that the film " highlights the creative challenges of making art in a way that many documentaries often aspire to , but rarely achieve . " She also praised Leto 's direction . Film critic Mike <unk> awarded the film three and a half out of four stars and wrote , " Artifact is a fascinating documentary because it pulls back the curtain on the music business . " He said that the film works both as an " accounting of a good band making an album during a bad time " and as an " indictment of a business practice that screws the people who actually make the product . " Natalie <unk> from Forbes stated that the film " <unk> breaks down what Leto considers to be grave imbalances , showing in one infographic how label contracts can result in bands accumulating debt with every release thanks to promotional costs , recording bills and advances record labels recoup . " Isabel <unk> from <unk> This ! gave the film four stars out of five and called it the Super Size Me of the music industry . 
 = South Pacific ( musical ) = 
 South Pacific is a musical composed by Richard Rodgers , with lyrics by Oscar Hammerstein II and book by Hammerstein and Joshua Logan . The work premiered in 1949 on Broadway and was an immediate hit , running for 1 @,@ 925 performances . The plot of the musical is based on James A. Michener 's Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning 1947 book Tales of the South Pacific and combines elements of several of those stories . Rodgers and Hammerstein believed they could write a musical based on Michener 's work that would be financially successful and , at the same time , would send a strong progressive message on racism . 
 The plot centers on an American nurse stationed on a South Pacific island during World War II , who falls in love with a middle @-@ aged expatriate French plantation owner but struggles to accept his mixed @-@ race children . A secondary romance , between a U.S. lieutenant and a young Tonkinese woman , explores his fears of the social consequences should he marry his Asian sweetheart . The issue of racial prejudice is candidly explored throughout the musical , most controversially in the lieutenant 's song , " You 've Got to Be Carefully Taught " . Supporting characters , including a comic petty officer and the Tonkinese girl 's mother , help to tie the stories together . Because he lacked military knowledge , Hammerstein had difficulty writing that part of the script ; the director of the original production , Logan , assisted him and received credit as co @-@ writer of the book . 
 The original Broadway production enjoyed immense critical and box @-@ office success , became the second @-@ longest running Broadway musical to that point ( behind Rodgers and Hammerstein 's earlier Oklahoma ! ( 1943 ) ) , and has remained popular ever since . After they signed Ezio Pinza and Mary Martin as the leads , Rodgers and Hammerstein wrote several of the songs with the particular talents of their stars in mind . The piece won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1950 . Especially in the Southern U.S. , its racial theme provoked controversy , for which its authors were unapologetic . Several of its songs , including " Bali Ha 'i " , " I 'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair " , " Some Enchanted Evening " , " There Is Nothing Like a Dame " , " Happy Talk " , " Younger Than Springtime " , and " I 'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy " , have become popular standards . 
 The production won ten Tony Awards , including Best Musical , Best Score , and Best Libretto , and it is the only musical production to win Tony Awards in all four acting categories . Its original cast album was the bestselling record of the 1940s , and other recordings of the show have also been popular . The show has enjoyed many successful revivals and tours , spawning a 1958 film and television adaptations . The 2008 Broadway revival , a critical success , ran for 996 performances and won seven Tonys , including Best Musical Revival . 
 = = Background = = 
 Although book editor and university instructor James Michener could have avoided military service in World War II as a birthright Quaker , he enlisted in the U.S. Navy in October 1942 . He was not sent to the South Pacific theater until April 1944 , when he was assigned to write a history of the Navy in the Pacific and was allowed to travel widely . He survived a plane crash in New Caledonia ; the near @-@ death experience motivated him to write fiction , and he began listening to the stories told by soldiers . One journey took him to the Treasury Islands , where he discovered an unpleasant village , called Bali @-@ ha 'i , populated by " scrawny residents and only one pig " . Struck by the name , Michener wrote it down and soon began to record , on a battered typewriter , his version of the tales . On a plantation on the island of Espiritu Santo , he met a woman named Bloody Mary ; she was small , almost toothless , her face stained with red betel juice . Punctuated with profanity learned from GIs , she complained endlessly to Michener about the French colonial government , which refused to allow her and other Tonkinese to return to their native Vietnam , lest the plantations be depopulated . She told him also of her plans to oppose colonialism in French Indochina . These stories , collected into Tales of the South Pacific , won Michener the 1948 Pulitzer Prize for fiction . 
 Tales of the South Pacific comprises nineteen stories . Each stands independently but revolves around the preparation for an American military operation to dislodge the Japanese from a nearby island . This operation , dubbed Alligator , occurs in the penultimate story , " The Landing at <unk> " . Many of the characters die in that battle , and the last story is titled " The Cemetery at <unk> Point " . The stories are thematically linked in pairs : the first and final stories are reflective , the second and eighteenth involve battle , the third and seventeenth involve preparation for battle , and so on . The tenth story , at the center , however , is not paired with any other . This story , " Fo ' Dolla ' " , was one of only four of his many works that Michener later admitted to holding in high regard . It was the one that attracted Rodgers and Hammerstein 's attention for its potential to be converted into a stage work . 
 " Fo ' Dolla ' " , set in part on the island of Bali @-@ ha 'i , focuses on the romance between a young Tonkinese woman , Liat , and one of the Americans , Marine Lieutenant Joe Cable , a Princeton graduate and scion of a wealthy Main Line family . Pressed to marry Liat by her mother , Bloody Mary , Cable reluctantly declines , realizing that the Asian girl would never be accepted by his family or Philadelphia society . He leaves for battle ( where he will die ) as Bloody Mary proceeds with her backup plan , to <unk> Liat to a wealthy French planter on the islands . Cable struggles , during the story , with his own racism : he is able to overcome it sufficiently to love Liat , but not enough to take her home . 
 Another source of the musical is the eighth story , " Our Heroine " , which is thematically paired with the 12th , " A Boar 's Tooth " , as both involve American encounters with local cultures . " Our Heroine " tells of the romance between Navy nurse Nellie Forbush , from rural Arkansas , and a wealthy , sophisticated planter , Frenchman Emile De Becque . After falling in love with Emile , Nellie ( who is introduced briefly in story # 4 , " An Officer and a Gentleman " ) learns that Emile has eight daughters , out of wedlock , with several local women . Michener tells us that " any person ... who was not white or yellow was a nigger " to Nellie , and while she is willing to accept two of the children ( of French @-@ Asian descent ) who remain in Emile 's household , she is taken aback by the other two girls who live there , evidence that the planter had cohabited with a darker Polynesian woman . To her great relief , she learns that this woman is dead , but Nellie endangers her relationship with Emile when she is initially unable to accept Emile 's " nigger children . " Nellie overcomes her feelings and returns to spend her life with her plantation owner . 
 Additional elements of South Pacific had their genesis in others of Michener 's 19 tales . One introduces the character of Bloody Mary ; another tells of a British spy hidden on the Japanese @-@ controlled island who relays information about Japanese movements to Allied forces by radio . Michener based the spy , dubbed " the <unk> Man " , on Captain Martin Clemens , a Scot , who unlike his fictional counterpart , survived the war . The stories also tell of the seemingly endless waiting that precedes battle , and the efforts of the Americans to repel boredom , which would inspire the song " There Is Nothing Like a Dame " . Several of the stories involve the Seabee , Luther Billis , who in the musical would be used both for comic relief and to tie together episodes involving otherwise unconnected characters . 
 = = Creation = = 
 = = = Inception = = = 
 In the early 1940s , composer Richard Rodgers and lyricist Oscar Hammerstein II , each a longtime Broadway veteran , joined forces and began their collaboration by writing two musicals that became massive hits , Oklahoma ! ( 1943 ) and Carousel ( 1945 ) . An innovation for its time in integrating song , dialogue and dance , Oklahoma ! would serve as " the model for Broadway shows for decades " . In 1999 , Time magazine named Carousel the best musical of the century , writing that Rodgers and Hammerstein " set the standards for the 20th century musical " . Their next effort , Allegro ( 1947 ) , was a comparative disappointment , running for less than a year , although it turned a small profit . After this , the two were determined to achieve another hit . 
 According to director Joshua Logan , a friend of both theatre men , he and Leland Hayward mentioned Michener 's best @-@ selling book to Rodgers as a possible basis for the duo 's next play , but the composer took no action . Logan recalled that he then pointed it out to Hammerstein , who read Michener 's book and spoke to Rodgers ; the two agreed to do the project so long as they had majority control , to which Hayward grudgingly agreed . Michener , in his 1992 memoirs , however , wrote that the stories were first pitched as a movie concept to MGM by Kenneth MacKenna , head of the studio 's literary department . MacKenna 's half brother was Jo Mielziner , who had designed the sets for Carousel and Allegro . Michener states that Mielziner learned of the work from MacKenna and brought it to the attention of Hammerstein and Rodgers , pledging to create the sets if they took on the project . 
 Hayward attempted to buy the rights from Michener outright , offering $ 500 ; Michener declined . Although playwright Lynn Riggs had received 1 @.@ 5 % of the box office grosses for the right to adapt Green Grow the Lilacs into Oklahoma ! , Michener never regretted accepting one percent of the gross receipts from South Pacific . As Rodgers and Hammerstein began their work on the adaptation , Michener worked mostly with the lyricist , but Rodgers was concerned about the implications of the setting , fearing that he would have to include ukuleles and guitars , which he disliked . Michener assured him that the only instrument he had ever heard the natives play was an emptied barrel of gasoline , drummed upon with clubs . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Soon after their purchase of the rights , Rodgers and Hammerstein decided not to include a ballet , as in their earlier works , feeling that the realism of the setting would not support one . Concerned that an adaptation too focused on " Fo ' Dolla ' " , the story of the encounter between Cable and Liat , would be too similar to Madama Butterfly , Hammerstein spent months studying the other stories and focused his attention on " Our Heroine " , the tale of the romance between Nellie and Emile . The team decided to include both romances in the musical play . It was conventional at the time that if one love story in a musical was serious , the other would be more comedic , but in this case both were serious and focused on racial prejudice . They decided to increase the role played by Luther Billis in the stories , merging experiences and elements of several other characters into him . Billis 's wheeling and dealing would provide comic relief . They also shortened the title to South Pacific – Rodgers related that the producers tired of people making risqué puns on the word " tales " . 
 In early drafts of the musical , Hammerstein gave significant parts to two characters who eventually came to have only minor roles , Bill Harbison and Dinah Culbert . Harbison is one of the major characters in Tales of the South Pacific ; a model officer at the start , he gradually degenerates to the point where , with battle imminent , he requests his influential father @-@ in @-@ law to procure for him a transfer to a post in the United States . Hammerstein conceived of him as a rival to Emile for Nellie 's affections , and gave him a song , " The Bright Young Executive of Today " . As redrafts focused the play on the two couples , Harbison became less essential , and he was relegated to a small role as the executive officer to the commander of the island , Captain Brackett . Dinah , a nurse and friend of Nellie , is also a major character in Michener 's work , and was seen as a possible love interest for Billis , though any actual romance was limited by Navy regulations forbidding fraternization between officers ( all American nurses in World War II were commissioned officers ) and enlisted men . " I 'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair " originated as a duet for Dinah and Nellie , with Dinah beginning the song and developing its theme . According to Lovensheimer , Nellie 's and Dinah 's " friendship became increasingly incidental to the plot as the writing continued . Hammerstein eventually realized that the decision to wash Emile out of her hair had to be Nellie 's . Only then did the scene have the dramatic potential for Nellie 's emotional transition " as she realizes her love for Emile . In the final version , Dinah retains one solo line in the song . 
 Joshua Logan , in his memoirs , stated that after months of effort in the first half of 1948 , Hammerstein had written only the first scene , an outline , and some lyrics . Hammerstein was having trouble due to lack of knowledge of the military , a matter with which Logan , a veteran of the armed forces , was able to help . The dialogue was written in consultation between the two of them , and eventually Logan asked to be credited for his work . Rodgers and Hammerstein decided that while Logan would receive co @-@ writing credit on the book , he would receive no author 's royalties . Logan stated that a contract putting these changes into force was sent over to his lawyer with instructions that unless it was signed within two hours , Logan need not show up for rehearsals as director . Logan signed , although his lawyer did not then tell him about the ultimatum . Through the decades that followed , Logan brought the matter up from time to time , demanding compensation , but when he included his version of the events in his 1976 memoirs , it was disputed by Rodgers ( Hammerstein had died in 1960 ) . Rodgers biographer Meryle Secrest suggests that Logan was compensated when South Pacific was filmed in 1958 , as Logan received a substantial share of the profits as director . According to Michener biographer Stephen J. May , " it is difficult to assess just how much of the final book Josh Logan was responsible for . Some estimates say 30 to 40 percent . But that percentage is not as critical perhaps as his knowledge of military lore and directing for the theatre , without which the creation of South Pacific would have collapsed during that summer of 1948 . " 
 Rodgers composed the music once he received the lyrics from Hammerstein . A number of stories are told of the speed with which he wrote the music for South Pacific ' s numbers . " Happy Talk " was said to have been composed in about twenty minutes ; when Hammerstein , who had sent the lyrics by messenger , called to check whether Rodgers had received them , his partner informed him that he had both lyrics and music . Legend has it he composed " Bali Ha 'i " in ten minutes over coffee in Logan 's apartment ; what he did create in that time frame was the three @-@ note motif which begins both song and musical . Hammerstein 's lyrics for " Bali Ha 'i " were inspired by the stage backdrop which designer Jo Mielziner had painted . Feeling that the island of Bali Ha 'i did not appear mysterious enough , Mielziner painted some mist near the summit of its volcano . When Hammerstein saw this he immediately thought of the lyric , " my head sticking up from a low @-@ flying cloud " and the rest of the song followed easily from that . 
 = = = Casting and out @-@ of @-@ town previews = = = 
 In May 1948 , Rodgers received a telephone call from Edwin Lester of the Los Angeles Civic Light Opera . Lester had signed former Metropolitan Opera star Ezio Pinza for $ 25 @,@ 000 to star in a new show , Mr. Ambassador . The show had not been written , and it never would be . Lester hoped that Rodgers would take over Pinza 's contract . Pinza had become bored as the Met 's leading lyric bass , and having played the great opera houses , sought other worlds to conquer . Rodgers immediately saw Pinza as perfect for the role of Emile . Lester carefully broached the subject to Pinza and his wife / business manager and provided them with a copy of Tales of the South Pacific . When Pinza read the book , he told Lester , " Sell me right away ! " Pinza 's contract for South Pacific included a clause limiting his singing to 15 minutes per performance . With Pinza 's signing , Rodgers and Hammerstein decided to make his the lead male role , subordinating the story of the pair of young lovers . It was unusual on Broadway for the romantic lead to be an older male . 
 For the role of Nellie , Rodgers sought Mary Martin , who had nearly been cast to originate the role of <unk> in Oklahoma ! Martin was playing the title role in the touring company of Annie Get Your Gun . After Hammerstein and Rodgers saw her play in Los Angeles in mid @-@ 1948 , they asked her to consider the part . Martin was reluctant to sing opposite Pinza 's powerful voice ; Rodgers assured her he would see to it the two never sang at the same time , a promise he mostly kept . Rodgers and Martin lived near each other in Connecticut , and after her tour Rodgers invited Martin and her husband , Richard Halliday , to his home to hear the three songs for the musical that he had completed , none of them for Nellie . " Some Enchanted Evening " especially struck Martin , and although disappointed the song was not for her , she agreed to do the part . Although Nellie and Emile were already fully developed characters in Michener 's stories , during the creation of South Pacific , Rodgers , Hammerstein and Logan began to adapt the roles specifically to the talents of Martin and Pinza and to tailor the music for their voices . 
 Martin influenced several of her songs . While showering one day during rehearsals , she came up with the idea for a scene in which she would shampoo her hair onstage . This gave rise to " I 'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair " . Built around a primitive shower that Logan remembered from his time in the military , the song became one of the most talked @-@ about in South Pacific . To introduce another of Martin 's numbers to her , Rodgers called her over to his apartment , where he and Hammerstein played " I 'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy " for her . When Martin essayed it for herself , she sang the final 26 words , as intended , with a single breath , and fell off her piano bench . Rodgers gazed down at her , " That 's exactly what I want . Never do it differently . We must feel you couldn 't squeeze out another sound . " 
 The producers held extensive auditions to fill the other roles . Myron McCormick was cast as Billis ; according to Logan , no one else was seriously considered . The two roles which gave the most trouble were those of Cable and Bloody Mary . They tried to get Harold Keel for the role of Cable ( he had played Curly in the West End production of Oklahoma ! ) only to find that he had signed a contract with MGM under the name Howard Keel . William <unk> was eventually cast as Cable , though Logan instructed him to lose 20 pounds ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) . African @-@ American singer Juanita Hall was cast as Bloody Mary ; Logan recalled that at her audition , she took a squatting pose which proclaimed , " I am Bloody Mary and don 't you dare cast anyone else ! " Betta St. John , who under the name Betty Striegler had replaced Bambi Linn as Louise in Carousel , took the role of Liat . Logan directed ( he and Hayward co @-@ produced with Rodgers and Hammerstein ) , Mielziner did the stage design , Trude Rittmann and Robert Russell Bennett prepared the orchestration , and Elizabeth Montgomery of Motley Theatre Design Group designed the costumes . Salvatore Dell 'Isola served as music director . 
 = = = Original production = = = 
 Rehearsals began at Broadway 's Belasco Theatre on February 2 , 1949 . There was no formal chorus ; each of the nurses and Seabees was given a name , and , in the case of the men , $ 50 to equip themselves with what clothing they felt their characters would wear from the military surplus shops which lined West 42nd Street . Don Fellows , the first Lt. Buzz Adams , drew on his wartime experience as a Marine to purchase a non @-@ regulation baseball cap and black ankle boots . Martin and Pinza had not known each other , but they soon formed a strong friendship . Of the mood backstage , " everyone agreed : throughout the rehearsals Logan was fiery , demanding , and brilliantly inventive . " He implemented lap changes ( pioneered by Rodgers and Hammerstein in Allegro ) , whereby the actors coming on next would already be on a darkened part of the stage as one scene concluded . This allowed the musical to continue without interruption by scene changes , making the action almost seamless . He soon had the Seabees pacing back and forth like caged animals during " There Is Nothing Like a Dame " , a staging so effective it was never changed during the run of the show . One Logan innovation that Rodgers and Hammerstein reluctantly accepted was to have Cable remove his shirt during the blackout after he and Liat passionately embrace on first meeting , his partial nakedness symbolizing their lovemaking . As originally planned , Martin was supposed to conclude " I 'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy " with an exuberant cartwheel across the stage . This was eliminated after she vaulted into the orchestra pit , knocking out <unk> . 
 There were no major difficulties during the four weeks of rehearsal in New York ; Martin later remembered that the " gypsy run @-@ through " for friends and professional associates on a bare stage was met with some of the most enthusiastic applause she could remember . One of the few people having trouble was Pinza , who had difficulty adjusting to the constant alterations in the show – he was used to the operatic world , where a role rarely changed once learned . Pinza 's mispronunciations of English exasperated Logan , and driving to New Haven for the first week of previews , Pinza discussed with his wife the possibility of a return to the Met , where he knew audiences would welcome him . She told him to let South Pacific ' s attendees decide for themselves . When the tryouts began in New Haven on March 7 , the play was an immediate hit ; the New Haven Register wrote , " South Pacific should make history " . 
 Nevertheless , a number of changes were made in New Haven and in the subsequent two weeks of previews in Boston . The show was running long ; Logan persuaded his friend , playwright Emlyn Williams , to go over the script and cut extraneous dialogue . There were wide expectations of a hit ; producer Mike Todd came backstage and advised that the show not be taken to New York " because it 's too damned good for them " . The show moved to Boston , where it was so successful that playwright George S. Kaufman joked that people lining up there at the Shubert Theatre " don 't actually want anything ... They just want to push money under the doors . " 
 South Pacific opened on Broadway on April 7 , 1949 , at the Majestic Theatre . The advance sale was $ 400 @,@ 000 , and an additional $ 700 @,@ 000 in sales was made soon after the opening . The first night audience was packed with important Broadway , business , and arts leaders . The audience repeatedly stopped the show with extended applause , which was sustained at length at the final curtain . Rodgers and Hammerstein had preferred , in the past , not to sponsor an afterparty , but they rented the St. Regis Hotel 's roof and ordered 200 copies of The New York Times in the anticipation of a hit . Times critic Brooks Atkinson gave the show a rave review . 
 Three days after the opening , Pinza signed a contract with MGM to star in films once his obligation to appear in the show expired . He left the show June 1 , 1950 , replaced by Ray Middleton , though Pinza missed a number of shows due to illness before that . Martin recalled that , unused to performing eight shows a week , the former opera star would sing full out early in the week , leaving himself little voice towards the end , and would have his understudy go on . Nevertheless , during the year he was in the show , and although aged 58 , he was acclaimed as a sex symbol ; George Jean Nathan wrote that " Pinza has taken the place of Hot Springs , Saratoga , and hormone injections for all the other old boys " . 
 A national tour began in Cleveland , Ohio , in April 1950 ; it ran for five years and starred Richard Eastham as Emile , Janet Blair as Nellie and Ray Walston as Billis , a role Walston would reprise in London and in the 1958 film . For the 48 @,@ 000 tickets available in Cleveland , 250 @,@ 000 requests were submitted , causing the box office to close for three weeks to process them . Jeanne Bal and Iva Withers were later <unk> on this tour . A scaled @-@ down version toured military bases in Korea in 1951 ; by the request of Hammerstein and Rodgers , officers and enlisted soldiers sat together to view it . 
 Martin left the Broadway production in 1951 to appear in the original London West End production ; Martha Wright replaced her . Despite the departure of both original stars , the show remained a huge attraction in New York . Cloris Leachman also played Nellie during the New York run ; George Britton was among the later <unk> . The London production ran from November 1 , 1951 for 802 performances at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane . Logan directed ; Martin and Wilbur Evans starred , with Walston as Billis , Muriel Smith as Bloody Mary and Ivor Emmanuel in the small role of Sgt. Johnson . Sean Connery and Martin 's son Larry Hagman , both at the start of their careers , played Seabees in the London production ; Julie Wilson eventually replaced Martin . On January 31 , 1952 , King George VI attended the production with his daughter Princess Elizabeth and other members of the Royal Family . He died less than a week later . 
 The Broadway production transferred to the Broadway Theatre in June 1953 to accommodate Rodgers and Hammerstein 's new show , Me and Juliet , although South Pacific had to be moved to Boston for five weeks because of schedule conflicts . When it closed on January 16 , 1954 , after 1 @,@ 925 performances , it was the second @-@ longest @-@ running musical in Broadway history , after Oklahoma ! . At the final performance , Myron McCormick , the only cast member remaining from the opening , led the performers and audience in " Auld Lang Syne " ; the curtain did not fall but remained raised as the audience left the theatre . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Act I = = = 
 On a South Pacific island during World War II , two half @-@ Polynesian children , Ngana and Jerome , happily sing as they play together ( " Dites @-@ Moi " ) . Ensign Nellie Forbush , a naïve U.S. Navy nurse from Little Rock , Arkansas , has fallen in love with Emile de Becque , a middle @-@ aged French plantation owner , though she has known him only briefly . Even though everyone else is worried about the outcome of the war , Nellie tells Emile that she is sure everything will turn out all right ( " A Cockeyed Optimist " ) . Emile also loves Nellie , and each wonders if the other reciprocates those feelings ( " Twin Soliloquies " ) . Emile expresses his love for Nellie , recalling how they met at the officers ' club dance and instantly were attracted to each other ( " Some Enchanted Evening " ) . Nellie , promising to think about their relationship , returns to the hospital . Emile calls Ngana and Jerome to him , revealing to the audience that they are his children , unbeknownst to Nellie . 
 Meanwhile , the restless American Seabees , led by crafty Luther Billis , lament the absence of available women – Navy nurses are commissioned officers and off @-@ limits to enlisted men . There is one civilian woman on the island , nicknamed " Bloody Mary " , a sassy middle @-@ aged Tonkinese vendor of grass skirts , who engages the sailors in sarcastic , flirtatious banter as she tries to sell them her wares ( " Bloody Mary " ) . Billis yearns to visit the nearby island of Bali Ha 'i – which is off @-@ limits to all but officers – supposedly to witness a Boar 's Tooth Ceremony ( at which he can get an unusual native artifact ) ; the other sailors <unk> him , saying that his real motivation is to see the young French women there . Billis and the sailors further lament their lack of feminine companionship ( " There Is Nothing Like a Dame " ) . 
 U.S. Marine Lieutenant Cable arrives on the island from Guadalcanal , having been sent to take part in a dangerous spy mission whose success could turn the tide of the war against Japan . Bloody Mary tries to persuade Cable to visit " Bali Ha 'i " , mysteriously telling him that it is his special island . Billis , seeing an opportunity , urges Cable to go . Cable meets with his commanding officers , Captain George Brackett and Commander William Harbison , who plan to ask Emile to help with the mission because he used to live on the island where the mission will take place . They ask Nellie to help them find out more about Emile 's background , for example , his politics and why he left France . They have heard , for instance , that Emile committed a murder , and this might make him less than desirable for such a mission . 
 After thinking a bit more about Emile and deciding she has become attracted on the basis of little knowledge of him , Nellie tells the other nurses that she intends to end her relationship with him ( " I 'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair " ) . When he arrives unexpectedly and invites Nellie to a party where he will introduce her to his friends , however , she accepts . Emile declares his love for Nellie and asks her to marry him . When she mentions politics , he speaks of universal freedom , and describes fleeing France after standing up against a bully , who died accidentally as the two fought . After hearing this , Nellie agrees to marry Emile . After he exits , Nellie joyously gives voice to her feelings ( " I 'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy " ) . 
 Cable 's mission is to land on a Japanese @-@ held island and report on Japanese ship movements . The Navy officers ask Emile to be Cable 's guide , but he refuses their request because of his hopes for a new life with Nellie . Commander Harbison , the executive officer , tells Cable to go on leave until the mission can take place , and Billis obtains a boat and takes Cable to Bali Ha 'i . There , Billis participates in the native ceremony , while Bloody Mary introduces Cable to her beautiful daughter , Liat , with whom he must communicate haltingly in French . Believing that Liat 's only chance at a better life is to marry an American officer , Mary leaves Liat alone with Cable . The two are instantly attracted to each other and make love ( " Younger Than Springtime " ) . Billis and the rest of the crew are ready to leave the island , yet must wait for Cable who , unbeknownst to them , is with Liat ( " Bali Ha 'i " ( reprise ) ) . Bloody Mary proudly tells Billis that Cable is going to be her son @-@ in @-@ law . 
 Meanwhile , after Emile 's party , Nellie and he reflect on how happy they are to be in love ( <unk> of " I 'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy " , " Twin Soliloquies " , " Cockeyed Optimist " and " I 'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair " ) . Emile introduces Nellie to Jerome and Ngana . Though she finds them charming , she is shocked when Emile reveals that they are his children by his first wife , a dark @-@ skinned Polynesian woman , now deceased . Nellie is unable to overcome her deep @-@ seated racial prejudices and tearfully leaves Emile , after which he reflects sadly on what might have been ( " Some Enchanted Evening " ( reprise ) ) . 
 = = = Act II = = = 
 It is Thanksgiving Day . The GIs and nurses dance in a holiday revue titled " Thanksgiving Follies " . In the past week , an epidemic of malaria has hit the island of Bali Ha 'i . Having visited Bali Ha 'i often to be with Liat , Cable is also ill , but escapes from the hospital to be with Liat . As Liat and Cable spend more time together , Bloody Mary is delighted . She encourages them to continue their carefree life on the island ( " Happy Talk " ) and urges them to marry . Cable , aware of his family 's prejudices , says he cannot marry a Tonkinese girl . Bloody Mary furiously drags her distraught daughter away , telling Cable that Liat must now marry a much older French plantation owner instead . Cable laments his loss . ( " Younger Than Springtime " ( reprise ) ) . 
 For the final number of the Thanksgiving Follies , Nellie performs a comedy burlesque dressed as a sailor singing the praises of " his " sweetheart ( " Honey Bun " ) . Billis plays Honey Bun , dressed in a blond wig , grass skirt and coconut @-@ shell bra . After the show , Emile asks Nellie to reconsider . She insists that she cannot feel the same way about him since she knows about his children 's Polynesian mother . Frustrated and uncomprehending , Emile asks Cable why he and Nellie have such prejudices . Cable , filled with self @-@ loathing , replies that " it 's not something you 're born with " , yet it is an ingrained part of their upbringing ( " You 've Got to Be Carefully Taught " ) . He also vows that if he gets out of the war alive , he won 't go home to the United States ; everything he wants is on these islands . Emile imagines what might have been ( " This Nearly Was Mine " ) . Dejected and feeling that he has nothing to lose , he agrees to join Cable on his dangerous mission . 
 The mission begins with plenty of air support . Offstage , Billis stows away on the plane , falls out when the plane is hit by anti @-@ aircraft fire , and ends up in the ocean waiting to be rescued ; the massive rescue operation inadvertently becomes a diversion that allows Emile and Cable to land on the other side of the island undetected . The two send back reports on Japanese ships ' movements in the " Slot " , a strategic strait ; American aircraft intercept and destroy the Japanese ships . When the Japanese Zeros strafe the Americans ' position , Emile narrowly escapes , but Cable is killed . 
 Nellie learns of Cable 's death and that Emile is missing . She realizes that she was foolish to reject Emile because of the race of his children 's mother . Bloody Mary and Liat come to Nellie asking where Cable is ; Mary explains that Liat refuses to marry anyone but him . Nellie comforts Liat . Cable and Emile 's espionage work has made it possible for a major offensive , Operation Alligator , to begin . The previously idle fighting men , including Billis , go off to battle . 
 Nellie spends time with Jerome and Ngana and soon comes to love them . While the children are teaching her to sing " Dites @-@ Moi , " suddenly Emile 's voice joins them . Emile has returned to discover that Nellie has overcome her prejudices and has fallen in love with his children . Emile , Nellie and the children rejoice ( " Dites @-@ Moi " ( reprise ) ) . 
 = = Principal roles and notable performers = = 
