 = = Songs = = 
 = = = Additional songs = = = 
 A number of songs were extensively modified , or were omitted , in the weeks leading up to the initial Broadway opening . They are listed in the order of their one @-@ time placement within the show : 
 " Bright Canary Yellow " , a short song for Nellie and Emile , was placed just before " A Cockeyed Optimist " , of which the opening line , " When the sky is a bright canary yellow " was intended to play off of the earlier song . 
 " Now Is the Time " ( Emile ) was placed in the beach scene ( Act I , Scene 7 ) just after Emile tells Nellie why he killed the man in France . It was to be reprised after " You 've Got to Be Carefully Taught " , but it was felt that for Emile to remain on stage while singing of immediate action was self @-@ contradictory . It was replaced in Act I by a reprise of " Some Enchanted Evening " ; in Act II it was initially replaced by " Will You Marry Me ? " ( later repurposed for Pipe Dream ) on March 24 , 1949 , and then by " This Nearly Was Mine " on March 29 , just over a week before the Broadway opening on April 7 . 
 " Loneliness of Evening " ( Emile ) was cut before the Broadway opening . It was to occur in the first backstage scene ( Act II , Scene 2 ) prior to " Happy Talk " and was sung to the same melody as " Bright Canary Yellow " . Its melody can be heard in the 1958 film as Emile reads aloud the card with the flowers he has brought backstage for Nellie to the Thanksgiving show ; the second stanza was repurposed and sung by the Prince in the 1965 TV production of Cinderella . 
 A reprise of " Younger Than Springtime " that follows Cable 's rejection of Liat , was added after January 1949 . It followed two separate attempts at songs for Cable . One song , designated as " My Friend " was a duet for Cable and Liat , included such lyrics as " My friend , my friend , is coming around the bend " and was rejected by Logan as one of the worst he 'd ever heard . Rodgers and Hammerstein 's second attempt to place a song there , " Suddenly Lovely " , was considered by Logan too lightweight and was later repurposed for The King and I as " Getting to Know You " . The melody for " Younger than Springtime " was from a song , " My Wife " , intended for Allegro but not used . 
 " Honey Bun " was not included in the January 1949 libretto ( a note marks that the lyrics will be supplied later ) . 
 " My Girl Back Home " ( Cable ) preceded " You 've Got to be Carefully Taught " in the original score but was cut before the first Broadway production . It appears in the movie version as a duet for Nellie and Cable . It was reinstated for the 2002 London revival , for Cable . 
 " You 've Got to be Carefully Taught " originally had several singing lines for Emile following the conclusion of the lyrics for Cable . 
 = = Revivals = = 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 A limited run of South Pacific by the New York City Center Light Opera Company opened at New York City Center on May 4 , 1955 , closing on May 15 , 1955 . It was directed by Charles Atkin , and had costumes by Motley and sets by Mielziner . The cast included Richard Collett as Emile , Sandra Deel as Nellie , Carol Lawrence as Liat , Sylvia Syms as Bloody Mary and Gene Saks as the Professor . A second limited run of the same production with a different cast opened at City Center on April 24 , 1957 , closing on May 12 , 1957 . It was directed by Jean Dalrymple , and the cast included Robert Wright as Emile , Mindy Carson as Nellie and Hall reprising the role of Bloody Mary . That production was given again in 1961 , this time with Ann <unk> and William Chapman in the lead roles . 
 There have been many stock or summer revivals of South Pacific . One , in 1957 at Long Island 's Westbury Music Fair , occurred at the same time that Arkansas Governor Orval Faubus was resisting the integration of Central High School by the Little Rock Nine . Nellie 's pronouncement that she was from Little Rock was initially met with boos . Logan refused to allow Nellie 's hometown to be changed , so a speech was made before each performance asking for the audience 's forbearance , which was forthcoming . 
 There were two revivals at Lincoln Center . Richard Rodgers produced the 1967 revival , which starred Florence Henderson and Giorgio Tozzi , who had been Rossano Brazzi 's singing voice in the 1958 film . Joe Layton was the director . The cast album was issued on LP and later on CD . The musical toured North America from 1986 to 1988 , headlined by Robert Goulet and Barbara Eden , with David Carroll as Cable , <unk> McQueen as Bloody Mary and Lia Chang as Liat , first directed by Geraldine Fitzgerald and then Ron Field . A New York City Opera production in 1987 featured alternating performers Justino Díaz and Stanley Wexler as Emile , and Susan Bigelow and Marcia Mitzman as Nellie . 
 A 1988 West End revival starred Gemma Craven and Emile Belcourt , supported by <unk> Reading , among others , and was directed by Roger Redfern . It ran at the Prince of Wales Theatre from January 20 , 1988 to January 14 , 1989 . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 A new production with slight revisions to the book and score was produced by the Royal National Theatre at the company 's Olivier Theatre in London for a limited run from December 2001 through April 2002 , timed to celebrate the centenary of Richard Rodgers ' birth . Trevor Nunn directed , with musical staging by Matthew Bourne and designs by John Napier . Lauren Kennedy was Nellie , and Australian actor Philip Quast played Emile , Borrowing from the 1958 film , this production placed the first Emile @-@ Nellie scene after the introduction of Cable , Billis and Bloody Mary . 
 A British touring production of South Pacific opened at the Blackpool Grand Theatre on August 28 , 2007 . The tour ended at the Cardiff New Theatre on July 19 , 2008 . It starred Helena Blackman as Nellie and Dave Willetts as Emile . Julian Woolford directed , with choreography by Chris Hocking . This production was most noted for its staging of the overture , which charted Nellie 's journey from Little Rock , Arkansas , to the South Pacific . On entering the theatre , the audience first saw a map of the U.S. , not the theater of war . 
 A Broadway revival of South Pacific opened on April 3 , 2008 at Lincoln Center 's Vivian Beaumont Theater . Bartlett Sher directed , with musical staging by Christopher <unk> and associate choreographer Joe <unk> . The opening cast starred Kelli O 'Hara as Nellie , Paulo Szot as Emile and Matthew Morrison as Lt. Cable , with Danny Burstein as Billis and Loretta Ables Sayre as Bloody Mary . Laura Osnes replaced O 'Hara during her seven @-@ month maternity leave , beginning in March 2009 , and also between January and August 2010 . Szot alternated with David Pittsinger as Emile . The production closed on August 22 , 2010 , after 37 previews and 996 regular performances . 
 With a few exceptions , the production received rave reviews . Ben Brantley wrote in The New York Times : 
 I know we 're not supposed to expect perfection in this imperfect world , but I 'm darned if I can find one serious flaw in this production . ( Yes , the second act remains weaker than the first , but Mr. Sher almost makes you forget that . ) All of the supporting performances , including those of the ensemble , feel precisely individualized , right down to how they wear Catherine Zuber 's carefully researched period costumes . 
 The production , with most of the original principals , was taped and broadcast live in HD on August 18 , 2010 on the PBS television show Live from Lincoln Center . 
 A production based on the 2008 Broadway revival opened at the Barbican Theatre in London on August 15 , 2011 and closed on October 1 , 2011 . Sher again directed , with the same creative team from the Broadway revival . Szot and Welsh National Opera singer Jason Howard alternated in the role of Emile , with Samantha Womack as Nellie , Ables Sayre as Bloody Mary and Alex Ferns as Billis . The production received mostly positive reviews . A U.K tour followed , with Womack , Ables Sayre and Ferns . 
 A U.S. national tour based on the 2008 revival began in San Francisco at the Golden Gate Theatre on September 18 , 2009 . Sher directed , and the cast starred Rod <unk> ( Emile ) and Carmen Cusack ( Nellie ) . The Sher production was also produced by Opera Australia at the Sydney Opera House from August to September 2012 and then at Princess Theatre , Melbourne through October 2012 . It starred Teddy Tahu Rhodes as Emile , Lisa McCune as Nellie , Kate Ceberano as Bloody Mary and Eddie Perfect as Billis . The production then played in Brisbane for the 2012 holiday season , with Christine Anu as Bloody Mary , and resumed touring in Australia in September 2013 . 
 = = Reception and success = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reviewers gave the original production uniformly glowing reviews ; one critic called it " South Terrific " . The New York Herald Tribune wrote : 
 The new and much @-@ heralded musical , South Pacific , is a show of rare enchantment . It is novel in texture and treatment , rich in dramatic substance , and eloquent in song , a musical play to be cherished . Under Logan 's superb direction , the action shifts with constant fluency . ... [ He ] has kept the book cumulatively arresting and tremendously satisfying . The occasional dances appear to be magical improvisations . It is a long and prodigal entertainment , but it seems all too short . The Rodgers music is not his finest , but it fits the mood and pace of South Pacific so felicitously that one does not miss a series of hit tunes . In the same way the lyrics are part and parcel of a captivating musical unity . 
 The New York Daily Mirror critic wrote , " Programmed as a musical play , South Pacific is just that . It boasts no ballets and no hot hoofing . It has no chorus in the conventional sense . Every one in it plays a part . It is likely to establish a new trend in musicals . " The review continued : " Every number is so outstanding that it is difficult to decide which will be the most popular . " The review in New York World @-@ Telegram found the show to be " the ultimate modern blending of music and popular theatre to date , with the finest kind of balance between story and song , and hilarity and heartbreak . " Brooks Atkinson of The New York Times especially praised Pinza 's performance : " Mr. Pinza 's bass voice is the most beautiful that has been heard on a Broadway stage for an eon or two . He sings ... with infinite delicacy of feeling and loveliness of tone . " He declared that " Some Enchanted Evening " , sung by Pinza , " ought to become reasonably immortal . " Richard Watts , Jr. of the New York Post focused on Mary Martin 's performance , writing , " nothing I have ever seen her do prepared me for the loveliness , humor , gift for joyous characterization , and sheer <unk> of her portrayal of Nellie Forbush ... who is so shocked to find her early racial prejudices cropping up . Hers is a completely irresistible performance . " 
 When South Pacific opened in London in November 1951 , the reviews were mixed . London 's Daily Express praised the music but disliked other elements of that show , writing , " We got a 42nd Street Madame Butterfly , the weakest of all the Hammerstein @-@ Rodgers musicals . The Daily Mail suggested , " The play moved so slowly between its songs that it seemed more like South Soporific . " The Times applauded the songs but indicated that " before the end the singing and the dancing have dwindled to almost nothing , while the rather sad little tale is slowly and conventionally wound up . " The Manchester Guardian , however , noted the anticipation in advance of the opening and concluded that " there was no disappointment ... the show bounces the audience and well deserves the cheers . " Drama critic Kenneth Tynan of The Spectator wrote that South Pacific was " the first musical romance which was seriously involved in an adult subject ... I have nothing to do but thank Logan , Rodgers and Hammerstein and climb up from my knees , a little cramped from the effort of typing in such an unusual position . " 
 A 2006 review asserted : " Many are the knowledgeable and discriminating people for whom Rodgers and Hammerstein 's South Pacific , brilliantly co @-@ written and staged by Joshua Logan , was the greatest musical of all . " In 1987 , however , John Rockwell of The New York Times reviewed the City Opera production , commenting that while South Pacific had been innovative for 1949 , " Sondheim has long since transcended its formal innovations , and the constant reprises of the big tunes sound mechanical . In 1949 , South Pacific epitomized the concerns of the day – America 's responsibilities in the world and the dangers of racism . ... At its 1967 State Theater revival , the show struck many as dated . It still seems that way , with M * A * S * H having contemporized this same setting " . A 2008 Huffington Post review criticized the play as having an Orientalist and Western @-@ centric storyline in which stereotypical natives take on " exotic background roles " in relation to Americans , and it characterized the relationship between Cable and Liat as underage prostitution , charging that she " speaks not a word in the whole musical , only smiles and takes the Yankee to bed . " South Pacific is the only major American musical set in World War II , but former Marine Robert Leckie wrote his memoir of that conflict , Helmet for My Pillow , after he walked out of a performance : " I have to tell the story of how it really was . I have to let people know the war wasn 't a musical . " 
 = = = Box office and awards = = = 
 South Pacific opened on Broadway with $ 400 @,@ 000 in advance sales . People were so eager to obtain tickets that the press wrote about the lengths people had gone to in getting them . Because " house seats " were being sold by scalpers for $ 200 or more , the attorney general 's office threatened to close the show . However , the parties who provided the scalpers with the tickets were never identified , and the show ran without interference . The production had a $ 50 @,@ 600 weekly gross , and ran for 1 @,@ 925 performances . The national tour began in 1950 and grossed $ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in the first year , making $ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 in profit . The original cast album , priced at $ 4 @.@ 85 , sold more than a million copies . 
 The original production of South Pacific won ten Tony Awards , including Best Musical , Best Male Performer ( Pinza ) , Best Female Performer ( Martin ) , Best Supporting Male Performer ( McCormick ) , Best Supporting Female Performer ( Hall ) , Best Director ( Logan ) , Best Book and Best Score . In 1950 , the musical won the Pulitzer Prize for Drama , the second musical to do so after Of Thee I Sing , which won in 1932 . Rodgers became the first composer of musical comedy to win the Pulitzer , as composer George Gershwin had not been recognized for Of Thee I Sing . The Pulitzer Prize was initially given only to Rodgers and Hammerstein ; Logan was later recognized in an amended announcement , much to his annoyance . 
 The 2001 London revival garnered a Laurence Olivier Award for Philip Quast ( Emile ) . The 2008 revival won seven Tony Awards , including Best Revival ( Sher and Szot also won , and the show won in all four design categories ) , and five Drama Desk Awards , including Outstanding Musical Revival . The late Robert Russell Bennett was also honored that season for " his historic contribution to American musical theatre in the field of orchestrations , as represented on Broadway this season by Rodgers and Hammerstein 's South Pacific . " The 2011 London production received three Olivier Award nominations , including Best Musical Revival , but won none . 
 = = Themes and cultural effect = = 
 = = = Race = = = 
 Part of the reason why South Pacific is considered a classic is its confrontation of racism . According to professor Philip Beidler , " Rodgers and Hammerstein 's attempt to use the Broadway theater to make a courageous statement against racial bigotry in general and institutional racism in the postwar United States in particular " forms part of South Pacific ' s legend . Although Tales of the South Pacific treats the question of racism , it does not give it the central place that it takes in the musical . Andrea Most , writing on the " politics of race " in South Pacific , suggests that in the late 1940s , American liberals , such as Rodgers and Hammerstein , turned to the fight for racial equality as a practical means of advancing their progressive views without risking being deemed communists . Trevor Nunn , director of the 2001 West End production , notes the importance of the fact that Nellie , a southerner , ends the play about to be the mother in an interracial family : " It 's being performed in America in 1949 . That 's the resonance . " 
 From the early drafts , Hammerstein and Logan made the issue of racial prejudice central to the story . Hammerstein repeatedly rewrote the Act II backstage scene where Emile , Nellie and Cable confront the question of the Americans ' racism . As critic Robert Butler pointed out in his educational companion to the 2001 London production , " if one young person has a prejudice , it might be a character flaw ; if two young people share a prejudice , it tells us something about the society in which they grew up " . In one draft , Emile advises that the Americans are no better than the Axis Powers , in their prejudice , and suggests they go home to sing songs about how all are created free and equal . Lovensheimer states that a postwar American audience would have found such onstage sentiments to be offensive . In the staged version , Emile 's expressions are limited to two lines arguing that prejudice is not inborn . 
 At the heart of this scene is Cable 's song " You 've Got to Be Carefully Taught " , in which Cable realizes the sources of his own racism . Its frank lyrics made it perhaps the most controversial element of the show . Michener recalled in his memoirs that a delegation of New Englanders had approached him after a New Haven tryout and urged him to recommend the song 's removal to Rodgers and Hammerstein . When Michener told Hammerstein , he laughed and replied , " That 's what the show is about ! " Boston drama critic Elliot Norton , after seeing the show in tryouts , strongly recommended its removal , or at least that Cable sing it less " briskly " , as there was much bigotry in Boston ; Logan replied that that was all the more reason for leaving it unaltered . Several New York reviewers expressed discomfort with the song ; Wolcott Gibbs wrote of " something called ' You 've Got to Be Taught ' , a poem in praise of tolerance that somehow I found a little embarrassing " while John Mason Brown opined that he was " somewhat distressed by the dragged @-@ in didacticism of such a plea for tolerance as ' You 've Got to Be Taught ' " . After the Broadway opening , Hammerstein received a large number of letters concerning " You 've Got to Be Carefully Taught " . Judging by the letters that remain among his papers in the Library of Congress , the reaction was mixed . One correspondent wrote " What can I say to a man who writes , ' You 've got to be taught to hate and fear ? ' ... Now that I know you , I feel that my informants didn 't praise you enough . " Nevertheless , another wrote , " I feel the inclusion of the song particularly in the album and to some extent in the show itself is not helpful to the cause of brotherhood , your intent to the contrary notwithstanding " . 
 When the tour of the show reached a racially segregated theatre in Wilmington , Delaware , Rodgers and Hammerstein threatened to cancel the performances there unless seating was integrated , which it was . In 1953 , with the tour in Atlanta , there was controversy over " You 've Got to Be Carefully Taught " . Two Georgia state legislators , Senator John D. Shepard and Representative David C. Jones , objected to the song , stating that though South Pacific was a fine piece of entertainment , that song " contained an underlying philosophy inspired by Moscow " , and explained , " Intermarriage produces half @-@ breeds . And half @-@ breeds are not conducive to the higher type of society . ... In the South , we have pure blood lines and we intend to keep it that way . " They stated that they planned to introduce legislation to outlaw such communist @-@ inspired works . The Northern press had a field day ; Hammerstein , when asked for comment , responded that he did not think the legislators were representing their constituents very well , and that he was surprised at the suggestion that anything kind and decent must necessarily originate in Moscow . In part because of the song , touring companies of South Pacific had difficulty getting bookings in the Deep South . 
 In the final scene of Act I , Nellie rejects Emile because of his part @-@ Polynesian children . In so doing , Nellie fails to live up to the American ideal that " all men are created equal " , which Emile had earlier affirmed . This scene was also toned down by Hammerstein ; in early drafts , Nellie , initially unable to force out a word to describe Emile 's first wife , after he supplies the word " Polynesian " , responds with " colored " . This pronouncement , which makes Nellie less sympathetic as a character , was restored for the 2008 Lincoln Center production . As Frank Rich of The New York Times commented , " it 's upsetting because Nellie isn 't some cracker stereotype – she 's lovable ... But how can we love a racist ? " Most argues that even Emile is tainted by racism , as his lifestyle is dependent on the maintenance of a system whereby he benefits from underpaid native labor – Bloody Mary is able to attract workers to make grass skirts for sale to GIs because , as she puts it , " French planters stingy bastards ! " 
 = = = Sex and gender roles = = = 
 Nellie Forbush , in her journey from Little Rock , Arkansas , to serving as a Navy nurse and on to the domesticity of the final scene of South Pacific , parallels the experience of many American women of the period . They entered the workforce during the war , only to find afterwards a societal expectation that they give up their jobs to men , with their best route to financial security being marriage and becoming a housewife . One means of securing audience acceptance of Nellie 's choices was the sanitization of her sexual past from her counterpart in the Michener work – that character had a 4 @-@ F boyfriend back in Arkansas and a liaison with Bill Harbison while on the island . 
 The male characters in South Pacific are intended to appear conventionally masculine . In the aftermath of World War II , the masculinity of the American soldier was beyond public question . Cable 's virility with Liat is made evident to the audience . Although Billis operates a laundry – Nellie particularly praises his pleats – and appears in a grass skirt in the " Thanksgiving Follies " , these acts are consistent with his desire for money and are clearly intended to be comic . His interest in the young ladies on Bali H 'ai establishes his masculinity . Lovensheimer writes that Billis is more defined by class than by sexuality , evidenced by the Seabee 's assumption , on learning that Cable went to college in New Jersey , that it was Rutgers ( the state 's flagship public university ) , rather than Ivy League Princeton , and by his delight on learning that the rescue operation for him had cost $ 600 @,@ 000 when his uncle had told him he would never be worth a dime . 
 Meryle Secrest , in her biography of Rodgers , theorizes that South Pacific marks a transition for the pair " between heroes and heroines who are more or less evenly matched in age and stories about powerful older men and the younger women who are attracted to them " . Lovensheimer , however , points out that this pattern really only holds for two of their five subsequent musicals , The King and I and The Sound of Music , and in the former , the love between Anna and the King is not expressed in words . He believes a different transition took place : that their plots , beginning with South Pacific , involve a woman needing to enter and accept her love interest 's world to be successful and accepted herself . He notes that both Oklahoma ! and Carousel involve a man entering his wife 's world , Curly in Oklahoma ! about to become a farmer with expectations of success , whereas Billy Bigelow in Carousel fails to find work after leaving his place as a barker . Lovensheimer deems Allegro to be a transition , where the attempts of the lead female character to alter her husband Joe 's world to suit her ambition lead to the breakup of their marriage . He argues that the nurse Emily , who goes with Joe in his return to the small town where he was happy , is a forerunner of Nellie , uprooting her life in Chicago for Joe . 
 Secrest notes that much is overlooked in the rush to have love conquer all in South Pacific , " questions of the long @-@ term survival of a marriage between a sophisticate who read Proust at bedtime and a girl who liked Dinah Shore and did not read anything were raised by Nellie Forbush only to be brushed aside . As for the interracial complexities of raising two Polynesian children , all such issues were subsumed in the general euphoria of true love . " Lovensheimer too wonders how Nellie will fare as the second Madame de Becque , " little Nellie Forbush from Arkansas ends up in a tropical paradise , far from her previous world , with a husband , a servant , and two children who speak a language she does not understand " . 
 = = = Cultural effect = = = 
 A mammoth hit , South Pacific sparked huge media and public attention . South Pacific was one of the first shows for which a variety of souvenirs were available : fans could buy South Pacific neckties , or for women , lipstick and scarves . Fake ticket stubs could be purchased for use as status symbols . There were South Pacific music boxes , dolls , fashion accessories and even <unk> for use after washing men from hair . Martin 's on @-@ stage shower prompted an immediate fashion craze for short hair that could be managed through once @-@ a @-@ day washing at home , rather than in a beauty salon , and for the products which would allow for such care . The songs of South Pacific could be heard on the radio , and they were popular among dance bands and in piano lounges . Mordden comments that South Pacific contained nothing but hit songs ; Rodgers and Hammerstein 's other successful works always included at least one song which did not become popular . 
 The cast album , recorded ten days after the show 's opening , was an immediate hit . Released by Columbia Records , it spent 69 weeks at # 1 on Billboard and a total of 400 weeks on the charts , becoming the best @-@ selling record of the 1940s . It was one of the early LP records , with a turntable speed of 33 ⅓ rpm , and helped to popularize that technology – previously , show albums and operas had been issued on sets of 78 rpm records , with high prices and much less music on a single disc . In the years to come , the LP would become the medium of choice for the " longhair " music niche of show , opera and classical performances . 
 An indirect effect of the success of the show was the career of James Michener . His one percent of the show as author of the source material , plus the income from a share which the duo allowed him to buy on credit , made him financially independent and allowed him to quit his job as an editor at Macmillan and to become a full @-@ time writer . Over the next five decades , his lengthy , detailed novels centering on different places would dominate the bestseller lists . 
 = = Music and recordings = = 
 = = = Musical treatment = = = 
 The role of Nellie Forbush was the first time with Hammerstein that Rodgers made the leading female role a belter , rather than a lyric soprano like <unk> in Oklahoma ! and Julie in Carousel . According to Mordden , " Nellie was something new in R & H , carrying a goodly share of the score on a ' Broadway ' voice " . 
 Nellie does not sing together with Emile , because Rodgers promised Martin that she would not have to compete vocally with Pinza , but the composer sought to unite them in the underlying music . A <unk> , heard before we see either lead , is played during the instrumental introduction to " Dites @-@ Moi " , the show 's first song . Considered as pitch classes , that is , as pitches without characterization by octave or register , the motif is C @-@ B @-@ A @-@ G. It will be heard repeatedly in Nellie 's music , or in the music ( such as " Twin Soliloquies " ) that she shares with Emile , and even in the bridge of " Some Enchanted Evening " . Lovensheimer argues that this symbolizes what Nellie is trying to say with her Act II line " We 're the same sort of people fundamentally – you and me " . 
 Originally , " Twin Soliloquies " came to an end shortly after the vocal part finishes . Logan found this unsatisfying and worked with Trude Rittmann to find a better ending to the song . This piece of music , dubbed " Unspoken Thoughts " , continues the music as Nellie and Emile sip brandy together , and is called by Lovensheimer " the one truly operatic moment of the score " . " This Nearly Was Mine " is a big bass solo for Emile in waltz time , deemed by Rodgers biographer William G. Hyland as " one of his finest efforts " . Only five notes are used in the first four bars , a phrase which is then repeated with a slight variation in the following four bars . The song ends an octave higher than where it began , making it perfect for Pinza 's voice . 
 Two songs , " I 'm Gonna Wash That Man Right Outa My Hair " and " Honey Bun " are intended to imitate American popular songs of the 1940s . In the former , the triple recitation of the song title at intervals suggests a big band arrangement of the wartime era , while in the bridge , the final eight bars ( repeating the lyrics from the bridge 's first eight bars ) gives a suggestion of swing . The sections beginning " If the man don 't understand you " and " If you laugh at different comics " have a blues style . Lovensheimer deems the song " Nellie 's spontaneous and improvisatory expression of her feelings through the vocabulary of popular song " . Mordden suggests that " I 'm in Love with a Wonderful Guy " with its " take no prisoners bounce " , might well be the center of the score , with the typical American girl defending her love by spouting clichés , many of which , such as " corny as Kansas in August " Hammerstein made up , and " sure enough , over the years they have become clichés " . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 Columbia Records recorded the overture and most of the songs from the original production in 1949 , using members of the cast including Ezio Pinza and Mary Martin . Drawing from the original lacquer disc masters , Columbia released the album in both the new LP format and on 78 @-@ rpm discs . Soon after Sony acquired Columbia in 1988 , a CD was released from the previously unused magnetic tape recording from the same 1949 sessions in New York City . The CD includes the bonus tracks " Loneliness of Evening " ( recorded in 1949 by Mary Martin ) , " My Girl Back Home " ( Martin ) , " Bali Ha 'i " ( Pinza ) and Symphonic Scenario for Concert Orchestra ( original orchestrations by Robert Russell Bennett ) . According to critic John Kenrick , the original cast recording " is the rare stuff that lasting legends are made of " , an essential classic . The original cast album was added to the National Recording Registry in the Library of Congress on March 21 , 2013 for long @-@ term preservation . The film soundtrack was released on the RCA Victor label in March 1958 . Kenrick calls the recording " mixed up " and does not recommend it . 
 Masterworks Broadway released a recording of the 1967 Lincoln Center production starring Florence Henderson as Nellie , Giorgio Tozzi as Emile , Justin McDonough as Cable and Irene Byatt as Bloody Mary . The recording includes a version of " Bali Ha 'i " , sung in French by Eleanor <unk> , the Liat . According to Kenrick , " Every track of this 1967 Lincoln Center cast recording is such a winner that you can 't help wondering why it took so long for this winner to make its way to CD . " Kenrick notes that the album is a more complete alternative to the original cast album . 
 In 1986 José Carreras and Kiri Te Kanawa made a studio recording of South Pacific , the sessions of which were filmed as a documentary , similar in style to Leonard Bernstein 's successful West Side Story documentary a year earlier that featured the same stars . Emile 's music was transposed to fit Carreras 's tenor voice . The recording also featured Sarah Vaughan as Bloody Mary and Mandy Patinkin as Cable . Stephen Holden reviewed the album in The New York Times , " the star of this South Pacific isn 't any individual , but rather the score itself " . Kenrick calls the recording badly miscast " pretentious trash . " Kenrick gives mixed praise to the 1988 London revival cast album . 
 The 2001 Royal National Theatre 's revival cast album was recorded in 2002 on First Night Records with Philip Quast as Emile , Lauren Kennedy as Nellie , Edward Baker @-@ Duly as Cable , Sheila Francisco as Bloody Mary and Nick Holder as Billis . The album includes the cut song , " Now Is the Time " . While Kenrick allows that most critics like the recording , he finds it a waste of money . The 2005 Carnegie Hall concert version was released on April 18 , 2006 by Decca Broadway with Reba McEntire as Nellie , Brian Stokes Mitchell as Emile , Lillias White as Bloody Mary , Jason <unk> as Cable and Alec Baldwin as Billis . Kendrick describes this recording as " one of the most ravishing that this glorious Rodgers & Hammerstein classic has ever received " and " a show tune lover 's dream come true . " The 2008 Broadway revival cast album was released on May 27 , 2008 by Masterworks Broadway . Kenrick finds it " very satisfying " . 
 = = Film and television versions = = 
 South Pacific was made into a film of the same name in 1958 , and it topped the box office that year . Joshua Logan directed the film , which starred Rossano Brazzi , Mitzi Gaynor , John Kerr , Ray Walston and Juanita Hall ; all of their singing voices except Gaynor 's and Walston 's were dubbed . <unk> Ravenscroft , later television 's Tony the Tiger , sang the basso <unk> notes in " There Is Nothing Like a Dame " . The film opened with Cable 's flight to the island in a PBY , followed by the Seabees ' beach scene , and added Billis ' rescue and scenes from the mission to spy on the Japanese . The film won the Academy Award for Best Sound . It was also nominated for the Oscar for Best Scoring of a Musical Picture ( Alfred Newman and Ken Darby ) , and the 65 mm Todd @-@ AO cinematography by Leon Shamroy was also nominated . The film was widely criticized for its use of color to indicate mood , with actors changing color as they began to sing . The film includes the song " My Girl Back Home " , sung by Cable , which was cut from the stage musical . The movie was the third @-@ highest @-@ grossing film in the U.S. of the 1950s ; its UK revenues were the highest ever , a record it kept until Goldfinger in 1963 . Although reviewers have criticized the film – Time magazine stated that it was " almost impossible to make a bad movie out of it – but the moviemakers appear to have tried " – it has added success on television , videotape and DVD to its box office laurels . 
 A made @-@ for @-@ television film , directed by Richard Pearce , was produced and televised in 2001 , starring Glenn Close as Nellie , Harry Connick , Jr. as Cable and Rade <unk> as Emile . This version changed the order of the musical 's songs ( the film opens with " There Is Nothing Like a Dame " ) and omits " Happy Talk " . " My Girl Back Home " was filmed but not included in the broadcast due to time constraints ; it was restored for the DVD , issued in 2001 . The last half @-@ hour of the film features scenes of war , including shots of segregated troops . Lovensheimer states that the film returned to the Michener original in one particular : " Harry Connick Jr . ' s Joe Cable is a fascinating combination of sensitive leading man and believable Leatherneck " . 
 The movie and Close were praised by The New York Times : " Ms. Close , lean and more mature , hints that a touch of desperation lies in Nellie 's <unk> optimism . " The review also commented that the movie " is beautifully produced , better than the stagy 1958 film " and praised the singing . Kenrick , however , dislikes the adaptation : " You certainly won 't ever want to put this disaster in your player , unless you want to hear the sound of Rodgers and Hammerstein whirling in their graves . Glenn Close is up to the material , but her supporting cast is uniformly disastrous . A pointless and offensive waste of money , time and talent . " 
 A 2005 concert version of the musical , edited down to two hours , but including all of the songs and the full musical score , was presented at Carnegie Hall . It starred Reba McEntire as Nellie , Brian Stokes Mitchell as Emile , Alec Baldwin as Billis and Lillias White as Bloody Mary . The production used Robert Russell Bennett 's original orchestrations and the Orchestra of St. Luke 's directed by Paul <unk> . It was taped and telecast by PBS in 2006 and released the same year on DVD . The New York Times critic Ben Brantley wrote , " Open @-@ voiced and open @-@ faced , Reba McEntire was born to play Nellie " ; the production was received " in a state of nearly unconditional rapture . It was one of those nights when cynicism didn 't stand a chance . " Kenrick especially likes Mitchell 's " This Nearly Was Mine " , and praises the concert generally : " this excellent performance helped restore the reputation of this classic " . 
 = Lucky Strike ( song ) = 
 " Lucky Strike " is a song by American band Maroon 5 recorded for their fourth studio album Overexposed ( 2012 ) . It was written by Adam Levine together with Ryan Tedder and Noel Zancanella who also served as producers of the song . " Lucky Strike " is a funk song that features dubstep and soul rock influences . Lyrically , it discovers the theme of sexual intercourse . 
 The song received generally positive reviews from music critics who found it catchy and labeled it as one of the best tracks on Overexposed . Following the release of the album , due to strong digital downloads , the song peaked at number two on the singles chart in South Korea and at number nine on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . " Lucky Strike " was included on the set list for Maroon 5 's fourth worldwide tour , the Overexposed Tour ( 2012 – 13 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Lucky Strike " was written by Maroon 5 's lead singer Adam Levine together with Ryan Tedder and Noel Zancanella , who also served as producers of the song . Tedder and Zancanella also co @-@ wrote and co @-@ produced another song for Overexposed titled " Love Somebody " . " Lucky Strike " was engineered by Smith Carlson at the Patriot Studios in Denver and Noah " Mailbox " Passovoy at the Conway Studios in Los Angeles ; Eric Eylands served as the engineering assistant . Serban Ghenea mixed the song at the Mixstar Studios in Virginia Beach . John Hanes served as engineer for mix , while Phil Seaford as mixing assistant . All the programming and keys were provided by Tedder and Zancanella . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Lucky Strike " is a funk song that features dubstep and soul influences and lasts for three minutes and five seconds . The song 's instrumentation consists of piano , " driven guitar " accompanied with Levine 's vocals . " Lucky Strike " is written in the key of B ♭ minor , in common time , with a tempo of 144 beats per minute . Levine 's vocal range spans from the low note of A4 to the high note of B5 . According to Robert Copsey of Digital Spy , the song contains the same " bells @-@ and @-@ whistles template " that is present in the band 's previous single " Moves Like Jagger " . Chuck Arnold of People shared the same opinion as Copsey and described the song as " lightning @-@ paced " . Lyrically , the song discovers the theme of sexual intercourse that can be seen through the lines , " Your body rockin ' , keep me up all night / One in a million , my lucky strike " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly labeled " Lucky Strike " together with " Payphone " best tracks on Overexposed and described the former as " a funk @-@ spiked strut " . Similarly as Markovitz , Suzanne Byrne of RTÉ.ie wrote that " Lucky Strike " alongside " Daylight " , " The Man Who Never Lied " and " Love Somebody " are potential single releases . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey named the track together with " One More Night " and " Ladykiller " as a worthy for digital download . Chris Payne of Billboard wrote that on the song " Maroon 5 's guitars finally come out to play in the opening bars here . Though not a rock song per se , it still packs the energy of the band 's earlier , more band @-@ based material . " Cameron Adams of Herald Sun described " Lucky Strike " as " uncharacteristically clubby " . 
 Contact Music 's Alex Lai wrote that Levine has exchanged his " angelic vocals for singing in favor of more universal hooks " such as the " backing to disco dancer ' Lucky Strike ' . " Evan Sawdey of PopMatters called the song a " danceable carbon copy " of " Second Chance " ( Gimme Some , 2011 ) by Peter Bjorn and John . According to him , " Lucky Strike " imitates the latter " down to the guitar tone " and replaces the original by also adding additional dance beats . 
 = = Chart performance and live renditions = = 
 Upon the release of Overexposed , due to strong digital downloads " Lucky Strike " debuted on the South Korea Gaon International Chart at number two on June 24 , 2012 , with sales of 53 @,@ 090 copies . The next week it fell to number four and sold additional 39 @,@ 392 copies . As of 9 February 2013 , the song remains at number 78 , having spent 34 consecutive weeks on the Gaon chart . Following the release of the album , the song did not enter the US Billboard Hot 100 , but peaked at number nine on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . 
 " Lucky Strike " was included on the set list for Maroon 5 's fourth worldwide tour , the Overexposed Tour ( 2012 — 13 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Engineering and mixing 
 Engineered at Patriot Studios , Denver , Colorado ; Conway Studios , Los Angeles , California 
 Mixed at Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Overexposed , A & M / Octone Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = Pixies = 
 The Pixies ( or just Pixies ) are an American alternative rock band formed in 1986 in Boston , Massachusetts . The group disbanded in 1993 in acrimonious circumstances , but reunited in 2004 . As of 2016 , the group currently consists of founders Black Francis ( lead vocals , rhythm guitar ) , Joey Santiago ( lead guitar ) , and David Lovering ( drums ) ; as well as Paz Lenchantin ( bass , vocals ) . Co @-@ founder Kim Deal ( bass , backing vocals ) left in 2013 , and was replaced by Kim Shattuck as live bass player for a few months ; then by Lenchantin for the band 's 2014 tour . In 2016 , Lenchantin was inducted as an official member of the band . 
 The Pixies achieved relatively modest popularity in their home country , but were significantly more successful in the United Kingdom , mainland Europe and Israel . The group is credited with having an influence on the alternative rock boom of the 1990s . 
 The band 's style of music contains a range of elements , including psychedelia , noise pop , hard rock , surf pop , and surf rock . Black Francis is the Pixies ' primary songwriter and singer . His lyrics feature a number of offbeat subjects such as extraterrestrials , surrealism , incest , and biblical violence . 
 Despite limited commercial success , their jarring pop sound subsequently influenced bands such as Nirvana , Radiohead , The Strokes , Blur and Weezer . The Pixies ' legacy and popularity grew in the years following their break @-@ up , leading to sold @-@ out world tours following their reunion in 2004 . In June 2013 , the band released their first new material in almost 10 years . Their popular song " Where Is My Mind ? " served as the ending song for the successful film Fight Club . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 1986 ) = = = 
 Joey Santiago and Black Francis ( born Charles Thompson IV ) first met when they lived next to each other in a suite while attending the University of Massachusetts Amherst . Although Santiago was worried about distractions , he noticed Francis played music and the pair began to jam together . Francis then embarked on a student exchange trip to Puerto Rico to study Spanish . After six months , he returned to Amherst and dropped out of the university . Francis and Santiago spent 1984 working in a warehouse , with Francis composing songs on his acoustic guitar and writing lyrics on the subway train . 
 Black Francis didn 't discover punk until he was 16 , saying " it was good I didn 't listen to these hip records . " He started out on a diet of 60s songs , religious music and Emerson Lake and Palmer , then Iggy Pop , Husker Du , Captain Beefheart and Talking Heads , who he says " weren 't punk either " . 
 The pair formed a band in January 1986 . Bass player Kim Deal joined Santiago and Francis two weeks later after responding to a classified advertisement Francis had placed , seeking a female bass player who liked both folk music icons Peter , Paul and Mary and the band Hüsker Dü . Deal was the only person to respond , but arrived at the audition without a bass as she had never played the instrument before . She was invited to join the band just because she liked the songs Black Francis was showing her . She later obtained a bass , and the trio started rehearsing in Deal 's apartment . 
 After recruiting Deal , the band tried unsuccessfully to get her sister , Kelley Deal , to join as its drummer . Kim 's husband suggested they hire drummer David Lovering , whom Kim had met at her wedding reception . The group arrived at a name after Santiago selected the word " pixies " randomly from a dictionary and took a liking to how it looked and its definition as " mischievous little elves " . Once the band had settled on a name and stable line @-@ up , they moved rehearsals to Lovering 's parents ' garage in mid @-@ 1986 . They began to play shows at bars in and around the Boston area . 
 = = = Record contract and Come on Pilgrim ( 1987 ) = = = 
 While the Pixies were playing a concert with Throwing Muses , they were noticed by producer Gary Smith , manager of Fort Apache Studios . He told the band he " could not sleep until you guys are world famous " . The band produced a 17 @-@ track demo at Fort Apache soon afterwards , known to fans as " The Purple Tape " because of the tape cover 's purple background . Funded by Francis ' father at the cost of $ 1000 , the recording session was completed in three days . Local promoter Ken Goes became the band 's manager , and he passed the demo to Ivo Watts @-@ Russell of the independent record label 4AD . Watts @-@ Russell nearly passed on the band , finding them too normal , " too rock ' n ' roll " , but signed them at the persuasion of his girlfriend . 
 Upon signing with 4AD , eight tracks from the Purple Tape were selected for the Come on Pilgrim mini @-@ LP , the band 's first release . On it , Francis drew upon his experiences in Puerto Rico , mostly in the songs " Vamos " and " Isla de Encanta " ; the album included lyrics describing the poverty in Puerto Rico . The religious lyrics in Come on Pilgrim and later albums came from his parents ' born @-@ again Christian days in the Pentecostal Church . Critic Heather Phares sees themes such as sexual frustration ( " I 've Been Tired " ) and incest ( " Nimrod 's Son " and " The Holiday Song " ) on the record . 
 = = = Surfer Rosa and Doolittle ( 1988 – 89 ) = = = 
 Come on Pilgrim was followed by the band 's first full @-@ length album , Surfer Rosa . The album was recorded by Steve Albini ( who was hired by Watts @-@ Russell on the advice of a 4AD colleague ) , completed in two weeks , and released in early 1988 . Surfer Rosa gained the Pixies acclaim in Europe ; both Melody Maker and Sounds gave Surfer Rosa their " Album of the Year " award . American critical response was also positive yet more muted , a reaction that persisted for much of the band 's career . The album was eventually certified Gold in the U.S. in 2005 . After the album was released , the band arrived in England to support Throwing Muses on the European " Sex and Death " tour — beginning at the Mean Fiddler in London . The tour also took them to the Netherlands , where the Pixies had already received enough media attention to be headlining the tour . Francis later recalled : " The first place I made it with the Pixies was in Holland . " The tour became notable for the band 's in @-@ jokes , such as playing their entire set list in alphabetical order . 
 Meanwhile , the Pixies signed an American distribution deal with major record label Elektra . Around this time , the Pixies struck up a relationship with the British producer Gil Norton . Norton produced their second full album , Doolittle , which was recorded in the last six weeks of 1988 and seen as a departure from the raw sound of Come on Pilgrim and Surfer Rosa . Doolittle had a much cleaner sound , largely due to Norton and the production budget of US $ 40 @,@ 000 , which was quadruple that of Surfer Rosa . Doolittle featured the single " Here Comes Your Man " , which biographers Josh Frank and Caryn Ganz describe as an unusually jaunty and pop @-@ like song for the band . " Monkey Gone to Heaven " was a Top 10 modern rock radio hit in the U.S. , and reached the Top 100 in the U.K. Like Surfer Rosa , Doolittle was acclaimed by fans and music critics alike . 
 = = = Hiatus ( 1989 – 90 ) = = = 
 After Doolittle tensions between Deal and Francis came to a head ( for example , Francis threw a guitar at Deal during a concert in Stuttgart ) , and Deal was almost fired from the band when she refused to play at a concert in Frankfurt . Santiago , in an interview with Mojo , described Deal as being " headstrong and want [ ing ] to include her own songs , to explore her own world " on the band 's albums ; eventually she accepted that Francis was the singer and had musical control of the band , but after the Frankfurt incident , " they kinda stopped talking " . The band became increasingly tired during the post @-@ Doolittle " Fuck or Fight " tour of the United States and fighting among members continued . After the tour 's final date in New York City , the band was too exhausted to attend the end @-@ of @-@ tour party the following night and soon announced a hiatus . 
 During this time , Santiago and Lovering went on vacation , while Francis performed a short solo tour , made up of a number of concerts to generate gas money as he traveled across the country . Deal formed a new band , The Breeders , with Tanya Donelly of Throwing Muses and bass player Josephine Wiggs of Perfect Disaster . Their debut album , Pod , was released in 1990 . 
 = = = Bossanova , Trompe le Monde , and break @-@ up ( 1990 – 2002 ) = = = 
 In 1990 , all members of the group except for Deal moved to Los Angeles . Lovering stated that he , Santiago , and Francis moved there " because the recording studio was there " . Unlike previous recordings , the band had little time to practice beforehand , and Black Francis wrote much of the album in the studio . Featuring the singles " Velouria " and " Dig for Fire " , Bossanova reached number 70 in the United States . In contrast , the album peaked at number three in the United Kingdom . Also in 1990 , the Pixies released a cover of the Paul Butterfield Blues Band 's " Born in Chicago " on the compilation album <unk> : Elektra 's 40th Anniversary . 
 The band continued to tour and released Trompe le Monde in 1991 , their final album before their break @-@ up . The album included " U @-@ Mass " , which has been described as being about college apathy , and whose guitar riff was written years before at the University of Massachusetts before Francis and Santiago dropped out . The album also featured a cover of " Head On " by The Jesus and Mary Chain . Also that year , the band contributed a cover of " I Can 't Forget " to the Leonard Cohen tribute album I 'm Your Fan , and began an international tour on which they played stadiums in Europe and smaller venues in the United States . They then embarked on an uncomfortable tour supporting U2 on their Zoo TV Tour in 1992 . Tensions rose between band members , and , at the end of the year , the Pixies went on sabbatical and focused on separate projects . 
 In early 1993 , Francis announced in an interview to BBC Radio 5 that the band was finished and offered no explanation at the time , unbeknownst to the other members of the band . He later called Santiago and subsequently notified Deal and Lovering via fax , in January 1993 . After the break @-@ up , the four members embarked on separate projects . Black Francis renamed himself Frank Black , and he released several solo albums , including a string of releases with Frank Black and the Catholics . Deal returned to The Breeders , who scored a hit with " Cannonball " from that group 's platinum @-@ selling Last Splash in 1993 , and released two more albums several years later . She also formed and released one album with The Amps . Santiago played lead guitar on multiple Frank Black albums , as well as on other artists ' albums . He wrote theme music for the show Undeclared on Fox television and for Crime and Punishment in Suburbia . He formed a band called The Martinis with his wife , Linda Mallari , who released an album in 2004 . In 2004 , he also played lead guitar on the album " Statecraft " by the novelist and musician Charles Douglas . Lovering went on to become a magician and made occasional appearances as " The Scientific Phenomenalist " , performing experiments on stage and occasionally opening for Frank Black and The Breeders . Lovering continued to do some drumming , playing with the band Cracker , as well as on one of Tanya Donelly 's solo albums , and on the Martinis ' song " Free " , which appeared on the Empire Records soundtrack . 
 4AD and Elektra Records continued to release Pixies material in the band 's absence . They released the best @-@ of album Death to the Pixies ( 1997 ) , the Peel @-@ session compilation Pixies at the BBC ( 1998 ) , and the Complete ' B ' Sides compilation ( 2001 ) . Meanwhile , in 2002 material from the band 's original 17 @-@ track demo tape was released as an EP , Pixies , on Cooking Vinyl in the U.K. and <unk> Records in the U.S. ; Frank Black has also used these labels to release solo work and albums with The Catholics . 
 = = = Reunion ( 2003 – 12 ) = = = 
 In the 11 years following the break @-@ up , rumors sometimes circulated regarding a reunion . Though Frank Black steadfastly dismissed them , he did begin to incorporate an increasing number of Pixies songs in his sets with The Catholics , and occasionally included Santiago in his solo work and Lovering 's magic show as an opening act to concerts . 
 In 2003 , a series of phone calls between band members resulted in some low @-@ key rehearsals , and soon to a decision to reunite . By February 2004 , a full tour was announced , and tickets for nearly all the initial tour dates sold out within minutes . The band 's four @-@ night run at London 's Brixton Academy was the fastest selling in the venue 's twenty @-@ year history . 
 The Pixies played their first reunion concert on April 13 , 2004 , at The Fine Line Music Cafe in Minneapolis , Minnesota , and a warm @-@ up tour through the U.S. and Canada was followed by an appearance at the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival . The band then spent much of 2004 touring throughout Brazil , Europe , Japan , and the U.S. The group won the Act @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Year award in the 2004 Boston Music Awards . The 2004 reunion tour reportedly grossed over $ 14 million in ticket sales . 
 In June 2004 , the band released a new song , " Bam Thwok " exclusively on the iTunes Music Store . The song reached number one in the UK Official Download Chart . 4AD released Wave of Mutilation : The Best of Pixies , along with a companion DVD , entitled Pixies . The band also contributed a rendition of " Ain 't That Pretty at All " to the Warren Zevon tribute album Enjoy Every Sandwich . " Bam Thwok " and " Ain 't That Pretty at All " were both recorded by engineer Ben Mumphrey , the former at Stagg Street Studios in Van Nuys , CA and the latter at Metamorphosis Studio in Vienna , Austria . 
 In 2005 , the band made appearances at festivals including Lollapalooza , " T on the Fringe " , and the Newport Folk Festival . They continued to make appearances through 2006 and 2007 , culminating in their first @-@ ever appearances in Australia . Since 2005 , Francis has at various times stated that the Pixies recording a new studio album was either a possibility , or an unlikelihood , the main obstacle being Deal 's reluctance to do so . 
 To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the release of Doolittle , the Pixies launched a tour in October 2009 where they performed the album track @-@ for @-@ track , including the associated B @-@ sides . The tour began in Europe , continued in the United States in November , with the <unk> and Australian tour following in March 2010 , then New Zealand , and more European dates in spring 2010 , and back to North America in fall 2010 and into spring 2011 . 
 = = = Kim Deal 's departure and Indie Cindy ( 2013 – 2015 ) = = = 
 On June 14 , 2013 , it was announced by the band 's Twitter profile that Kim Deal had left the band . Deal has since posted new solo music on her website and the remaining Pixies have welcomed her to come back as her schedule with Breeders allows . Two weeks later , the band released a new song , " <unk> " , as a free download via the Pixies website . The song features Jeremy Dubs of Bunnies and formerly of the <unk> on vocals in place of Deal . 
 On July 1 , 2013 , the Pixies announced the addition of The Muffs and The <unk> guitarist and vocalist Kim Shattuck , who would be replacing Deal for the band 's 2013 European tour . On September 3 , 2013 the Pixies released an EP of new songs titled EP1 . On November 29 , 2013 , Shattuck announced that she had been dismissed from the band that day . In December 2013 , Paz Lenchantin was announced as the new bassist for the 2014 tour . More new material surfaced when the Pixies released their second EP , titled <unk> , on January 3 , 2014 . The single released to radio was " Blue Eyed <unk> . " Another new EP , called EP3 , was released on March 24 , 2014 . All the EPs were only available as downloads and limited edition vinyl . The three EPs were collected in LP format and released as the album Indie Cindy in April 2014 . The album was the first release from the band in over two decades , the last being Trompe le Monde in 1991 . 
 In 2015 it was revealed that the Pixies would go on tour as a supporting act to former Led Zeppelin frontman Robert Plant for a series of dates across North America . 
 = = = Head Carrier ( 2016 – present ) = = = 
 On July 6 , 2016 , the band announced both that their sixth album , Head Carrier would be released on September 30 , and that Lenchantin was now a full @-@ time member of the band . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Spin magazine described the Pixies ' musical style as " Surf music @-@ meets @-@ Stooges <unk> and oft @-@ imitated stop / start and quiet / loud dynamics " . Their music has also been pictured as " an unorthodox marriage of surf music and punk rock , ... characterized by Black 's bristling lyrics and hackle @-@ raising caterwaul , Kim Deal 's whispered harmonies and <unk> basslines , Joey Santiago 's fragile guitar , and the persistent flush of David Lovering 's drums . " The band 's music incorporates extreme dynamic shifts ; Francis explained in 1991 , " Those are the two basic components of rock music [ ... ] the dreamy side and the rockin ' side . It 's always been either sweaty or laid back and cool . We do try to be dynamic , but it 's <unk> dynamics , because we don 't know how to do anything else . We can play loud or quiet — that 's it " . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 The Pixies are influenced by a range of artists and genres ; each member came from a different musical background . When he first started writing songs for the Pixies , Francis says he was listening to nothing but Hüsker Dü , Captain Beefheart , and Iggy Pop ; Other influences associated with Francis include The Gun Club and The Cars . During the making of Doolittle he was listening heavily to The Beatles ' The White Album . He has cited Buddy Holly as a model for his compressed songwriting . 
 Santiago listened to 1970s and 1980s punk including Black Flag , as well as David Bowie . Guitarists who influenced him include Jimi Hendrix , Les Paul , Wes Montgomery , and George Harrison . Deal 's musical background was folk music and country ; she had formed a country @-@ folk band with her sister in her teenage years , and played covers of artists such as The Everly Brothers and Hank Williams . Other artists they listened to included XTC , Gang of Four and Elvis Costello . Lovering is a fan of the band Rush . 
 Other media such as film has influenced the Pixies ; Francis cites surrealist films Eraserhead and Un chien <unk> ( as mentioned in " Debaser " ) as influences . He has commented on these influences , saying he " didn 't have the patience to sit around reading Surrealist novels " , but found it easier to watch twenty @-@ minute films . 
 = = = Songwriting and vocals = = = 
 Most of the Pixies ' songs were composed and sung by Francis . Critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine has described Francis 's writing as containing " bizarre , fragmented lyrics about space , religion , sex , mutilation , and pop culture " . Biblical violence is a theme of Doolittle 's " Dead " and " Gouge Away " ; Francis told a Melody Maker interviewer , " It 's all those characters in the Old Testament . I 'm obsessed with them . Why it comes out so much I don 't know . " He has described Come on Pilgrim 's " Caribou " as being about reincarnation , and extraterrestrial themes appear in a number of songs on Bossanova . 
 Deal co @-@ wrote Doolittle 's " Silver " with Francis , and they share lead harmony vocals on the track . She also co @-@ wrote and sang lead vocals on Surfer Rosa 's " Gigantic " , and is the sole songwriter of the 2004 digital single " Bam Thwok " . She was credited as Mrs. John Murphy on the former composition — at the time she was married and she used this name as an ironic feminist joke . She also sang lead vocals on the song " Into the White " and the Neil Young cover " <unk> " , both B @-@ sides . Lovering sang lead vocals on Doolittle 's " La La Love You " and the B @-@ side " Make Believe " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although the Pixies produced relatively few albums , whose sales were modest , they influenced a number of bands associated with the alternative rock boom of the 1990s . Gary Smith , who produced their Come on Pilgrim , commented on the band 's influence on alternative rock and their legacy in 1997 : 
 I 've heard it said about The Velvet Underground that while not a lot of people bought their albums , everyone who did started a band . I think this is largely true about the Pixies as well . Charles ' secret weapon turned out to be not so secret and , sooner or later , all sorts of bands were exploiting the same strategy of wide dynamics . It became a kind of new pop formula and , within a short while , " Smells Like Teen Spirit " was charging up the charts and even the members of Nirvana said later that it sounded for all the world like a Pixies song . 
 Sonically , the Pixies are credited with popularizing the extreme dynamics and stop @-@ start timing that would become widespread in alternative rock ; Pixies songs typically feature hushed , restrained verses , and explosive , wailing choruses . Artists including David Bowie , Radiohead , PJ Harvey , U2 , Nirvana , The Strokes , Alice in Chains , Weezer , Bush , Arcade Fire and Pavement have cited admiration of or influence by the Pixies . Bono of U2 has called the Pixies " one of America 's greatest bands ever " , and Radiohead 's Thom Yorke has said that , while at school , " the Pixies had changed my life " . Bowie , whose own music had inspired Francis and Santiago while they were at university , has said that the Pixies made " just about the most compelling music of the entire 80s . " 
 One notable citation as an influence was by Kurt Cobain , on influencing Nirvana 's " Smells Like Teen Spirit " , which he admitted was a conscious attempt to co @-@ opt the Pixies ' style . In a January 1994 interview with Rolling Stone , he said , " I was trying to write the ultimate pop song . I was basically trying to rip off the Pixies . I have to admit it [ smiles ] . When I heard the Pixies for the first time , I connected with that band so heavily I should have been in that band — or at least in a Pixies cover band . We used their sense of dynamics , being soft and quiet and then loud and hard . " Cobain cited Surfer Rosa as one of his main musical influences , and particularly admired the album 's natural and powerful drum sounds — a result of Steve Albini 's influence on the record . Albini later produced Nirvana 's 1993 In Utero at the request of Cobain . 
 = = Music videos and DVDs = = 
 No music videos were released from Come on Pilgrim or Surfer Rosa , but from Doolittle onwards , the following videos were made : " Monkey Gone To Heaven " , " Here Comes Your Man " , " Velouria " , " Dig For Fire " , " Allison " , " Alec Eiffel " , " Head On " , and " Debaser " ; these were later released on the 2004 DVD Pixies . Furthermore , a music video accompanied the release of their 2013 song , " <unk> " , as well an alternate video released on a later date . Videos have been made for all the songs in EP1 . The videos for " Here Comes Your Man " and " Allison " were also released on The Complete ' B ' Sides . 
 By Bossanova , the band had developed a severe aversion to recording music videos , and Francis refused to lip @-@ sync to them . For example , in the " Here Comes Your Man " video , both Black and Deal open their mouths wide instead of mouthing their lyrics . According to the record label this became one of the reasons that the Pixies never achieved major coverage on MTV . 
 With Bossanova 's release , 4AD hoped to get the Pixies chosen to perform their single " Velouria " on the BBC music programme Top of the Pops . To this end , the band was pressured into producing a video for the song , and they made one cheaply with the band members filmed running down a quarry , shown in slow motion . The group was ultimately not given a spot on the show . 
 A 90 @-@ minute documentary called <unk> : a film about the Pixies directed by Steven Cantor and Matthew Galkin was released in 2006 . The film documents their 2004 reunion and tour , and covers the years after the break @-@ up . In addition to Pixies and <unk> , four other Pixies ' DVDs were released between 2004 and 2006 , all featuring concert performances : Live at the Town and Country Club 1988 , The Pixies — Sell Out , The Pixies Acoustic : Live in Newport , and The Pixies Club Date : Live at the Paradise in Boston . 
 = = Members = = 
 Current members 
 Black Francis – vocals , rhythm guitar ( 1986 @-@ 1993 , 2004 – present ) 
 Joey Santiago – lead guitar , keyboards ( 1986 @-@ 1993 , 2004 – present ) 
 David Lovering – drums , percussion ( 1986 @-@ 1993 , 2004 – present ) 
 Paz Lenchantin – bass guitar , violin , vocals ( 2014 – present ) 
 Former members 
 Kim Deal – bass guitar , vocals ( 1986 – 1993 , 2004 @-@ 2013 ) 
 Kim Shattuck – bass guitar , vocals ( 2013 ) 
 = = Discography = = 
 Surfer Rosa ( 1988 ) 
 Doolittle ( 1989 ) 
 Bossanova ( 1990 ) 
 Trompe le Monde ( 1991 ) 
 Indie Cindy ( 2014 ) 
 Head Carrier ( 2016 ) 
 = Unruhe = 
 " Unruhe " is the fourth episode of the fourth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 27 , 1996 , and was the first episode to air on Sunday night when the show was moved from Fridays to Sundays . " Unruhe " was written by Vince Gilligan , directed by Rob Bowman , and featured a guest appearance from Pruitt Taylor Vince . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Unruhe " earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 7 , being watched by 19 @.@ 10 million people upon its initial broadcast . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a man who kidnaps women and <unk> them . The agents ' only clues to catching him are distorted photos of the victims taken just before their kidnapping . 
 Gilligan wrote the episode after being inspired by stories of serial killers he read as a child . Other inspirations include the concept of thought @-@ photographs , and common fears associated with dentist chairs . The episode received a generally positive reception , though critics criticized the plotline featuring Scully being kidnapped . Critical attention also expressed a positive opinion of how scary the episode was in nature . Guest actor Taylor Vince received positive reviews as the episode 's antagonist . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Traverse City , Michigan , Mary Lefante goes to a local pharmacy to get her passport photo taken . Realizing she has forgotten her wallet , she returns to her car and finds that her boyfriend has been murdered . The killer , clad in a hooded raincoat , renders Lefante unconscious with a hypodermic needle , then kidnaps her . Meanwhile , in the pharmacy , the elderly clerk peels open Lefante 's developed photo , which shows her screaming amidst a distorted background . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are assigned to the case . Discussing the photograph , Mulder tells Scully about Ted <unk> , who was famous for making photos which showed what was in his mind . He takes pictures of his gloved hand using a camera found in Lefante 's apartment , and they all appear the same as the one from the pharmacy . Mulder deduces that the kidnapper has been stalking his victims . 
 Lefante is found wandering on a roadside , but appears to have been given an improperly @-@ performed lobotomy . Another woman , Alice Brandt , is later kidnapped . She wakes up bound to a dentist 's chair , with her kidnapper brandishing an ice pick and speaking in German . Mulder returns to Washington , D.C. to digitally analyze the photos and finds no evidence that they were doctored . By closely examining the photos , he finds the face of an old man as well as the shadow of the kidnapper , who appears to be abnormally tall . 
 Scully , finding a construction company referenced at both crime scenes , investigates the possible lead , meeting Gerry Schnauz ( Pruitt Taylor Vince ) , who worked near both scenes of the kidnapping . Schnauz , who is wearing stilts that make him very tall , attempts to flee , but Scully pursues and arrests him . The agents interrogate Schnauz , who was once institutionalized for beating his father with an axe handle in retaliation for the abuse his sister suffered at their father 's hands . When questioned on the location of Brandt , Schnauz claims she is safe from the " howlers " . Brandt is soon found in the woods , lobotomized . Mulder believes that Schnauz thinks he is rescuing his victims from howlers and that the photos show his nightmares . 
 Schnauz escapes police custody by killing an officer and then robs the pharmacy from the opening , taking the passport photo camera , film , and an assortment of drug @-@ related materials . While investigating the robbery , Scully is rendered unconscious and kidnapped by Schnauz . Mulder heads to the office where Schnauz 's father used to work as a dentist , and finds the exam chair missing . Scully awakens bound to the chair with Schnauz claiming he 's going to kill the howlers in her head . Schnauz takes a photo of himself , the result of which greatly disturb him , then prepares to <unk> Scully . Mulder , having found a clue in a photo of Scully from the drugstore 's photo booth , finds a trailer in a cemetery and realizes it belongs to Schnauz . He manages to break in and shoot Schnauz in the nick of time . Mulder looks at the photo Schnauz took of himself , in which he is lying dead on the floor . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Vince Gilligan was inspired to write the episode based on Time @-@ Life mail order books he read as a child discussing the lives of serial killers . One of the books featured mass murderer Howard Unruh . The episode was also inspired by Ted <unk> , whose thought @-@ photographs were mentioned by Fox Mulder in the episode . The use of the dentist chair where Schnauz sat his victims was included considering people 's common fear of the dentist . Gilligan had written the role of Schnauz with Taylor Vince in mind when he saw him in the Adrian Lyne film Jacob 's Ladder . Vince had been approached to be a guest star on the show in the first season but declined the role due to it being too small . 
 Most of the scenes featuring Schnauz on plasterer 's stilts were shot using stuntmen . In the scene where Scully meets Schnauz , a safety cable was attached to Vince to keep him upright on the stilts and was edited out in post @-@ production . Ken Hawryliw created the lobotomy instrument Schnauz used from scratch when he was unsuccessful with his attempts to borrow one from a doctor or hospital . The title of the episode , " Unruhe " , is the German word for " unrest " or " anxiety " . When Scully talks in German to Schnauz , she says " Ich habe <unk> Unruhe " ( literally " I do not have anxiety " ) . The episode prominently features the drug scopolamine which can cause people to quickly become unconscious , and twilight sleep , which is a condition that can render people unconscious following great moments of pain . 
 The name of the serial killer – Gerald Thomas Schnauz – comes from Vince Gilligan 's friend and classmate at Tisch School of Arts , Thomas Schnauz , who would eventually serve as writer / story editor for The X @-@ Files in season 9 , as well as for the spin @-@ off , The Lone Gunman , and later for Breaking Bad and Better Call Saul . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Unruhe " premiered on the Fox network on October 27 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 7 , with an 18 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 18 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 19 @.@ 10 million people . This episode was broadcast out of order in the series ' production schedule as once the producers of the show knew that they would be moving to Sundays starting with the fourth episode of the season , they decided to push this episode back , feeling that it would be an excellent representative of the show for its first Sunday night episode and a better representative than the fourth episode of the season filmed , " Teliko " . 
 Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a " C " , feel that the " interesting concept " of the psychic photographs were ruined by " boilerplate Scully @-@ in @-@ distress shtick " . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club was more positive , grading it as a " B + " . He felt that its " greatest virtue " was being terrifying and that it worked for being an " urban fairytale " . However , he also criticized it for putting Scully in danger . Sarah Stegall awarded the episode four stars out of five , praising the writing by Gilligan , who she commented was " genius for tight confrontation scenes " , complimenting the atmosphere and presentation of the episode . She criticized the final scene featuring Scully tied up with duct @-@ tape , commenting that the way she was loosely tied up was unrealistic . The fact that the episode 's " absurd concept " was simply a " side @-@ story " also drew positive attention , summarizing her review with , " otherwise a creepy and engaging detective story " . 
 Taylor Vince 's performance as Gerry Schnauz received positive critical attention . Writer Barbara Barnett in her book Chasing Zebras stated that he was memorable as a " psychotic killer " . John Kenneth Muir in his book Horror Films of the 1990s wrote that Taylor Vince portrayed one of the " memorable and frightening serial killers " of the series . In a later book , Terror Television American Series 1970 – 1999 , Muir praised the episode as a whole , writing that the episode " is nightmare provoking because it subjects a wonderful individual to a terrifying situation which will remove all traces of individuality from that character " . Television Without Pity ranked " Unruhe " the sixth most nightmare @-@ inducing episode of the show . 
 = California State Route 115 = 
 State Route 115 ( SR 115 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of California . It runs from Interstate 8 ( I @-@ 8 ) southeast of Holtville to SR 111 in Calipatria ; the entire route is in Imperial County . The routing was added to the state highway system in 1933 , and was constructed by 1934 ; SR 115 was officially designated in the 1964 state highway renumbering . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 115 begins with an interchange at I @-@ 8 . It then heads northwest through the community of Date City and briefly enters the city of Holtville . Near its exit of the city , it intersects a few county roads before turning due north and continuing through rural Imperial County , eventually beginning an overlap with SR 78 and continuing west . East of <unk> , SR 115 turns due north again , and intersects CR S26 . After a few miles , the highway turns due west , reaching its north end in Calipatria at SR 111 . 
 SR 115 is part of the California Freeway and Expressway System , but is not part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . SR 115 is eligible for the State Scenic Highway System , but it is not officially designated as a scenic highway by the California Department of Transportation . In 2013 , SR 115 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 830 between Wirt Road and East Avenue , and 5 @,@ 800 between the intersection of Walnut Avenue and 5th Street and the intersection of the highway with Holt Avenue , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The routing from Brawley to Calipatria was added to the state highway system in 1933 ; following the completion of the road from Yuma to San Diego , increased tourism and growth led to the development of more highways in Imperial County , and the construction of the system was expected to aid in future growth , according to the Los Angeles Times . The northern section above SR 78 was legislatively defined as Route 187 ; the part of the highway south of Route 187 was defined as Route 201 . 
 The roadway had been constructed by 1934 , though the state described the majority of it as a " low type " road . The portion from Route 78 to US 80 was paved by 1938 , and the entire road had been paved by 1940 . By 1956 , the routing was signed as Route 115 . By 1961 , the highway continued just west of Holtville to an intersection with US 80 ( later I @-@ 8 ) , where it ran concurrently with US 80 briefly before heading south to a junction with SR 98 in Bonds Corner . 
 SR 115 was officially defined in the 1964 state highway renumbering . The segment south of SR 78 was altered in 1972 ; the portion between I @-@ 8 south to SR 98 near Bonds Corner was deleted , and the definition was clarified from " Route 8 near Holtville " to " Route 8 southeasterly of Holtville " . By 1975 , the routing of SR 115 had been adjusted to end at I @-@ 8 , south of the old US 80 routing . 
 = = Future = = 
 The 2007 Imperial County Transportation Plan proposed the improvement of SR 115 from the Evan Hewes Highway north to SR 111 from a two @-@ lane highway to a four @-@ lane expressway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in Imperial County . 
 = Fear of a Black Planet = 
 Fear of a Black Planet is the third studio album by American hip hop group Public Enemy , released on April 10 , 1990 , by Def Jam Recordings and Columbia Records . It was produced by the group 's production team The Bomb Squad , who sought to expand on the dense , sample @-@ layered sound of Public Enemy 's previous album , It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back ( 1988 ) . Having fulfilled their initial creative ambitions with that album , Public Enemy pursued a different direction and aspired to create what the group 's lead rapper Chuck D called " a deep , complex album " . Their songwriting was partly inspired by the controversy with member Professor Griff and his dismissal from the group in 1989 . 
 Fear of a Black Planet features elaborate sound collages that incorporate varying rhythms , numerous samples , media sound bites , and eccentric loops , reflecting the songs ' confrontational tone . Recorded during the golden age of hip hop , its assemblage of reconfigured and recontextualized aural sources preceded the sample clearance system that later emerged in the music industry . Fear of a Black Planet explores themes about organization and empowerment within the black community , social issues affecting African Americans , and race relations at the time . The record 's criticism of institutional racism , White supremacy , and the power elite were partly inspired by Dr. Frances Cress <unk> 's views on color . 
 A critical and commercial success in 1990 , Fear of a Black Planet sold two million copies in the United States and received rave reviews from critics , many of whom named it one the year 's best albums . Its immediate success contributed significantly to the popularity of Afrocentric and political subject matter in hip hop and the genre 's mainstream resurgence at the time . Since then , it has been viewed as one of hip hop 's greatest and most important records , as well as being musically and culturally significant . In 2003 , Fear of a Black Planet was ranked number 300 on Rolling Stone 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , and in 2005 , the Library of Congress added it to the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1988 , Public Enemy released their second album It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back to critical and commercial success . Their music 's dense textures , provided by the group 's production team The Bomb Squad , exemplified a new production aesthetic in hip hop at the time . The controversial , politically charged lyrics by the group 's lead rapper Chuck D , whose braggadocio raps contained references to political figures such as Assata Shakur and Nelson Mandela , as well as endorsements of Nation of Islam @-@ leader Louis Farrakhan , intensified the group 's affiliation with black nationalism and Farrakhan . It Takes a Nation 's success helped raise hip hop 's profile as both art and sociopolitical statement , amid media criticism of the genre . It helped give hip hop a critical credibility and standing in the popular music community after it had been largely dismissed as a fad since its introduction at the turn of the 1980s . In promoting the record , Public Enemy expanded their live shows and performing dynamic . With the album 's content and the group 's rage @-@ filled showmanship in concert , they became the vanguard of a movement in hip hop that reflected a new black consciousness and sociopolitical dynamic that were taking shape in America at the time . 
 In May 1989 , Chuck D , Bomb Squad producer Hank Shocklee , and publicist Bill <unk> were negotiating with several labels for a production deal from a major record company , their goal since starting Public Enemy in the early 1980s . As they were in negotiations , group member Professor Griff made anti @-@ Semitic remarks in an interview for The Washington Times , in which he said that Jews were the cause of " the majority of the wickedness " in the world . Public Enemy received media scrutiny and criticism from religious organizations and liberal rock critics , which added to charges against the group 's politics being racist , homophobic , and misogynistic . Amid controversy , Chuck D was given an ultimatum by <unk> and <unk> to dismiss Griff from the group or the production deal would fall through . He fired Griff in June , but he later rejoined and has since denied holding anti @-@ Semitic views and apologized for the remarks . Several people who had worked with Public Enemy expressed concern about Chuck D 's leadership abilities and role as a social spokesman . Def Jam director of publicity Bill Adler later said that the controversy " partly ... fueled the writing of [ the album ] " . 
 To follow @-@ up It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back , the group pursued a different direction , content @-@ wise . According to Chuck D , they sought to make a more thematically focused work and to condense Dr. Frances Cress <unk> 's theory of " Color Confrontation and Racism ( White Supremacy ) " into an album @-@ length recording , " telling people , well , color 's an issue created and concocted to take advantage of people of various characteristics with the benefit of a few " . He recalled their concept for the album in an interview for Billboard , " We wanted really to go with a deep , complex album ... more conducive to the high and lows of great stage @-@ performance " . Chuck D also cited in their creative vision the commercial circumstances for hip hop at the time , having quickly transitioned from a singles to an album medium in the music industry during the 1980s . In an interview for Westword , he later said , " We understood the magnitude of what an album was , so we set out to make something that not only epitomized the standard of an album , but would stand the test of time by being diverse with sounds and textures , and also being able to home in on the aspect of peaks and valleys " . 
 The album 's artwork followed Chuck D 's concept of two planets , the " Black " planet and Earth , eclipsing . The group enlisted B.E. Johnson , a NASA illustrator , to create the cover . Cey Adams , creative director for Def Jam at the time , later said of the creative decision for the artwork , " It was so interesting to me that a black hip @-@ hop act did an illustration for their album cover . At that time black hip @-@ hop artists , for the most part , had photos of themselves on their covers . But this was the first time someone took a chance to do something in the rock 'n'roll vein " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Fear of a Black Planet was recorded in sessions held during June to October 1989 at Greene St. Recording in New York City , The Music Palace in West Hempstead , and Spectrum City Studios in Hempstead . It was produced entirely by The Bomb Squad , which included Chuck D , Eric " Vietnam " Sadler , and brothers Hank and Keith Shocklee . The sessions marked the first time that Keith was credited as a member of the team , playing a significant role in composing the main tracks and music for the album . Hank Shocklee directed them and was referred to by Chuck D as " the Phil Spector of hip @-@ hop " . For Fear of a Black Planet , they sought to expand on the dense , sample @-@ layered " wall of noise " sound of It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back . 
 The Bomb Squad worked out an elaborate method that involved the members assembling different types of sounds in the studio . They proceeded to reconfigure and recontextualize fragments from various sources into their own compositions . Each member brought a different philosophy to composing music , arranging sounds , and working with technology , while sampled material was taken from singles , LP albums , and radio , among other sources . Hank Shocklee called the group " a production assembly line where each person had their own particular specialty . " In his words , he came " from a DJ 's perspective . Eric [ Sadler ] is coming from a musician ’ s perspective . So together , you know , we started working out different ideas . " Sadler advocated a more traditional , structured approach to songwriting , while Shocklee 's approach was more experimental . As the main lyricist , Chuck D wanted to recontextualize the sampled material into his lyrics and create a theme for the album . 
 The Bomb Squad listened to various music records and used devices such as the E @-@ mu SP @-@ 1200 drum machine and sampler , the Akai <unk> sampler , and a Macintosh computer to arrange samples and sequence tracks . The sessions , which were recorded by Shocklee for future reference , had the group playing beats and records , while collecting potential sample material . Chuck D has said that " 95 percent of the time it sounded like mess . But there was 5 percent of magic that would happen . " Shocklee compared their production to that of filmmaking , " with different lighting effects , or film speeds , or whatever " , while Chuck D found their intention to " blend sound " similar to a visual artist " tak [ ing ] yellow and blue and come up with green " . He said of their approach in a 1990 interview for Keyboard Magazine , " We approach every record like it was a painting . Sometimes , on the sound sheet , we have to have a separate sheet just to list the samples for each track . We used about 150 , maybe 200 samples on Fear of a Black Planet . " 
 Instead of selecting from the numerous , basic backing tracks Sadler had collected before the sessions , Chuck D wanted for the production team to improvise beats in the studio . This led to much of Fear of a Black Planet 's music being composed on the spot . Chuck D said he spent numerous hours listening to various tapes , music records , and other audio sources in search of samples for the album . Of their search for samples , Hank Shocklee said , " When you ’ re talking about the kind of sampling that Public Enemy did , we had to comb through thousands of records to come up with maybe five good pieces . And as we started putting together those pieces , the sound got a lot more dense . " 
 In order to synchronize the samples , The Bomb Squad used <unk> <unk> and arranged and overdubbed particular bits of backing tracks , which had been inspected by the members for snare , bass , and hi @-@ hat sounds . Chuck D said of their production and sampling , " Our music is all about samples in the right area , layers that pile on each other . We put loops on top of loops on top of loops , but then in the mix we cut things away " . Their production was innovative , according to journalist Jeff Chang . " They 're figuring out how to jam with the samples and to create these layers of sound " , Chang said . " I don 't think it ’ s been matched since then . " After the tracks were completed , The Bomb Squad began sequencing what was at first a seemingly discontinuous album , amid internal disputes among its members . The final mixing took place at Greene St. Recording and lasted into February 1990 . According to Sadler , " a lot of people were like , ' Wow , it 's a brilliant album ' . But it really shoulda been much better . If we had more time and we didn 't have to deal with the situation of nobody talking " . 
 Fear of Black Planet was conceived during the golden age of hip hop , a period roughly between 1987 and 1992 when artists took advantage of newly emerging sampling technology , before record labels and lawyers took notice . Accordingly , Public Enemy were not compelled to obtain sample clearance for the album . This preceded the legal limits and clearance costs later placed on sampling , which effectively limited hip hop production and the complexity of its musical arrangements . In an interview with Stay Free ! , Chuck D said of their use of sampling , " Public Enemy 's music was affected more than anybody 's because we were taking thousands of sounds . If you separated the sounds , they wouldn 't have been <unk> were unrecognizable . The sounds were all <unk> together to make a sonic wall " . An analysis by law professors Peter <unk> and Kembrew McLeod estimated that under the sample clearance system that had emerged in the music industry since the album 's release , Public Enemy were to lose at least five dollars per copy if they were to clear the album 's samples at 2010 rates ; McLeod commented , " a loss of five million dollars on a platinum record " . 
 For the track " Burn Hollywood Burn " , Chuck D dealt with clearance issues from different record labels in order to collaborate with rappers Big Daddy Kane and Ice Cube , who had been pursuing the Bomb Squad to produce his debut album . The recording marked one of the first times in which MCs from different rap crews collaborated , and it led to the Bomb Squad working with Ice Cube on his 1990 debut album <unk> 's Most Wanted . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Fear of a Black Planet 's music features assemblage compositions that draw on numerous aural sources . The production 's musique concrète @-@ influenced approach reflects the political and confrontational tones of the group 's lyrics , with sound collages that feature varying rhythms , aliased or scratchy samples , media sound bites , and eccentric music loops . Recordings sampled for Fear of a Black Planet include those from funk , soul , rock , and hip hop genres . Elements such as choruses , guitar sounds , or vocals from sampled recordings are reappropriated as riffs in songs on the album , while sampled dialogue from speeches are incorporated to support Chuck D 's arguments and commentary on certain songs . The Bomb Squad 's Hank Shocklee compared their produced sounds , surrounding Chuck D 's rhythmic , <unk> baritone voice , to putting " the voice of God in a storm " . 
 According to The Greenwood Encyclopedia of African American Folklore ( 2006 ) , Fear of a Black Planet introduced a production style that " borrowed elements from jazz , especially that of John Coltrane , to craft a soundscape that was more challenging than that of their previous two albums , but still complemented the complex social commentary " . Journalist Kembrew McLeod called the music " both agitprop and pop , mixing politics with the live @-@ wire thrill of the popular music experience " , adding that the Bomb Squad " took sampling to the level of high art while keeping intact hip @-@ hop 's populist heart . They would graft together dozens of fragmentary samples to create a single song collage . " Simon Reynolds said it was " a work of unprecedented density for hip hop , its claustrophobic , backs @-@ against @-@ the @-@ wall feel harking back to Sly Stone 's There 's a Riot Goin ' On or even Miles Davis ' On the Corner " . 
 Some tracks used elements from Public Enemy 's previous material , which Pete Watrous of The New York Times interpreted as a dual reference to hip hop tradition and the history of the group . Watrous described the music as " the sound of urban alienation , where silence doesn 't exist and sensory stimulation is oppressive and predatory " , and writes that its dense textures " envelop Chuck D 's voice and make his rapping sound as if it is under duress , as if he were fighting against a background intent on taking him over ... Layer after layer of sounds are placed on top of each other until the music becomes nearly tactile " . Chuck D called Fear of a Black Planet a record entirely of " found sounds ... probably the most elaborate smorgasbord of sound that we did ... When we put together our music , we try to put together layers that complement each other , and then the voice tries to complement that , and the theme tries to complement that , and then the song itself tries to complement the album as a whole , fitting into the overall context . " In his essay on hip hop aesthetics , Richard Schur interpreted such layering as a motif in hip hop and as " the process by which ... new meanings are created and communicated , primarily to an equally knowledgeable audience " , concluding that " Public Enemy probably took the ideal of layering to its farthest point " . 
 Fear of a Black Planet contains themes of organization and empowerment within the African @-@ American community , and of confrontation . Chuck D 's critical lyrics on the album , interspersed with the surrealism of Flavor Flav , also concern contemporary black life , the state of race relations , and criticisms of institutional racism , White supremacy , and the power elite . Greg Sandow called Chuck D 's language " strong and elusive , often fragmentary " and " embedded [ with ] critical , sometimes brutal thoughts " . Although he viewed that " some people might disagree with some of these ideas " , Sandow wrote that " it 's hard to dispute the lyrics ' assertion that many Whites are afraid of blacks " , adding that the album " touches on " the idea of " an age when whites understand that they 're a minority in the world " . Robert Hilburn believed that the songs " decried what Chuck D. saw as the consequences of white , European cultural domination in the United States and throughout much of the world " . Sputnikmusic 's Nick Butler observed " two recurring themes – inter @-@ racial relationships ... and the racism inherent in the American media " . 
 In his book Somebody Scream ! : Rap Music 's Rise to Prominence in the Aftershock of Black Power , Marcus Reeves said that Fear of a Black Planet " was as much a musical assault on America 's racism as it was a call to blacks to effectively react to it " . According to Greg Kot , the album was " hardly a black power manifesto for world domination , but a statement about racial paranoia . Though he spares virtually no one with his withering raps , Public Enemy 's Chuck D is harshest of all on his fellow blacks , expounding on everything from history to fashion : Use your brain instead of a gun . Drugs are death . Know your past so you won 't screw up the future . Gold chains worn around the neck demean the brotherhood in South Africa . " Kot wrote of Chuck D 's perspective and the theme of fear , " It 's fear that divides us , he says ; understand me better and you won 't run . Fear of a Black Planet is about achieving that understanding , but on Public Enemy 's terms . In presenting their view of life from an Afro @-@ centric , as opposed to Euro @-@ centric , perspective , P.E. challenges listeners to step into their world . " 
 = = = Songs = = = 
 The opening track , " Contract on the World Love Jam " , is a sound collage made up of samples , scratch cuts , and snippets recorded by Chuck D from radio stations and sound bites of interviews and commercials . The tension @-@ building track introduces the album 's dense , sample @-@ based production . According to Chuck D , the song features " about forty @-@ five to fifty [ sampled ] voices " that interweave as part of an assertive sonic collage and underscore the album ’ s themes . " Incident at 66 @.@ 6 FM " , another collage that segues into " Welcome to the Terrordome " , contains snippets from a radio call @-@ in show interview of Chuck D and alludes to the media persecution perceived by Public Enemy . " Burn Hollywood Burn " <unk> the use of black stereotypes in movies , and " Who Stole the Soul ? " condemns the record industry 's exploitation of black recording artists and calls for reparations . " Revolutionary Generation " celebrates the strength and endurance of black women with lyrics related to black feminism , an unfamiliar topic in hip hop . It also addresses sexism within the black community and misogyny in hip hop culture . 
 The title track discusses racial classification and the root of White fear of African Americans , particularly racist concerns by some Whites over the effect of miscegenation . In the song , Chuck D argues that they should not worry as the original man was black and " white comes from black / No need to be confused " . The song features a vocal sample of comedian and activist Dick Gregory : " Black man , black woman , black baby / white man , black woman , black baby ? " . " <unk> " also concerns interracial relations , including Blacks who leave their communities to marry wealthy Whites , and societal views of the matter : " This system had no wisdom / The devil split us in pairs / and taught us white is good , black is bad / and black and white is still too bad " . " Meet the G That Killed Me " features homophobic etiology and condemns homosexuality : " Man to man / I don 't know if they can / From what I know / The parts don 't fit " . Written by hypeman Flavor Flav and Bomb Squad @-@ producers Keith Shocklee and Eric " Vietnam " Sadler , " 911 Is a Joke " features Flav as the main vocalist and criticizes the inadequacy of 9 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 , the emergency telephone number used in the United States , and the lack of police response to emergency calls in predominantly African @-@ American neighborhoods . 
 Songs such as " Fight the Power " , " Power to the People " , and " Brothers Gonna Work It Out " propose a response for African Americans to the issues criticized throughout the album . " Power to the People " has a tempo of approximately 125 beats per minute and elements of Miami bass , electro @-@ boogie , and fast @-@ paced Roland TR @-@ 808 . Addressing their plight at the turn of the 1990s , " Brothers Gonna Work It Out " features <unk> sound textures and a theme of unity among African Americans , with Chuck D preaching " Brothers that try to work it out / They get mad , revolt , revise , realize / They 're <unk> / Small chance a smart brother 's gonna be a victim of his own circumstance " . Richard Harrington of The Washington Post writes that songs such as " War at 33 ⅓ " and " Fight the Power " " may sound like a call to ohms and arms , but they are really a call to action ( ' turn us loose and we shall overcome ' ) , a message to conscience and a plea for unity ( ' move as team , never move alone , ' both cautionary advice and game plan ) " . " War at 33 ⅓ " has a theme of resistance and a 128 bpm @-@ tempo , cited by Chuck D as " the fastest thing I 've ever rapped to , rapping right on top of the beat " . 
 The lead single " Fight the Power " features revolutionary rhetoric by Chuck D and was used by director Spike Lee as a leitmotif in his acclaimed 1989 film Do the Right Thing , a film about racial tension in a Brooklyn neighborhood . Lee approached the group in 1988 after the release of It Takes a Nation with the proposition of making a song for his movie . Chuck D wrote most of the song trying to adapt The Isley Brothers ' " Fight the Power " to a modernist perspective . The song 's third verse contains disparaging lyrics about popular American icons Elvis Presley and John Wayne , as Chuck D rhymes " Elvis was a hero to most / But he never meant shit to me ' / Straight up , racist the sucker was / Simple and plain " , with Flavor Flav following , " <unk> him and John Wayne ! " . The lyrics were shocking and offensive to many listeners upon the single 's release . Chuck D 's lyrics express the identification of Presley with racism — either personally or symbolically — and the largely held notion among Blacks that Presley , whose musical and visual performances owed much to African @-@ American sources , unfairly achieved the cultural acknowledgment and commercial success largely denied his black peers in rock and roll . The line regarding John Wayne refers to his controversial personal views , including racist remarks made in his 1971 interview for Playboy . " Fight the Power " has since become the group 's best @-@ known song and has been named one of the best songs of all time by numerous publications . 
 The controversial single " Welcome to the Terrordome " references the murder of Yusef Hawkins and the 1989 riots in Virginia Beach , and it has Chuck D criticizing Jewish leaders who protested Public Enemy in response to Professor Griff 's anti @-@ Semitic remarks . He addresses the controversy as being in the center of political turmoil , with criticisms of the media and references to the Crucifixion of Jesus : " Crucifixion ain 't no fiction / So called chosen frozen / Apology made to who ever pleases / Still they got me like Jesus " . He is also critical of Blacks and those who " blame somebody else when you destroy yourself " : " Every brother ain 't a brother / ' cause a Black hand squeezed on Malcolm X the man / the shootin of Huey Newton / from the hand of Nig who pulled the trigger " . His lyricism features dizzying raps and internal rhyme : " Lazer , <unk> , maze ya / Ways to blaze your brain and train ya [ ... ] Sad to say I got sold down the river / Still some quiver when I deliver / Never to say I never knew or had a clue / Word was heard , plus hard on the boulevard / Lies , <unk> ' , basin ' / Traits of hate who 's <unk> ' wit Satan ? " . Its dense production incorporates numerous samples , including several James Brown tracks and the guitar line from The Temptations ' " Psychedelic Shack " . Several other samples are heard amid Chuck D 's rapping , such as the line " come on , you can get it @-@ get it @-@ get it " from Instant Funk 's " I Got My Mind Made Up ( You Can Get It Girl ) " . AllMusic 's John Bush cites the track as " the production peak of the Bomb Squad and one of Chuck D. ' s best rapping performances ever ... [ N ] one of their tracks were more musically incendiary " . 
 The third single " 911 Is a Joke " features Flavor Flav as the lead MC . He was given the idea by Chuck D to write the song . As Flav recalled , " I went and got high and wrote the record . I went and got ripped , I went and got out of my mind , and I started speaking all kinds of crazy shit ' cos usually back in the days when I used to smoke , it used to broaden my ideas and everything " . Its humorous and satirical subject matter is reflected in its music video , which featured a severely injured Flav being mistreated by a remiss , overdue ambulance staff . Another Flavor Flav @-@ solo track , fifth single " Can 't Do Nuttin ' for Ya Man " , has lyrics advocating African @-@ American self @-@ reliance and denouncing welfare dependence . It also reflects on Flav 's experiences with acquaintances from poor neighborhoods . He said of his inspiration for the song , " I was in my Corvette riding from Long Island going to The Bronx . I was slipping . I was roasting . I mean I was smoked @-@ out crazy . And everybody kept asking me for stuff and yet nobody wanted to give me stuff . So then if anybody ever asked me for something I would be like , ' Yo , I can 't do nothing for ya man . ' Next thing you know I started to vibe on it : ' I can 't do nothing for ya man , ' um ahh um um ahh . So I went and told that to Chuck . Chuck was like , ' Record that shit man ' " . Writing of both tracks , music critic Tom Moon comments that Flav " affects a tone of gimme @-@ a @-@ break sarcasm that is crucial to both tracks , and is welcome respite from Chuck D. ' s assault " . " Can 't Do Nuttin ' for Ya Man " was featured in the 1990 comedy film House Party . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Originally intended for an October 1989 release date , Fear of a Black Planet was released on April 10 , 1990 by Def Jam Recordings and Columbia Records . Although It Takes a Nation garnered Public Enemy more exposure with black audiences and music journalists , urban radio outlets had mostly rejected Def Jam 's requests to include the group 's singles in their regular rotation . This incited Def Jam co @-@ founder Russell Simmons to attempt grassroots promotional tactics from his earlier years of promoting hip hop shows . In promoting Fear of a Black Planet , he recruited young street crews to put up posters , billboards , and stickers on public surfaces , while Simmons himself met with nightclub DJs and college radio program directors to persuade them to add albums tracks such as " Fight the Power " , " 911 is a Joke " , and " Welcome to the Terrordome " to their playlists . 
 Fear of a Black Planet debuted at number 40 on the Billboard Top Pop Albums chart , with first @-@ week sales of one million copies in the United States . It also charted for 10 weeks and reached number four in the United Kingdom , while in Canada , it charted for 28 weeks and reached number 15 . By July 1990 , it had sold 1 @.@ 5 million copies in the US , where it ultimately peaked at number 10 and charted for 27 weeks on the Top Pop Albums . After 1991 , when the tracking system Nielsen SoundScan began tracking domestic sales data , Fear of a Black Planet sold 561 @,@ 000 additional copies by 2010 . 
 The controversy surrounding the group and their exposure through the singles " Fight the Power " and " Welcome to the Terrordome " helped Fear of a Black Planet exceed the sales of their previous two albums , Yo ! Bum Rush the Show and It Takes a Nation of Million to Hold Us Back at the time , 500 @,@ 000 and 1 @.@ 1 million copies , respectively . The latter single 's lyrics were initially viewed by religious groups and the media as anti @-@ semitic upon its release . The album contributed to hip hop 's commercial breakthrough at the beginning of the 1990s , despite its limited radio airplay . Its success made Public Enemy the top @-@ selling act , both domestically and internationally , for Def Jam Recordings at the time . Ruben Rodriguez , Columbia 's senior vice president at the time , said in one of the label 's press releases , " What 's happening with Public Enemy is unbelievable . The album is selling across the board to all demographics and nationalities " . In a December 1990 article , Chicago Sun @-@ Times writer Michael Corcoran discussed Public Enemy 's commercial success with the album and remarked that " more than half of the 2 million fans who bought [ Fear of a Black Planet ] are white " . 
 Fear of a Black Planet received rave reviews from contemporary critics . After asserting prior to its release that it was " bound to be one of the most dissected pop collections in years " , Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times wrote that the album " rivals the force and the power of It Takes a Nation " while " maintaining commercial and artistic credibility in the fast @-@ changing rap world " with original music . USA Today 's Edna Gundersen called it " a masterpiece of innovation [ and ] challenging music " that makes the group 's pro @-@ black lyrics more interesting and plausible . Rolling Stone magazine 's Alan Light praised Public Enemy 's self @-@ assured and realistic lyrics , and viewed the album as a deeper , more focused version of " the careening rage of Nation of Millions " . Greg Sandow of Entertainment Weekly found it powerfully relevant to contemporary American culture and unparalleled by anything in popular music : " It sounds like a partly African , partly postmodern collage , stitched together on tumultuous urban streets . " Tom Moon of The Philadelphia Inquirer observed " some of the genre 's most sophisticated sound designs and unconventionally agile rapping " on the album and called it " a major piece of work , the first hard evidence of rap 's maturity and a measure of its continuing relevance " . 
 In The Washington Post , Richard Harrington said because Feat of a Black Planet is a challenging listen , " How it 's met depends on how it 's understood . " Robert Christgau , writing for The Village Voice , felt that its " brutal pace " ultimately loses momentum and that the group 's lyrics are still ideologically flawed , but wrote that although their " rebel music " is gimmicky , " this is show business , and they still think harder than anybody else working their beat . " Peter Watrous of The New York Times called it " an essential pop album " and stated , " On their own , the lyrics seen [ sic ] functional . Taken with the music , they bloom with meaning . " Simon Reynolds of Melody Maker remarked that the content epitomizes the group 's significance at the time : " Public Enemy are important ... because of the angry questions that seethe in their music , in the very fabric of their sound ; the bewilderment and rage that , in this case , have made for one hell of strong , scary album " . Chicago Tribune critic Greg Kot felt that with the album , " Public Enemy affirms that it is not just a great rap group , but one of the best rock bands on the planet @-@ black or otherwise " . 
 At the end of 1990 , Fear of a Black Planet appeared in the top @-@ 10 of several critics ' lists of the year 's best albums . It was voted the third best record of 1990 in The Village Voice 's annual Pazz & Jop critics ' poll , and the publication 's Robert Christgau ranked it number 10 on his own " Dean 's list " . It was named the second best album of the year by The Boston Globe , the third best by USA Today , and fifth best by the Los Angeles Times 's Robert Hilburn , who wrote that it " dissects aspects of the black experience with an energy and vision that illustrates why rap continues to be the most creative genre in pop " . The State named it one of the year 's best albums and hailed it as " possibly the boldest and most important rap record ever made . A sonic tour de force " . Fear of a Black Planet was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group , presented at the 33rd Grammy Awards in 1991 . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 Fear of a Black Planet 's success with critics and consumers was viewed as a significant factor to hip hop 's mainstream emergence in 1990 , which Billboard editor Paul Grein said was " the year that rap exploded " . In a July 1990 article , Kot compared Public Enemy 's influence with the album on hip hop at the start of the 1990s to the impact of Bob Dylan , George Clinton , and Bob Marley on each of their respective genres and eras , having " given it legitimacy and authority far beyond its core following " . Chuck D later said of the album in retrospect , " If It Takes a Nation was our ' nation ' record , Fear of a Black Planet was our ' world ' record " . With respect to hip hop , the album was important in the field of sampling , as copyright lawyers took notice of The Bomb Squad 's production and such a sample @-@ heavy work would not be cost effective in the future . Chuck D later said of its sampling issues , " We got sued for everything . We knew that the door on sampling was gonna close " . Subsequent use of sampled material , particularly the use of whole songs on top of a beat , by other hip hop artists prompted stricter sampling laws . Fear of a Black Planet was the group 's commercial apex , with sales dropping off for their subsequent albums . Chuck D said it was their most successful record , " not because of all the hype and hysteria . It was a world record . Because of all the different feels and the different textures and the flow it had " . 
 Fear of a Black Planet also helped popularize political subject matter in hip hop music , as it epitomized the resurgence in black consciousness among African @-@ American youths at the turn of the 1990s , amid a turbulent social and political zeitgeist during the Bush administration and South African apartheid . Black consciousness became the prevailing subject matter of many hip hop acts , exemplified by X @-@ Clan 's cultural nationalism on their debut album To the East , <unk> , the revolutionary , Black Panther @-@ minded The Devil Made Me Do It by Paris , and the Five Percenter religious nationalism of Poor Righteous Teachers ' debut Holy Intellect . Christgau wrote in 1990 that Public Enemy had become not only " the most innovative popular musicians in America if not the world " but also " the most politically ambitious . Not even in the heyday of [ the ] Clash has any group come so close to the elusive and perhaps ridiculous ' 60s rock ideal of raising political consciousness with music . " Their music on the album inspired leftist and Afrocentric ideals among rap listeners who were previously exposed to more materialist themes in the music . Reeves said it introduced black consciousness to the " hip @-@ hop youth " of the " post @-@ black power generation " , " as leather African medallions made popular by rappers like P.E. replaced thick gold chains as the ultimate fashion statement ... P.E. ' s million seller sat at the front of a full @-@ blown black pride resurgence within rap " . 
 However , this resurgence soon became commodified as a trend , while actual awareness within the African @-@ American community was limited and ineffectual to issues such as drug dealing and the prevalence of liquor stores in such neighborhoods . Public Enemy responded to this and other deep @-@ rooted problems of Black America on their following album , Apocalypse 91 ... The Enemy Strikes Black ( 1991 ) , which featured more critical assessments of African @-@ Americans , denouncing Black drug dealers who donned Afrocentric merchandise , hip hop artists who promoted malt liquor , black radio stations for lacking significant airplay to hip hop , and even the Africans at the onset of the Atlantic slave trade for lacking unity . 
 Since Fear of a Black Planet was first released , it has been viewed by critics as one of the greatest and most important hip hop albums of all time , as well as a culturally significant work . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic believed that " as a piece of music , this is the best hip @-@ hop has ever had to offer " , calling it " a remarkable piece of modern art , a record that ushered in the ' 90s in a hail of multi @-@ culturalism and kaleidoscopic confusion " . Alex Ross cited it as one of " the most densely packed sonic assemblages in musical history " , while Q said it " achieved the near impossible by being every bit as good as its predecessor " . In the opinion of Kembrew McLeod , Public Enemy had worked with production equipment that would seem primitive decades later but still managed to invent new " techniques and workarounds that electronics manufacturers never imagined " . Sputnikmusic staff writer Nick Butler said the album remained an enduring and vital work in a genre that " has a habit of moving at such a pace that records date in a matter of years " . 
 According to Acclaimed Music , Fear of a Black Planet is the 126th most ranked album on critics ' lists of the all @-@ time greatest records . In 1997 , The Guardian ranked it number 50 in their 100 Best Albums Ever list , which was voted on by a panel of various artists , critics , and DJs . The following year , it was selected as one of The Source 's 100 Best Rap Albums . The record was ranked number 21 in Spin 's " 100 Greatest Albums , 1985 – 2005 " publication . Pitchfork Media named it the 17th @-@ best album of the 1990s . Rolling Stone included Fear of a Black Planet on their " Essential Recording of the ' 90s " list , and in 2003 , the magazine ranked it number 300 on their list of the 500 greatest albums of all time . In 2004 , it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry , which selects recordings annually that are " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . According to a press release for the registry , " ' Fear of a Black Planet ' brought hip @-@ hop respect from critics , millions of new fans and passionate debate over its political content . The album signaled the coupling of a strongly political message with hip @-@ hop music " . In 2013 , NME named it the 96th best record ever in their all @-@ time list . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All tracks were produced by The Bomb Squad . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune = 
 Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune is a 2007 action @-@ adventure platform video game developed by Naughty Dog , and published by Sony Computer Entertainment for PlayStation 3 . It is the first game in the Uncharted series . Combining action @-@ adventure and platforming elements with a third @-@ person perspective , the game charts the journey of protagonist Nathan Drake , supposed descendant of the explorer Sir Francis Drake , as he seeks the lost treasure of El Dorado , with the help of journalist Elena Fisher and mentor Victor Sullivan . 
 Originally announced at E3 2006 , the title was developed for about two years before being released at the end of 2007 . Seen as a key title for the PlayStation 3 during the holiday season of 2007 , the game was well received by critics , many of whom cited its technical achievements and its high production values , similar to that of summer blockbuster films , though some of the mechanics , particularly the climbing segments , were less well received . The game went on to sell more than one million copies in ten weeks , and become part of the European best @-@ selling Platinum Range of titles . A sequel titled Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves was released in 2009 , and a third entry to the series , Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception , was released in 2011 . A fourth and final game , Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End , was released on May 10 , 2016 . The game was released on the PlayStation 4 , along with its two sequels , as part of Uncharted : The Nathan Drake Collection . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Off the coast of Panama , treasure hunter Nathan " Nate " Drake ( Nolan North ) and journalist Elena Fisher ( Emily Rose ) excavate the coffin of English explorer Sir Francis Drake , Nate 's supposed ancestor , whose ring ( in Nate 's possession ) has coordinates leading to the location . Instead of a body , the duo find only a small notebook , which Nathan refuses to allow Elena to read . A small fleet of pirates attack their ship and set it on fire , destroying any record of their find save for the notebook and Elena 's camera . After getting her to safety , Nate holds a private discussion with Victor " Sully " Sullivan ( Richard <unk> ) , his old friend and mentor . Based on clues provided by the notebook , he theorizes that Drake faked his death to cover up the discovery of El Dorado , an ancient city said to be made entirely of gold . Burdened by severe financial problems , Sully persuades him to help find the city , ditching Elena in port , as he fears that a report on the find will summon competitors . 
 The two follow a trail left by Drake to a temple in the Amazon , where they learn that El Dorado isn 't a city , but a massive gold statue , which was taken centuries before by Spanish Conquistadors . They follow tracks to a waterfall , where they come across an abandoned U @-@ boat . A search of the vessel 's cabins turns up a missing page from the notebook , pinpointing the statue 's location in a former Spanish colony on an uncharted Pacific island . 
 Once Nate emerges from the vessel , he and Sully are confronted by another treasure hunter named Gabriel Roman ( Simon Templeman ) , to whom Sully owes a great deal of money . Backed by his partner , archaeologist <unk> Navarro ( Robin Atkin Downes ) , and pirate captain Eddy Raja ( James Sie ) , an old enemy of Nate 's , Roman forces Nate to hand over the page and seemingly shoots Sully dead when he tries to intervene . Before he can kill Nate , a loose torpedo charge previously triggered by Nate causes the U @-@ boat to explode , distracting the gang long enough for Drake to escape . He runs into Elena , who agrees to help him find the statue , and together they use Sully 's plane to travel to the old colony . 
 The plane is shot down mid @-@ air , separating Nate from Elena when they parachute out . He tracks her to an old fort controlled by Eddy , who traps him and demands that he help him find the treasure . Elena arrives in a stolen jeep and breaks him out , but they are unable to outrun Eddy 's men . Stalling for time , Nate manages to drive the jeep over a cliff and into a lake surrounding the colony 's port . Tired , injured , and grieving Sully 's death , Nate decides to give up and return home . Elena convinces him to see Drake 's work through , and the two work together to reach the crumbling customs house , where Nate is able to trace the statue to an inland monastery . While on reconnaissance , they discover that Roman has also found the statue with help from the supposedly @-@ dead Sully . While in pursuit , Elena falls through a bridge and reluctantly discards her camera so that Nate can save her . Nate subsequently catches up to Sully and accuses him of betrayal , to which Sully reveals that he was only pretending to help , having survived Roman 's bullet by using the notebook as a shield . 
 The trio fights their way through Roman ′ s men , reaching an underground chamber where Nate believes the statue is buried . Meanwhile , Eddy , consumed by paranoia , warns Roman that an unearthly force has been killing off his men , which the former dismisses as nonsense . Nate investigates the chamber , finding not the statue but Drake 's corpse , with whom he sadly leaves the ring . A group of zombie @-@ like creatures swarm him and his companions , including Eddy and his bodyguard . In the chaos that follows , Eddy and his man are killed , and Sully disappears . Nate and Elena press on and find themselves in an old Nazi submarine base built into the island . Looking for a way out , Nate finds a letter written by Drake exposing the truth : El Dorado is protected by a curse that turned both the Spanish colonists and the German soldiers into monsters . Drake sought to destroy it , but the creatures killed him before he could . 
 Meanwhile , Elena is kidnapped by Roman , and Nate reunites with Sully and follows him to the statue . Encouraged by Navarro , Roman opens the statue 's burial vault , exposing himself to an airborne virus . As he begins to turn , Navarro guns him down and orders his men to secure the statue so that he can weaponize the virus and sell it . Nate jumps onto the net carrying the treasure connected to the transport chopper while a captive Elena gets the pilot killed , causing it to crash on Navarro 's cargo ship . Nate kills the remaining mercenaries and attempts to rescue Elena , only to be attacked by Navarro . After a fistfight , he pulls her out of the chopper and pushes it overboard , taking Navarro , whose leg is tangled in the rope connected to the net , and the statue with it . 
 Moments later , Sully arrives on a small speedboat loaded with riches from the pirates . Elena surprises Drake by returning his family ring and makes him promise to give her the story she lost . The two then embrace as Sully drives the boat into the sunset . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Gameplay in Uncharted is a combination of action @-@ adventure gameplay elements and 3D platforming with a third @-@ person perspective . Platforming elements allow Nate to jump , swim , grab and move along ledges , climb and swing from ropes , and perform other acrobatic actions that allow players to make their way along the ruins in the various areas of the island that Drake explores . 
 When facing enemies , the player can either use melee and combo attacks at close range to take out foes or can opt to use weapons . Melee attacks comprise a variety of single punches , while combo attacks are activated through specific sequences of button presses that , when timed correctly , offer much greater damage ; the most damaging of these is the specific " brutal combo " , which forces enemies to drop twice the ammunition they would normally leave . Nate can only carry one pistol and one rifle at a time , and there is a limited amount of ammunition per gun . Picking up a different firearm switches that weapon for the new one . Grenades are also available at certain points , and the height of the aiming arc is adjusted by tilting the Sixaxis controller up or down . These third @-@ person perspective elements were compared by several reviewers to Gears of War , in that the player can have Drake take cover behind walls , and use either blind fire or aimed fire to kill enemies . In common with the aforementioned game , Uncharted lacks an actual on @-@ screen health bar ; instead , when the player takes damage , the graphics begin to lose color . While resting or taking cover for a brief period , Drake 's health level , indicated by the screen color , returns to normal . 
 The game also includes vehicle sections , where Drake must protect the jeep he and Elena are in using a mounted turret , and where Drake and Elena ride a jet ski along water @-@ filled routes while avoiding enemy fire and explosive barrels . While players direct Drake in driving the jet ski , they may also switch to Elena by aiming the gun in order to use her weapon — either the grenade launcher or the Beretta , depending on the chapter — in defense , or to clear the barrels from their path . 
 The game also features reward points , which can be gained by collecting 60 hidden treasures in the game that glimmer momentarily or by completing certain accomplishments , such as achieving a number of kills using a specific weapon , performing a number of headshots , or using specific methods of killing enemies . In subsequent playthroughs of the game , the player can use these rewards points to unlock special options ; these include in @-@ game bonuses such as alternate costumes and unlimited ammunition but also non @-@ game extras , such as making @-@ of videos and concept art . There are also several references to other Naughty Dog games , especially the Jak and Daxter series ; this is done through the " <unk> " branding on Drake and Fisher 's wetsuits , a reference to the species that mixes otter and weasel found in the game , and the strange relic found in one of the earlier chapters , which is actually a precursor orb from the same series . 
 The game is censored when playing on a Japanese console to remove blood , which normally appears when shooting enemies ; this follows the trend of other censored console games in the region , such as Dead Rising and Resistance : Fall of Man . 
 = = Development = = 
 After completing Jak 3 , Naughty Dog assembled their most technically talented staff members and began development of Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune under the codename Big . It was in full production for about two years , with a small team of engineers working on the game for about a year before hand . Naughty Dog decided to create a brand new IP rather than opt to develop a PlayStation 3 Jak and Daxter game — they wanted to create a franchise suitable for the new hardware , in order to develop such ideas as realistic human characters instead of stylized ones owing to limitations of previous hardware , as well as create something " fresh and interesting " , although termed as ' stylized realism ' . Inspiration was drawn from various sources in the action and adventure genres : pulp magazines , movie serials , and more contemporary titles like Indiana Jones and National Treasure . The team felt the sources shared themes of mystery and " what @-@ if scenarios " that romanticized adventure and aimed to include those in Uncharted . 
 The game was first unveiled at E3 2006 . From early previews of the game , inevitable comparisons of elements such as platforming and shooting between Uncharted and the well @-@ known Tomb Raider series were drawn , earning the title the nickname of " Dude Raider " . However , the developers saw their game as concentrating more on third @-@ person cover @-@ based play , in contrast to Tomb Raider 's " auto @-@ aiming " play and greater puzzle @-@ solving elements . Throughout the game 's development the staff tried to remain flexible and detached from the original design concepts ; attention was focused on the features that worked well , while features that did not work were removed . The development team intended the game 's main setting , the island , to play a big role in the overall experience . Feeling too many games used bleak , dark settings with monochromatic color schemes , they wanted the island to be a vibrant , believable game world that immersed the player and encouraged exploration . 
 In designing the characters , the artists aimed for a style that was photorealistic . The creators envisaged the main protagonist , Nathan Drake , as more of an everyman character than Lara Croft , shown as clearly under stress in the game 's many fire fights , with no special training and constantly living at the edge of his abilities . Director Amy Hennig felt a heavily armored , " tough as nails " protagonist with a large weapon was not a suitable hero , and decided a " tenacious and resourceful " character would portray more human qualities . Supporting characters ( Elena Fisher and Victor Sullivan ) were included to avoid a dry and emotionless story . Fisher 's character underwent changes during development ; in early trailers for the game , the character had dark brown hair , but ultimately the color changed to blonde and the style was altered . 
 The game went gold in the middle of October 2007 . A demo was then released on November 8 , 2007 on the PlayStation Network before its final release on November 19 in North America . The demo was first placed on the North American store , and was initially region @-@ locked such that it would only play on a North American PS3 . However , this was later confirmed as a mistake , as the developers were apparently unaware that people from different regions could sign up for a North American account and download the demo ; a region @-@ free demo was released soon after . 
 = = = Graphics and technology = = = 
 Uncharted uses the Cell microprocessor to generate dozens of layered character animations to portray realistic expressions and fluid movements , which allow for responsive player control . The PlayStation 3 's graphics processing unit , the <unk> Reality Synthesizer , employed several functions to provide graphical details that helped immerse the player into the game world : lighting models , pixel shaders , dynamic real @-@ time shadowing , and advanced water simulation . The new hardware allowed for processes which the team had never used in PlayStation 2 game development and required them to quickly familiarize with the new techniques ; for example , parallel processing and pixel shaders . While Blu @-@ ray afforded greater storage space , the team became concerned with running out of room several times — Uncharted used more and bigger textures than previous games , and included several languages on the disc . Gameplay elements requiring motion sensing , such as throwing grenades and walking across beams , were implemented to take advantage of the Sixaxis controller . A new PlayStation 3 controller , the DualShock 3 , was unveiled at the 2007 Tokyo Game Show , and featured force feedback vibration . Uncharted was also on display at the show with demonstrations that implemented limited support for vibration . 
 Being Naughty Dog 's first PlayStation 3 game , the project required the company to familiarize themselves with the new hardware , and resulted in several development mistakes . The switch from developing for the PlayStation 2 to the PlayStation 3 prompted the staff to implement changes to their development technology . Naughty Dog switched to the industry standard language C + + in order to participate in technology sharing among Sony 's first @-@ party developers — the company had previously used their own proprietary programming language <unk> , a Lisp @-@ based language . In rewriting their game code , they decided to create new programming tools as well . This switch , however , delayed the team 's progress in developing a prototype , as the new tools proved to be unreliable and too difficult to use . Ten months into full production , the team decided to recreate the game 's pipeline , the chain of processing elements designed to progress data through a system . In retrospect , Naughty Dog 's Co @-@ President Evan Wells considered this the greatest improvement to the project . Additionally , the animation blending system was rewritten several times to obtain the desired character animations . 
 = = = Trophies integration = = = 
 The game was patched on August 4 , 2008 in Europe and North America to version 1 @.@ 01 to include support for the PlayStation 3 's Trophy system . There are 47 trophies in the game that match the medals that can already be won in the game and one further trophy , the Platinum trophy , awarded when all other trophies have been collected ; Uncharted was the first Naughty Dog game to include the Platinum trophy type . Similar to other PlayStation 3 titles that receive trophy support via downloaded patches , players must start a new save game to be awarded trophies , regardless of how many medals they received in previous playthroughs . This was enforced because the developers wanted to avoid the sharing of save data in order to gain trophies they did not earn . The patch was described as " incredibly easy " to implement , owing to the game already containing preliminary support for Trophies via its Medals system ; it was also stated that these hooks were already included due to Naughty Dog 's belief that Sony would roll out the Trophy system before the game 's launch in November 2007 . Despite mentioning that the game was developed as a franchise and that it lent itself to episodic content , it was later stated that no content available via download would be made for Uncharted . 
 = = = PlayStation Home = = = 
 During the Closed Beta of PlayStation Home on October 11 , 2008 , Naughty Dog released an Uncharted themed game space for PlayStation Home . This space is " Sully 's Bar " from the game . In this space users can play an arcade mini @-@ game called " Mercenary Madness " , which during the Closed Beta , there were rewards . The rewards were removed with the release of the Home Open Beta . There are also three other rooms in this space , in which during the Closed Beta , users had to find out codes to the doors that accessed these rooms . The code entry to the rooms was also removed with the release of the Home Open Beta . The three other rooms are the " Artifact Room " , " Archives " , and " Smuggler 's Den " . There is an artifact viewer in the Archives and Smuggler 's Den rooms . Also in the Archives there is a video screen that previews Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves . The Artifact Room only features seating and different artifacts for users to look at . This space was one of the first five @-@ game spaces of the PlayStation Home Open Beta in North America , which Home went Open Beta on December 11 , 2008 . This space was released to the European version on November 5 , 2009 , almost a year after the Open Beta release . Naughty Dog has also released a game space for Uncharted 's sequel on October 23 , 2009 making Uncharted the first game series to have a game space for both games in its series . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune received critical acclaim from game critics . Game Informer complimented the visuals and dialogue between the characters Drake and Fisher , calling them stunning and entertaining respectively . They further added that the production values appeared high , citing the level of detail and musical score . PlayStation Magazine echoed similar statements about the visuals and compared them to that of Crysis . 
 The overall presentation of the game received unanimous praise from critics , who recognized the game 's high production values , describing them as " top @-@ notch " , " incredible " or comparing them to those found in Hollywood . When combined with the overall style of the game , this led many reviewers to compare Uncharted to summer blockbuster films , with the action and theme of the game drawing comparisons to the Indiana Jones film series and Tomb Raider . As part of the presentation , the game 's story and atmosphere were also received well . The depth of the characters was praised , each having " their own tone " . The voice acting was also received well , as the cast " nails its characterizations " ; overall , the voice acting was described as a " big @-@ star performance " , " superb " and " stellar " . 
 The technical achievements in creating this presentation were also lauded . The graphics and visuals were a big part of this , including appreciation of the " lush " jungle environments , with lighting effects greatly adding to them . The game 's water effects were also appreciated . Overall , many reviewers commented that , at the time , it was one of the best @-@ looking PlayStation 3 games available . Further to the graphical aspects , both facial animation and the animation of characters , such as Nate 's " fluid " animations as he performs platforming sections were noted , although the wilder animations of enemies reacting to being shot were over @-@ animated " to perhaps a laughable degree " . 
 Criticism of the game included some graphical issues , such as texture pop @-@ in and screen tearing . Of more concern were gameplay issues , including overall gameplay length being rather short , with reviewers completing the game in anywhere from six to ten hours , and some disappointment with the " not particularly memorable " vehicle sections ; the inability to both aim weapons and drive the jet @-@ ski was a well @-@ noted issue . Further , some " frustrating , repetitive <unk> " with regards to the " constant stream " of pirates and mercenaries , and " moving from one infuriating firefight to the next " towards the end of the game were cited as part of poorer elements of overall gameplay . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Uncharted received several accolades from web review sites such as Kotaku and IGN , who named it their PlayStation 3 game of the year . The game went on to sell one million copies after its first ten weeks of retail , and later became one of the first batch of titles to be released as part of Europe 's budget Platinum range of best @-@ selling titles . 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 Sony announced at E3 2009 that Uncharted : Drake 's Fortune has sold over 2 @.@ 6 million copies worldwide and was a hit for the PlayStation 3 . Game designer Tim Schafer , well known as the creator of the early LucasArts adventure games such as The Secret of Monkey Island , has also lauded the game , saying he " liked it a lot " , and jokingly thanked it for teaching him a new fashion tip ( Nathan Drake 's " half @-@ tucked " shirt ) . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 Shortly after the release of the game , Naughty Dog 's co @-@ president , Evan Wells , stated that Uncharted had been developed as a franchise , and so a sequel was likely . It was later confirmed that the development team had put their work on the next installment of Jak and Daxter on @-@ hold to work on Uncharted 2 for release in 2009 . This sequel was revealed to be entitled Uncharted 2 : Among Thieves in December , 2008 by Game Informer . A sequel to Uncharted 2 , Uncharted 3 : Drake 's Deception was announced on December 11 , 2010 and was released worldwide in November 2011 . The fourth installment of the series , Uncharted 4 : A Thief 's End , which is set to be the last main installment in the series , was released on May 10 , 2016 . A single @-@ player @-@ only remaster of the first three titles , titled Uncharted : The Nathan Drake Collection , was released for the PlayStation 4 on October 7 , 2015 . Two spin @-@ offs for the PlayStation Vita , titled Uncharted : Golden Abyss and Uncharted : Fight for Fortune was released in 2011 and 2012 respectively . 
 = = Film adaptation = = 
 = Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis = 
 Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis is a point @-@ and @-@ click adventure game by LucasArts originally released in 1992 . Almost a year later , it was reissued on CD @-@ ROM as an enhanced " talkie " edition with full voice acting and digitized sound effects . In 2009 , this version was also released as an unlockable extra of the Wii action game Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings , and as a digitally distributed Steam title . The seventh game to use the script language SCUMM , Fate of Atlantis has the player explore environments and interact with objects and characters by using commands constructed with predetermined verbs . It features three unique paths to select , influencing story development , gameplay and puzzles . The game used an updated SCUMM engine and required a 286 @-@ based PC , although it still runs as a real @-@ mode DOS application . The CD talkie version required EMS memory enabled to load the voice data . 
 The plot is set in the fictional Indiana Jones universe and revolves around the eponymous protagonist 's global search for the legendary sunken city of Atlantis . Sophia Hapgood , an old co @-@ worker of Indiana Jones who gave up her archaeological career to become a psychic , supports him along the journey . The two partners are pursued by the Nazis who seek to use the power of Atlantis for warfare , and serve as the adventure 's antagonists . The story was written by Hal Barwood and Noah Falstein , the game 's designers , who had rejected the original plan to base it on an unused movie script . They came up with the final concept while researching real @-@ world sources for a suitable plot device . 
 Fate of Atlantis was praised by critics and received several awards for best adventure game of the year . It became a million @-@ unit seller and is widely regarded as a classic of its genre today . Two concepts for a supposed sequel were conceived , but both projects were eventually canceled due to unforeseen problems during development . They were later reworked into two separate Dark Horse Comics series by Lee Marrs and Elaine Lee , respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Fate of Atlantis is based on the SCUMM story system by Ron Gilbert , Aric Wilmunder , Brad P. Taylor , and Vince Lee , thus employing similar gameplay to other point @-@ and @-@ click adventures developed by LucasArts in the 1980s and 1990s . The player explores the game 's static environments while interacting with sprite @-@ based characters and objects ; they may use the pointer to construct and give commands with a number of predetermined verbs such as " Pick up " , " Use " and " Talk to " . Conversations with non @-@ playable characters unfold in a series of selectable questions and answers . 
 Early on , the player is given the choice between three different game modes , each with unique cutscenes , puzzles to solve and locations to visit : the Team Path , the Wits Path , and the Fists Path . In the Team Path , protagonist Indiana Jones is joined by his partner Sophia Hapgood who will provide support throughout the game . The Wits Path features an abundance of complex puzzles , while the Fists Path focuses heavily on action sequences and fist fighting , the latter of which is completely optional in the other two modes . Atypical for LucasArts titles , it is possible for the player character to die at certain points in the game , though dangerous situations were designed to be easily recognizable . A score system , the Indy Quotient Points , keeps track of the puzzles solved , the obstacles overcome and the important objects found . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story of Fate of Atlantis is set in 1939 , on the eve of World War II . At the request of a visitor named Mr. Smith , archaeology professor and adventurer Indiana Jones tries to find a small statue in the archives of his workplace Barnett College . After Indy retrieves the horned figurine , Smith uses a key to open it , revealing a sparkling metal bead inside . Smith then pulls out a gun and escapes with the two artifacts , but he loses his coat in the process . The identity card inside reveals " Smith " to be Klaus Kerner , an agent of the Third Reich . Another pocket of the coat holds an old magazine containing an article about an expedition on which Jones collaborated with a young woman named Sophia Hapgood , who has since given up archeology to become a psychic . 
 Fearing that she might be Kerner 's next target , Indy travels to New York City in order to warn her and to find out more about the mysterious statue . There , he interrupts her lecture on the culture and downfall of Atlantis , and the two return to Sophia 's apartment . They discover that Kerner ransacked her office in search of Atlantean artifacts , but Sophia says that she keeps her most valuable item , her necklace , with her . She owns another of the shiny beads , now identified as the mystical metal orichalcum , and places it in the medallion 's mouth , invoking the spirit of the Atlantean god Nur @-@ Ab @-@ Sal . She explains that a Nazi scientist called Dr. Hans Ubermann is searching for the power of Atlantis to use it as an energy source for warfare . 
 Sophia then gets a telepathic message from Nur @-@ Ab @-@ Sal , instructing them to find the Lost Dialogue of Plato , the <unk> , a book that will guide them to the city . After gathering information , Indy and Sophia eventually find it in a collection of Barnett College . <unk> Plato 's " tenfold error " , a mistranslation from Egyptian to Greek , the document pinpoints the location of Atlantis in the Mediterranean , 300 miles from the Kingdom of Greece , instead of 3000 as mentioned in the dialogue Critias . It also says that in order to gain access to the Lost City and its colonies , three special stones are required . At this point , the player has to choose between the Team , Wits , or Fists Path , which influences the way the stones are acquired . In all three paths , Sophia gets captured by the Nazis , and Indiana makes his way to the underwater entrance of Atlantis near Thera . 
 The individual scenarios converge at this point and Jones starts to explore the Lost City . He saves Sophia from a prison , and they make their way to the center of Atlantis , where her medallion guides them to the home of Nur @-@ Ab @-@ Sal . The Atlantean god takes full possession of Sophia and it is only by a trick that Indy rids her of the necklace and destroys it , thus freeing her . Meanwhile , they notice grotesquely deformed bones all over the place . They advance further and eventually reach a large colossus the inhabitants of the city built to transform themselves into gods . 
 Using ten orichalcum beads at a time would enable them to control the water with the powers they gained , keeping the sea level down to prevent an impending catastrophe . Unknowingly , Indiana starts the machine with the stones , upon which Kerner , Ubermann , and the Nazi troops invade the place and announce their intention to use the machine to become gods . The machine was responsible for creating the mutated skeletons seen earlier , but the Nazis believe that it will work on them due to their Aryan qualities . Ubermann wants to use Jones as a test subject , but Kerner steps onto the platform first , claiming himself to be most suitable for godhood . Just as Ubermann wants to start the machine , Jones mentions Plato 's tenfold error , which convinces Kerner to use one bead instead of ten . He is then turned into a horribly deformed and horned creature , and falls into the lava . Indiana is forced to step on the platform next but threatens Ubermann with eternal damnation once he is a god . Fearing his wrath , Ubermann uses the machine on himself , feeding it one hundred beads . He is turned into a green ethereal being , but his form becomes unstable and he flies apart with an agonized scream . 
 Three bad endings see one of the protagonists undergo the second transformation if Indiana could not convince Ubermann to use the machine instead , or if Sophia was not freed from her prison or Nur @-@ Ab @-@ Sal 's influence . In the good ending , Atlantis succumbs to the eruption of the still active volcano as the duo flees from the city . The final scene depicts Indiana kissing Sophia on top of the escape submarine , to comfort himself for the lack of evidence for their discovery . 
 = = Development = = 
 At the time a sequel to Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade : The Graphic Adventure was decided , most of the staff of Lucasfilm Games was occupied with other projects such as The Secret of Monkey Island and The Dig . Designer Hal Barwood had only created two computer games on his own before , but was put in charge of the project because of his experience as a producer and writer of feature films . The company originally wanted him to create a game based on Indiana Jones and the Monkey King / Garden of Life , a rejected script written by Chris Columbus for the third movie that would have seen Indiana looking for Chinese artifacts in Africa . However , after reading the script Barwood decided that the idea was substandard , and requested to create an original story for the game instead . Along with co @-@ worker Noah Falstein , he visited the library of George Lucas ' workplace Skywalker Ranch to look for possible plot devices . They eventually decided upon Atlantis when they looked at a diagram in " some cheap coffee @-@ table book on the world 's unsolved mysteries " , which depicted the city as built in three concentric circles . 
 Writing the story involved extensive research on a plethora of pseudo @-@ scientific books . Inspiration for the mythology in the game , such as the description of the city and the appearance of the metal orichalcum , was primarily drawn from Plato 's dialogues Timaeus and Critias , and from Ignatius Loyola Donnelly 's book Atlantis : The <unk> World that revived interest in the myth during the nineteenth century . The magical properties of orichalcum and the Atlantean technology depicted in the game were partly adopted from Russian spiritualist Helena Blavatsky 's publications on the force <unk> . The giant colossus producing gods was based on a power @-@ concentrating device called " <unk> " , formerly described by American psychic Edgar Cayce . 
 Once Barwood and Falstein completed the rough outline of the story , Barwood wrote the actual script , and the team began to conceive the puzzles and to design the environments . The Atlantean artifacts and architecture devised by lead artist William Eaken were made to resemble those of the Minoan civilization , while the game in turn implies that the Minoans were inspired by Atlantis . Barwood intended for the Atlantean art to have an " alien " feel to it , with the machines seemingly operating on as yet unknown physics rather than on magic . The majority of the 256 @-@ color backgrounds in the game were mostly mouse @-@ drawn with Deluxe Paint , though roughly ten percent were paintings scanned at the end of the development cycle . As a consequence of regular design changes , the images often had to be revised by the artists . Character animations were fully rotoscoped with video footage of Steve Purcell for Indiana 's and Collette Michaud for Sophia 's motions . The main art team that consisted of Eaken , James Dollar and Avril Harrison was sometimes consulted by Barwood to help out with the more graphical puzzles in the game , such as a broken robot in Atlantis . 
 The addition of three different paths was suggested by Falstein and added about six more months of development time , mainly because of all the extra dialogue that had to be implemented for the interaction between Indiana and Sophia . Altogether , the game took around two years to finish , starting in early 1990 , and lasting up to the floppy disk release in June 1992 . The only aspect Barwood was not involved in at all was the production of voices for the enhanced " talkie " edition released on CD @-@ ROM in May 1993 , which was instead handled by <unk> Barra . The voice @-@ over recordings for the approximately 8000 lines of dialogue took about four weeks , and were done with actors from the American Federation of Television and Radio Artists . Harrison Ford was not available to record Indiana Jones 's voice , so a substitute actor Doug Lee was used . The " talkie " version was later included as an extra game mode in the Wii version of the 2009 action game Indiana Jones and the Staff of Kings , and distributed via the digital content delivery software Steam as a port for Windows XP , Windows Vista and Mac OS X that same year . The versions on the Wii and available on Steam have improved MIDI versions of the soundtrack , along with both voices and text . 
 The package illustration for Fate of Atlantis was inspired by the Indiana Jones movie posters of Drew Struzan . It was drawn by Eaken within three days , following disagreements with the marketing department and an external art director over which concept to use . Clint Bajakian , Peter McConnell and Michael Land created the soundtrack for the game , arranging John Williams ' main theme " The Raiders March " for a variety of compositions . The DOS version uses sequenced music played back by either an internal speaker , the FM synthesis of an <unk> or Sound Blaster sound card , or the sample @-@ based synthesis of a Roland MT @-@ 32 sound module . During development of the game , William Messner @-@ <unk> and Dan Barry wrote a Dark Horse Comics series based on Barwood 's and Falstein 's story , then titled Indiana Jones and the Keys to Atlantis . In an interview , Eaken mentioned hour @-@ long meetings of the development team trying to come up with a better title than Fate of Atlantis , though the staff members could never think of one and always ended up with names such as " Indiana Jones Does Atlantis " . The final title was Barwood 's idea , who first had to convince the company 's management and the marketing team not to simply call the game " Indy 's Next Adventure " . 
 LucasArts developed a port of the enhanced edition for the Sega CD , but the release was eventually canceled because The Secret of Monkey Island failed to be much of a commercial success on the platform . The arcade @-@ style game Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis : The Action Game designed by Attention To Detail was released almost simultaneously with its adventure counterpart , and loosely follows its plot . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the release of the game , a story for a supposed successor in the adventure genre was conceived by Joe Pinney , Hal Barwood , Bill Stoneham , and Aric Wilmunder . Titled Indiana Jones and the Iron Phoenix , it was set after World War II and featured Nazis seeking refuge in Bolivia , trying to resurrect Adolf Hitler with the philosophers ' stone . The game was in development for 15 months before it was showcased at the European Computer Trade Show . 
 However , when the German coordinators discovered how extensively the game dealt with Neo @-@ Nazism , they informed LucasArts about the difficulty of marketing the game in their country . As Germany was an important overseas market for adventure games , LucasArts feared that the lower revenues would not recoup development costs , and subsequently canceled the game . The plot was later adapted into a four @-@ part Dark Horse Comics series by Lee Marrs , published monthly from December 1994 to March 1995 . In an interview , Barwood commented that the development team should have thought about the story more thoroughly beforehand , calling it insensitive and not regretting the cancellation of the title . 
 Another follow @-@ up game called Indiana Jones and the Spear of Destiny was planned , which revolved around the Spear of Longinus . Development was outsourced to a small Canadian studio , but eventually stopped as LucasArts did not have experience with the supervision of external teams . Elaine Lee loosely reworked the story into another four @-@ part comic book series , released from April to July 1995 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Fate of Atlantis was met with critical acclaim , and it sold one million units across all platforms on which it was released . Reviewers from Game Informer , Computer Game Review , Games Magazine and Game Players Magazine named it the best adventure game of the year , and it was later labeled a " classic " by IGN . Patricia Hartley and Kirk Lesser of Dragon called it " terrific " and " thought @-@ provoking " . They lauded the " Team , Wits , Fists " system for increasing the game 's replay value , but believed that the Team option was the best . The reviewers summarized it as a " must @-@ buy " . Lim Choon Wee of the New Straits Times praised the game 's graphics and arcade @-@ style sequences . About the former , he wrote , " The attention to detail is excellent , with great colours and brilliant sprite animation . " He echoed Hartley 's and Lesser 's opinion that " Team " was the best mode of the game . Wee ended his review by calling Fate of Atlantis " a brilliant game , even beating Secret of Monkey Island 2 . " 
 Charles Ardai of Computer Gaming World in 1992 praised its setting for containing the " right combination of gravity , silliness , genuine scholarship and mystical mumbo @-@ jumbo " , and called it a " strong enough storyline to hold its own next to any of the Indy films . " He highly praised the game 's Team , Wits , Fists system , about which he wrote , " Never before has a game paid this much attention to what the player wants . " He also enjoyed its graphics and varied locales . Although he cited the pixelated character sprites and lack of voice acting as low points , Ardai summarized Fate of Atlantis as an " exuberant , funny , well @-@ crafted and clever game " that bettered its predecessor , The Last Crusade . <unk> also praised the game , stating that it " is not only the best adventure ever done by LucasArts ... but is also probably the nicest graphic adventure ever ... just about perfect in all areas " . The reviewer wrote " Atlantis shines in 256 colors " and that " the musicians and sound effects specialists deserve a tip of the hat " , stating that the audio " completes the effect of playing a movie " . He described the puzzles as quite creative and certainly fair " and liked the multiple solutions . The reviewer concluded that the game was " a must @-@ buy for all adventurers " and " gets my vote ... for ' Best Quest of the Year ' " , tied with Ultima Underworld , " both of which redefine the state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art in their respective genres " . 
 The following year , Ardai stated that " Unlike many recent CD @-@ ROM upgrades , which have been embarrassing and amateurish " , the CD @-@ ROM version " has the stamp of quality all over it " , with the added dialogue and sound effects " like taking a silent film and turning it into a talkie ... It 's hard to go back to reading text off a monitor after experiencing a game like this " . He concluded that " LucasArts has done an impeccable job ... a must @-@ see " . In 1992 the magazine named the title as one of the year 's four best adventure games . Andy <unk> of Amiga Format wrote , " The puzzles are very well thought @-@ out , with some exquisite , subtle elements that give you a real kick when you solve them . " He noted that the game is " littered with elements that are genuinely funny " . His sole complaint was about the game 's linearity compared to Monkey Island 2 ; but he finished by saying , " It 's a minor point , anyway , and it shouldn 't put you off buying what is one of the best Amiga adventures ever . " In 2008 , Retro Gamer Magazine praised it as " a masterful piece of storytelling , and a spellbinding adventure " . 
 Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis was nominated for an award at the 1993 Game Developers Conference . 
 = = 8 @-@ bit versions = = 
 A game called Indiana Jones and the Fate of Atlantis was released around the same time for 8 @-@ bit home computers including the ZX Spectrum , Amstrad CPC , and Commodore 64 home computers . Due to machine limitations , this was an entirely different game , based around a 3D isometric perspective and fighting with Nazi guards . 
 = Antonio Berni = 
 <unk> Antonio Berni ( Rosario , 14 May 1905 - Buenos Aires , 13 October 1981 ) was an Argentine figurative artist . He is associated with the movement known as Nuevo Realismo ( " New Realism " ) , a Latin American extension of social realism . His work , including a series of Juanito Laguna collages depicting poverty and the effects of industrialization in Buenos Aires , has been exhibited around the world . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Berni was born in the city of Rosario on May 14 , 1905 . His mother Margarita <unk> was the Argentine daughter of Italians . His father <unk> , an immigrant tailor from Italy , died in the first World War . 
 In 1914 Berni became the apprentice of Catalan craftsman N. <unk> at the <unk> and Co. stained glass company . He later studied painting at the Rosario <unk> Center where he was described as a child prodigy . In 1920 seventeen of his oil paintings were exhibited at the Salon Mari . On November 4 , 1923 his impressionist landscapes were praised by critics in the daily newspapers La Nación and La Prensa . 
 = = = Paris = = = 
 The Jockey Club of Rosario awarded Berni a scholarship to study in Europe in 1925 . He chose to visit Spain , as Spanish painting was in vogue , particularly the art of Joaquín <unk> , Ignacio Zuloaga , <unk> Anglada , and Julio Romero de Torres . But after visiting Madrid , Toledo , Segovia , Granada , Córdoba , and Seville he settled in Paris where fellow Argentine artists Horacio Butler , <unk> Badi , Alfredo <unk> , Xul Solar , Héctor <unk> , and Lino Enea Spilimbergo were working . He attended " City of Lights " workshops given by André Lhote and Othon Friesz at Académie de la Grande Chaumière . Berni painted two landscapes of <unk> , <unk> de París ( Landscape of Paris ) , Mantel <unk> ( The Yellow <unk> ) , La casa del <unk> ( The House of Crime ) , <unk> ( Nude ) , and <unk> <unk> con guitarra ( Still Life with Guitar ) . 
 He went back to Rosario for a few months but returned to Paris in 1927 with a grant from the Province of Santa Fe . Studying the work of Giorgio de Chirico and René Magritte , Berni became interested in surrealism and called it " a new vision of art and the world , the current that represents an entire youth , their mood , and their internal situation after the end of the World War . A dynamic and truly representative movement . " His late 1920s and early 1930s surrealist works include La Torre Eiffel en la Pampa ( The Eiffel Tower in Pampa ) , La <unk> y su sueño ( The Nap and its Dream ) , and La muerte <unk> en cada <unk> ( Death <unk> Around Every Corner ) . 
 He also began studying revolutionary politics including the Marxist theory of Henri Lefebvre , who introduced him to the Communist poet Louis Aragon in 1928 . Berni continued corresponding with Aragon after leaving France , later recalling , " It is a pity that I have lost , among the many things I have lost , the letters that I received from Aragon all the way from France ; if I had them today , I think , they would be magnificent documents ; because in that correspondence we discussed topics such as the direct relationship between politics and culture , the responsibilities of the artist and the intellectual society , the problems of culture in colonial countries , the issue of freedom . " 
 Several groups of Asian minorities lived in Paris and Berni helped distribute Asian newspapers and magazines , to which he contributed illustrations . 
 = = = Nuevo Realismo = = = 
 In 1931 Berni returned to Rosario where he briefly lived on a farm and was then hired as a municipal employee . The Argentina of the 1930s was very different from the Paris of the 1920s . He witnessed labor demonstrations and the miserable effects of unemployment and was shocked by the news of a military coup d 'état in Buenos Aires ( see Infamous Decade ) . Surrealism didn 't convey the frustration or hopelessness of the Argentine people . Berni organized <unk> de Estudiantes y Artistas and became a member of the local Communist party . 
 Berni met Mexican artist David Alfaro Siqueiros who had been painting large @-@ scale political murals on public buildings and was visiting Argentina to give lectures and exhibit his work in an effort to " summon artists to participate in the development of a proletarian art . " In 1933 Berni , Siqueiros , Spilimbergo , Juan Carlos <unk> and Enrique Lázaro created the mural <unk> <unk> ( Plastic Exercise ) . But ultimately Berni didn 't think the murals could inspire social change and even implied a connection between <unk> 's artwork and the privileged classes of Argentina , saying , " Mural painting is only one of the many forms of popular artistic expression ... for his mural painting , <unk> was obliged to seize on the first board offered to him by the bourgeoisie . " 
 Instead he began painting realistic images that depicted the struggles and tensions of the Argentine people . His popular Nuevo Realismo paintings include <unk> ( The Unemployed ) and <unk> ( Manifestation ) . Both were based on photographs Berni had gathered to document , as graphically as possible , the " abysmal conditions of his subjects . " As one critic noted , " the quality of his work resides in the precise balance that he attained between narrative painting with strong social content and aesthetic originality . " 
 In a 1936 interview Berni said that the decline of art was indicative of the division between the artist and the public and that social realism stimulated a mirror of the surrounding spiritual , social , political , and economic realities . 
 = = = 1940s and 1950s = = = 
 In 1941 , at the request of the Comisión Nacional de Cultura , Berni traveled to Bolivia , Ecuador , Peru and Colombia to study pre @-@ Columbian art . His painting Mercado <unk> ( Indian Market ) is based on the photos he took during this trip . 
 Two years later he was awarded an Honorary Grand Prix at the Salón Nacional and co @-@ founded a mural workshop with fellow artists Spilimbergo , Juan Carlos <unk> , Demetrio <unk> , and Manuel <unk> . The artists decorated the dome of the <unk> Pacifico . 
 The 1940s saw various revolutions and coups d 'état in Latin America including the ousting of Argentine President Ramón Castillo in 1943 . Berni responded with more political paintings including <unk> ( Massacre ) and El Obrero Muerto ( The Dead Worker ) . 
 From 1951 to 1953 Berni lived in Santiago del Estero , a province in northwestern Argentina . The province was suffering massive ecological damage including the exploitation of <unk> trees . While in Santiago del Estero he painted the series " <unk> <unk> " and " Chaco , " which were later exhibited in Paris , Berlin , Warsaw , Bucharest and Moscow . 
 In the 1950s he returned to expressionism with works like Los <unk> ( <unk> ) and La <unk> ( Food ) , and began a series of suburban landscapes including Villa <unk> ( Villa Tweety ) , La casa del <unk> ( House of Taylor ) , La <unk> ( The Church ) , El <unk> blanco ( White Tank ) , La <unk> ( Street ) , La res ( The Answer ) , <unk> ( Carnage ) , La luna y su eco ( The Moon and its Echo ) , and <unk> <unk> en el páramo <unk> ( Morning Frost on the Moor ) . He also painted Negro y blanco ( Black and White ) , <unk> de <unk> sobre un <unk> celeste ( <unk> on a Blue Wall ) , and El <unk> ( The Pony ) . 
 = = = Juanito Laguna = = = 
 Berni 's post @-@ 1950s work can be viewed as " a synthesis of Pop Art and Social realism . " In 1958 he began collecting and collaging discarded material to create a series of works featuring a character named Juanito Laguna . The series became a social narrative on industrialization and poverty and pointed out the extreme disparities existing between the wealthy Argentine aristocracy and the " <unk> ” of the slums . 
 As he explained in a 1967 Le Monde interview , " One cold , cloudy night , while passing through the miserable city of Juanito , a radical change in my vision of reality and its interpretation occurred ... I had just discovered , in the unpaved streets and on the waste ground , scattered discarded materials , which made up the authentic surroundings of Juanito Laguna - old wood , empty bottles , iron , cardboard boxes , metal sheets etc . , which were the materials used for constructing shacks in towns such as this , sunk in poverty . " 
 Latin American art expert Mari Carmen Ramirez has described the Juanito works as an attempt to " seek out and record the typical living truth of underdeveloped countries and to bear witness to the terrible fruits of neocolonialism , with its resulting poverty and economic backwardness and their effect on populations driven by a fierce desire for progress , jobs , and the inclination to fight . " 
 Notable Juanito works include Retrato de Juanito Laguna ( Portrait of Juanito Laguna ) , El mundo <unk> a Juanito ( The World Promised to Juanito ) , and Juanito va a la ciudad ( Juanito Goes to the City ) . Art featuring Juanito ( and Ramona Montiel , a similar female character ) won Berni the Grand Prix for Printmaking at the Venice Biennale in 1962 . 
 In 1965 a retrospective of Berni 's work was organized at the Instituto Di Tella , including the collage Monsters . Versions of the exhibit were shown in the United States , Argentina , and several Latin American countries . Compositions such as Ramona en la <unk> ( Ramona in the Cavern ) , El mundo de Ramona ( Ramona 's World ) , and La <unk> de los <unk> ( Massacre of the Innocent ) were becoming more complex . The latter was exhibited in 1971 at the Paris Museum of Modern Art . By the late 1970s Berni 's Juanito and Ramona oil paintings had evolved into three @-@ dimensional altar pieces . 
 = = = Later years and death = = = 
 After a March 1976 coup Berni moved to New York City where he continued painting , engraving , collaging , and exhibiting . New York struck him as luxurious , consumerist , materially wealthy , and spiritually poor . He conveyed these observations in subsequent work with a touch of social irony . His New York paintings display a great <unk> of color and include <unk> ( Airport ) , Los Hippies , Calles de Nueva York ( Streets of New York ) , <unk> ( Lunch ) , Chelsea Hotel , and <unk> de <unk> ( Promise of Chastity ) . He also produced several decorative panels , scenographic sketches , illustrations , and collaborations for books . 
 Berni 's work gradually became more spiritual and reflective . In 1980 he completed the paintings <unk> ( Apocalypse ) and La crucifixion ( The Crucifixion ) for the Chapel of San Luis Gonzaga in Las Heras , where they were installed the following year . 
 Antonio Berni died on October 13 , 1981 in Buenos Aires where he had been working on a Martin Fierro monument . The monument was inaugurated in San Martin on November 17 of the same year . In an interview shortly before his death he said , " Art is a response to life . To be an artist is to undertake a risky way to live , to adopt one of the greatest forms of liberty , to make no compromise . Painting is a form of love , of transmitting the years in art . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since the late 1960s various Argentine musicians have written and recorded Juanito Laguna songs . Mercedes Sosa recorded the songs Juanito Laguna <unk> un <unk> ( on her 1967 album Para <unk> a mi gente ) and La <unk> de Juanito Laguna ( on her 1970 album Navidad con Mercedes Sosa ) . In 2005 a compilation CD commemorating Berni 's 100th birthday included songs by César <unk> , Marcelo San Juan , Dúo <unk> , Eduardo <unk> , and Las Voces Blancas , as well as two short recordings of Berni speaking in interviews . 
 Several Argentine government organizations also celebrated Berni 's centennial in 2005 , including the Ministerio de Educación , Ciencia y Tecnología de la Nación , and Secretaría de Turismo de la Nación . Berni 's daughter Lily curated an art show entitled Un <unk> para Juanito , 40 años <unk> ( A painting for Juanito , 40 years later ) . Through the organization De Todos Para Todos ( By All For All ) children across Argentina studied Berni 's art then created their own using his collage techniques . 
 In July 2008 thieves disguised as police officers stole fifteen Berni paintings that were being transported from a suburb to the Bellas Artes National Museum . Culture Secretary Jose Nun described the paintings as being " of great national value " and described the robbery as " an enormous loss to Argentine culture . " 
 = Guto Puw = 
 Guto <unk> Puw ( born 1971 ) is a Welsh composer , university lecturer and conductor . He is considered to be one of the most promising Welsh composers of his generation and a key figure in current Welsh music . Puw 's music has been broadcast on BBC Radio 3 and been featured on television programmes for the BBC and S4C . He has twice been awarded the Composer 's Medal at the National Eisteddfod . 
 Puw 's works include pieces for unusual combinations of instruments , such as a tuba quartet or a trio consisting of harp , cello and double @-@ bass , as well as more traditional forces such as solo baritone and piano , choir or orchestra . He was associated with the BBC National Orchestra of Wales as its Resident Composer , the first holder of this title , from 2006 to 2010 . Puw wrote an Oboe concerto as part of this association , and his latest composition for the orchestra was premiered at the 2007 Proms . Puw 's own Welsh identity is a recurrent theme in his music : some of his pieces set Welsh @-@ language poetry to music and one of his pieces , Reservoirs , is written about the flooding of Welsh valleys to provide water for England . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Born in Parc ( a village in Gwynedd near Bala ) , Puw studied at Bangor University with John Pickard , Andrew Lewis and Pwyll ap <unk> . Puw was awarded a <unk> degree in 1996 and a PhD degree in 2002 . He was then awarded an Arts Council of Wales bursary and studied with the composer John Metcalf . Puw was appointed as a Lecturer in Music at Bangor University in 2006 , having previously been a Teaching Fellow in Music from 2004 . A Welsh speaker , he has been the Welsh Medium Teaching Fellow for the School of Music . He was the founding member and conductor for <unk> <unk> i 'r Felin , a Welsh @-@ language choir based in Y <unk> near Bangor . 
 Puw has received commissions from ( amongst others ) BBC Radio 3 , the Welsh baritone Jeremy Huw Williams , the Bangor New Music Festival and the North Wales International Music Festival . He was appointed the first Resident Composer with BBC National Orchestra of Wales ( BBC NOW ) in 2006 and held this position until 2009 . During this time , Puw wrote a concerto for oboe ( premiered in 2006 ) and an orchestral piece , ... onyt agoraf y drws ... , which was first performed to critical acclaim at the 2007 Proms . 
 He has been active in the promotion of new music in north Wales through his involvement with the Bangor Music Festival , being its Artistic Director and founding member since 2000 . In 2014 he received the Sir Geraint Evans Award by the Welsh Music Guild for his ‘ significant contribution to Welsh music . ’ 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Welsh links = = = 
 Puw 's music is rooted in the language and literature of Wales , with a particular affinity to the poetry of R. S. Thomas . Welsh titles and settings of poetry in Welsh feature in his work , such as Mecanwaith , Dawns y <unk> , and ... onyt agoraf y drws ... ) . He has won the Composer 's Medal at the National Eisteddfod of Wales twice , winning it first in 1995 for a harp piece , Ffantasia II . In 1997 , when the Eisteddfod was held in Bala , he won the Medal for a string quartet , Mecanwaith ( " Mechanism " ) – this piece was later featured in S4C 's television series Y <unk> ( " The Composers " ) . Mecanwaith has also been performed by the Duke Quartet at the 1998 Bath International Music Festival and the 1999 Huddersfield Contemporary Music Festival . 
 = = = Orchestral works = = = 
 Puw 's oboe concerto was commissioned by BBC NOW and was premiered by them at Theatr Brycheiniog , Brecon , on 27 April 2006 , with the orchestra 's principal oboist ( David Cowley ) as the soloist . It takes its inspiration from different qualities of the human voice , including stutters and <unk> . Puw has said that " The second movement is inspired by talkative people who won 't let you contribute to a conversation " , represented by a repeated row of 13 notes played until " it gets rather unbearable " . It was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 on 1 March 2007 as part of a programme of music by Welsh composers to celebrate St David 's Day . The concerto won Puw the 2007 BBC Radio 3 Listeners Award at the British Composer Awards . 
 His orchestral piece Reservoirs was inspired by a 1968 poem by R. S. Thomas about the drowning of Welsh valleys such as Tryweryn ( a few miles from where Puw grew up ) and <unk> to provide water for England . Puw had a particular affinity with the topic as his grandfather lost farmland in the Tryweryn flooding . Nevertheless , he has said that he " decided not to take the poem too literally because as a composer you can be subject to criticism for doing that . " It was nominated in 2005 in the Large @-@ Scale Composition category of the Royal Philharmonic Society Music Awards . The music was used in a BBC2 Wales documentary , " Drowning a Village " , broadcast on 9 March 2006 . A performance by BBC NOW was broadcast on BBC Radio 3 as part of the 2005 Vale of Glamorgan Festival . 
 As part of his association with BBC NOW , Puw was commissioned by the BBC to compose for the 2007 Proms . His orchestral piece , ... onyt agoraf y drws ... ( " ... unless I open the door ... " ) was premiered on 9 August 2007 , conducted by David Atherton . It is based on a story from the Mabinogion , a collection of medieval Welsh tales , in which a group of warriors , lately returned from Ireland , feast in Harlech for seven years with the severed head of their leader at the head of the table . They then feast in <unk> for eight years in a hall with three doors , and only remember the dreadful events that happened in Ireland when the third door opens . Each of the three doors in <unk> was represented by an instrument in a box in the Royal Albert Hall . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Unusual instrumentation and unusual performance techniques , including elements of improvisation , are also important features of his work . In 1998 he composed X @-@ ist , a piece for IST ( the Improvising String Trio , consisting of harp , cello and double @-@ bass ) . It was described by reviewers as a " frighteningly frantic " and " challenging " piece . X @-@ ist uses a graphic score and includes written directions to the players that act as " creative stimuli " , containing notes and motifs to be followed . The piece also requires the cellist and double @-@ bassist to tap their instruments , as well as use normal playing methods . Another piece requiring improvisation by performers was his commission for the 2001 Bangor New Music Festival , <unk> , which was written for ensemble ( saxophone , guitar , harp , keyboard , cello , piano ) and optional dancer . In his performing notes , Puw describes the pieces as a " stimulus for musical improvisation " in which any notes , normal or extended musical techniques and / or percussive effects may be applied . <unk> has two contrasting sub @-@ sections , a and b , arranged in the form a @-@ b @-@ a @-@ a @-@ a @-@ b @-@ a @-@ b to match the Welsh poetic measure of the same name , with the strings playing calmly in the " a " sections , and saxophone and keyboard ( gradually joined by the other instruments ) playing in a more lively manner in the " b " sections . The musicians and the dancer are required to react to each other 's contributions in each section to create a " multi @-@ media " experience . 
 <unk> , his 1999 piece for 2 tubas and 2 <unk> , was described as " astringent , often whimsical but well written for these instruments " . Puw said that in the piece " Freedom is granted to the performers to make any subtle facial expressions that add to the musical interpretation " . Puw describes Ffantasia III ( a piece for solo piano , composed for the 2000 Bangor New Music Festival ) as an " intimate reflection " upon the music of , and a tribute to , Robert Schumann , his " intricate compositional style " and " world of delicate expression " . The music becomes " simpler and softer " throughout the piece , moving from the " rhythmic complexity " of the opening bars through to slow quavers transforming into triplets . An ensemble piece , different light ( for clarinet , violin , cello and piano ) was " inspired by the idea of moving a picture from one place to another , be it to another house , or from one room to the next , or even from one wall to another . " As the picture is moved , it looks the same but is perceived in a different light . Puw attempts to convey this in musical terms by having each instrument enter separately with its own musical phrase in the first part of the piece . Then , in the second part of the piece , all the thematic material is repeated with the instruments playing simultaneously , so that the music is similarly perceived in a different <unk> different light was featured at the 2001 <unk> festival at the Angel <unk> Center in New York City . His 2005 composition for the Bangor New Music Festival , Stereo Type , was written for amplified typewriters and tape . It was premiered by <unk> School of Music students in the Deiniol Shopping Centre , Bangor , on 5 March 2005 . 
 = = List of compositions = = 
 A list of Puw 's major compositions . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 1995 – Winner of the Composer 's Medal at the National Eisteddfod of Wales for Ffantasia II ( harp ) 
 1997 – Winner of the Composer 's Medal at the National Eisteddfod of Wales for Mecanwaith ( string quartet ) 
 2005 – Reservoirs ( orchestral ) nominated in the Large @-@ Scale Composition category of the Royal Philharmonic Society Music Awards 
 2007 – Winner of the BBC Radio 3 Listeners Award at the British Composer Awards for his Oboe Concerto 
 2013 – Sir Geraint Evans Award presented by the Welsh Music Guild " for his significant contribution to Welsh music " 
 = = Recordings = = 
 Reservoirs – Orchestral Works by Guto <unk> Puw , Signum Records ( May 2014 ) . Tracks includes ... onyt agoraf y drws ... , Concerto for Oboe , Reservoirs , Hologram and Break the Stone ' Overture . 
 = Hypnotized ( 1910 film ) = 
 Hypnotized , released in Britain as A Quack <unk> , is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film focuses on May Smalley and Jack , who loves her , who attend a traveling show that comes to their little town . The show consists of a hypnotist and a Hindu magician and proves to be a popular show , but the hypnotist who is becomes interest in May . The hypnotist lures May away by telling her that he has a message from the spirit world and later gets her to leave town with him . Jack knocks the magician down and takes his costume and follows the hypnotist and May back to their hotel , where he rescues her . Aside from William Russell 's role in the film , the production and cast credits are unknown . The film was released on December 30 , 1910 , it was met with positive reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from December 31 , 1910 . It states , " May Smalley is a simple little country girl with whom Jack , a youth whom she has known since childhood , is very much in love . When a traveling show , consisting of a hypnotist and a Hindu magician comes to the opera house in her little town , the two young people are among the other interested spectators who flock to see the performance . May 's youth and beauty attract the hypnotist , who plans to lure her away from her home . He sends May a message that he has a communication for her from the spirit world . Against the protest of Jack , her escort , May goes behind the scenes after the performance to meet with the great hypnotist , who fascinates her with his wiles . The hypnotist is an unscrupulous villain , and seeing that May is thoroughly impressed with his few tricks and considers him quite superhuman , he induces her to follow him when he leaves the town . How Jack proves himself to be a youth of resource as well as courage , the important part he played in May 's deliverance by the Hindu fakir , is well told by the picture . Finally the hypnotist is shown in his true light . May is disillusioned , and comes to decide that Jack is just about the kind of protection she needs in a world of uncertainty . " According to a reviewer , Jack comes up to the stage where the Hindu magician is and knocks him down . Jack takes his costume and follows the hypnotist and May to the hotel where he rescues her . 
 = = Cast = = 
 William Russell as the hypnotist . 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . According to Bowers the cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . Though a production still shows William Russell in the film . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 This film was an example of the use of the character names Jack and May , which were to be repeatedly used by Lonergan in various productions . Bowers writes , " It developed that Lloyd F. Lonergan , ... liked these names , and during the years to come used them again and again . One can imagine that it must have become a studio joke to decide who was to play Jack and who was to play May . In actuality , names such as Jack and May were used in printed synopses to keep track of who was who , but such names were usually not mentioned in the film 's subtitles . Patrons watching the picture in a theatre had not the foggiest idea whether the hero was named Jack , Bertram , or Ezekiel . " The first usage of the two leading character roles was in Dots and Dashes . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on December 30 , 1910 . The film was released in Britain under the title A Quack <unk> on April 26 , 1913 . The film likely had a wide national release , known advertising theaters include those in Arizona , Pennsylvania , and Kansas . Some theaters did not provide the production credits , complicating identification with Selig Polyscope 's Hypnotized . The film received a positive review in the Moving Picture World which said , " It is a good story , well told , and the audience seems intensely interested in it . " The New York Dramatic Mirror offered a review that neither commended or criticized the production in its summary review of the film . 
 = You Only Live Twice ( novel ) = 
 You Only Live Twice is the eleventh novel ( and twelfth book ) in Ian Fleming 's James Bond series of stories . It was first published by Jonathan Cape in the United Kingdom on 26 March 1964 and sold out quickly . The book holds the distinction of being the last novel by Fleming to be published in his lifetime , with subsequent works being published posthumously . You Only Live Twice is the concluding chapter in what is known as the " Blofeld Trilogy " . 
 The story starts eight months after the murder of Tracy Bond , which occurred at the end of the previous novel , On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . James Bond is drinking and gambling heavily and making mistakes on his assignments when , as a last resort , he is sent to Japan on a semi @-@ diplomatic mission . Whilst there he is challenged by the Head of the Japanese Secret Service to kill Dr. Guntram Shatterhand . Bond realises that Shatterhand is Ernst Stavro Blofeld and sets out on a revenge mission to kill him and his wife , Irma Bunt . 
 The novel deals on a personal level with the change in Bond from a depressed man in mourning , to a man of action bent on revenge , to an amnesiac living as a Japanese fisherman . Through the mouths of his characters , Fleming also examines the decline of post @-@ World War II British power and influence , notably in relation to the United States . The book was popular with the public , with pre @-@ orders in the UK totalling 62 @,@ 000 ; critics were more muted in their reactions , generally delivering mixed reviews of the novel . 
 The story was serialised in the Daily Express newspaper and Playboy magazine , and also adapted for comic strip format in the Daily Express . In 1967 , it was released as the fifth entry in the Eon Productions James Bond film series , starring Sean Connery as Bond . The novel has also been adapted as a radio play and broadcast on the BBC . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the wedding @-@ day murder of his wife , Tracy ( see On Her Majesty 's Secret Service ) , Bond begins to let his life slide , drinking and gambling heavily , making mistakes and turning up late for work . His superior in the Secret Service , M , had been planning to dismiss Bond , but decides to give him a last @-@ chance opportunity to redeem himself by assigning him to the diplomatic branch of the organisation . Bond is subsequently re @-@ numbered <unk> and handed an " impossible " mission : convincing the head of Japan 's secret intelligence service , Tiger Tanaka , to provide Britain with information from radio transmissions captured from the Soviet Union , codenamed Magic 44 . In exchange , the Secret Service will allow the Japanese access to one of their own information sources . 
 Bond is introduced to Tanaka — and to the Japanese lifestyle — by an Australian intelligence officer , Dikko Henderson . When Bond raises the purpose of his mission with Tanaka , it transpires that the Japanese have already penetrated the British information source and Bond has nothing left to bargain with . Instead , Tanaka asks Bond to kill Dr. Guntram Shatterhand , who operates a politically embarrassing " Garden of Death " in an ancient castle ; people flock there to commit suicide . After examining photos of Shatterhand and his wife , Bond discovers that " Shatterhand " and his wife are Tracy 's murderers , Ernst Stavro Blofeld and Irma Bunt . Bond gladly takes the mission , keeping his knowledge of Blofeld 's identity a secret so that he can exact revenge for his wife 's death . Made up and trained by Tanaka , and aided by former Japanese film star Kissy Suzuki , Bond attempts to live and think as a mute Japanese coal miner in order to penetrate Shatterhand 's castle . Tanaka renames Bond " Taro Todoroki " for the mission . 
 After infiltrating the Garden of Death and the castle where Blofeld spends his time dressed in the costume of a Samurai warrior , Bond is captured and Bunt identifies him as a British secret agent and not a Japanese coal miner . After surviving a near execution , Bond exacts revenge on Blofeld in a duel , Blofeld armed with a sword and Bond with a wooden staff . Bond eventually kills Blofeld by strangling him , then blows up the castle . Upon escaping , he suffers a head injury , leaving him an amnesiac living as a Japanese fisherman with Kissy , while the rest of the world believes him dead ; his obituary appears in the newspapers . 
 While Bond 's health improves , Kissy conceals his true identity to keep him forever to herself . Kissy eventually sleeps with Bond and becomes pregnant , and hopes that Bond will propose marriage after she finds the right time to tell him about her pregnancy . Bond reads scraps of newspaper and fixates on a reference to Vladivostok , making him wonder if the far @-@ off city is the key to his missing memory ; he tells Kissy he must travel to Russia to find out . 
 = = Characters and themes = = 
 The central character in the novel is James Bond himself and the novel ends with his obituary , purportedly written for The Times by M. The obituary provides a number of biographical details of Bond 's early life , including his parents ' names and nationalities . Bond begins You Only Live Twice in a disturbed state , described by M as " going to pieces " , following the death of his wife Tracy eight months previously . Academic Jeremy Black points out that it was a very different Bond to the character who lost Vesper Lynd at the end of Casino Royale . Given a final chance by M to redeem himself with a difficult mission , Bond 's character changes under the ministrations of Dikko Henderson , Tiger Tanaka and Kissy Suzuki . The result , according to Benson , is a Bond with a sense of humour and a purpose in life . Benson finds the transformation of Bond 's character to be the most important theme in the novel : that of rebirth . This is suggested in Bond 's attempt at a haiku , written in the style of Japanese poet Matsuo Bashō : 
 The rebirth in question is that of Bond , transformed from the heavily drinking man mourning his wife at the beginning of the book to a man of action and then , after the death of Blofeld , becoming Taro Todoroki , the Japanese partner of Kissy Suzuki . While Bond is in his action phase , Benson sees Fleming 's writing becoming allegorical and epic , using Bond as a symbol of good against the evil of Blofeld . As in Goldfinger and The Spy Who Loved Me , Bond is referred to as St George in his fight against the dragon , this time by Tiger Tanaka , who says that " it would make the subject for a most entertaining Japanese print . " 
 According to the author of continuation Bond novels , Raymond Benson , Kissy Suzuki is " a most appealing heroine " and " apparently loves Bond very much . " Apart from being the mother of Bond 's unborn child at the end of the book , Suzuki also acts as a " cultural translator " for Bond , helping explain the local traditions and customs : Quarrel had the same function in Live and Let Die and Dr. No . Academic Christoph Lindner identifies Tiger Tanaka as one of Fleming 's characters with morals closer to those of traditional villains , but who act on the side of good in support of Bond ; others of this type have included Darko Kerim ( From Russia , with Love ) , Marc @-@ Ange Draco ( On Her Majesty 's Secret Service ) and Enrico Colombo ( " Risico " ) . 
 Blofeld makes his third appearance in the Bond series in You Only Live Twice and Benson notes that on this occasion he is quite mad and egocentric in his behaviour ; Tanaka refers to him as " a devil who has taken human form " . Comentale , Watt and Willman note that Fleming , through Bond , parallels Blofeld with Caligula , Nero and Hitler , and that this exemplifies Blofeld 's actions as being on " a titanic scale " , as much of the criminal action was throughout the Bond series . Linder echoes this , noting that the crimes perpetrated are not against individuals per se , but entire nations or continents . 
 Much in the novel concerns the state of Britain in world affairs . Black points out that the reason for Bond 's mission to Japan is that the US did not want to share intelligence regarding the Pacific , which it saw as its " private preserve " . As Black goes on to identify , however , the defections of four members of MI6 to the Soviet Union had a major impact in US intelligence circles on how Britain was viewed . The last of the defections was that of Kim Philby in January 1963 , while Fleming was still writing the first draft of the novel . Black contends that the conversation between M and Bond allows Fleming to discuss the decline of Britain , with the defections and the 1963 Profumo Affair as a backdrop . 
 The theme of Britain 's declining position in the world is also dealt with in conversations between Bond and Tanaka , Tanaka voicing Fleming 's own concerns about the state of Britain in the 1950s and early 60s . Tanaka accuses Britain of throwing away the empire " with both hands " ; this would have been a contentious situation for Fleming , as he wrote the novel as the Indonesia – Malaysia confrontation was breaking out in December 1962 , a direct challenge to British interests in the region . Fleming 's increasingly jaundiced views on America appear in the novel too , through Bond 's responses to Tiger 's comments , and they reflect on the declining relationship between Britain and America : this is in sharp contrast to the warm , co @-@ operative relationship between Bond and Leiter in the earlier books . 
 = = Background = = 
 You Only Live Twice is the twelfth book ( the eleventh novel ) of Fleming 's Bond series and the last book completed by Fleming before his death . The story is the third part of the Blofeld trilogy , coming after Thunderball , where SPECTRE is introduced , and On Her Majesty 's Secret Service , where Blofeld is involved in the murder of Bond 's wife . You Only Live Twice was the last book by Fleming that was published in his lifetime : he died five months after the UK release of the novel . It was written in January and February 1963 in Jamaica at Fleming 's Goldeneye estate . The original manuscript was 170 pages long and the least revised of all Fleming 's novels , with a mood that is dark and claustrophobic , reflecting Fleming 's own increasing melancholia . The story was written after the film version of Dr. No was released in 1962 , and Bond 's personality was somewhat skewed towards the screen persona rather than simply to Fleming himself ; Sean Connery 's filmic depiction of Bond affected the book version , with You Only Live Twice giving Bond a sense of humour and Scottish antecedents that were not present in the previous stories , although Fleming himself was part Scottish . Correspondence dating back to 1960 shows that Fleming contacted a Scottish nobleman to help develop Bond 's family history , in particular seeking a Scottish " Bond " family line . 
 Fleming 's first trip to Japan was as part of the Thrilling Cities trip undertaken for The Sunday Times in 1959 , although his visit only lasted for three days . He returned in 1962 and was accompanied on his trip round the country by Australian friend Richard Hughes and Tiger Saito , both journalists . In You Only Live Twice , these two characters became Dikko Henderson and Tiger Tanaka , respectively . Hughes was also the model for " Old Craw " in John le Carré 's The Honourable Schoolboy . 
 The novel contains a fictional obituary of Bond , purportedly published in The Times , which provided details of Bond 's early life , although many of these were Fleming 's own traits . These included Bond 's expulsion from Eton College , which was part of Fleming 's own history . As with a number of the previous Bond stories , You Only Live Twice used names of individuals and places that were from Fleming 's past . Bond 's mother , Monique Delacroix , was named after two women in Fleming 's life : Monique Panchaud de Bottomes , a girl Fleming was engaged to in the early 1930s , with Delacroix taken from Fleming 's own mother , whose maiden name was Ste Croix Rose . Bond 's aunt was called Charmian Bond : Charmian was the name of Fleming 's cousin who married Richard Fleming , Ian 's brother . Charmian 's sister was called " Pet " which , when combined with the Bottom from Monique Panchaud de Bottomes , gives Pett Bottom , where Charmian lives . Pett Bottom is also the name of a real place which amused Fleming when he stopped for lunch after a round of golf at Royal St George 's Golf Club , Sandwich . 
 Ernst Stavro Blofeld 's name partially comes from Tom Blofeld , a Norfolk farmer and a fellow member of Fleming 's club Boodle 's , who was a contemporary of Fleming 's at Eton . Tom Blofeld 's son is Henry Blofeld , a sports journalist , best known as a cricket commentator for Test Match Special on BBC Radio . For Blofeld 's pseudonym in the novel , Dr. Guntram Shatterhand , Fleming uses the name of an old café he had seen in Hamburg in 1959 — " Old Shatterhand " . The characterisation of him dressed as a Samurai was taken from the sketch Fleming had come up with thirty five years earlier for a character called Graf <unk> . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 You Only Live Twice was published in the UK on 16 March 1964 , by Jonathan Cape and cost sixteen shillings . There were 62 @,@ 000 pre @-@ orders for the book , a significant increase over the 42 @,@ 000 advance orders for the hardback first edition of On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . Richard Chopping , cover artist for The Spy Who Loved Me , was engaged for the design . On 17 July 1963 , Michael Howard of Jonathan Cape had written to Chopping about the artwork , saying : " I have had a talk with Ian about the ideas for the ingredients of this design . He is very much in favour of the toad ... but with a suitable array of oriental <unk> , i.e. toad plus Japanese flower arrangements , which he thinks should be sitting in a suitable piece of Japanese pottery , perhaps ornamented with a dragon motif . If you could manage a pink dragonfly sitting on the flowers , and perhaps just one <unk> eye peering through them he thinks that will be just splendid ! " Chopping 's fee rose to 300 guineas for the cover , a rise from the 250 guineas he received for The Spy Who Loved Me . 
 You Only Live Twice was published in the United States by New American Library in August 1964 ; it was 240 pages long and cost $ 4 @.@ 50 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Cyril Connolly , reviewing You Only Live Twice in The Sunday Times wrote that Fleming 's latest book was " reactionary , sentimental , square , the Bond @-@ image flails its way through the middle @-@ brow masses , a relaxation to the great , a stimulus to the humble , the only common denominator between Kennedy and Oswald " . The critic for The Times was largely unimpressed with You Only Live Twice , complaining that " as a moderate to middling travelogue what follows will just about do ... the plot with its concomitant sadism does not really get going until more than half way through " . In contrast to the previous novels , The Times continued , " though Mr. Fleming 's macabre imagination is as interesting as ever , some of the old snap seems to have gone " . Dealing with the cliffhanger ending to the story , the reviewer wrote that " Mr. Fleming would keep us on tenterhooks , but at this rate of going even his most devoted admirers will free themselves before very long . " 
 The critic for The Spectator felt that " Ian Fleming has taken a hint from films of his books and is now inclined to send himself up . I am not at all sure that he is wise " , while The Belfast Telegraph considered that Fleming was " still in a class of his own . " The Bookman declared that You Only Live Twice " must rank among the best of the Bonds " . Malcolm Muggeridge , writing in Esquire magazine disagreed , writing that " You Only Live Twice has a decidedly perfunctory air . Bond can only manage to sleep with his Japanese girl with the aid of colour pornography . His drinking sessions seem somehow desperate , and the horrors are too absurd to horrify ... it 's all rather a muddle and scarcely in the tradition of Secret Service fiction . Perhaps the earlier novels are better . If so , I shall never know , having no intention of reading them . " 
 Maurice Richardson , in The Observer , thought You Only Live Twice " though far from the best Bond , is really almost as easy to read as any of them " . He was critical of a number of aspects , saying that the " narrative is a bit weak , action long delayed and disappointing when it comes but the surround of local colour ... has been worked over with that unique combination of pubescent imagination and industry which is Mr. Fleming 's speciality . " In The Guardian , Francis Iles wrote that " I think he [ Fleming ] must be getting tired of the ineffable James Bond and perhaps even of writing thrillers at all " . Iles reasoned that " of the 260 pages of You Only Live Twice ... only 60 are concerned with the actual business of a thriller " , and his enjoyment was further diminished by what he considered " the grossness of Bond 's manners and his schoolboy obscenities " . 
 Peter Duval Smith , in the Financial Times , was in two minds about the book , believing on the one hand that " the background is excellent ... Mr. Fleming has caught the exact ' feel ' of Japan " , and on the other that You Only Live Twice " is not really a success and it 's Bond 's fault mainly . He just doesn 't add up to a human being " . Maggie Ross , in The Listener was also a little dissatisfied , writing that the novel can be read as a thriller and , " if interest flags , as it may do , the book can be treated as a tourist guide to some of the more interesting parts of Japan . " She went on to say that " since not very much in the way of real excitement happens until the latter half of the book , perhaps it is better to ignore the whole thing " . 
 Robert Fulford in the Toronto @-@ based magazine Maclean 's , noted that " the characteristic which makes Fleming appear so silly also helps make him so popular : his moral simplicity . When we read James Bond we know whose side we are on , why we are on that side and why we are certain to win . In the real world that is no longer possible . " Charles Poore , writing in The New York Times , noted that Bond 's mission " is aimed at restoring Britain 's pre @-@ World War II place among the powers of the world . And on that subject , above all others , Ian Fleming 's novels are endlessly , bitterly eloquent . " The Boston Globe 's Mary Castle opined that the agent 's trip was " Bond 's latest and grimmest mission " , which she called " Escapism in the Grand Manner " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Daily Express serialisation ( 1964 ) 
 You Only Live Twice was adapted for serialisation in the Daily Express newspaper on a daily basis from 2 March 1964 onwards . 
 Playboy serialisation ( 1964 ) 
 You Only Live Twice was serialised in the April , May and June 1964 issues of Playboy magazine . 
 Comic strip ( 1965 – 1966 ) 
 Ian Fleming 's novel was adapted as a daily comic strip published in the Daily Express newspaper , and syndicated worldwide . The adaptation , written by Henry Gammidge and illustrated by John McLusky , ran from 18 May 1965 to 8 January 1966 . It was the final James Bond strip for Gammidge , while McClusky returned to illustrating the strip in the 1980s . The strip was reprinted by Titan Books in The James Bond Omnibus Vol . 2 , published in 2011 . 
 You Only Live Twice ( 1967 ) 
 In 1967 , the book was adapted into the fifth film in the Eon Productions series , starring Sean Connery as Bond . Only a few elements of the novel and a limited number of Fleming 's characters survive into the film version . 
 Radio adaptation ( 1990 ) 
 In 1990 , the novel was adapted into a 90 @-@ minute radio play for BBC Radio 4 with Michael Jayston playing James Bond . The production was repeated a number of times between 2008 and 2013 . 
 = Davidson Seamount = 
 Davidson Seamount is a seamount ( underwater volcano ) located off the coast of Central California , 80 mi ( 129 km ) southwest of Monterey and 75 mi ( 121 km ) west of San Simeon . At 26 mi ( 42 km ) long and 8 mi ( 13 km ) wide , it is one of the largest known seamounts in the world . From base to crest , the seamount is 7 @,@ 480 ft ( 2 @,@ 280 m ) tall , yet its summit is still 4 @,@ 101 ft ( 1 @,@ 250 m ) below the sea surface . The seamount is biologically diverse , with 237 species and 27 types of deep @-@ sea coral having been identified . 
 Discovered during the mapping of California 's coast in 1933 , Davidson Seamount is named after geographer George Davidson of the U.S. National Geodetic Survey . Studied only sparsely for decades , NOAA expeditions to the seamount in 2002 and 2006 cast light upon its unique deep @-@ sea coral ecosystem . Davidson Seamount is populated by a dense population of large , ancient corals , some of which are over 100 years of age . The data gathered during the studies fueled the making of Davidson Seamount into a part of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary in 2009 . 
 = = Geology = = 
 A seamount such as Davidson is an underwater volcano ; this one rises over 3 @,@ 280 ft ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) above the surrounding ocean floor . Although there are over 30 @,@ 000 seamounts in the Pacific Ocean alone , only about 0 @.@ 1 % of them have been explored . The aqueous environment of the seamount means that it behaves differently from volcanoes on land . Its surface is composed mostly of blocky lava flows , although some pillow lava , which is the typical lava type of a seamount , prevails at the deeper flank . The summit is composed of layered deposits of volcanic ash and pyroclastic material . These rocks indicate mildly explosive eruptions of gas @-@ rich lava near the summit of the volcano . The base of Davidson is probably buried in a deep layer of muds . 
 At 26 mi ( 42 km ) long and 8 mi ( 13 km ) wide , Davidson Seamount is impressively large . If it were on land , it would dominate the landscape in a way similar to how Mount Shasta dominates the horizon of northern California . Put in perspective , the size of the seamount is enough to fill Monterey Bay from the Santa Cruz boardwalk to Monterey 's Fishermen 's Wharf . 
 Davidson Seamount is part of a group of seamounts off the continental margin , including Guide , Pioneer , Gumdrop , and Rodriguez seamounts , all located roughly between 37 @.@ 5 ° and 34 @.@ 0 ° degrees of latitude . This group is morphologically unique , and very similar to one another . All the seamounts in the group are complex northeast @-@ southwest trending structures , consisting of parallel ridges separated by sediment @-@ filled troughs . The ridges constructed run parallel to an ancient spreading center which has since been replaced in its role by the San Andreas Fault system . They are unique in this origin , as they are formed from the remnants of an old ocean @-@ ridge spreading center . A series of " knobs " are aligned with the ridges ; however the distinctive summit crater , evident in many oceanic volcanoes , is absent . This lack of a collapse crater suggests that magma was never stored in a chamber within the structure , as with most other volcanoes . 
 Analysis of argon – argon dating studies indicate that Davidson formed between 9 and 15 million years ago , 5 to 12 million years after the formation of the overlaying oceanic crust . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Studies have indicated that a seamount functions as an " oasis of life , " with a higher species count and more biodiversity then the surrounding seafloor . Although previous analysis has stressed the exceptionally of the seamount habitat , recent biological analysis , much of it centered on Davidson Seamount , has indicated that this does not necessarily translate into a higher endemic percentage . However , it is believed that they provide a refuge for rare species that have difficulty surviving elsewhere . 
 There are reasons that seamounts are biologically important . They rise high in the water column , creating complex current patterns that support life on , around , and above the seamount . The surface of the seamount also provides a substrate upon which organisms can attach themselves and grow . This in turn supports the species that feed on them , in turn supporting the whole ecological food web . Scientists have found that seamounts often provide a habitat for endemic species that are not found anywhere else . 
 Davidson Seamount is among the best biologically described seamounts worldwide . Six major expeditions to the volcano have yielded over 60 @,@ 000 species observations . As of 2009 scientists have observed and recorded 168 species of megafauna on the seamount . Of these , about 7 % of the species at Davidson are endemic , meaning they live only at Davidson . 71 % of the species can be confidently classified as cosmopolitan ( widespread ) , and sufficient data exists for 22 % of the observed species to strongly suggest that their range is not limited to seamounts . The remaining 7 % have only been seen in video footage . Interestingly , 13 species have been identified in other areas , but never in other seamounts . 
 The seamount is populated by a large variety of deep @-@ sea corals , most of which in turn provide a habitat for other species . It has in the past been called " An Oasis in the Deep " , hosting a vast coral forest , large sponge field , crabs , deep @-@ sea fish , basket stars , and a number of rare benthic species , some of which have yet to be studied properly or even named . These are all cold @-@ water species , as the temperature even at the top of the seamount is just above freezing — around 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) , as compared to 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) at the ocean 's surface . 
 Despite its size , the top of Davidson Seamount remains over 4 @,@ 500 ft ( 1 @,@ 372 m ) below the ocean 's surface . This great depth means that the habitats that the seamount supports have not been significantly disturbed by human activity ; anchoring and trawling typically does not occur below a depth of 1 @,@ 500 ft ( 457 m ) , and waste disposal and discharge occurs much closer to shore . 
 In comparisons drawn to the nearby Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary , the two were shown to be very different biologically . Species that are rare in Monterey Bay are common on Davidson , and vice versa . 
 = = = Deep @-@ sea coral = = = 
 The ecology on Davidson Seamount is dominated by an extensive " forest " of ancient deep @-@ sea coral and sponges , some of which are over 100 years old . Although these species also grow elsewhere , they are generally sparsely distributed and far smaller and younger than the coral growth on Davidson . Conversely , sea cucumbers , which are very common on the walls of Monterey Canyon , are all but absent on Davidson , an example of the polarity between Davidson and Monterey Bay . 
 Researchers speculate that Davidson Seamount is an ideal habitat for deep @-@ sea corals and sponges because it has favorable bottom rock ( bare lava rock ) , a steady food supply ( supplied by a water current favoring the seamount ; see the section above ) , and has not been disturbed by strong bottom currents than often bother other seafloor areas . 
 Craig McClain , one of the scientists studying the seamount , told <unk> : 
 Research also suggests that seamounts such as Davidson Seamount may be ecologically valuable to rare species that use them as breeding grounds . The seamounts are likely to be a source of larvae that maintains the population of the species in nearby , sub @-@ optimal areas , known as " sinks . " <unk> are low @-@ lying areas in which species can live , but do so very poorly ; if they are not replenished by nearby population centers , such as at Davidson , they could disappear from the area entirely . DNA studies may in the future help scientists prove seamounts are indeed sources of larvae for their surrounding seafloor . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Exploration = = = 
 Davidson Seamount was initially discovered and mapped in 1933 . Davidson Seamount was the first underwater volcano to be classified as " seamount " by the United States Board of Geographic Names , in 1938 , and was named in honor of the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey scientist George Davidson , one of the key figures in the survey of America 's west coast . 
 Because of its great depth , for a long time Davidson Seamount had been preceded only by a sparse few investigations . Davidson is interesting to volcanologists because of its unique geology , and to biologists for its unique ecology . In 2002 the NOAA sponsored the first modern in @-@ depth study of the seamount . The team included scientists , educators , and resource managers , with the goal of documenting species , taking geologic samples , and describing the ocean environment . The expedition documented many rare , previously undiscovered species that exist nowhere else , not even on nearby seamounts , including ancient coral gardens that are vulnerable to human activity . 
 Recent expeditions to Davidson have focused on its ecology , and specifically on the variety of deep @-@ sea corals , some over 100 years old , that live on its banks . These large colonies are extremely fragile to human interaction . Davidson 's proximity to scientific research institutions has helped its exploration , as multiple dives , mappings , and studies have made it one of the better @-@ studied seamounts in the world . 
 In 2006 , another exploration , a collaboration of the Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary , the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute ( MBARI ) , and Moss Landing Marine Laboratories was undertaken , mainly to test a model that had been developed to predict the availability of coral and to advance the understanding of the seamount 's deep @-@ sea coral . The NOAA outlined a set of 4 goals for the expedition : 
 Understand why deep @-@ sea corals live where they do on the seamount 
 Determine the age and growth patterns of the bamboo coral 
 Improve the species list and taxonomy of corals from the seamount 
 Share the exciting experience with the public through television and the Internet 
 Scientific data on the water currents and food availability of the seamount was collected , as was information on the age and growth patterns of the corals themselves . The British Broadcasting Corporation ( BBC ) filmed the cruise for their series , Planet Earth . A total of 70 hours of observations and 102 deep @-@ sea animal and rock specimens were collected during the cruise . The expedition , which lasted from January 26 through February 4 , made use if the MBARI 's research vessel Western Flyer and the ROV Tiburon . 
 = = = As a marine sanctuary = = = 
 Following the information learned from the 2002 and 2006 expeditions , there was public support for the making of Davidson Seamount into a marine sanctuary . A key group of research scientists , fishermen , officials , educators , and marine biologists was formed in 2006 to discuss whether or not to make Davidson Seamount a National Marine Sanctuary under the National Marine Sanctuaries Act , and if so whether to make it its own sanctuary , or incorporate it into the nearby Monterey Bay National Marine Sanctuary . The group decided that the seamount was eligible for sanctuary designation , and the majority of the group recommended its incorporation into the nearby Monterey Bay sanctuary . 
 The Monterey Bay advisory group concurred with the findings , and submitted its approval to the NOAA , with whom the final decision rested . In a press release dated November 20 , 2008 , the NOAA finalized its approval of the plans , and expanded Monterey Bay by a total of 775 sq mi ( 2 @,@ 007 km2 ) to include Davidson Seamount in its protected area . After a management plan was created , Davidson Seamount was incorporated into Monterey Bay in 2009 , 7 years after it was originally proposed . 
 = Rhode Island Route 99 = 
 Route 99 , also known as the Woonsocket Industrial Highway , is a numbered state highway running 2 @.@ 9 miles ( 4 @.@ 7 km ) in Providence County , Rhode Island , United States . The route is a nominally north – south limited @-@ access freeway for its entire length . Route 99 serves Manville and the Highland Industrial Park , providing freeway access to the city of Woonsocket from Rhode Island Route 146 , which bypasses the city . The southern terminus of Route 99 is at a partial interchange with Route 146 in Lincoln . The freeway has one unnumbered interchange in Manville , a village in Lincoln , before terminating at an at @-@ grade intersection with Rhode Island Route 122 in Woonsocket . 
 Originally conceived as a freeway linking Route 146 and Interstate 295 with Interstate 495 in Bellingham , Massachusetts , Route 99 was constructed primarily to provide freeway access to Woonsocket and the developing Highland Industrial Park . Although originally proposed to serve Downtown Woonsocket , an alternate routing that terminated at Route 122 and ran closer to the Woonsocket – Cumberland border was later constructed by the Rhode Island Department of Transportation ( RIDOT ) . The four @-@ lane freeway began construction in 1987 and was completed in 1993 . RIDOT has long @-@ range plans to extend Route 99 north to Route 114 in Downtown Woonsocket , but plans for a northerly extension to I @-@ 495 have been abandoned . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 99 begins at a partial interchange with Route 146 in Lincoln ; the route is only accessible from Route 146 north , and the mainline of Route 99 south defaults onto Route 146 south with no direct access to Route 146 north . The exit for Route 99 off Route 146 north is accessed via a collector road that also serves Interstate 295 from Route 146 ; I @-@ 295 has an alignment slightly south of Route 99 but has no direct interchange with it . 
 Route 99 north diverges from Route 146 north and heads in an almost due north direction . The freeway has its only interchange with Sayles Hill Road , an unnumbered road that is used to access the village of Manville and Route 126 ( Old River Road ) . Sayles Hill Road is also used to access Route 146 north , which has no direct freeway connection with Route 99 south . 
 After the Sayles Hill Road interchange , Route 99 begins to head in a northeastern direction , passing to the west of the densely populated village of Manville and the St. James Cemetery . Route 99 passes over Route 126 ( Old River Road ) , Railroad Street , and the Providence and Worcester Railroad on a single @-@ span bridge before crossing over the Blackstone River into the town of Cumberland . The freeway passes over 2nd Avenue before entering the city of Woonsocket shortly before its northern terminus at a traffic signal with Route 122 ( Mendon Road ) . The road continues northward as Highland Corporate Drive , an unnumbered route that enters the Highland Industrial Park . 
 = = History = = 
 The origins of Route 99 date back to 1959 , when the Rhode Island Department of Public Works ( RIDPW ) began planning studies for a freeway linking I @-@ 95 in Pawtucket with the city of Woonsocket . The freeway was planned in addition to Route 146 , the <unk> Expressway , to serve the cities and towns of northern Providence County . In 1964 , $ 535 @,@ 000 ( 1964 USD ) was allocated for further planning studies , but the proposed freeway was ultimately dropped by RIDPW . In 1968 , plans for a freeway were revived when the Massachusetts Department of Public Works proposed the construction of a " Woonsocket Connector " linking Woonsocket with Bellingham , Massachusetts and I @-@ 495 on a route similar to that of Massachusetts Route 126 . 
 In 1971 , RIDOT again began studies on a new freeway to Woonsocket , this time to connect the city 's developing industrial parks to Route 146 , I @-@ 295 , and the rest of the Providence metropolitan area . Four different alignments were proposed for the new route , each beginning near the intersection of Route 146 and I @-@ 295 and ending near Downtown Woonsocket . The first proposal began the freeway at the intersection of Route 146 and Route 104 in North Smithfield , north of I @-@ 295 . The freeway would have taken a northeast route to the downtown area . The second proposal began the freeway near the intersection of Route 146 and Route 146A in North Smithfield ; this route would have also taken a northeastern route to the border between Woonsocket and the town of Cumberland . The third proposal called for a similar route to the Cumberland border , but had the freeway beginning at the intersection of Route 146 and Sayles Hill Road in the North Smithfield business district . Finally , the fourth alignment called for the freeway to begin just north of the Route 146 and I @-@ 295 interchange in Lincoln , with a northern route heading to either Downtown Woonsocket or the Cumberland – Woonsocket border . RIDOT eventually constructed the fourth alignment , with the freeway beginning north of the I @-@ 295 interchange and proceeding north to the border between Woonsocket and Cumberland . The route was assigned the number " Route 325 " by RIDOT . 
 RIDOT conducted further planning and environmental studies in the 1970s , proposing to construct the four @-@ lane freeway with a dual carriageway and a 65 @-@ foot ( 20 m ) landscaped median . The freeway would be constructed over a 400 @-@ foot ( 122 m ) right @-@ of @-@ way , running through mostly undeveloped land in the Blackstone River Valley . RIDOT planned to construct the highway first as a two @-@ lane freeway to be upgraded at a later date . 
 Further environmental studies in the late 1980s altered the plans for the construction of the Woonsocket Industrial Highway ; after studies indicated that the freeway , as originally planned , would interfere with the water supply for the city of Woonsocket , RIDOT revised the proposal , removing the large median and reducing the right @-@ of @-@ way . The freeway was instead planned with a 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) right @-@ of @-@ way and concrete barriers to separate the opposing traffic lanes . The plan to open the highway as a two @-@ lane freeway was also abandoned ; instead , all four lanes would be constructed at one time . In the 1980s , the planned Route 325 was also renumbered to Route 99 . Construction on Route 99 began in 1987 . The project , which included the construction of a four @-@ lane bridge over the Providence and Worcester Railroad and the Blackstone River and new collector / distributor roads on Route 146 between I @-@ 295 and Route 99 , was completed in 1993 . 
 = = Future = = 
 The proposal to extend the Woonsocket freeway north to I @-@ 495 in Bellingham was placed on RIDOT long @-@ range planning studies in 1971 , resurrecting the proposal made by the Massachusetts Department of Public Works in the 1960s . Throughout the 1980s , RIDOT planned the alignment or Route 99 to allow for a northern extension of the freeway beyond Route 122 . In 1977 , however , RIDOT officially abandoned plans for an extension north to Bellingham , Massachusetts and I @-@ 495 , instead opting for a shorter route that would extend the freeway north to Route 114 ( Diamond Hill Road ) in northern Woonsocket . The freeway extension remains on RIDOT 's long @-@ term plans . 
 In 2009 , RIDOT announced that it would begin resurfacing and repaving the collector / distributor roads serving I @-@ 295 and Route 99 from Route 146 . <unk> the most deteriorated portions of the roads began in March 2009 , with a complete repaving scheduled for June 2009 . <unk> was later rescheduled for August 2009 , but has since been postponed until September . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire route is in Providence County . 
 The route will be getting exit numbers for the first time in the summer of 2015 . Signs with exit tabs were placed prior to this announcement . 
 = The Incredibles = 
 The Incredibles is a 2004 American computer @-@ animated superhero comedy @-@ drama film written and directed by Brad Bird , produced by Pixar Animation Studios , and released by Walt Disney Pictures . The film follows a family of superheroes who are forced to hide their powers and live a quiet suburban life . Mr. Incredible 's desire to help people draws the entire family into a battle with a villain and his killer robot . 
 Bird , who was Pixar 's first outside director , developed the film as an extension of 1960s comic books and spy films from his boyhood and personal family life . He pitched the film to Pixar after the box office disappointment of his first feature , The Iron Giant ( 1999 ) , and carried over much of its staff to develop The Incredibles . The animation team was tasked with animating an all @-@ human cast , which required creating new technology to animate detailed human anatomy , clothing and realistic skin and hair . Michael Giacchino composed the film 's orchestral score . 
 The film premiered on October 27 , 2004 , at the BFI London Film Festival and had its general release in the United States on November 5 , 2004 . The film performed well at the box office , grossing $ 631 million worldwide during its original theatrical run . The Incredibles was met with high critical acclaim , garnering high marks from professional critics , and provoking commentary on its themes . The film received the 2004 Annie Award for Best Animated Feature , along with two Academy Awards . It became the first entirely animated film to win the prestigious Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation . 
 A sequel , The Incredibles II , is scheduled for release on June 21 , 2019 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Public opinion turns against humans with superpowers – called " <unk> " – and after facing several lawsuits over peripheral damage caused by their crime @-@ fighting activities , the government forces them into civilian relocation programs . Fifteen years later , Bob and Helen Parr , formerly known as Mr. Incredible and Elastigirl , and their children Violet , Dash , and Jack @-@ Jack live as a suburban family . Bob is dissatisfied with suburban life and his white @-@ collar job and longs for the glory days . Sometimes , Bob and his old friend Lucius Best – formerly known as Frozone – perform vigilante work , without their wives ' knowledge during the night . 
 One day , Bob loses his temper when his supervisor refuses to let him stop a mugging , causing him to lose his job . Returning home , Bob finds a message from a mysterious woman named Mirage , who convinces him to become Mr. Incredible again and gives him a mission to destroy a savage tripod @-@ like robot called the Omnidroid on the remote island of Nomanisan , promising a substantial reward . Arriving on Nomanisan Island , Bob is able to find and destroy the Omnidroid by tricking it into ripping out its own power source . 
 Bob is rejuvenated by being able to use his powers freely , improving his attitude and relationship with his family , and he begins rigorous training while waiting for more work from Mirage . Discovering a tear in his suit , Bob visits superhero costume designer Edna Mode who decides to make him and his whole family suits , unbeknownst to Helen and the kids . Leaving for Nomanisan once again , Bob discovers that Mirage is working for Buddy Pine , a disaffected former super @-@ fan rejected by Mr. Incredible who adopted the name Syndrome . Syndrome intends to perfect the Omnidroid and defeat it in public while manipulating its controls to become a hero himself , and then sell his inventions so everyone will become equally " super " , making the term meaningless . Bob sneaks into Syndrome 's island base and finds his computer . He discovers Syndrome has lured countless retired superheroes to their deaths , pitting them against previous Omnidroid prototypes to test their design . Meanwhile , Helen visits Edna , finds out what Bob has been up to , and activates a homing beacon Edna built into the suits to find him , inadvertently causing Bob to be discovered and captured . 
 Helen borrows an airplane to head for Nomanisan , but finds Violet and Dash have stowed away wearing their own suits , leaving Jack @-@ Jack in the care of a babysitter . Syndrome picks up Helen 's radio transmissions and shoots down the plane , but Helen and the kids survive and make it to the island , though Bob thinks they are dead . Bob threatens to kill Mirage to force Syndrome to release him , but Syndrome calls his bluff and Bob releases Mirage . 
 Helen proceeds to the base to find Bob , discovering Syndrome 's intentions to send the Omnidroid to <unk> in a rocket . Distraught by Syndrome 's behavior and his true plans , Mirage releases Bob and informs him that his family is alive . Helen arrives and races off with Bob to find their children . Dash and Violet use their powers to counter a number of Syndrome 's guards in Nomanisan 's tropical jungle before reunited with their parents . The family is captured by Syndrome , who heads off to initiate his plan . 
 The Parrs escape and use a security RV and a spare orbital rocket system to travel to the danger in <unk> . The Omnidroid has gained more intelligence and knocks the remote that Syndrome controls out of his control as well as knocking him unconscious . The Parrs and Frozone team up to fight the robot , until Bob reminisces the power of Syndrome 's control . A pincer of the robot is used as the power source , destroying it . Returning home , the Parrs find Syndrome who plans to raise Jack @-@ Jack as own sidekick to exact revenge on the family . As Syndrome tries to escape to his airplane , Jack @-@ Jack 's own shapeshifting superpowers start to manifest and impede his kidnap and Syndrome 's escape . Helen rescues Jack @-@ Jack , and Bob kills Syndrome by throwing his own car at the plane which causes Syndrome to be sucked into the plane 's turbine by his cape ( a warning that was said by Edna where capes were a danger ) . 
 Three months later , the Parrs , having adjusted to civilian life , witness the arrival of a new villain called the Underminer . The family dons their superhero outfits , preparing to face the new threat . 
 = = Voice cast = = 
 Craig T. Nelson as Bob Parr / Mr. Incredible , the patriarch of the Parr family , possessing super @-@ strength and limited invulnerability 
 Holly Hunter as Helen Parr / Elastigirl , Bob 's wife , who possesses the ability to stretch her body like rubber 
 Sarah Vowell as Violet Parr , the Parrs ' junior @-@ high @-@ aged first child , who possesses the ability to become invisible and generate an impact @-@ resistant force shield 
 Spencer Fox as Dashiell Robert " Dash " Parr / The Dash , the Parrs ' fourth @-@ grader second child , who possesses super @-@ speed 
 Jason Lee as Buddy Pine / <unk> @-@ Boy / Syndrome , a former superhero fanatic who has no super powers of his own but uses advanced technology to give himself equivalent abilities 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Lucius Best / Frozone , Bob 's best friend , who has the ability to form ice from the humidity in the air 
 Elizabeth Peña as Mirage , Syndrome 's agent 
 Brad Bird as Edna Mode , the fashion designer for the <unk> 
 Eli Fucile and Maeve Andrews as Jack @-@ Jack Parr , the Parrs ' infant third child , who initially shows no powers but eventually reveals himself to have a wide range of abilities 
 Bud Luckey as Rick Dicker , the government agent overseeing the relocation program 
 Wallace Shawn as Gilbert <unk> , Bob 's supervisor at his white @-@ collar insurance job 
 John Ratzenberger as The Underminer , a new villain who appears at the end of the film 
 Dominique Louis as Bomb Voyage , a villain from the past who uses Buddy 's interference in Mr. Incredible 's heroism to escape 
 Michael Bird as Tony <unk> , a popular boy at Violet 's school who develops a crush on Violet 
 Jean Sincere as Mrs. <unk> , an elderly woman who seeks help from Mr. Incredible for an insurance claim 
 Kimberly Adair Clark as Honey Best , Frozone 's wife 
 Bret Parker as Kari McKeen , Jack @-@ Jack 's babysitter 
 Lou Romano as Bernie <unk> , Dash 's teacher 
 Wayne <unk> as John Walker , the principal of Dash 's school 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The Incredibles as a concept dates back to 1993 , when Bird sketched the family during a period in which he tried to break into film . Personal issues had percolated into the story as they weighed on him in life . During this time , Bird had inked a production deal with Warner Bros. Animation and was in the process of directing his first feature , The Iron Giant . Approaching middle age and having high aspirations for his filmmaking , Bird pondered whether his career goals were attainable only at the price of his family life . He stated , " Consciously , this was just a funny movie about superheroes . But I think that what was going on in my life definitely filtered into the movie . " After the box office failure of The Iron Giant , Bird gravitated toward his superhero story . 
 He imagined it as an homage to the 1960s comic books and spy films from his boyhood and he initially tried to develop it as a 2D cel animation . When The Iron Giant became a box office bomb , he reconnected with old friend John Lasseter at Pixar in March 2000 and pitched his story idea to him . Bird and Lasseter knew each other from their college years at CalArts in the 1970s . Lasseter was sold on the idea and convinced Bird to come to Pixar , where the film would be done in computer animation . The studio announced a <unk> contract with Bird on May 4 , 2000 , breaking Pixar 's mold of having directors who had all risen through the ranks . The Incredibles was written and directed solely by Brad Bird , a departure from previous Pixar productions which typically had two or three directors and as many screenwriters . In addition , it would be the company 's first film in which all characters are human . 
 Bird came to Pixar with the lineup of the story 's family members worked out : a mom and dad , both suffering through the dad 's midlife crisis ; a shy teenage girl ; a cocky ten @-@ year @-@ old boy ; and a baby . Bird had based their powers on family archetypes . After several failed attempts to cast Edna Mode , Bird took on her voice role himself . It was an extension of the Pixar custom of tapping in @-@ house staff whose voices came across particularly well on scratch dialogue tracks . During production , Hayao Miyazaki of Studio Ghibli visited Pixar and saw the film 's story reels . When Bird asked if the reels made any sense or if they were just " American nonsense , " Miyazaki replied , through an interpreter , " I think it 's a very adventurous thing you are trying to do in an American film . " 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 Upon Pixar 's acceptance of the project , Brad Bird was asked to bring in his own team for the production . He brought up a core group of people he worked with on The Iron Giant . Because of this , many 2 @-@ D artists had to make the shift to 3 @-@ D , including Bird himself . Bird found working with CG " wonderfully malleable " in a way that traditional animation is not , calling the camera 's ability to easily switch angles in a given scene " marvelously adaptable . " He found working in computer animation difficult in a different way than working traditionally , finding the software sophisticated and not particularly friendly . Bird wrote the script without knowing the limitations or concerns that went hand @-@ in @-@ hand with the medium of computer animation . As a result , this was to be the most complex film for Pixar yet . The film 's characters were designed by Tony Fucile and Teddy Newton , whom Bird had brought with him from Warner Bros. Like most computer @-@ animated films , The Incredibles had a year @-@ long period of building the film from the inside out : modeling the exterior and understanding controls that work face and body – the articulation of the character – before animation could even begin . Bird and Fucile tried to emphasize the graphic quality of good 2 @-@ D animation to the Pixar team , who 'd only worked primarily in CG . Bird attempted to incorporate teaching from Disney 's Nine Old Men that the crew at Pixar had " never really emphasized . " 
 For the technical crew members , the film 's human characters posed a difficult set of challenges . Bird 's story was filled with elements that were difficult to animate with CGI at the time . Humans are widely considered to be the most difficult thing to execute in animation . Pixar animators filmed themselves walking to better grasp proper human motion . Creating an all @-@ human cast required creating new technology to animate detailed human anatomy , clothing and realistic skin and hair . Although the technical team had some experience with hair and cloth in Monsters , Inc . ( 2001 ) , the amount of hair and cloth required for The Incredibles had never been done by Pixar until this point . Moreover , Bird would tolerate no compromises for the sake of technical simplicity . Where the technical team on Monsters , Inc. had persuaded director Pete Docter to accept pigtails on Boo to make her hair easier to animate , the character of Violet had to have long hair that obscured her face ; it was integral to her character . Violet 's long hair , which was extremely difficult to animate , was only successfully animated toward the end of production . In addition , animators had to adapt to having hair underwater and blowing through the wind . Disney was initially reluctant to make the film because of these issues , feeling a live @-@ action film would be preferable , though Lasseter vetoed this . 
 The Incredibles not only dealt with the trouble of animating CG humans , but also many other complications . The story was bigger than any prior story at the studio , was longer in running time , and had four times the number of locations . Supervising technical director Rick Sayre noted that the hardest thing about the film was that there was " no hardest thing , " alluding to the amount of new technical challenges : fire , water , air , smoke , steam , and explosions were all additional to the new difficulty of working with humans . The film 's organizational structure could not be mapped out like previous Pixar features , and it became a running joke to the team . Sayre said the team adopted “ Alpha Omega , " where one team was concerned with building modeling , shading and layout and another that dealt with final camera , lighting and effects . Another team , dubbed the character team , digitally sculpted , rigged and shaded the characters , and a simulation team was responsible for developing simulation technology for hair and clothing . There were 781 visual effects shots in the film , and they were quite often visual gags , such as the car window shattering when Bob angrily shuts the car door . In addition , the effects team improved their modeling of clouds , using volumetric rendering for the first time . 
 The skin of the characters gained a new level of realism from a technology to produce what is known as " subsurface scattering . " The challenges did not stop with modeling humans . Bird decided that in a shot near the film 's end , baby Jack @-@ Jack would undergo a series of transformations , and in one of the five planned he would turn himself into a kind of goo . Technical directors , who anticipated spending two months or even longer to work out the goo effect , stealing precious hours from production that had already entered its final and most critical stages , petitioned the film 's producer , John Walker for help . Bird , who had himself brought Walker over from Warner Bros. to work on the project , was at first immovable , but after arguing with Walker in several invective @-@ laced meetings over the course of two months , Bird finally conceded . Bird also insisted that the storyboards define the blocking of characters ' movements , lighting , and camera moves , which had previously been left to other departments rather than storyboarded . 
 Bird self @-@ admitted that he " had the knees of [ the studio ] trembling under the weight " of The Incredibles , but called the film a testament to the talent of the animators at Pixar , who were admiring the challenges the film provoked . He recalled , " Basically , I came into a wonderful studio , frightened a lot of people with how many presents I wanted for Christmas , and then got almost everything I asked for . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The Incredibles is the first Pixar film to be scored by Michael Giacchino . Brad Bird was looking for a specific sound as inspired by the film 's design – the future as seen from the 1960s . John Barry was the first choice to do the film 's score , with a trailer of the film given a rerecording of Barry 's theme to On Her Majesty 's Secret Service . However , Barry did not wish to duplicate the sound of some of his earlier soundtracks ; the assignment was instead given to Giacchino . Giacchino noted that recording in the 1960s was largely different from modern day recording and Dan Wallin , the recording engineer , said that Bird wanted an old feel , and as such the score was recorded on analogue tapes . Wallin noted that brass instruments , which are at the forefront of the film 's score , sound better on analog equipment rather than digital . Wallin came from an era in which music was recorded , according to Giacchino , " the right way , " which consists of everyone in the same room , " playing against each other and feeding off each other 's energy . " Tim <unk> was the conductor / orchestrator for the score 's recording . 
 The film 's orchestral score was released on November 2 , 2004 , three days before the film opened in theaters . It won numerous awards for best score including Los Angeles Film Critics Association Award , BMI Film & TV Award , ASCAP Film and Television Music Award , Annie Award , Las Vegas Film Critics Society Award and Online Film Critics Society Award and was nominated for Grammy Award for Best Score Soundtrack for Visual Media , Satellite Award and Broadcast Film Critics Association Award . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Several film reviewers drew precise parallels between the film and certain superhero comic books , like Powers , Watchmen , Fantastic Four and The Avengers . Indeed , the producers of the 2005 adaptation of the Fantastic Four were forced to make significant script changes and add more special effects because of similarities to The Incredibles . Bird was not surprised that comparisons arose due to superheroes being " the most well @-@ trod turf on the planet , " but noted that he had not been inspired by any comic books specifically , only having heard of Watchmen . He did comment that it was nice to be compared to it , since " if you 're going to be compared to something , it 's nice if it 's something good " . 
 Some commentators took Bob 's frustration with celebrating mediocrity and Syndrome 's comment that if " everyone is super , then no one is " as a reflection of views shared by German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche or an extension of Russian @-@ American novelist 's Ayn Rand 's Objectivism philosophy , which Bird felt was " ridiculous . " He stated that a large portion of the audience understood the satire whereas " two percent thought I was doing The Fountainhead or Atlas Shrugged . " Some purported that The Incredibles exhibited a right @-@ wing bias , which Bird found silly . " I think that 's as silly of an analysis as saying The Iron Giant was left @-@ wing . I 'm definitely a centrist and feel like both parties can be absurd . " 
 The film also explored Bird 's dislike for the tendency of the children 's comics and Saturday morning cartoons of his youth to portray villains as unrealistic , ineffectual , and non @-@ threatening . In the film , Dash and Violet have to deal with villains who are perfectly willing to use deadly force against children . On another level , both Dash and Violet display no emotion or regret at the deaths of those who are trying to kill them , such as when Dash <unk> pursuers who crash their vehicles while chasing him , or when both of them witness their parents destroy several attacking vehicles with people inside , in such a manner that the deaths of those piloting them is undeniable . Despite disagreeing with some analysis , Bird felt it gratifying for his work to be considered on many different levels , which was his intention : " The fact that it was written about in the op / ed section of The New York Times several times was really gratifying to me . Look , it 's a mainstream animated movie , and how often are those considered thought provoking ? " 
 = = Release = = 
 The film opened on November 5 , 2004 , as Pixar 's first film to be rated PG ( for " action violence " ) . Its theatrical release was accompanied with a Pixar short film Boundin ' . While Pixar celebrated another triumph with The Incredibles , Steve Jobs was embroiled in a public feud with the head of its distribution partner , The Walt Disney Company . This would eventually lead to the ousting of Michael Eisner and Disney 's acquisition of Pixar the following year . 
 In March 2014 , Disney CEO and chairman Bob Iger announced that the film will be reformatted and re @-@ released in 3D . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The film 's 2 @-@ disc collector 's edition DVD set was released on March 15 , 2005 . This release also includes Jack @-@ Jack Attack and Mr. Incredible and Pals , two Pixar short films made especially for the release of the film , and Boundin ' , a Pixar short film which the film premiered with in theaters . It was the highest @-@ selling DVD of 2005 , with 17 @.@ 38 million copies sold . The film was also released on UMD for the Sony PSP . It was released on Blu @-@ ray in North America on April 12 , 2011 . The film was also released on VHS on March 15 , 2005 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Despite concerns that the film would receive underwhelming results , the film 's domestic gross was $ 70 @,@ 467 @,@ 623 in its opening weekend from 7 @,@ 600 screens at 3 @,@ 933 theaters , averaging $ 17 @,@ 917 per theater or $ 9 @,@ 272 per screen , the highest opening weekend gross for a Pixar film ( the record was later broken in 2010 by Toy Story 3 , with $ 110 @,@ 307 @,@ 189 ) , the highest November opening weekend for a Disney film ( the record was broken in 2013 by Thor : The Dark World with $ 85 @.@ 7 million ) , the highest @-@ opening weekend for a non @-@ sequel animated feature ( the record was broken in 2007 by The Simpsons Movie , with $ 74 @,@ 036 @,@ 787 ) , and the highest opening weekend for a non @-@ franchise @-@ based film for just over five years when Avatar opened with $ 77 @,@ 025 @,@ 481 . The film was also number 1 in its second weekend , grossing another $ 50 @,@ 251 @,@ 359 , dropping just 29 percent , and easily out @-@ grossing new animated opener The Polar Express . The film ultimately grossed $ 261 @,@ 441 @,@ 092 , as the sixth highest @-@ grossing Pixar film behind Toy Story 3 ( $ 415 @.@ 0 million ) , Finding Nemo ( $ 380 @.@ 8 million ) , Up ( $ 293 @.@ 0 million ) , Monsters , Inc . ( $ 289 @.@ 9 million ) , and Monsters University ( $ 268 @.@ 5 million ) and the fifth highest @-@ grossing film of 2004 . Worldwide , the film grossed $ 631 @,@ 442 @,@ 092 , is the fifth highest @-@ grossing Pixar film behind Toy Story 3 ( $ 1 @.@ 063 billion ) , Finding Nemo ( $ 936 @.@ 7 million ) , Monsters University ( $ 743 @.@ 6 million ) and Up ( $ 731 @.@ 3 million ) , and ranked fourth for 2004 . It is also the second highest @-@ grossing 2004 animated film behind Shrek 2 ( $ 919 @.@ 8 million ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received a 97 % approval rating at review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes , which , as of October 2015 , makes it the 14th highest @-@ rated animated film of all time . The site 's consensus reads " Bringing loads of wit and tons of fun to the animated superhero genre , The Incredibles easily lives up to its name . " Metacritic , another review aggregator , indicates the film was met with " universal acclaim " , garnering a score of 90 / 100 . 
 Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times give the film three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four , writing that the film " alternates breakneck action with satire of suburban sitcom life " and is " another example of Pixar 's mastery of popular animation . " Peter Travers of Rolling Stone also gave the film three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars , calling it " one of the year 's best " and saying that it " doesn 't ring cartoonish , it rings true . " Giving the film three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars as well , People magazine found that The Incredibles " boasts a strong , entertaining story and a truckload of savvy comic touches . " 
 Conversely , Eleanor Ringel Gillespie of The Atlanta Journal @-@ Constitution was bored by the film 's " recurring pastiches of earlier action films " , concluding that " the Pixar whizzes do what they do excellently ; you just wish they were doing something else . " Similarly , Jessica Winter of The Village Voice criticized the film for " playing as a standard summer action film " , despite being released in early @-@ November . Her review , titled as " Full Metal Racket , " noted that The Incredibles " announces the studio 's arrival in the vast yet overcrowded Hollywood lot of eardrum @-@ bashing , metal @-@ crunching action sludge . " 
 Travers also named The Incredibles as # 6 on his list of the decade 's best films , writing " Of all the Pixar miracles studded through the decade , The Incredibles still delights me the most . It 's not every toon that deals with midlife crisis , marital dysfunction , child neglect , impotence fears , fashion faux pas , and existential angst . " The National Review Online named The Incredibles No. 2 on its list of the 25 best conservative movies of the last 25 years , saying that it " celebrates marriage , courage , responsibility , and high achievement . " Entertainment Weekly named the film No. 25 on its list of the 25 greatest action films ever and No. 7 on its list of the 20 best animated movies ever . IGN ranked the film as the third favorite animated film of all time in a list published in 2010 . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film won the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature , beating two DreamWorks films , Shrek 2 and Shark Tale , as well as Best Sound Editing at the 77th Academy Awards . It also received nominations for Best Original Screenplay ( for writer / director Brad Bird ) and Best Sound Mixing ( Randy Thom , Gary Rizzo and Doc Kane ) . It was Pixar 's first feature film to win multiple Oscars , followed in 2010 by Up . Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal called The Incredibles the year 's best picture . Premiere magazine released a cross @-@ section of all the top critics in America and The Incredibles placed at number three , whereas review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes cross @-@ referenced reviews that suggested it was its year 's highest @-@ rated film . 
 The film also received the 2004 Annie Award for Best Animated Feature and the 2005 Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Long Form , and it was nominated for the 2004 Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Musical or Comedy . It also won the Saturn Award for Best Animated Film . The American Film Institute nominated The Incredibles for its Top 10 Animated Films list . 
 = = Merchandising = = 
 Several companies released promotional products related to the film . Dark Horse Comics released a limited series of comic books based on the film . Kellogg 's released an Incredibles @-@ themed cereal , as well as promotional Pop @-@ Tarts and fruit snacks , all proclaiming an " <unk> Blast " of flavor . Pringles included potato chips featuring the superheroes and quotes from the film . Furthermore , in the weeks before the film 's opening , there were also promotional tie @-@ ins with SBC Communications ( using Dash to promote the " blazing @-@ fast speed " of its SBC Yahoo ! DSL service ) Tide , Downy , Bounce and McDonald 's . Toy maker Hasbro produced a series of action figures and toys based on the film , although the line was not as successful as the film itself . 
 In Europe , Kinder chocolate eggs contained small plastic toy characters from the film . In Belgium , car manufacturer Opel sold special The Incredibles editions of their cars . In the United Kingdom , Telewest promoted <unk> internet services with branding from the film , including television adverts starring characters from the film . In all merchandising outside of the film itself , Elastigirl is referred to as Mrs. Incredible . This is due to a licensing agreement between Disney · Pixar and DC Comics , who has a character named <unk> @-@ Girl ( a member of the Doom Patrol ) . The DC Comics character is able to grow and shrink at will from microscopic size to thousands of feet tall . 
 In July 2008 , it was announced that a series of comic books based on the film would be published by BOOM ! Studios in collaboration with Disney Publishing by the end of the year . The first miniseries by BOOM ! was The Incredibles : Family Matters by Mark Waid and Marcio Takara , which was published from March to June 2009 , and collected into a trade paperback published in July of that year . An ongoing series written by both Mark Waid and Landry Walker , with art by Marcio Takara and <unk> <unk> , began later that same year , running for sixteen issues before being cancelled in October 2010 . Marvel Comics began a reprint of the series in August 2011 – set to possibly finish the storyline – which was abruptly cancelled , despite the production of scripts and art for a finale . 
 = = Video game = = 
 A video game based on the film was released on the PlayStation 2 , Xbox , GameCube , Game Boy Advance , PC , and Macintosh , as well as on mobile phones . Though based on the film , several key scenes are altered from the original script . A second game , The Incredibles : Rise of the Underminer , was released for the PlayStation 2 , GameCube , Xbox , Game Boy Advance , and Nintendo DS , as well as on Windows and OS X. Taking place immediately after the film , the sequel focuses on Mr. Incredible and Frozone as they battle with the megalomaniacal mole , The Underminer . A third game , The Incredibles : When Danger Calls , was released for Windows and OS X. It is a collection of 10 games and activities for the playable characters to perform . Another game , Kinect Rush : A Disney Pixar Adventure , was released on March 20 , 2012 , for Xbox 360 . It features characters and missions from five Pixar 's films : The Incredibles , Up , Cars , Ratatouille and Toy Story . The Incredibles characters also star in Disney Infinity , which was released in August 2013 . The play @-@ set for The Incredibles is featured in the starter pack . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In 2004 , Disney owned the rights to a follow @-@ up , and announced plans to make sequels for The Incredibles and Finding Nemo without Pixar 's involvement . Those plans were subsequently scrapped . When Disney acquired Pixar in 2006 , the expectation of Disney was that Pixar would create more sequels and bankable franchises . Director Brad Bird stated in 2007 that he was open to the idea of a sequel , if he could come up with an idea superior to the original film : " I have pieces that I think are good , but I don 't have them all together . " 
 During an interview in May 2013 , Bird reiterated his interest in making a sequel : " I have been thinking about it . People think that I have not been , but I have . Because I love those characters and love that world . " He continues , " I am stroking my chin and scratching my head . I have many , many elements that I think would work really well in another Incredibles film , and if I can get ' em to click all together , I would probably wanna do that . " At the Disney shareholders meeting in March 2014 , Disney CEO and chairman Bob Iger confirmed that Pixar is working on a sequel to The Incredibles , with Bird returning as writer . Later that month , Samuel L. Jackson told Digital Spy that he would likely reprise his role as Frozone in the sequel . 
 In April 2015 , Bird revealed to NPR that he had begun writing the screenplay for the sequel . In May 2015 , Bird confirmed that the Incredibles sequel would be his next film following Tomorrowland . He also stated that the film will not reflect trends in the superhero genre since the first film 's release , explaining , " I don 't think that kind of idea stays interesting for very long . For me , the interesting thing was never the superhero part of it . It was more the family dynamic , and how do superhero things play into that . " 
 In August 2015 , the sequel 's logo was revealed at D23 Expo . 
 In October 2015 , Pixar announced the film will be released on June 21 , 2019 . In the same month , Bird confirmed that Michael Giacchino will return to compose the score . 
 = Kingdom Hearts Coded = 
 Kingdom Hearts Coded ( キングダム ハーツ <unk> ) , stylized as Kingdom Hearts coded , is an episodic action role @-@ playing puzzle video game developed and published by Square Enix , in collaboration with Disney Interactive Studios , for mobile phones . Coded was a Japan @-@ only release announced at the 2007 Tokyo Game Show , its Nintendo DS remake entitled Kingdom Hearts Re : coded was released in Japan , North America , Europe , and Australia . A cinematic remake of the game was included in the Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix video game compilation for the PlayStation 3 . 
 The gameplay is centered mostly around puzzle solving , with action @-@ RPG gameplay elements , similar to previous Kingdom Hearts games . Mini @-@ games and platforming are also featured , with three dimensional backgrounds and two dimensional characters . In mid @-@ 2007 , game director Tetsuya Nomura decided to create a Kingdom Hearts spin @-@ off for mobile phones that would have a different gameplay style than previous titles and allow players to explore the game like a playground . The game was originally released in eight parts and one preview to mobile phone gamers from June 2009 to January 2010 . To reach a wider audience , it was remade for the Nintendo DS and released internationally . And after some consideration of a third remake , a movie version of the game was created for the PlayStation version . 
 Kingdom Hearts coded is the fourth installment in the Kingdom Hearts series and takes place after the events of Kingdom Hearts II . Jiminy Cricket 's journal chronicling Sora 's fight against the Heartless and Organization XIII is found to have two secret messages written by persons unknown , and after the journal is digitized for further analysis , the contents become corrupted . This leads king Mickey and his friends to make a digital Sora to enter and repair the journal so that the meaning of the hidden messages can be deciphered . The game received mixed reviews , with critics praising the graphics and gameplay variety , but panning the story , camera and controls . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Kingdom Hearts coded is a puzzle game with action elements mixed into the gameplay , which is similar to the action @-@ RPG style of the previous titles in the series . It also features a similar interface with fight , item , and " magic " in the command window . There are also minigame and platforming elements . The game features a mix of different graphic styles , with three @-@ dimensional backgrounds and two @-@ dimensional characters . The initial trailer showcased the main character , Sora , in dungeons with floating red and black blocks . Battles feature a " debugging " mode to remove the blocks in order to progress towards enemies . Blocks are also used to solve puzzles or reach higher ground . 
 Kingdom Hearts Re : coded has an added system to incorporate multiplayer experiences called " tag mode " . If other Nintendo DS players are nearby , they do not need to be playing the game and they will be registered in the game as " ghosts " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The game takes place after the events of Kingdom Hearts II and follows the story of Jiminy Cricket , Mickey Mouse , Donald Duck and Goofy in Disney Castle . In the game , players progress through a series of levels which are virtual representations of worlds contained within the digitized version of Jiminy 's journal from the first Kingdom Hearts game , and are arranged according to the order in which Sora visited the worlds originally in Kingdom Hearts . These virtual worlds are based on various locales from many Disney animated films as well as original worlds seen in the first game of the series , including Destiny Islands , Traverse Town , Wonderland from Alice in Wonderland , Olympus Coliseum from Hercules , Agrabah from Aladdin ; and Hollow Bastion . Castle Oblivion from Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories also returns as the game 's final level . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The main protagonist and sole player character of the game is an artificially intelligent virtual avatar of Sora , occasionally referred to in @-@ game as " Data @-@ Sora " , created from the data from Jiminy 's journal entries . Because the game 's setting is based on the first game , Data @-@ Sora resembles the original Sora in his attire from the same game . Three other original Kingdom Hearts characters — Riku , Naminé , and Roxas — similarly appear as virtual avatars of themselves . Like previous Kingdom Hearts titles , coded features numerous Disney and Final Fantasy characters who have appeared in the first game . Some characters include King Mickey , Pluto , and Jiminy Cricket , as well as Donald Duck and Goofy , who briefly reprise their roles as computer @-@ controlled partners of Sora in one of the game 's levels . The main antagonists of the game are software bugs that corrupt the data of Jiminy 's journal , which take the form of red @-@ and @-@ black blocks and Heartless that Sora had encountered in the first game . Other antagonists include Maleficent and Pete , who return in a continuation of their roles from previous games . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Jiminy Cricket organizes his journals chronicling Sora 's journeys when he discovers a line he does not remember writing : " We must return to free them from their torment " ( rewritten as " Their hurting will be mended when you return to end it " in Re : coded ) . King Mickey digitizes the contents of the journal to investigate this message , only to find the datascape has been corrupted with bugs , which take the form of red @-@ and @-@ black blocks and Heartless . Mickey creates a virtual Sora named " Data @-@ Sora " to guide him through the datascape 's multiple worlds and debug the journal by destroying the blocks and digitized Heartless that appear . 
 While this happens , Mickey , Donald , Goofy , and Jiminy are imported into the datascape by an avatar of the journal 's uncorrupted data , which takes the form of a virtual Riku , to better assist Data @-@ Sora in debugging the journal . They discover that Pete and Maleficent have also entered the datascape to use it in their latest attempt at world domination . After Data @-@ Sora has made significant headway into his mission , Maleficent destroys his Keyblade and kidnaps Data @-@ Riku , but he continues through the datascape with the help of Donald and Goofy until he regains the ability to conjure the Keyblade . He then confronts Pete at the top of Hollow Bastion . 
 When he proves unable to defeat Data @-@ Sora himself , Pete infects Data @-@ Riku 's code with bugs and forces him to fight , putting the Datascape in danger of being totally corrupted . Seeing no alternative , Data @-@ Sora chooses to debug Data @-@ Riku from inside , an act which will cause the Datascape to reset if he succeeds , wiping his memories . The debugging process also activates the bug responsible for the data 's corruption , which takes the form of Sora 's Heartless . Data @-@ Sora destroys the bug while Mickey and the others are returned to their world by Data @-@ Riku before the reset occurs . In a scene exclusive to HD 2 @.@ 5 ReMix , after Maleficent and Pete take their leave , Maleficent speaks with Pete about the Book of Prophecies , an ancient artifact capable of transcribing events that have yet to take place and even conjuring them , including entire worlds , and resolves to find it , believing it may hold a connection with the Datascape and the journal . 
 With the journal debugged , Data @-@ Riku uncovers extra data that contains the secret to the journal 's message . Mickey guides the reset Data @-@ Sora to the extra world where he is tested by a virtual Roxas to endure the pain of having forgotten his friends as a result of being reset . Data @-@ Sora defeats Data @-@ Roxas and is allowed access to the deepest portion of Castle Oblivion . There he and Mickey encounter a virtual Naminé , who reveals the real Naminé as the one who left the message after discovering a set of memories relating to the people tied to the real Sora 's heart — Roxas , Axel , Xion , Terra , Aqua , and Ventus — while restoring his lost memories ; the bugs are also revealed to have been an unintentional side effect of her message . Before disappearing , Data @-@ Naminé explains that it is the real Sora 's duty to save these people . Mickey relays this message to Sora through the bottled letter shown at the end of Kingdom Hearts II . 
 In a secret ending exclusive to Re : coded , Mickey and Yen Sid discuss the location of Terra , Aqua , and Ventus . During their conversation , however , Yen Sid reveals that the destruction of Xehanort 's Heartless and Nobody has brought about the eventual return of Master Xehanort . To prepare for this new threat , Yen Sid orders Mickey to bring Sora and Riku to him , intending to examine them for the Mark of Mastery . In a second secret ending exclusive to Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , a resurrected Braig meets with the time @-@ traveling Young Xehanort . With the plot to summon the thirteen incarnations of Xehanort to gather for Master Xehanort 's own reconstruction already underway , Braig and Young Xehanort discuss the latter 's eventual inheritance of a Keyblade from his elder self . Braig surmises the entire plan relates to the Keyblade War , and debates which of the reconstructed members of Organization XIII will be the " poor soul " he chooses for his own unknown agenda . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 Kingdom Hearts coded consists of eight episodes , released monthly between June 2009 and January 2010 , as well as a preview episode released November 2008 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In mid @-@ 2007 , Nomura mentioned a desire to create a spin @-@ off Kingdom Hearts game on a mobile platform and wanted it to play slightly different than other titles in the series . The game 's concept was devised by Nomura , who wanted to make the game feel like a " playground " for fans . Tabata originally thought the plan was terrible , but still interesting . 
 The story was initially supposed to be " fluid " and did not fit into the chronology of the Kingdom Hearts series , but later developers tied the games final chapters into Birth by Sleep and 358 / 2 Days . The development team planned to make use of mobile phones communication abilities to facilitate interaction between players . Coded was developed with 3D and 2D graphics to have the game available on a range of mobile phones for distribution overseas . The game was designed around hardware that was more powerful than any yet available , like Final Fantasy Agito , but developer were not as aggressive with this boundary @-@ pushing with Coded to help it spread to overseas markets where mobile phones were not very powerful in terms of hardware . Early screenshots showed the game in a wide screen format , based on the idea that more future models will feature a swivel screen . Few mobile phones , however , were able to support the games technical specifications , so the planned expansion to other Japanese phone carriers and to the United States were not possible . 
 It was announced alongside Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep and Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days at the Tokyo Game Show on September 20 , 2007 , where a trailer was shown in a photo @-@ prohibited theater . New trailers were shown at the 2008 Jump Festa in December 2007 and the DKΣ3713 Private party in August 2008 . Playable demonstrations , as well as new trailers , were available at the 2008 Tokyo Game Show in October 2008 and the 2009 Jump Festa in December 2008 . Early trailers highlighted coded 's gameplay , while later ones focused more on the game 's story , which would fill in some plotholes present in the first Kingdom Hearts game . 
 Coded was first released pre @-@ installed on the Docomo <unk> Series " P @-@ 01A " mobile phone . Because many mobile games offer free content , Nomura planned to try a new business model from Square Enix 's usual practice in order to lower barriers to entry . Included one the phone was an online mobile phone portal called Kingdom Hearts Mobile which will allow users to create avatars and play minigames . As mobile phone technology improved , the development team planned on adding online gameplay . The game was discontinued for download on Japanese mobile phones on April 30 , 2013 . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts Re : coded = = = 
 In May 2010 , the new English voice actor for Jiminy Cricket , Phil Snyder , who took over the role after the death of Jiminy 's former voice actor Eddie Carroll , wrote on his official website that he was recording his first voice work for the game Kingdom Hearts Re : coded ; it was speculated to be a remake of Coded in the same way Kingdom Hearts Re : Chain of Memories brought Kingdom Hearts : Chain of Memories to the PlayStation 2 . However , it remained unconfirmed until Re : coded was presented at E3 2010 . 
 Game director Tetsuya Nomura wanted to re @-@ release Kingdom Hearts : coded , and considered releasing the game on the Wii though the <unk> virtual game store , which would then allow players to download the game in chapters just like the mobile phone original . Nomura 's prime reason for wanting to re @-@ release the game was to reach a broader audience however , so the Nintendo DS , being the most popular portable video game system in the world and in America and Europe , was chosen . The development team originally planned on simply re @-@ releasing the game , but after they selected software developer h.a.n.d. , who had done an " excellent " conversion of Kingdom Hearts 358 / 2 Days , they began to consider a remake . At first , Nomura asked for an " as is " recreation of the original game , and when the game cartridge was still not full , he asked for a full 3D remake . Development took almost a year , and <unk> told Nomura that the task was " nearly impossible " . The scale of the game grew so large that the Square Enix team in Osaka that had worked on Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep was brought in to assist . 
 The lower screen on the Nintendo DS was used for the gameplay panel like Kingdom Hearts : 358 / 2 Days . The gameplay mechanics of the game were completely changed from the original : the lack of an analogue control stick on the Nintendo DS was a " challenge " according to Nomura , leading to a more simplified combat system and mechanics that borrowed from Birth by Sleep . The story of the remake did not change , although more scenes were added , including a new secret movie and a few hints about the then @-@ unreleased Kingdom Hearts 3D : Dream Drop Distance . Gameplay elements from other titles in the series were also used , including the leveling system from 358 / 2 Days , and the random encounter system from Kingdom Hearts Mobile . The game was released in Japan on October 7 , 2010 , in North America on January 11 , 2011 and Europe on January 14 , 2011 . 
 = = = Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix = = = 
 In the credits of HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix , clips of Kingdom Hearts Re : coded were shown , hinting at its inclusion in another collection . On October 14 , 2013 , Square Enix announced that Re : coded would be part of the Kingdom Hearts HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix collection , released exclusively on the PlayStation 3 . Due to the games touch screen use on the Nintendo DS , console conversion was ruled out as it would necessitate a full remake . Two additional hours of cinematics were created for the game to cover the entire story and show the games connections to other Kingdom Hearts titles . The collection features the game as HD cinematics , much like 358 / 2 Days was in the HD 1 @.@ 5 Remix collection . The collection also includes both Kingdom Hearts II Final Mix and Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep Final Mix in HD and trophy support . Additional events occur in the cinematic scenes not seen in the original , with new voice acting , orchestrated audio , and including new battle scenes and a scene that ties Re : coded and Dream Drop Distance together . The collection was released in Japan on October 2 , 2014 , North America on December 2 , 2014 , Australia on December 4 , 2014 , and Europe on December 5 , 2014 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Prior to Coded 's release , Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com praised the game 's graphics and scope . He stated the graphics were comparable to those of the PlayStation Portable and commented that coded was a sign of mobile games turning into " full @-@ fledged " games . 1UP.com 's Vernon Hastings commented that the game deserved the attention of video game enthusiasts , and praised its features : the themes and the online mobile phone portal . 
 Kingdom Hearts Re : coded received mixed reviews . IGN praised the gameplay variety and graphics , but criticized the story and platforming . GameSpot said that " <unk> platforming and a tepid narrative mar this journey into classic Kingdom Hearts realms . " Game Informer called the game " The most skip @-@ worthy entry in the series " . 1UP.com called it " one of the best remakes yet " . Nintendo Power said it was " the best ' Kingdom Hearts ' game to yet grace a Nintendo platform . " Official Nintendo Magazine stated that " While it may suffer from some unforgivable camera problems , it is a decent game for Kingdom Hearts fans and will keep them entertained until Dream Drop Distance comes out " . 
 VentureBeat reviewed the HD 2 @.@ 5 Remix , and called the Re : coded part of the game collection as a long and not particularly interesting retread of plot points from the original Kingdom Hearts , further complicated by elements added from other games and containing many complex subplots . Game Revolution called the movie " boring " , as the cut scenes were intended to fill in between sections of gameplay and never as a film unto itself . 
 = John Olver = 
 John Walter Olver ( born September 3 , 1936 ) is an American politician who was the U.S. Representative for Massachusetts 's 1st congressional district from 1991 to 2013 . Raised on a farm in Pennsylvania , Olver graduated from college at the age of 18 and went on to earn a Ph.D. in chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology , and later taught chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Amherst for eight years . 
 He served in both chambers of the Massachusetts General Court , being elected to the Massachusetts House of Representatives in 1968 , and the Massachusetts Senate in 1972 . He ran in a 1991 special election to succeed 17 @-@ term Congressman Silvio O. Conte , who died in office . He was the first Democrat to ever represent the 1st congressional district . 
 Olver announced that he would not seek re @-@ election in 2012 , and retired at the end of his eleventh term in Congress after his district was dismantled in redistricting . 
 = = Early life , education , and career = = 
 Olver was born on September 3 , 1936 in Honesdale , Pennsylvania , the son of Helen Marguerite ( née <unk> ) and Thomas Horace Olver . His paternal grandparents were of English descent and his maternal grandparents were German . Olver grew up on his father 's farm , where the two tended cows , while his mother ran a boarding house which served families from Philadelphia and New York . Olver graduated from high school when he was 15 and enrolled in Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute , where he earned a Bachelor of Science in chemistry at the age of 18 . After earning his undergraduate degree , Olver went on to earn a Master of Science in chemistry from Tufts University in 1956 , and a Doctor of Philosophy in chemistry from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1961 . 
 Olver taught chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Amherst for eight years , and later resigned to pursue a career in politics . He served two terms as a member of the Massachusetts House of Representatives from January 1 , 1969 , to January 3 , 1973 . He later served for nine terms in the Massachusetts Senate from January 3 , 1973 , until his resignation in 1991 to serve in the U.S. House of Representatives . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 On February 18 , 1991 , Congressman Silvio Conte died one month after taking office for his 17th term . That June , Olver , who had been sworn in for his 10th term in the state Senate a few months earlier , in January 1991 , narrowly defeated Republican Steven Pierce in a special election for the seat , becoming the first Democrat to win the seat since it changed from being the 13th district in 1893 . Olver resigned from the state Senate on June 15 and was sworn in June 18 . 
 Olver won election to a full term in 1992 . In 1994 , the year which Republican took control of the House for the first time in 40 years , Olver ran unopposed . In 1996 , he defeated State Senator and future Lieutenant and Acting Governor Jane Swift by a 53 % to 47 % margin . After 1996 , Olver continually won re @-@ election with high margins above 60 % . 
 On October 26 , 2011 Olver announced he would not seek re @-@ election in 2012 , clearing the way for any potential Democratic primaries due to Massachusetts losing a congressional seat after the 2010 United States Census . His district had been eliminated in redistricting . The bulk of his former territory had been merged with the 2nd district of fellow Democrat Richard Neal , while his home in Amherst was drawn into the 2nd District ( the old 3rd District ) of fellow Democrat Jim McGovern . 
 = = = Tenure = = = 
 CQ 's Politics in America described Olver as " a staunch liberal who prefers to yield the spotlight to other similarly ideological members . " Olver has consistently high rankings from the progressive lobbying group Americans for Democratic Action , and consistently low rankings from its conservative counterpart the American Conservative Union . 
 As a superdelegate to the 2008 Democratic National Convention , Olver endorsed future President Barack Obama . In a tribute to an outgoing Olver and Barney Frank , Ed Markey remarked unlike other elected officials who embraced superficial positions to curry public favor , the two were " happy to tell you [ they ] disagree with you " if they believed so . 
 Foreign policy 
 Olver has been a staunch opponent of the United States involvement in Iraq , and opposed a United States military presence in Iraq since the 2002 authorization for the use of force in Iraq . Olver has advocated for the removal of U.S. troops from Iraq , and has consistently voted against proposals to increase funding for military operations and increased deployment . Olver stated that he believes that the United States should seek out a political solution in cooperation with the states neighboring Iraq , such as Iran and Syria , rather than pursuing a strategy based primarily on military means in order to create a stable and democratic Iraq . 
 Olver has been critical of the United States lack of involvement regarding the genocide in Darfur . Olver was one of five members of Congress arrested April 28 , 2006 after protesting the genocide outside the Sudanese Embassy . Olver was arrested again in front of the Sudanese Embassy during a protest in 2012 along with other members of Congress and actor George Clooney . 
 Domestic policy 
 Olver was one of thirty @-@ one House Representatives who voted to not count the electoral votes from Ohio in the 2004 presidential election , which would have given the presidency to John Kerry . 
 Olver co @-@ sponsored H.R. 676 which would introduce a universal health insurance program with single @-@ payer financing . In addition to supporting different pieces of healthcare reform legislation in the House , Olver has also strongly supported allowing federal funds related to health care programs to fund abortion operations . In addition to supporting the inclusion of coverage for abortions in healthcare , Olver has consistently supported pro @-@ choice legislation in the House and has received favorable ratings from pro @-@ choice interest groups such as the NARAL Pro @-@ Choice America , which gave Olver a rating of 100 . 
 Olver supports efforts to reduce the number of illegal immigrants entering the United States , but also believes in immigration reform so that qualified immigrants could more easily be granted entrance . Olver also believes that illegal immigrants currently residing in the United States need to be provided with a pathway to citizenship , and that these immigrants should not have to return to their countries of origin before obtaining citizenship . 
 = = = Committee assignments = = = 
 Committee on Appropriations 
 Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development 
 Subcommittee on Homeland Security 
 Subcommittee on Transportation , Housing and Urban Development , and Related Agencies ( Ranking Member ) 
 Party leadership 
 Congressional Progressive Caucus 
 Senior Whip of the Democratic Caucus 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Olver was married to Rose Richardson Olver , a Professor of Psychology and Sexuality , Women 's and Gender Studies at Amherst College , from 1959 until her death in 2014 , and they had one daughter named Martha . He has lived in Amherst , Massachusetts , since 1963 . 
 On May 4 , 2012 a new central bus and rail station in Greenfield , Massachusetts was dedicated in Olver 's honor . The building is the first zero @-@ net @-@ energy transportation facility in the nation , generating heat and power via geothermal wells , photovoltaic panels and sunlight . 
 On October 28 , 2010 Olver was awarded the Soldier On Award presented by the veterans group , Soldier On . This award , created for Soldier On by sculptor Andrew DeVries , recognizes individuals whose leadership and actions have advanced the goal of ending veteran homelessness . 
 = Lufthansa Flight 592 = 
 Lufthansa Flight 592 was a regularly scheduled passenger flight from Frankfurt , Germany to Addis Ababa , Ethiopia that was hijacked on February 11 , 1993 . The Lufthansa @-@ operated Airbus A310 @-@ 300 was hijacked by Nebiu Demeke , an Ethiopian man who forced the pilot to fly to New York City 's John F. Kennedy International Airport . The aircraft landed safely , and the gunman surrendered peacefully and without incident . He was charged with air piracy in United States district court , and was sentenced to 20 years in prison . 
 = = Flight = = 
 Flight 592 was an international flight operated by Deutsche Lufthansa AG between Frankfurt International Airport , Frankfurt , Germany , and Bole International Airport , Addis Ababa , Ethiopia , with a scheduled intermediate stop at Cairo International Airport , Cairo , Egypt . The aircraft was an Airbus A310 @-@ 300 , registration D @-@ <unk> , that had been in service since August 30 , 1991 . The flight carried 94 passengers and 10 crew . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Nebiu <unk> Demeke was born on September 24 , 1972 in Egypt . His father , an economist , was a political prisoner in Ethiopia , and the Demeke family moved to Morocco after his arrest to escape persecution . Nebiu Demeke studied at the American School in Tangiers , Morocco , where he was described as " distracted " and " emotional . " His older sister , <unk> , went to study at Gettysburg College in Gettysburg , Pennsylvania . His older brother , <unk> , enrolled at Macalester College in St. Paul , Minnesota , and his younger brother , Brook , lived in Indiana . Though Demeke attempted to join his siblings in the United States , he was denied a student visa , and was unable to otherwise receive permission to legally enter the country . 
 Six months prior to the hijacking , 20 @-@ year @-@ old Demeke moved to Germany and applied for political asylum . When he withdrew his application for asylum , the German government purchased him a ticket on Flight 592 back to Ethiopia . 
 Demeke entered the airport carrying a starting pistol loaded with blanks . Prior to reaching security , he placed the pistol on his head and covered it with an " Indiana Jones " -style fedora . When it came time to pass through the metal @-@ detector , he pinched the top of the hat and placed both it and the hidden pistol on a table . He retrieved both prior to boarding the plane . 
 = = Hijacking = = 
 At Frankfurt Airport , Nebiu Demeke took advantage of the airport security by stuffing a pistol deep into his hat and then placing his hat on a table adjacent to the scanner . The security guards were not as strict as now since the incident took place before 9 / 11 and they allowed Demeke to pass . 
 Approximately 35 minutes into the flight , as the aircraft reached cruising altitude in Austrian airspace , Demeke entered the forward lavatory . He put on a black ski mask and removed his pistol . Leaving the lavatory , he entered the cockpit , which was unlocked . Placing the pistol to the pilot 's head , he said , " If you do not turn west , I 'll shoot you . " 
 Demeke demanded that the aircraft be flown to New York City and demanded political asylum in the United States . After being told that the plane would need to be refueled , Demeke agreed to allow a refueling stop in Hannover , Germany . The aircraft landed at Hannover @-@ <unk> Airport around noon local time , where it was surrounded by law enforcement officials . Demeke remained in the cockpit with the pistol to the pilot 's head , and threatened to begin killing a flight attendant every five minutes . German authorities allowed the plane to depart after Demeke threatened to kill his hostages but promised to surrender peacefully upon reaching the United States . 
 Pilot Gerhard Goebel was able to calm Demeke down during the non @-@ stop flight to New York . Though Demeke kept the pistol pointed at Goebel 's head for the duration of the flight , he removed his ski mask . Goebel later told newspapers that he spent the hours trying to build a rapport with Demeke , who admitted to having spent several months planning the hijacking . Both men agreed that , upon arriving in New York , Goebel would give Demeke his sunglasses in exchange for Demeke 's pistol . 
 The aircraft arrived at John F. Kennedy International Airport at around 4 : 00 pm EDT and taxied to a remote part of the runway . A three @-@ man hostage negotiation team had been assembled in the air traffic control tower . NYPD detective Dominick <unk> spoke with Demeke over the radio , assisted by FBI special agent John Flood and Port Authority detective sergeant Carmine Spano . After 70 minutes of negotiation , Demeke traded his pistol for the pilot 's sunglasses and surrendered peacefully to authorities . All 94 passengers and ten crew were unharmed . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Nebiu Demeke was arrested and charged with air piracy in the United States District Court for the Eastern District of New York in Brooklyn . He was arraigned on February 12 , 1993 ; Judge Allyne Ross ordered him held without bail until his trial . Demeke remained convinced that he would not spend any time in prison and that he would be granted asylum . During the course of his trial , he was twice found to be incompetent to stand trial and was prescribed medication for depression and hallucinations . He represented himself during the course of his four @-@ day trial . He was found guilty in a jury trial after an hour of deliberation , and Judge Sterling Johnson , Jr. sentenced him to prison until 2013 . 
 Germany was criticized severely by the international press for lax security measures in Frankfurt Airport that allowed Demeke to smuggle a pistol on board , and for allowing the hijacked aircraft to leave after refueling in Hannover . Frankfurt Airport , the busiest airport in Europe at the time , had recently come under fire after the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland in 1988 , when it had been alleged that the explosives had been loaded in Frankfurt . Since the 1988 bombing , the Frankfurt airport had performed numerous security reviews and implemented more stringent security procedures . 
 The incident was the first trans @-@ Atlantic hijacking since five Croatian nationalists hijacked TWA Flight 355 on September 10 , 1976 . In that incident , the domestic New York @-@ Chicago flight was forced to fly to Paris , France . 
 In 2012 , the hijacking was mentioned on an episode of the TV show Hostage : Do or Die on the episode " The Last Transatlantic Hijacking " . 
