 Brig. Gen. Orlando B. Willcox ( brigades of Cols . Benjamin C. Christ and Thomas Welsh ) . 
 Brig. Gen. Samuel D. Sturgis ( brigades of Brig. Gens . James Nagle and Edward Ferrero ) . 
 Brig. Gen. Isaac P. Rodman ( brigades of Cols . Harrison S. Fairchild and Edward Harland ) . 
 Kanawha Division , under Col. Eliakim P. Scammon ( brigades of Cols . Hugh Ewing and George Crook ) . 
 The XII Corps , under Maj. Gen. Joseph K. Mansfield , consisted of the divisions of : 
 Brig. Gen. Alpheus S. Williams ( brigades of Brig. Gens . Samuel W. Crawford and George H. Gordon ) . 
 Brig. Gen. George S. Greene ( brigades of Lt. Col. Hector Tyndale , Col. Henry J. <unk> , and Col. William B. Goodrich ) . 
 The Cavalry Division of Brig. Gen. Alfred Pleasonton consisted of the brigades of Maj. Charles J. Whiting and Cols . John F. Farnsworth , Richard H. Rush , Andrew T. McReynolds , and Benjamin F. Davis . 
 = = = Confederate = = = 
 General Lee 's Army of Northern Virginia was organized into two large infantry corps . 
 The First Corps , under Maj. Gen. James Longstreet , consisted of the divisions of : 
 Maj. Gen. Lafayette McLaws ( brigades of Brig. Gens . Joseph B. Kershaw , Howell Cobb , Paul J. Semmes , and William Barksdale ) . 
 Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson ( brigades of Cols . Alfred Cumming , W.A. Parham , and Carnot Posey , and Brig. Gens . Lewis A. Armistead , Roger A. Pryor , and Ambrose R. Wright ) . 
 Brig. Gen. David R. Jones ( brigades of Brig. Gens . Robert A. Toombs , Thomas F. Drayton , Richard B. Garnett , James L. Kemper , and Cols . Joseph T. Walker and George T. Anderson ) . 
 Brig. Gen. John G. Walker ( brigades of Colonel Van H. Manning and Brig. Gen. Robert Ransom , Jr . ) . 
 Brig. Gen. John Bell Hood ( brigades of Cols . William T. Wofford and Evander M. Law ) . 
 Independent brigade under Brig. Gen. Nathan G. " Shanks " Evans . 
 The Second Corps , under Maj. Gen. Thomas J. " Stonewall " Jackson , consisted of the divisions of : 
 Brig. Gen. Alexander R. Lawton ( brigades of Col. Marcellus Douglass , Brig. Gen. Jubal A. Early , Col. James A. Walker , and Brig. Gen. Harry T. Hays ) . 
 Maj. Gen. A.P. Hill ( the Light Division — brigades of Brig. Gens . Lawrence O 'Bryan Branch , Maxcy Gregg , James J. Archer , and William Dorsey Pender , and Cols . John M. Brockenbrough and Edward L. Thomas ) . 
 Brig. Gen. John R. Jones ( brigades of Cols . A.J. Grigsby , E. T. H. Warren , Bradley T. Johnson , and Brig. Gen. William E. Starke ) . 
 Maj. Gen. D.H. Hill ( brigades of Brig. Gens . Roswell S. Ripley , Robert E. Rodes , Samuel Garland , Jr . , George B. Anderson , and Col. Alfred H. Colquitt ) . 
 The remaining units were the Cavalry Corps , under Maj. Gen. J.E.B. Stuart , and the reserve artillery , commanded by Brig. Gen. William N. Pendleton . The Second Corps was organized with artillery attached to each division , in contrast to the First Corps , which reserved its artillery at the corps level . 
 = = Prelude to battle = = 
 = = = Disposition of armies = = = 
 Near the town of Sharpsburg , Lee deployed his available forces behind Antietam Creek along a low ridge , starting on September 15 . While it was an effective defensive position , it was not an impregnable one . The terrain provided excellent cover for infantrymen , with rail and stone fences , outcroppings of limestone , and little hollows and swales . The creek to their front was only a minor barrier , ranging from 60 to 100 feet ( 18 – 30 m ) in width , and was fordable in places and crossed by three stone bridges each a mile ( 1 @.@ 5 km ) apart . It was also a precarious position because the Confederate rear was blocked by the Potomac River and only a single crossing point , Boteler 's Ford at Shepherdstown , was nearby should retreat be necessary . ( The ford at Williamsport , Maryland , was 10 miles ( 16 km ) northwest from Sharpsburg and had been used by Jackson in his march to Harpers Ferry . The disposition of Union forces during the battle made it impractical to consider retreating in that direction . ) And on September 15 , the force under Lee 's immediate command consisted of no more than 18 @,@ 000 men , only a third the size of the Federal army . 
 The first two Union divisions arrived on the afternoon of September 15 and the bulk of the remainder of the army late that evening . Although an immediate Union attack on the morning of September 16 would have had an overwhelming advantage in numbers , McClellan 's trademark caution and his belief that Lee had as many as 100 @,@ 000 men at Sharpsburg caused him to delay his attack for a day . This gave the Confederates more time to prepare defensive positions and allowed Longstreet 's corps to arrive from Hagerstown and Jackson 's corps , minus A.P. Hill 's division , to arrive from Harpers Ferry . Jackson defended the left ( northern ) flank , anchored on the Potomac , Longstreet the right ( southern ) flank , anchored on the Antietam , a line that was about 4 miles ( 6 km ) long . ( As the battle progressed and Lee shifted units , these corps boundaries overlapped considerably . ) 
 On the evening of September 16 , McClellan ordered Hooker 's I Corps to cross Antietam Creek and probe the enemy positions . Meade 's division cautiously attacked Hood 's troops near the East Woods . After darkness fell , artillery fire continued as McClellan positioned his troops for the next day 's fighting . McClellan 's plan was to overwhelm the enemy 's left flank . He arrived at this decision because of the configuration of bridges over the Antietam . The lower bridge ( which would soon be named Burnside Bridge ) was dominated by Confederate positions on the bluffs overlooking it . The middle bridge , on the road from Boonsboro , was subject to artillery fire from the heights near Sharpsburg . But the upper bridge was 2 miles ( 3 km ) east of the Confederate guns and could be crossed safely . McClellan planned to commit more than half his army to the assault , starting with two corps , supported by a third , and if necessary a fourth . He intended to launch a simultaneous diversionary attack against the Confederate right with a fifth corps , and he was prepared to strike the center with his reserves if either attack succeeded . The skirmish in the East Woods served to signal McClellan 's intentions to Lee , who prepared his defenses accordingly . He shifted men to his left flank and sent urgent messages to his two commanders who had not yet arrived on the battlefield : Lafayette McLaws with two divisions and A.P. Hill with one division . 
 = = = Terrain and its consequences = = = 
 McClellan 's plans were ill @-@ coordinated and were executed poorly . He issued to each of his subordinate commanders only the orders for his own corps , not general orders describing the entire battle plan . The terrain of the battlefield made it difficult for those commanders to monitor events outside of their sectors , and McClellan 's headquarters were more than a mile in the rear ( at the Philip Pry house , east of the creek ) , making it difficult for him to control the separate corps . Therefore , the battle progressed the next day as essentially three separate , mostly uncoordinated battles : morning in the northern end of the battlefield , midday in the center , and afternoon in the south . This lack of coordination and concentration of McClellan 's forces almost completely nullified the two @-@ to @-@ one advantage the Union enjoyed and allowed Lee to shift his defensive forces to meet each offensive . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Morning phase = = = 
 Location : Northern end of the battlefield 
 = = = = Cornfield = = = = 
 The battle opened at dawn ( about 5 : 30 a.m. ) on September 17 with an attack down the Hagerstown Turnpike by the Union I Corps under Joseph Hooker . Hooker 's objective was the plateau on which sat the Dunker Church , a modest whitewashed building belonging to a local sect of German Baptists . Hooker had approximately 8 @,@ 600 men , little more than the 7 @,@ 700 defenders under Stonewall Jackson , and this slight disparity was more than offset by the Confederates ' strong defensive positions . Abner Doubleday 's division moved on Hooker 's right , James Ricketts 's moved on the left into the East Woods , and George Meade 's Pennsylvania Reserves division deployed in the center and slightly to the rear . Jackson 's defense consisted of the divisions under Alexander Lawton and John R. Jones in line from the West Woods , across the Turnpike , and along the southern end of the Miller Cornfield . Four brigades were held in reserve inside the West Woods . 
 As the first Union men emerged from the North Woods and into the Cornfield , an artillery duel erupted . Confederate fire was from the horse artillery batteries under Jeb Stuart to the west and four batteries under Col. Stephen D. Lee on the high ground across the pike from the Dunker Church to the south . Union return fire was from nine batteries on the ridge behind the North Woods and twenty 20 @-@ pounder Parrott rifles , 2 miles ( 3 km ) east of Antietam Creek . The conflagration caused heavy casualties on both sides and was described by Col. Lee as " artillery Hell . " 
 Seeing the glint of Confederate bayonets concealed in the Cornfield , Hooker halted his infantry and brought up four batteries of artillery , which fired shell and canister over the heads of the Federal infantry , covering the field . All at once , the cornfield exploded into chaos as a savage battle raged through the area . Men beat each other over the head with rifle butts and stabbed each other with bayonets . Officers rode around on their horses swearing and cursing and yelling orders no one could hear in the noise . Rifles became hot and fouled from too much firing . The air was filled with a hail of bullets and shells . 
 Meade 's 1st Brigade of Pennsylvanians , under Brig. Gen. Truman Seymour , began advancing through the East Woods and exchanged fire with Colonel James Walker 's brigade of Alabama , Georgia , and North Carolina troops . As Walker 's men forced Seymour 's back , aided by Lee 's artillery fire , Ricketts 's division entered the Cornfield , also to be torn up by artillery . Brig. Gen. Abram Duryée 's brigade marched directly into volleys from Colonel Marcellus Douglass 's Georgia brigade . Enduring heavy fire from a range of 250 yards ( 230 m ) and gaining no advantage because of a lack of reinforcements , Duryée ordered a withdrawal . 
 The reinforcements that Duryée had expected — brigades under Brig. Gen. George L. Hartsuff and Col. William A. Christian — had difficulties reaching the scene . Hartsuff was wounded by a shell , and Christian dismounted and fled to the rear in terror . When the men were rallied and advanced into the Cornfield , they met the same artillery and infantry fire as their predecessors . As the superior Union numbers began to tell , the Louisiana " Tiger " Brigade under Harry Hays entered the fray and forced the Union men back to the East Woods . The casualties received by the 12th Massachusetts Infantry , 67 % , were the highest of any unit that day . The Tigers were beaten back eventually when the Federals brought up a battery of 3 @-@ inch ordnance rifles and rolled them directly into the Cornfield , point @-@ blank fire that slaughtered the Tigers , who lost 323 of their 500 men . 
 While the Cornfield remained a bloody stalemate , Federal advances a few hundred yards to the west were more successful . Brig. Gen. John Gibbon 's 4th Brigade of Doubleday 's division ( recently named the Iron Brigade ) began advancing down and astride the turnpike , into the cornfield , and in the West Woods , pushing aside Jackson 's men . They were halted by a charge of 1 @,@ 150 men from Starke 's brigade , leveling heavy fire from 30 yards ( 30 m ) away . The Confederate brigade withdrew after being exposed to fierce return fire from the Iron Brigade , and Starke was mortally wounded . The Union advance on the Dunker Church resumed and cut a large gap in Jackson 's defensive line , which teetered near collapse . Although the cost was steep , Hooker 's corps was making steady progress . 
 Confederate reinforcements arrived just after 7 a.m. The divisions under McLaws and Richard H. Anderson arrived following a night march from Harpers Ferry . Around 7 : 15 , General Lee moved George T. Anderson 's Georgia brigade from the right flank of the army to aid Jackson . At 7 a.m. , Hood 's division of 2 @,@ 300 men advanced through the West Woods and pushed the Union troops back through the Cornfield again . The Texans attacked with particular ferocity because as they were called from their reserve position they were forced to interrupt the first hot breakfast they had had in days . They were aided by three brigades of D.H. Hill 's division arriving from the Mumma Farm , southeast of the Cornfield , and by Jubal Early 's brigade , pushing through the West Woods from the Nicodemus Farm , where they had been supporting Jeb Stuart 's horse artillery . Some officers of the Iron Brigade rallied men around the artillery pieces of Battery B , 4th U.S. Artillery , and Gibbon himself saw to it that his previous unit did not lose a single caisson . Hood 's men bore the brunt of the fighting , however , and paid a heavy price — 60 % casualties — but they were able to prevent the defensive line from crumbling and held off the I Corps . When asked by a fellow officer where his division was , Hood replied , " Dead on the field . " 
 Hooker 's men had also paid heavily but without achieving their objectives . After two hours and 2 @,@ 500 casualties , they were back where they started . The Cornfield , an area about 250 yards ( 230 m ) deep and 400 yards ( 400 m ) wide , was a scene of indescribable destruction . It was estimated that the Cornfield changed hands no fewer than 15 times in the course of the morning . Major Rufus R. Dawes , who assumed command of Iron Brigade 's 6th Wisconsin Regiment during the battle , later compared the fighting around the Hagerstown Turnpike with the stone wall at Fredericksburg , Spotsylvania 's " Bloody Angle " , and the slaughter pen of Cold Harbor , insisting that " the Antietam Turnpike surpassed them all in manifest evidence of slaughter . " Hooker called for support from the 7 @,@ 200 men of Mansfield 's XII Corps . 
 Half of Mansfield 's men were raw recruits , and Mansfield was also inexperienced , having taken command only two days before . Although he was a veteran of 40 years ' service , he had never led large numbers of soldiers in combat . Concerned that his men would bolt under fire , he marched them in a formation that was known as " column of companies , closed in mass , " a bunched @-@ up formation in which a regiment was arrayed ten ranks deep instead of the normal two . As his men entered the East Woods , they presented an excellent artillery target , " almost as good a target as a barn . " Mansfield himself was shot in the chest and died the next day . Alpheus Williams assumed temporary command of the XII Corps . 
 The new recruits of Mansfield 's 1st Division made no progress against Hood 's line , which was reinforced by brigades of D.H. Hill 's division under Colquitt and McRae . The 2nd Division of the XII Corps , under George Sears Greene , however , broke through McRae 's men , who fled under the mistaken belief that they were about to be trapped by a flanking attack . This breach of the line forced Hood and his men , outnumbered , to regroup in the West Woods , where they had started the day . Greene was able to reach the Dunker Church , Hooker 's original objective , and drove off Stephen Lee 's batteries . Federal forces held most of the ground to the east of the turnpike . 
 Hooker attempted to gather the scattered remnants of his I Corps to continue the assault , but a Confederate sharpshooter spotted the general 's conspicuous white horse and shot Hooker through the foot . Command of his I Corps fell to General Meade , since Hooker 's senior subordinate , James B. Ricketts , had also been wounded . But with Hooker removed from the field , there was no general left with the authority to rally the men of the I and XII Corps . Greene 's men came under heavy fire from the West Woods and withdrew from the Dunker Church . 
 In an effort to turn the Confederate left flank and relieve the pressure on Mansfield 's men , Sumner 's II Corps was ordered at 7 : 20 a.m. to send two divisions into battle . Sedgwick 's division of 5 @,@ 400 men was the first to ford the Antietam , and they entered the East Woods with the intention of turning left and forcing the Confederates south into the assault of Ambrose Burnside 's IX Corps . But the plan went awry . They became separated from William H. French 's division , and at 9 a.m. Sumner , who was accompanying the division , launched the attack with an unusual battle formation — the three brigades in three long lines , men side @-@ by @-@ side , with only 50 to 70 yards ( 60 m ) separating the lines . They were assaulted first by Confederate artillery and then from three sides by the divisions of Early , Walker , and McLaws , and in less than half an hour Sedgwick 's men were forced to retreat in great disorder to their starting point with over 2 @,@ 200 casualties , including Sedgwick himself , who was taken out of action for several months by a wound . Sumner has been condemned by most historians for his " reckless " attack , his lack of coordination with the I and XII Corps headquarters , losing control of French 's division when he accompanied Sedgwick 's , failing to perform adequate reconnaissance prior to launching his attack , and selecting the unusual battle formation that was so effectively flanked by the Confederate counterattack . Historian M.V. Armstrong 's recent scholarship , however , has determined that Sumner did perform appropriate reconnaissance and his decision to attack where he did was justified by the information available to him . 
 The final actions in the morning phase of the battle were around 10 a.m. , when two regiments of the XII Corps advanced , only to be confronted by the division of John G. Walker , newly arrived from the Confederate right . They fought in the area between the Cornfield in the West Woods , but soon Walker 's men were forced back by two brigades of Greene 's division , and the Federal troops seized some ground in the West Woods . 
 The morning phase ended with casualties on both sides of almost 13 @,@ 000 , including two Union corps commanders . 
 = = = Midday phase = = = 
 Location : Center of the Confederate line 
 = = = = Sunken Road : " Bloody Lane " = = = = 
 By midday , the action had shifted to the center of the Confederate line . Sumner had accompanied the morning attack of Sedgwick 's division , but another of his divisions , under French , lost contact with Sumner and Sedgwick and inexplicably headed south . Eager for an opportunity to see combat , French found skirmishers in his path and ordered his men forward . By this time , Sumner 's aide ( and son ) located French , described the terrible fighting in the West Woods and relayed an order for him to divert Confederate attention by attacking their center . 
 French confronted D.H. Hill 's division . Hill commanded about 2 @,@ 500 men , less than half the number under French , and three of his five brigades had been torn up during the morning combat . This sector of Longstreet 's line was theoretically the weakest . But Hill 's men were in a strong defensive position , atop a gradual ridge , in a sunken road worn down by years of wagon traffic , which formed a natural trench . 
 French launched a series of brigade @-@ sized assaults against Hill 's improvised breastworks at around 9 : 30 a.m. The first brigade to attack , mostly inexperienced troops commanded by Brig. Gen. Max Weber , was quickly cut down by heavy rifle fire ; neither side deployed artillery at this point . The second attack , more raw recruits under Col. Dwight Morris , was also subjected to heavy fire but managed to beat back a counterattack by the Alabama Brigade of Robert Rodes . The third , under Brig. Gen. Nathan Kimball , included three veteran regiments , but they also fell to fire from the sunken road . French 's division suffered 1 @,@ 750 casualties ( of his 5 @,@ 700 men ) in under an hour . 
 Reinforcements were arriving on both sides , and by 10 : 30 a.m. Robert E. Lee sent his final reserve division — some 3 @,@ 400 men under Maj. Gen. Richard H. Anderson — to bolster Hill 's line and extend it to the right , preparing an attack that would envelop French 's left flank . But at the same time , the 4 @,@ 000 men of Maj. Gen. Israel B. Richardson 's division arrived on French 's left . This was the last of Sumner 's three divisions , which had been held up in the rear by McClellan as he organized his reserve forces . Richardson 's fresh troops struck the first blow . 
 Leading off the fourth attack of the day against the sunken road was the Irish Brigade of Brig. Gen. Thomas F. Meagher . As they advanced with emerald green flags snapping in the breeze , a regimental chaplain , Father William Corby , rode back and forth across the front of the formation shouting words of conditional absolution prescribed by the Roman Catholic Church for those who were about to die . ( Corby would later perform a similar service at Gettysburg in 1863 . ) The mostly Irish immigrants lost 540 men to heavy volleys before they were ordered to withdraw . 
 Gen. Richardson personally dispatched the brigade of Brig. Gen. John C. Caldwell into battle around noon ( after being told that Caldwell was in the rear , behind a haystack ) , and finally the tide turned . Anderson 's Confederate division had been little help to the defenders after Gen. Anderson was wounded early in the fighting . Other key leaders were lost as well , including George B. Anderson ( no relation ; Anderson 's successor , Col. Charles C. Tew of the 2nd North Carolina , was killed minutes after assuming command ) and Col. John B. Gordon of the 6th Alabama . ( Gordon received 5 serious wounds in the fight , twice in his right leg , twice in the left arm , and once in the face . He lay unconscious , face down in his cap , and later told colleagues that he should have smothered in his own blood , except for the act of an unidentified Yankee , who had earlier shot a hole in his cap , which allowed the blood to drain . ) Rodes was wounded in the thigh but was still on the field . These losses contributed directly to the confusion of the following events . 
 As Caldwell 's brigade advanced around the right flank of the Confederates , Col. Francis C. Barlow and 350 men of the 61st and 64th New York saw a weak point in the line and seized a knoll commanding the sunken road . This allowed them to get enfilade fire into the Confederate line , turning it into a deadly trap . In attempting to wheel around to meet this threat , a command from Rodes was misunderstood by Lt. Col. James N. Lightfoot , who had succeeded the unconscious John Gordon . Lightfoot ordered his men to about @-@ face and march away , an order that all five regiments of the brigade thought applied to them as well . Confederate troops streamed toward Sharpsburg , their line lost . 
 Richardson 's men were in hot pursuit when massed artillery hastily assembled by Gen. Longstreet drove them back . A counterattack with 200 men led by D.H. Hill got around the Federal left flank near the sunken road , and although they were driven back by a fierce charge of the 5th New Hampshire , this stemmed the collapse of the center . Reluctantly , Richardson ordered his division to fall back to north of the ridge facing the sunken road . His division lost about 1 @,@ 000 men . Col. Barlow was severely wounded , and Richardson mortally wounded . Winfield S. Hancock assumed division command . Although Hancock would have an excellent future reputation as an aggressive division and corps commander , the unexpected change of command sapped the momentum of the Federal advance . 
 The carnage from 9 : 30 a.m. to 1 : 00 p.m. on the sunken road gave it the name Bloody Lane , leaving about 5 @,@ 600 casualties ( Union 3 @,@ 000 , Confederate 2 @,@ 600 ) along the 800 @-@ yard ( 700 m ) road . And yet a great opportunity presented itself . If this broken sector of the Confederate line were exploited , Lee 's army would have been divided in half and possibly defeated . There were ample forces available to do so . There was a reserve of 3 @,@ 500 cavalry and the 10 @,@ 300 infantrymen of Gen. Porter 's V Corps , waiting near the middle bridge , a mile away . The VI Corps had just arrived with 12 @,@ 000 men . Maj. Gen. William B. Franklin of the VI Corps was ready to exploit this breakthrough , but Sumner , the senior corps commander , ordered him not to advance . Franklin appealed to McClellan , who left his headquarters in the rear to hear both arguments but backed Sumner 's decision , ordering Franklin and Hancock to hold their positions . 
 Later in the day , the commander of the other reserve unit near the center , the V Corps , Maj. Gen. Fitz John Porter , heard recommendations from Maj. Gen. George Sykes , commanding his 2nd Division , that another attack be made in the center , an idea that intrigued McClellan . However , Porter is said to have told McClellan , " Remember , General , I command the last reserve of the last Army of the Republic . " McClellan demurred and another opportunity was lost . 
 = = = Afternoon phase = = = 
 Location : <unk> end of the battlefield 
 = = = = " Burnside 's Bridge " = = = = 
 The action moved to the southern end of the battlefield . McClellan 's plan called for Maj. Gen. Ambrose Burnside and the IX Corps to conduct a diversionary attack in support of Hooker 's I Corps , hoping to draw Confederate attention away from the intended main attack in the north . However , Burnside was instructed to wait for explicit orders before launching his attack , and those orders did not reach him until 10 a.m. Burnside was strangely passive during preparations for the battle . He was disgruntled that McClellan had abandoned the previous arrangement of " wing " commanders reporting to him . Previously , Burnside had commanded a wing that included both the I and IX Corps and now he was responsible only for the IX Corps . Implicitly refusing to give up his higher authority , Burnside treated first Maj. Gen. Jesse L. Reno ( killed at South Mountain ) and then Brig. Gen. Jacob D. Cox of the Kanawha Division as the corps commander , funneling orders to the corps through him . 
 Burnside had four divisions ( 12 @,@ 500 troops ) and 50 guns east of Antietam Creek . Facing him was a force that had been greatly depleted by Lee 's movement of units to bolster the Confederate left flank . At dawn , the divisions of Brig. Gens . David R. Jones and John G. Walker stood in defense , but by 10 a.m. all of Walker 's men and Col. George T. Anderson 's Georgia brigade had been removed . Jones had only about 3 @,@ 000 men and 12 guns available to meet Burnside . Four thin brigades guarded the ridges near Sharpsburg , primarily a low plateau known as Cemetery Hill . The remaining 400 men — the 2nd and 20th Georgia regiments , under the command of Brig. Gen. Robert Toombs , with two artillery batteries — defended Rohrbach 's Bridge , a three @-@ span , 125 @-@ foot ( 38 m ) stone structure that was the southernmost crossing of the Antietam . It would become known to history as Burnside 's Bridge because of the notoriety of the coming battle . The bridge was a difficult objective . The road leading to it ran parallel to the creek and was exposed to enemy fire . The bridge was dominated by a 100 @-@ foot ( 30 m ) high wooded bluff on the west bank , strewn with boulders from an old quarry , making infantry and sharpshooter fire from good covered positions a dangerous impediment to crossing . 
 Antietam Creek in this sector was seldom more than 50 feet ( 15 m ) wide , and several stretches were only waist deep and out of Confederate range . Burnside has been widely criticized for ignoring this fact , starting with derision from Confederate staff officer Henry Kyd Douglas . However , the commanding terrain across the sometimes shallow creek made crossing the water a comparatively easy part of a difficult problem . Burnside concentrated his plan instead on storming the bridge while simultaneously crossing a ford McClellan 's engineers had identified a half mile ( 1 km ) downstream , but when Burnside 's men reached it , they found the banks too high to negotiate . While Col. George Crook 's Ohio brigade prepared to attack the bridge with the support of Brig. Gen. Samuel Sturgis 's division , the rest of the Kanawha Division and Brig. Gen. Isaac Rodman 's division struggled through thick brush trying to locate Snavely 's Ford , 2 miles ( 3 km ) downstream , intending to flank the Confederates . 
 Crook 's assault on the bridge was led by skirmishers from the 11th Connecticut , who were ordered to clear the bridge for the Ohioans to cross and assault the bluff . After receiving punishing fire for 15 minutes , the Connecticut men withdrew with 139 casualties , one @-@ third of their strength , including their commander , Col. Henry W. Kingsbury , who was fatally wounded . Crook 's main assault went awry when his unfamiliarity with the terrain caused his men to reach the creek a quarter mile ( 400 m ) upstream from the bridge , where they exchanged volleys with Confederate skirmishers for the next few hours . 
 While Rodman 's division was out of touch , slogging toward Snavely 's Ford , Burnside and Cox directed a second assault at the bridge by one of Sturgis 's brigades , led by the 2nd Maryland and 6th New Hampshire . They also fell prey to the Confederate sharpshooters and artillery , and their attack fell apart . By this time it was noon , and McClellan was losing patience . He sent a succession of couriers to motivate Burnside to move forward . He ordered one aide , " Tell him if it costs 10 @,@ 000 men he must go now . " He increased the pressure by sending his inspector general , Col. Delos B. Sackett , to confront Burnside , who reacted indignantly : " McClellan appears to think I am not trying my best to carry this bridge ; you are the third or fourth one who has been to me this morning with similar orders . " 
 The third attempt to take the bridge was at 12 : 30 p.m. by Sturgis 's other brigade , commanded by Brig. Gen. Edward Ferrero . It was led by the 51st New York and the 51st Pennsylvania , who , with adequate artillery support and a promise that a recently canceled whiskey ration would be restored if they were successful , charged downhill and took up positions on the east bank . Maneuvering a captured light howitzer into position , they fired double canister down the bridge and got within 25 yards ( 23 m ) of the enemy . By 1 p.m. , Confederate ammunition was running low , and word reached Toombs that Rodman 's men were crossing Snavely 's Ford on their flank . He ordered a withdrawal . His Georgians had cost the Federals more than 500 casualties , giving up fewer than 160 themselves . And they had stalled Burnside 's assault on the southern flank for more than three hours . 
 Burnside 's assault stalled again on its own . His officers had neglected to transport ammunition across the bridge , which was itself becoming a bottleneck for soldiers , artillery , and wagons . This represented another two @-@ hour delay . Gen. Lee used this time to bolster his right flank . He ordered up every available artillery unit , although he made no attempt to strengthen D.R. Jones 's badly outnumbered force with infantry units from the left . Instead , he counted on the arrival of A.P. Hill 's Light Division , currently embarked on an exhausting 17 mile ( 27 km ) march from Harpers Ferry . By 2 p.m. , Hill 's men had reached Boteler 's Ford , and Hill was able to confer with the relieved Lee at 2 : 30 , who ordered him to bring up his men to the right of Jones . 
 The Federals were completely unaware that 3 @,@ 000 new men would be facing them . Burnside 's plan was to move around the weakened Confederate right flank , converge on Sharpsburg , and cut Lee 's army off from Boteler 's Ford , their only escape route across the Potomac . At 3 p.m. , Burnside left Sturgis 's division in reserve on the west bank and moved west with over 8 @,@ 000 troops ( most of them fresh ) and 22 guns for close support . 
 An initial assault led by the 79th New York " Cameron Highlanders " succeeded against Jones 's outnumbered division , which was pushed back past Cemetery Hill and to within 200 yards ( 200 m ) of Sharpsburg . Farther to the left , Rodman 's division advanced toward Harpers Ferry Road . Its lead brigade , under Col. Harrison Fairchild , containing several colorful Zouaves of the 9th New York , commanded by Col. Rush Hawkins , came under heavy shellfire from a dozen enemy guns mounted on a ridge to their front , but they kept pushing forward . There was panic in the streets of Sharpsburg , clogged with retreating Confederates . Of the five brigades in Jones 's division , only Toombs 's brigade was still intact , but he had only 700 men . 
 A. P. Hill 's division arrived at 3 : 30 p.m. Hill divided his column , with two brigades moving southeast to guard his flank and the other three , about 2 @,@ 000 men , moving to the right of Toombs 's brigade and preparing for a counterattack . At 3 : 40 p.m. , Brig. Gen. Maxcy Gregg 's brigade of South Carolinians attacked the 16th Connecticut on Rodman 's left flank in the cornfield of farmer John Otto . The Connecticut men had been in service for only three weeks , and their line disintegrated with 185 casualties . The 4th Rhode Island came up on the right , but they had poor visibility amid the high stalks of corn , and they were disoriented because many of the Confederates were wearing Union uniforms captured at Harpers Ferry . They also broke and ran , leaving the 8th Connecticut far out in advance and isolated . They were enveloped and driven down the hills toward Antietam Creek . A counterattack by regiments from the Kanawha Division fell short . 
 The IX Corps had suffered casualties of about 20 % but still possessed twice the number of Confederates confronting them . Unnerved by the collapse of his flank , Burnside ordered his men all the way back to the west bank of the Antietam , where he urgently requested more men and guns . McClellan was able to provide just one battery . He said , " I can do nothing more . I have no infantry . " In fact , however , McClellan had two fresh corps in reserve , Porter 's V and Franklin 's VI , but he was too cautious , concerned he was greatly outnumbered and that a massive counterstrike by Lee was imminent . Burnside 's men spent the rest of the day guarding the bridge they had suffered so much to capture . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 = = = = Bloodiest day in American military history = = = = 
 The battle was over by 5 : 30 p.m. Losses for the day were heavy on both sides . The Union had 12 @,@ 410 casualties with 2 @,@ 108 dead . Confederate casualties were 10 @,@ 316 with 1 @,@ 546 dead . This represented 25 % of the Federal force and 31 % of the Confederate . Of the other casualties , 1 @,@ 910 Union and 1 @,@ 550 Confederate troops died of their wounds soon after the battle , while 225 Union and 306 Confederate troops listed as missing were later confirmed as dead . The fighting on September 17 , 1862 , therefore killed 7 @,@ 650 American soldiers . More Americans died in battle on September 17 , 1862 , than on any other day in the nation 's military history . Several generals died as a result of the battle , including Maj. Gens . Joseph K. Mansfield and Israel B. Richardson and Brig. Gen. Isaac P. Rodman on the Union side ( all mortally wounded ) , and Brig. Gens . Lawrence O. Branch and William E. Starke on the Confederate side ( killed ) . Confederate Brig. Gen. George B. Anderson was shot in the ankle during the defense of the Bloody Lane . He survived the battle but died later in October after an amputation . 
 = = = Lee 's retreat and McClellan 's removal = = = 
 On the morning of September 18 , Lee 's army prepared to defend against a Federal assault that never came . After an improvised truce for both sides to recover and exchange their wounded , Lee 's forces began withdrawing across the Potomac that evening to return to Virginia . 
 President Lincoln was disappointed in McClellan 's performance . He believed that McClellan 's cautious and poorly coordinated actions in the field had forced the battle to a draw rather than a crippling Confederate defeat . Historian Stephen Sears agrees . 
 In making his battle against great odds to save the Republic , General McClellan had committed barely 50 @,@ 000 infantry and artillerymen to the contest . A third of his army did not fire a shot . Even at that , his men repeatedly drove the Army of Northern Virginia to the brink of disaster , feats of valor entirely lost on a commander thinking of little beyond staving off his own defeat . 
 = = = = Lincoln relieves McClellan of his command = = = = 
 The president was even more astonished that from September 17 to October 26 , despite repeated entreaties from the War Department and the president himself , McClellan declined to pursue Lee across the Potomac , citing shortages of equipment and the fear of overextending his forces . General @-@ in @-@ Chief Henry W. Halleck wrote in his official report , " The long inactivity of so large an army in the face of a defeated foe , and during the most favorable season for rapid movements and a vigorous campaign , was a matter of great disappointment and regret . " Lincoln relieved McClellan of his command of the Army of the Potomac on November 5 , effectively ending the general 's military career . He was replaced on November 9 by General Burnside . 
 = = = Turning point of the American Civil War = = = 
 Some students of history question the designation of " strategic victory " for the Union . After all , it can be argued that McClellan performed poorly in the campaign and the battle itself , and Lee displayed great generalship in holding his own in battle against an army that greatly outnumbered his . Casualties were comparable on both sides , although Lee lost a higher percentage of his army . Lee withdrew from the battlefield first , the technical definition of the tactical loser in a Civil War battle . However , in a strategic sense , despite being a tactical draw , Antietam is considered a turning point of the war and a victory for the Union because it ended Lee 's strategic campaign ( his first invasion of Union territory ) . American historian James M. McPherson summed up the importance of the Battle of Antietam in his book , Crossroads of Freedom : 
 No other campaign and battle in the war had such momentous , multiple consequences as Antietam . In July 1863 the dual Union triumphs at Gettysburg and Vicksburg struck another blow that blunted a renewed Confederate offensive in the East and cut off the western third of the Confederacy from the rest . In September 1864 Sherman 's capture of Atlanta electrified the North and set the stage for the final drive to Union victory . These also were pivotal moments . But they would never have happened if the triple Confederate offensives in Mississippi , Kentucky , and most of all Maryland had not been defeated in the fall of 1862 . 
 = = = Union victory and its political consequences = = = 
 = = = = Emancipation Proclamation = = = = 
 The results of Antietam also allowed President Lincoln to issue the Emancipation Proclamation on September 22 , which took effect on January 1 , 1863 . Although Lincoln had intended to do so earlier , he was advised by his Cabinet to make this announcement after a Union victory to avoid the perception that it was issued out of desperation ( since the Confederates had the upper edge in the war prior to Antietam ) . 
 = = = = United States foreign relations = = = = 
 The Union victory and Lincoln 's proclamation played a considerable role in dissuading the governments of France and the United Kingdom from recognizing the Confederacy ; some suspected they were planning to do so in the aftermath of another Union defeat . When the issue of emancipation was linked to the progress of the war , neither government had the political will to oppose the United States , since it linked support to the Confederacy to support for slavery . Both countries had already abolished slavery , and the public would not have tolerated the government militarily supporting a sovereignty upholding the ideals of slavery . 
 = = Additional battle maps = = 
 = = = Gallery : the Battle of Antietam hour by hour = = = 
 = = Battlefield preservation = = 
 The battle is commemorated at Antietam National Battlefield . Conservation work undertaken by Antietam National Battlefield and private groups , has earned Antietam a reputation as one of the nation 's best preserved Civil War battlefields . Few visual intrusions mar the landscape , letting visitors experience the site nearly as it was in 1862 . 
 Antietam was one of the first five Civil War battlefields preserved federally , receiving that distinction on August 30 , 1890 . The U.S. War Department also placed over 300 tablets at that time to mark the spots of individual regiments and of significant phases in the battle . The battlefield was transferred to the Department of the Interior in 1933 . The Antietam National Battlefield now consists of 2 @,@ 743 acres , while the Civil War Trust has preserved 240 acres around the site . 
 = = Historic photographs and paintings = = 
 = = = Mathew Brady 's gallery , " The Dead of Antietam " ( 1862 ) = = = 
 In October 2012 , the National Museum of Civil War Medicine displayed 21 original Mathew Brady 1862 photographs documenting the Battle of Antietam . Brady is considered the father of photojournalism . He is known for his efforts to document the Civil War on a grand scale by bringing his photographic studio to the battlefields after receiving special permission from Lincoln in 1861 . On September 19 , 1862 , two days after the Battle of Antietam , Mathew Brady sent photographer Alexander Gardner and his assistant James Gibson to photograph the carnage . In October 1862 Brady displayed the photos by Gardner in an exhibition entitled " The Dead of Antietam " at Brady 's New York gallery . Many images in this presentation were graphic photographs of corpses , a presentation new to America . This was the first time that many Americans saw the realities of war in photographs as distinct from previous " artists ' impressions " . The New York Times published a review on October 20 , 1862 , describing how , " Of all objects of horror one would think the battle @-@ field should stand preeminent , that it should bear away the palm of repulsiveness . " But crowds came to the gallery drawn by a " terrible fascination " to the images of mangled corpses which brought the reality of remote battle fields to New Yorkers . Viewers examined details using a magnifying glass . " We would scarce choose to be in the gallery , when one of the women bending over them should recognize a husband , a son , or a brother in the still , lifeless lines of bodies , that lie ready for the gaping trenches . " 
 = = = Captain James Hope murals = = = 
 Captain James Hope of the 2nd Vermont Infantry , a professional artist , painted five large murals based on battlefield scenes he had sketched during the Battle of Antietam . He had been assigned to sideline duties as a scout and mapmaker due to his injuries . The canvasses were exhibited in his gallery in Watkins Glen , New York , until his death in 1892 . He had prints made of these larger paintings and sold the reproductions . In the 1930s his work was damaged in a flood . The original murals were shown in a church for many years . In 1979 , the National Park Service purchased and restored them . They were featured in a 1984 Time @-@ Life book entitled The Bloodiest Day : The Battle of Antietam . 
 = = = Gallery = = = 
 The images below include photographs by Alexander Gardner who was employed by Mathew Brady and whose photographs were exhibited in Brady 's New York gallery in October 1862 , and the murals by Captain James Hope restored by the National Park Service . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 The Battle of Antietam was depicted ( at the beginning ) in the film Glory ( 1989 ) , directed by Edward Zwick and starring Matthew Broderick , Denzel Washington , Cary Elwes , and Morgan Freeman . 
 In Hell on Wheels season 1 , episode 8 ( " Derailed " ) , the former Union Army lieutenant carries a Confederate saber that he took as a trophy at Antietam , which he termed a " glorious victory " . Cullen Bohannon , a former Confederate soldier , disagrees with the blue coat 's assessment of what Bohannon calls the Battle of Sharpsburg . The lieutenant , who was with the 51st from Pennsylvania , which stormed the Burnside Bridge , thought they had the Confederate soldiers running scared . Bohannon corrects him , explaining that the Confederate forces retreated from Burnside Bridge because they ran out of ammunition shooting Union Army soldiers , who kept lining up as if at a firing squad , to be shot like " fish in a bloody barrel " . The men 's animosity and opposing views of that skirmish reflect their differing philosophies and bode badly for the outcome of their shared mission in this episode . 
 = = = Memoirs and primary sources = = = 
 Dawes , Rufus R. A Full Blown Yankee of the Iron Brigade : Service with the Sixth Wisconsin Volunteers . Lincoln : University of Nebraska Press , 1999 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8032 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . First published 1890 by E. R. Alderman and Sons . 
 Douglas , Henry Kyd . I Rode with Stonewall : The War Experiences of the Youngest Member of Jackson 's Staff . Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press , 1940 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8078 @-@ 0337 @-@ 5 . 
 " Brady 's Photographs : Pictures of the Dead at Antietam " . New York : New York Times . October 20 , 1862 . 
 U.S. War Department , The War of the Rebellion : a Compilation of the Official Records of the Union and Confederate Armies . Washington , DC : U.S. Government Printing Office , 1880 – 1901 . 
 = Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions ( <unk> <unk> , Fainaru Fantajī Takutikusu Shishi Sensō ) is a tactical role @-@ playing game developed and published by Square Enix originally for the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) , the game is an updated version of Final Fantasy Tactics made for the PlayStation which was originally released in 1997 . 
 The War of the Lions is the second announced game in Square Enix 's " Ivalice Alliance " promotional campaign of video games set in the Ivalice fictional world . The first is Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings ( a sequel to Final Fantasy XII ) and the third is Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift ( both of which were released on Nintendo DS ) . Ivalice ( during the setting of the game ) has technology in line with the late medieval era of human history along with the typical magic and supernatural abilities found in most Final Fantasy games . Players control a mercenary named Ramza who finds himself embroiled in a civil war and an ancient demonic evil that has begun to take hold over the world . A noble by birth , he is forced to re @-@ evaluate his opinion of commoners when his <unk> best friend starts a revolution against the ruling powers of Ivalice . 
 The game was overhauled during development to take advantage of the PSP 's screen ratio and technical abilities which resulted in new cutscenes , the capacity for multiplayer , and other features . War of the Lions also includes new playable characters from other Final Fantasy titles , such as Cloud Strife from Final Fantasy VII and Luso Clemens from Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift . The War of the Lions received strong reviews upon its release and has since been adapted for mobile and tablet audiences . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The War of the Lions is a turn @-@ based tactical roleplaying game . It can be compared with board games such as chess , with each piece corresponding to a party member in Ramza 's current roster of fighters . Each fighter may move about the grid @-@ like board in accordance with their move allotment as well as attack enemy fighters or activate more complex abilities . The terrain of each map dictates the range and mobility of the warriors . Ramza 's soldiers can each equip a job in the Final Fantasy tradition , from standard swordsmen and archers to magic specialists to even more exotic positions , like the dragoon and dancer . Fulfilling actions during a battle grants experience and job points to each character , the latter of which can be used to purchase new abilities . There are 22 jobs available in The War of the Lions . Once a character has learned a skill from a job , they have permanent access to it , although only one primary group of skills is available at a time and is job @-@ dependent . Many abilities , such as those related to movement or being struck by an enemy , can still be equipped if the character later changes jobs . The game also features permadeath — if a character is incapacitated from excessive damage and is not healed within several turns , they are permanently dead and cannot be used again in battle . 
 Outside of battles , players can move around on an overworld map . This is not free movement like other Final Fantasy games ; instead Ramza can only go from point to point on the map . Crossing a wilderness location may lead to a random battle . In cities and towns , the players can buy new equipment , recruit fresh soldiers , and send party members out on automated missions to earn cash and other rewards . Later in the game , the player can earn additional rewards by poaching creatures during battles . 
 Another addition to the game is a wireless multiplayer mode , both for co @-@ operative and competitive play . In competitive play , opposing teams may place traps onto the battlefield , and these traps are hidden from the opponent . To ease identification , teams are assigned colors . The battle ends after a set number of rounds , and the team with the most remaining HP is declared the winner . The winner may then receive an item randomly generated from treasure chests . Multiplayer is not included in the iOS version , however . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The War of the Lions retains the setting of the PlayStation version , in which the fictional kingdom of Ivalice has just ended a lengthy conflict ( dubbed the Fifty Years ' War ) with its neighbor , Ordalia . In the PSP version , a complete retranslation changed various location and character names in addition to the overall tone of the dialogue and plot . The game revolves around the War of the Lions , a conflict occurring due to the death of the Ivalician monarch , King <unk> . The heir to the throne , Prince <unk> , is but an infant - a regent must therefore be selected to rule in the prince 's stead . Loyalists of the crown choose Duke Larg as their candidate to serve in conjunction with the power @-@ hungry Queen <unk> , while the nobles ' council backs Duke Goltanna and the ascension of Princess Ovelia . Each of these men served as distinguished generals in the Fifty Years ' War under the banner of the White Lion and Black Lion respectively . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 As with the PlayStation version , The War of the Lions possesses the same large cast supporting a deep , complex story . With the unfolding political drama between Larg and Goltanna serving as the backdrop , the game follows the story of two friends : Ramza , the youngest scion of the noble house Beoulve ; and Delita Heiral , the son of a common farmer . Though they have been companions since childhood , the eventual treachery of Delita 's sister 's death creates a lasting rift between the two that leads them along different paths through the myriad of conspiracies surrounding the nobles ' conflict . Among the names afforded a new translation are Delita 's sister Teta becoming <unk> , Olan becoming Orran , Zalbag becoming Zalbaag , Orlandu changing to <unk> , and also <unk> to <unk> . In addition , The War of the Lions contains new characters , including Balthier from Final Fantasy XII . Balthier is said to have an " important role " , branded as a heretic in search of the " Cache of Glabados " . He joins Ramza , the protagonist while he searches for his sister . Another new character , a monster hunter named Luso from Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift , also joins Ramza . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 War of the Lions has retained much of the original storyline from Final Fantasy Tactics . The game is told through the framing device of a historian , Arazlam Durai , who is seeking to shed light on an era of Ivalice 's history : specifically , the War of the Lions , and King Delita Heiral 's rise to power . It is his contention that another man , Ramza Beoulve , is the true hero of the era . To prove it , the game flashes back to Ramza 's day , finding him a mercenary employed as a bodyguard to Princess Ovelia as she prepares to leave Orbonne Monastery . Though Ramza and his companions defend the monastery against an apparent attack by Goltanna 's knights , a rogue kidnapper sneaks in the back and makes off with the princess : none other than Delita Heiral , future king and Ramza 's former best friend . The game 's first chapter depicts the past friendship between the noble @-@ born Ramza and Delita , a commoner . Both are squire @-@ cadets enrolled in the Order of the Northern Sky 's <unk> , burdened by moral conflict as the Order ( under the command of Ramza 's brothers Dycedarg and Zalbaag , as well as Duke Larg ) seeks to eradicate a brigade of disenfranchised peasant @-@ soldiers , the Corpse Brigade . Successive battles against the cabal 's leadership , <unk> and Wiegraf Folles , further erode Ramza and Delita 's faith in their purpose as aspiring cadets . The harsh reality of their world 's social stratification is finally made obvious when Delita 's sister , <unk> , is sacrificed by Zalbaag to quell the remaining element of the peasant uprising . Ramza and Delita both turn against their Order and their former comrade <unk> , with Delita swearing to direct his wrath at Ramza and all the nobles of Ivalice once immediate vengeance is satisfied . For turning against his family and birthright , a disillusioned Ramza is stripped of the Beoulve name , while Delita is seemingly killed in the fiery aftermath of the Order 's purge . 
 The second chapter opens outside Orbonne immediately after Ovelia 's kidnapping . Ramza , together with his mercenary captain Gaffgarion and Ovelia 's personal bodyguard Agrias , catch up to Delita as he is beset by the Order of the Northern Sky , helping save the princess . Gaffgarion betrays Ramza and Agrias , revealing he was ultimately hired by Dycedarg and Larg to facilitate her assassination , removing the only obstacle to Larg 's declaration as regent . Ramza and Agrias agree to escort Ovelia to Cardinal Delacroix of Lionel , a province of Ivalice controlled by the powerful Church of Glabados - the one authority neither the White nor Black Lions will dare offend . En route they encounter Mustadio Bunansa , who is on the run from the Baert Trading Company ; Mustadio is in possession of a mystical artifact known as auracite . Eventually reaching the Cardinal in Lionel 's capital , Delacroix explains that this auracite is one of the Zodiac Stones , relics from an ancient Ivalician tale : that of the Zodiac Braves , heroes who once defeated a demon summoned to Ivalice by a king with more ambition than sense . Though Delacroix promises to put an end to Baert , it transpires that he is actually part of a faction within the Glabados Church that is trying to collect the Zodiac Stones for their own purposes . This faction is also manipulating and motivating the entire war , secretly provoking Dukes Larg and Goltanna in an effort to destroy both men and cripple their knightly orders . Misled by Delacroix after witnessing Baert still active in the Clockwork City of Goug , Ramza and Mustadio encounter Agrias under pursuit from the Cardinal 's forces . She informs the pair that Ovelia is due to be executed ; rushing to intervene , Ramza is instead led into a trap laid by Gaffgarion . Though his former captain escapes , Ramza finally puts an end to him at Delacroix 's stronghold before confronting the Cardinal himself . Delacroix then invokes the auracite 's true power , merging with the demonic Lucavi known as Cúchulainn . Though Ramza defeats the abomination , Glabados brands him a heretic . 
 Various cut scenes depict the worsening war and Delita 's rise to power by means of manipulation . In chapter three , Ramza seeks answers and help first from his estranged family in the Ivalician capital of Lesalia ; there he is rebuked by Zalbaag , though his sister , Alma , believes his tales of deeper corruption and accompanies him . At Orbonne , the pair are surprised to discover the Knights Templar , the military wing of Glabados , sacking and plundering its own monastery . Within , Ramza first confronts Isilud as he makes off with yet another piece of auracite recovered from the bowels of Orbonne 's labyrinthine library . During the debacle another Templar , Wiegraf , converts into a Lucavi and escapes . A dying monk gives Ramza the one thing that can thwart the church 's ambitions to manipulate The War of the Lions : the ancient Scriptures of <unk> , a truthful biography of the life of St. Ajora Glabados . Within the text Ramza discovers the legend of the Zodiac Braves is a falsehood , and Ajora 's supposedly divine nature nothing less than a fabrication . Ramza is shortly thereafter confronted by an agent of Grand Duke Barrington , claiming possession of Alma , whom Isilud had kidnapped upon fleeing Orbonne . Pursuing his sister , Ramza is first beset by <unk> and Rapha , mage assassins in the Duke 's employ - Rapha defects to Ramza , and as they travel , Barrington meets with Folmarv , commander of the Templars , presenting his captured son , Isilud , and relaying Glabados ' entire plan , threatening to expose the church and elevate himself to the throne , to which Folmarv merely transforms into a Lucavi and sets about slaughtering the castle 's inhabitants . Ramza arrives after this devastation and defeats the demonic Wiegraf . It is on the castle 's roof that Ramza protects Rapha from the demonically possessed Marquis <unk> , after <unk> 's assassins have dispatched Barrington . Afterwards , Rapha appeals to the auracite much as Wiegraf had , though this succeeds in resurrecting her fallen brother rather than manifesting another demon . The three question whether auracite is a gateway to an infernal realm , or merely a window into the human heart . 
 The final chapter of the game involves Ramza 's fight against the Knights Templar 's leadership , revealed as the orchestrators of every conspiracy behind The War of the Lions , having even deluded the priesthood of Glabados . This faction is controlled by the Lucavi and is attempting to resurrect Ajora Glabados , the chosen host Lucavi 's leader , the High Seraph Ultima . Ramza traverses across all of Ivalice in pursuit of Folmarv and his lieutenants <unk> and <unk> . As the Templar 's agenda becomes more overt , they cause increasing chaos , as Ultima 's resurrection requires the sacrifice of an incomprehensible magnitude of bloodshed . Among the slain are Dukes Larg and Goltanna after the battle of Fort <unk> , as well as Dycedarg and Zalbaag Beoulve . Ramza 's sister Alma is retained by Folmarv in anticipation of a more insidious fate : it will be her body that substitutes for Ajora 's as a container for Ultima . After the death of the Glabados Church 's high priest , Marcel <unk> , Ramza and his party travel to the long @-@ sunken Necrohol of Mullonde , where they rescue Alma and defeat Ultima , saving Ivalice from destruction . 
 The epilogue reveals that neither Ramza nor his compatriots were ever confirmed to have survived the battle . In this same epilogue , Orran Durai sees both Ramza and Alma riding off on Chocobos , though it is never confirmed that they were truly there . He later compiles records of the Church 's deceit , preparing to publish the tale . However , he is captured and burned at the stake as a heretic , and his records , the " Durai Papers , " lay unheeded for more than four centuries until their release from the Church and dissemination by Orran 's descendant : the game 's narrator , Arazlam Durai . In the final scene , Ovelia accuses Delita of having manipulated her as he does everyone and stabs him in anger . Delita kills her , and then staggers backwards , questioning whether his pursuits yielded the end he truly desired . 
 = = Development = = 
 Final Fantasy Tactics : The War of the Lions was revealed on December 13 , 2006 , in the Weekly Shonen Jump magazine as a PlayStation Portable port of Final Fantasy Tactics . The magazine stated additions of cel @-@ shaded full motion videos , and extra job classes among other new features . The title was originally made for the PlayStation console in 1997 . Takamasa Shiba , the remakes game 's producer , said that Square Enix decided to " re @-@ envision the game a decade later " . Because of the extensive gameplay and deep storyline , the PlayStation version would " compel players to spend hours playing it " . Shiba cited this , as well as the system 's portability , as the main reasons why Square chose to develop for the PlayStation Portable . The subtitle of The War of the Lions was chosen as it describes " the backdrop for the story of the two main characters Ramza and Delita " , as well as illustrating the multiplayer gameplay . 
 Following the trend of Final Fantasy video games on PlayStation systems , The War of the Lions features full motion video during certain scenes . These videos are rendered using cel @-@ shading , a technique giving the illusion of hand drawn animation . Because of the PlayStation Portable 's screen size , the game features a 16 : 9 aspect ratio , as opposed to the previous 4 : 3 . The developers added sequences with visual arts illustrated by Akihiko Yoshida , and the game is complete with new episodes and cutscenes that were not in the original title . Developers wanted the game to suit both new players and players that have experienced the original title . The cut scenes were also added to help players become immersed in the culture and history of Ivalice and " War of the Lions " . The Zodiac battle system was used in an international release of Final Fantasy XII due to both games taking place in the world of Ivalice and that the " War of the Lions " battle director also Final Fantasy XII 's international release and liked the combat system . Luso from Final Fantasy Tactics A2 : Grimoire of the Rift was added to connect the game to the Ivalice Alliance game series . 
 New character classes were chosen at the beginning of development , with a staff member who loved the original Tactics title assigned to balance the new jobs within the game . The new classes are the Onion Knight , taken from Final Fantasy III , and the Dark Knight , which was previously only available to one character , Gaffgarion . The Dark Knight in the remake has additional abilities and thus the original Dark Knight class was renamed to " Fell Knight " . The Fell Knight class is still unique to Gaffgarion . 
 The North American localization of The War of the Lions has full audio voice acting for the video sequences in the game . The slowdown and sound downgrade , though acknowledged by the localizers , was not a priority for them to fix , being stated as " out of their hands . " Various reviewers have differing opinions about how the slowdown issue has been addressed ; one of the previews of the North American version claims that the slowdown has been reduced , stating that " now the technical issues are about on par with the minor slowdown exhibited in the PS1 release and are no longer distracting " , while others stated that the slowdowns still " occur when performing attacks or spells in battle " . 
 Because of vocal criticism of the original English language translation , a whole new translation was commissioned for the remake . The PlayStation Portable producer Akitoshi Kawazu described the game as having " an incredible amount of text " versus an ordinary RPG . Translating the game 's script was assigned to Joe Reeder , who pulled in fellow translator Tom Slattery after becoming impressed with some of his internal work at Square Enix . Both worked on the game , alternating between each other translating scenes until Reeder had to leave the project to work on Final Fantasy XII : Revenant Wings and Slattery became head translator . The translation work took six to seven days a week at twelve to thirteen hour stretches . To incorporate the game deeper into the world of Ivalice , the new English translation changed words to standard Final Fantasy terms and spellings such as " magick " , " Dragoon " , and " Mystic " . To help address any controversy that the game 's plot was a criticism of Christianity , Slattery retained the game 's opening prayer that is directed toward the " gods " , separating the church of <unk> from the monotheistic Christian faith . 
 = = = Other platforms = = = 
 A PlayStation Network version was released on March 9 , 2011 , in Japan , and in North America on July 18 , 2011 . In response to players requests that Square Enix release more of their catalogue on mobile phones , a project to port " War of the Lions " commenced . Rebuilding the game for a touch interface and not having the PlayStation <unk> shoulder buttons took much time and " trial and error " , relying on the work done to adapt previous Final Fantasy titles . Certain iOS features were not supported including Game Center since the game is not " inherently competitive " . 
 The War of the Lions for iOS was announced at E3 2010 and released for in 2011 , with the iPhone version released on August 4 , 2011 . An iPad version was released on February 23 , 2012 . An Android port was released through the Square Enix Market on February 14 , 2013 , in Japan , featuring enhanced graphics , a higher draw speed , and controls optimized for a touchscreen . An iOS update was promised , and when released also included multiple iCloud save slot support . The Android version was globally launched on Google Play on June 4 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The War of the Lions reached the top of Japanese gaming charts , and sold 100 @,@ 000 copies in the first month of release in the United States . The game was the 53rd best @-@ selling game of 2007 in Japan at 301 @,@ 796 copies according to Famitsu . The Ultimate Hits edition sold an additional 19 @,@ 488 copies in Japan . 
 As of December 18 , 2007 , The War of the Lions on the PSP has a score of 88 / 100 at the aggregate review site Metacritic based on 39 reviews , 88 @.@ 3 % at GameRankings based on 47 reviews . In comparison , the original Final Fantasy Tactics scored 83 from 12 reviews at Metacritic . Critics in general were pleased that the game had been remade , as it was considered a cult hit in its original incarnation but copies had become difficult to find . The War of the Lion 's tactical gameplay was widely praised as deep and engaging , as battles could proceed along any number of lines depending on party composition and player strategy . Reviewers liked the focus on player choice on the battlefield , such as approaching an engagement with defense in mind , or alternatively hitting enemies hard and fast in a kind of blitzkrieg . The Job system , especially its complexity , customization , and ability to influence battles , was commended . GameTrailers wrote : " Even up to now , Final Fantasy Tactics ’ job classing structure is still one of the best the genre has seen ; a feature @-@ rich and flexible system matched only by its equally complex battle engine . " The new jobs were also appreciated . 
 The War of the Lions ' new translation was frequently commented upon . Reviewers felt that while its narrative was florid , even Shakespearean , it was an improvement over the original , which was described as confusing and convoluted . The story itself was also lauded for its depth and maturity , although commentators did note that its large cast of characters was occasionally difficult to follow . The new cel @-@ shaded cutscenes were very popular and described as " magical " , " beautiful " , and " outstanding " . There were some comments that the sprites , textures , and environmental visuals in general had not been improved , with the exception of new spell animations . The sound was both praised and criticized , with observations about beautiful music but grating camera sound effects . 
 The negative comments about The War of the Lions focused on the game 's slowdown during battles and its difficulty . Some party actions slow down the game 's framerate and decrease the audio quality , becoming most apparent when casting spells or using special abilities that require different lighting effects . Despite the move from disc @-@ only to the option of playing via PlayStation Network download , the slowdown remains , as confirmed by PlayStation LifeStyle 's review . The difficulty was widely considered punishing and perhaps discouraging to new players . Eurogamer 's Rob Fahey said : " [ The game 's ] difficulty curve is somewhat peculiar - to put it charitably ... We certainly encountered some battles that were ludicrously easy , and a couple ( especially early on ) so hard that we had to re @-@ equip and fight a few random battles before trying again . " 
 The iOS version was less well received than the PSP edition . While reviewers echoed positive comments about the storyline and gameplay , they were displeased with the removal of multiplayer , graphical issues that still had not been fixed , and most importantly , the price point at initial release . At the time , it was the most expensive game ever released on the operating system . US Gamer on the other hand listed the remake as one of the best ever made . 
 = Sól ( sun ) = 
 Sól ( Old Norse " Sun " ) or Sunna ( Old High German , and existing as an Old Norse and Icelandic synonym : see Wiktionary sunna , " Sun " ) is the Sun personified in Germanic mythology . One of the two Old High German Merseburg Incantations , written in the 9th or 10th century CE , attests that Sunna is the sister of Sinthgunt . In Norse mythology , Sól is attested in the Poetic Edda , compiled in the 13th century from earlier traditional sources , and the Prose Edda , written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson . 
 In both the Poetic Edda and the Prose Edda she is described as the sister of the personified moon , Máni , is the daughter of Mundilfari , is at times referred to as Álfröðull , and is foretold to be killed by a monstrous wolf during the events of Ragnarök , though beforehand she will have given birth to a daughter who continues her mother 's course through the heavens . In the Prose Edda , she is additionally described as the wife of <unk> . As a proper noun , Sól appears throughout Old Norse literature . Scholars have produced theories about the development of the goddess from potential Nordic Bronze Age and Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European roots . 
 = = " Horse cure " Merseburg Incantation = = 
 One of the two Merseburg Incantations ( the " horse cure " ) , recorded in Old High German , mentions Sunna , who is described as having a sister , Sinthgunt . The incantation describes how Phol and Wodan rode to a wood , and there Balder 's foal sprained its foot . Sinthgunt sang charms , her sister Sunna sang charms , Friia sang charms , her sister Volla sang charms , and finally Wodan sang charms , followed by a verse describing the healing of the foal 's bone . 
 = = Norse attestations = = 
 = = = Poetic Edda = = = 
 In the poem Völuspá , a dead völva recounts the history of the universe and foretells the future to the disguised god Odin . In doing so , the völva recounts the early days of the universe , in which : 
 In the poem Vafþrúðnismál , the god Odin tasks the jötunn Vafþrúðnir with a question about the origins of the sun and the moon . Vafþrúðnir responds that Mundilfari is the father of both Sól and Máni , and that they must pass through the heavens every day to count the years for man : 
 In a stanza Vafþrúðnismál , Odin asks Vafþrúðnir from where another sun will come from once Fenrir has assailed the current sun . Vafþrúðnir responds in a further stanza , stating that before Álfröðull ( Sól ) is assailed by Fenrir , she will bear a daughter who will ride on her mother 's paths after the events of Ragnarök . 
 In a stanza of the poem Grímnismál , Odin says that before the sun ( referred to as " the shining god " ) is a shield named <unk> , and if the shield were to fall from its frontal position , mountain and sea " would burn up " . In stanza 39 Odin ( disguised as Grimnir ) says that both the sun and the moon are pursued through the heavens by wolves ; the sun , referred to as the " bright bride " of the heavens , is pursued by Sköll , while the moon is pursued by Hati Hróðvitnisson . 
 In the poem Alvíssmál , the god Thor questions the dwarf Alvíss about the sun , asking him what the sun is called in each of the worlds . Alvíss responds that it is called " sun " by mankind , " sunshine " by the gods , " Dvalinn 's <unk> " by the dwarves , " <unk> " by the jötnar , " the lovely wheel " by the elves , and " all @-@ shining " by the " sons of the Æsir " . 
 = = = Prose Edda = = = 
 Sól is referenced in the Prose Edda book Gylfaginning , where she is introduced in chapter 8 in a quote from stanza 5 of Völuspá . In chapter 11 of Gylfaginning , Gangleri ( described as King Gylfi in disguise ) asks the enthroned figure of High how the sun and moon are steered . High describes that Sól is one of the two children of Mundilfari , and states that the children were so beautiful they were named after the sun ( Sól ) and the moon ( Máni ) . Mundilfari has Sól married to a man named <unk> . 
 High says that the gods were " angered by this arrogance " and that the gods had the two placed in the heavens . There , the children were made to drive the horses <unk> and <unk> that drew the chariot of the sun . High says that the gods had created the chariot to illuminate the worlds from burning embers flying from the fiery world of <unk> . In order to cool the horses , the gods placed two bellows beneath their shoulders , and that " according to the same lore " these bellows are called <unk> . 
 In chapter 12 of Gylfaginning , Gangleri tells High that the sun moves quickly , almost as if she were moving so quickly that she fears something , that she could not go faster even if she were afraid of her own death . High responds that " It is not surprising that she moves with such speed . The one chasing her comes close , and there is no escape for her except to run . " Gangleri asks who chases her , to which High responds that two wolves give chase to Sól and Máni . The first wolf , Sköll , chases Sól , and despite her fear , Sköll will eventually catch her . Hati Hróðvitnisson , the second wolf , runs ahead of Sól to chase after Máni , whom Hati Hróðvitnisson will also catch . In chapter 35 , Sól 's status as a goddess is stated by High , along with Bil . 
 In chapter 53 , High says that after the events of Ragnarök , Sól 's legacy will be continued by a daughter that is no less beautiful than she , who will follow the path she once rode , and , in support , Vafþrúðnismál stanza 47 is then quoted . 
 In the Prose Edda book Skáldskaparmál , Sól is first presented in chapter 93 , where the kennings " daughter of <unk> " , " sister of Máni " , " wife of Glen " , " fire of sky and air " are given for her , followed by an excerpt of a work by the 11th century skald <unk> <unk> : 
 God @-@ blithe <unk> of Glen 
 steps to her divine sanctuary 
 with brightness ; then descends the good 
 light of grey @-@ clad moon . 
 In chapter 56 , additional names for Sól are given ; " day @-@ star " , " disc " , " ever @-@ glow " , " all @-@ bright seen " , " fair @-@ wheel " , " grace @-@ shine " , " Dvalinn 's toy " , " elf @-@ disc " , " doubt @-@ disc " , and " ruddy " . In chapter 58 , following a list of horses , the horses <unk> and <unk> are listed as drawing the sun , and , in chapter 75 , Sól is again included in a list of goddesses . 
 = = Theories = = 
 Scholars have proposed that Sól , as a goddess , may represent an extension of an earlier Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European deity due to Indo @-@ European linguistic connections between Norse Sól , Sanskrit Surya , Common Brittonic Sulis , Lithuanian <unk> , Latin Sol , and Slavic Tsar <unk> . 
 Regarding Sól 's attested personifications in Norse mythology , John Lindow states that " even kennings like ' hall of the sun ' for sky may not suggest personification , given the rules of kenning formation " ; that in poetry only stanzas associated with Sól in the poem Vafþrúðnismál are certain in their personification of the goddess ; and " that Sól is female and Máni male probably has to do with the grammatical gender of the nouns : Sól is feminine and Máni is masculine . " Lindow states that , while the sun seems to have been a focus of older Scandinavian religious practices , it is difficult to make a case for the placement of the sun in a central role in surviving sources for Norse mythology . 
 Rudolf Simek states that Nordic Bronze Age archaeological finds , such as rock carvings and the <unk> sun chariot , provide ample evidence of the sun having been viewed as a life @-@ giving heavenly body to the Bronze Age Scandinavians , and that the sun likely always received an amount of veneration . Simek states that the only evidence of the sun assuming a personification stems from the Old High German Incantation reference and from Poetic Edda poems , and that both of these references do not provide enough information to assume a Germanic sun cult . " On the other hand " , Simek posits , the " great age of the concept is evident " by the <unk> sun chariot , which specifically supports the notion of the sun being drawn across the sky by horses . Simek further theorizes that the combination of sun symbols with ships in religious practices , which occur with frequency from the Bronze Age into Middle Ages , seem to derive from religious practices surrounding a fertility god ( such as the Vanir gods Njörðr or Freyr ) , and not to a personified sun . 
 = Project Alberta = 
 Project Alberta , also known as Project A , was a section of the Manhattan Project which assisted in delivering the first nuclear weapons in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki during World War II . 
 Project Alberta was formed in March 1945 , and consisted of 51 United States Army , Navy , and civilian personnel , including one British scientist . Its mission was three @-@ fold . It first had to design a bomb shape for delivery by air , then procure and assemble it . It supported the ballistic testing work at Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , conducted by the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit ( Project W @-@ 47 ) , and the modification of B @-@ 29s to carry the bombs ( Project Silverplate ) . After completion of its development and training missions , Project Alberta was attached to the 509th Composite Group at North Field , Tinian , where it prepared facilities , assembled and loaded the weapons , and participated in their use . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The Manhattan Project began in June 1941 , during World War II . Most of the project was concerned with producing the necessary fissile materials , but in early 1943 , the project director , Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , created the Los Alamos Laboratory , also known as Project Y , under the direction of Robert Oppenheimer to design and build atomic bombs . Within the Los Alamos Laboratory , responsibility for delivery lay with its Ordnance Division , headed by Captain William S. Parsons . With the Ordnance Division , the E @-@ 7 Group was created with responsibility for the integration of design and delivery . Led by physicist Norman F. Ramsey , it consisted of himself , Sheldon Dike and Bernard Waldman . 
 The size of the 17 @-@ foot ( 5 @.@ 2 m ) Thin Man bomb under development at Los Alamos in 1943 reduced the number of Allied aircraft that could deliver the bomb to the British Avro Lancaster and the American Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress , although the latter required substantial modification . Any other airframe would have had to be completely redesigned and rebuilt , or carry the bomb externally . Parsons arranged for tests to be carried at the Naval Proving Ground in Dahlgren , Virginia in August 1943 . No B @-@ 29s or Lancasters were available so a 9 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) scale model Thin Man was used , and dropped from a Grumman TBF Avenger . The results were disappointing , with the bomb falling in a flat spin . This indicated that a thorough test program was required . 
 Further testing of Silverplate B @-@ 29 aircraft and Thin Man and Fat Man bomb shapes was carried out at Muroc Army Air Field in March and June 1944 . Testing shifted to Wendover Army Air Field , Utah , in October . Project Y controlled the scheduling and contents of the tests , which were carried out by the Flight Test Section of the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit as Project W @-@ 47 . The tests were supervised by Ramsey until November , when Commander Frederick Ashworth became Parson 's head of operations , and assumed responsibility for the test program . The test bombs were assembled by the 509th Composite Group 's 1st Ordnance Squadron , Special ( Aviation ) , and the 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit 's Special Ordnance Detachment . Tests continued until the end of the war in August 1945 . At first only the Ordnance Division 's fuse and delivery groups were involved , but as the tests became more detailed , and live explosives were incorporated into the test bombs , other groups were drawn into the test program . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Project Alberta , also known as Project A , was formed in March 1945 , absorbing existing groups of Parsons 's Ordnance ( O ) Division that were working on bomb preparation and delivery . These included Ramsey 's delivery group , now called O @-@ 2 , Commander Francis Birch 's O @-@ 1 ( Gun ) Group , Kenneth Bainbridge 's X @-@ 2 ( Development , Engineering , and Tests ) Group , Robert Brode 's O @-@ 3 ( Fuse Development ) Group and George Galloway 's O @-@ 4 ( Engineering ) Group . 
 Parsons became the head of Project Alberta , with Ramsey as his scientific and technical deputy , and Ashworth as his operations officer and military alternate . There were two bomb assembly teams , a Fat Man Assembly Team under Commander Norris Bradbury and Roger Warner , and a Little Boy Assembly under Birch . Philip Morrison was the head of the Pit Crew , Bernard Waldman and Luis Alvarez led the Aerial Observation Team , and Sheldon Dike was in change of the Aircraft Ordnance Team . Physicists Robert Serber and William Penney , and US Army Captain James F. Nolan , a medical expert , were special consultants . All members of Project Alberta had volunteered for the mission . 
 In all , Project Alberta consisted of 51 Army , Navy and civilian personnel . Army personnel were two officers , Nolan and First Lieutenant John D. Hopper , and 17 enlisted men from the Manhattan Project 's Special Engineer Detachment . There were Navy personnel were Parsons , Ashworth , Lieutenant Commander Edward C. Stephenson , Lieutenant ( junior grade ) Victor A. Miller , and eight ensigns . The remaining 17 were civilians . The 1st Technical Service Detachment , to which the personnel of Project Alberta were administratively assigned , was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Peer de Silva , and provided security and housing services on Tinian . 
 In addition , there were three senior officers on Tinian , who were part of the Manhattan Project but not formally part of Project Alberta : Rear Admiral William R. Purnell , the representative of the Military Liaison Committee ; Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , Groves ' Deputy for Operations ; and Colonel Elmer E. Kirkpatrick , who was responsible for base development , and was Farrell 's alternate . Purnell , Farrell and Parsons became informally known as the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " . They had decision @-@ making authority over the nuclear mission . 
 = = Tinian = = 
 Manhattan Project and United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) officials agreed in December 1944 that operations would be based in the Mariana Islands , and the following month Parsons and Ashworth held a conference with USAAF officers to discuss the logistics of establishing such a base . In February 1945 , Ashworth traveled to Guam bearing a letter for Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz informing him of the Manhattan Project . 
 Up to this point it had been expected that the 509th Composite Group would be based on Guam , but Ashworth was struck by the congestion in the harbor and the shortage of construction units there . USAAF suggested that he take a look at Tinian , which had two good airfields , and was 125 miles ( 201 km ) further north , an important consideration for potentially overloaded aircraft . Ashworth toured Tinian with the island commander , Brigadier General Frederick V. H. Kimble , who recommended North Field . Ashworth agreed , and had Kimble hold them for future use . 
 Groves sent Kirkpatrick to supervise construction on Tinian by the Seabees of the 6th Naval Construction Brigade . Four air @-@ conditioned Quonset huts of a type normally used for bombsight repair were provided for laboratory and instrument work . There were five warehouses , a shop building , and assembly , ordnance and administrative buildings . Ramsey overcame the problem of how to ship through the San Francisco Port of Embarkation . The port wanted a detailed list of what was being sent so it could track it to ensure delivery , but what needed to be shipped was still subject to last @-@ minute change . He simply designated everything as a " bomb assembly kit " . Three of these , one for Little Boy , one for Fat Man and one spare , were shipped to Tinian , which was now codenamed Destination O , commencing in May . Kirkpatrick arranged for everything to be shipped direct to Tinian rather than via Guam , as was usual . 
 To meet the schedule , the 509th Composite Group 's commander , Colonel Paul Tibbets , had his ground echelon depart Wendover on 25 April , followed by his air echelon in May . The 1st Ordnance Squadron carefully packed the Pumpkin bombs and Fat Man assemblies that they had received from Project Camel , the assemblies being sets of bomb components without the fissile pit or modulated neutron initiators . Uniforms were issued to Project Alberta 's civilian personnel , and Nolan administered immunization shots . A Project Alberta Advance Party was created , consisting of Sheldon Dike for Air Force liaison , Theodore Perlman for Little Boy , and Victor Miller and Harlow Russ for Fat Man . The rest of the Fat Man team prepared the " Gadget " , the case @-@ less Fat Man bomb used for the Trinity nuclear test . Parsons and Warner had decided that the combat use of the Little Boy would proceed regardless of the outcome of the Trinity test . 
 The Advance Party departed Los Alamos for Kirtland Field , New Mexico , by bus on 17 June . Accompanied by Major Bud Uanna and other members of the 1st Technical Service Detachment , they flew in C @-@ 54 " Green Hornets " of the 509th Composite Group 's 320th Troop Carrier Squadron via the Port of Aerial Embarkation at Hamilton Field , California , and arrived on Tinian on 23 June . Sheldon Dike accompanied bombers of the 509th Composite Group 's 393d Bombardment Squadron on practice bombing missions against airfields on Japanese @-@ held Truk , Marcus , Rota , and <unk> . The rest of the Advance Party prepared the Little Boy assembly facility . They were joined on 6 July by a team under Edward H. Doll of the Fusing Group , who prepared for Pumpkin Bomb missions . 
 The rest of Project Alberta departed for Tinian following the successful completion of the Trinity test on 16 July . The remainder of the Little Boy assembly team arrived on 22 July , followed by Parsons , Ashworth , Purnell , Farrell and the remainder of the Fat Man assembly , Pit , Observation and Firing teams . The whole of Project Alberta was assembled on Tinian by 25 July , except for members who were couriers for bomb parts . Nolan arrived on 26 July on the cruiser USS Indianapolis , along with Major Robert Furman and Captain Charles H. O 'Brien of the 1st Technical Services Detachment , with the Little Boy assembly and active material . Jesse <unk> and Raemer Schreiber arrived by C @-@ 54 with the remainder of the Little Boy active material and the plutonium Fat Man pit . 
 = = Bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 Although Project Alberta had no attack orders , it proceeded with the plan to have the Little Boy ready by 1 August , and the first Fat Man ready for use as soon as possible after that . In the meantime , a series of twelve combat missions were flown between 20 and 29 July against targets in Japan using high @-@ explosive Pumpkin bombs . Project Alberta 's Sheldon Dike and Milo <unk> flew on some of these missions , as did the British observer Group Captain Leonard Cheshire . One serious incident occurred when a Pumpkin bomb was released in the bomb bay of the B @-@ 29 Strange Cargo while it was taxiing . The bomb fell though the closed bomb bay doors onto the taxiway . The plane came to a halt in a shower of sparks , but fire fighters doused the plane and the bomb in foam , and the bomb did not explode . The aircraft had to be jacked up to remove the bomb . 
 Four Little Boy assemblies , L @-@ 1 , L @-@ 2 , L @-@ 5 and L @-@ 6 were expended in test drops . L @-@ 6 was used in the Iwo Jima dress rehearsal on 29 July . This was repeated on 31 July , but this time L @-@ 6 was test dropped near Tinian by Enola Gay . L @-@ 11 was the assembly used for the Hiroshima bomb . The Little Boy team had it completely assembled and ready for use on 31 July . The final item of preparation for the operation came on 29 July 1945 . Orders for the attack were issued to General Carl Spaatz on 25 July under the signature of General Thomas T. Handy , the acting Chief of Staff of the United States Army , since General of the Army George C. Marshall was at the Potsdam Conference with the President . The order designated four targets : Hiroshima , Kokura , Niigata , and Nagasaki , and ordered the attack to be made " as soon as weather will permit after about 3 August . " 
 Assembly of a Fat Man unit was a complex operation involving personnel from the HE @-@ ME , Pit , Fusing and Firing teams . To prevent the assembly building from becoming overcrowded and thereby causing an accident , Parsons limited the numbers allowed inside at any time . Personnel waiting to perform a specific task had to wait their turn outside the building . The first Fat Man assembly , known as F13 , was assembled by 31 July , and expended in a drop test the next day . This was followed by <unk> on 4 August , which was dropped the next day . Three sets of Fat Man high explosive pre @-@ assemblies , designated F31 , F32 , and F33 , arrived on a B @-@ 29 of the 509th Composite Group and 216th Army Air Forces Base Unit on 2 August . On inspection , the high explosive blocks of F32 were found to be badly cracked and unserviceable . The other two were assembled , with F33 earmarked for a rehearsal and F31 for operational use . 
 = = = Hiroshima = = = 
 In the space of a week on Tinian , four B @-@ 29s crashed and burned on the runway . Parsons became very concerned . If a B @-@ 29 crashed with a Little Boy , the fire could cook off the explosive and detonate the weapon , with catastrophic consequences . Consideration was given to evacuating the 20 @,@ 000 personnel on Tinian from the island , but instead it was decided to load the four cordite powder bags into the gun breech to arm the bomb in flight . 
 Enola Gay took off at 02 : 45 , 7 @.@ 5 long tons ( 7 @.@ 6 t ) overweight and near maximum gross weight . Arming of the bomb began eight minutes into the flight and took 25 minutes . Parsons , as the " weaponeer " , was in command of the mission . Parsons and his assistant , Second Lieutenant Morris R. Jeppson of the 1st Ordnance Squadron , made their way into the bomb bay of the Enola Gay along the narrow catwalk on the port side . Jeppson held a flashlight while Parsons disconnected the primer wires , removed the breech plug , inserted the powder bags , replaced the breech plug , and reconnected the wires . Before climbing to altitude on approach to the target , Jeppson switched the three safety plugs between the electrical connectors of the internal battery and the firing mechanism from green to red . The bomb was then fully armed . Jeppson monitored its circuits . 
 Four other members of Project Alberta flew on the Hiroshima mission . Luis Alvarez , Harold Agnew and Lawrence H. Johnston were on the instrument plane The Great Artiste . They dropped " <unk> " canisters to measure the force of the blast , but this was not used to calculate the yield at the time . Bernard Waldman was the camera operator on the observation aircraft . He was equipped with a special high @-@ speed Fastax movie camera with six seconds of film in order to record the blast . Unfortunately , Waldman forgot to open the camera shutter , and no film was exposed . In addition , some members of the team flew to Iwo Jima in case Enola Gay was forced to land there , but this was not required . 
 The mission was flown as planned and executed without significant problems . The three target @-@ area aircraft arrived over Iwo Jima approximately three hours into the mission and departed together at 06 : 07 . The safeties on the bomb were removed at 07 : 30 , 90 minutes before time over target , and 15 minutes later the B @-@ 29s began a climb to the 30 @,@ 000 @-@ foot ( 9 @,@ 100 m ) bombing altitude . The bomb run began at 09 : 12 , with the drop three minutes later . Simultaneously The Great Artiste dropped its three <unk> canisters , after which the B @-@ 29s immediately performed steep 155 @-@ degree diving turns , The Great Artiste to the left and Enola Gay to the right . The detonation followed 45 @.@ 5 seconds after the drop . Primary and " echo " shock waves overtook the B @-@ 29s a minute following the blast , and the smoke cloud was visible to the crews for 90 minutes , by which time they were almost 400 miles ( 640 km ) away . The only footage of the mushroom cloud was taken by Harold Agnew while Robert " Bob " Caron took the definitive photograph of the cloud from the tail gunner position of the " Enola Gay . " Enola Gay returned to Tinian at 14 : 58 . 
 = = = Nagasaki = = = 
 Purnell , Parsons , Tibbets , Spaatz and Curtis LeMay met on Guam on 7 August , the day after the Hiroshima attack , to discuss what should be done next . Parsons said that Project Alberta would have a Fat Man bomb ready by 11 August , as originally planned , but Tibbets pointed to weather reports indicating poor flying conditions on that day due to a storm , and asked if it could be readied by 9 August . Parsons agreed to do so . 
 For this mission , Ashworth was the weaponeer , with Lieutenant Philip M. Barnes , USN , of the 1st Ordnance Squadron as his assistant weaponeer on the B @-@ 29 Bockscar . Project Alberta 's Walter Goodman and Lawrence H. Johnston were on board the instrumentation aircraft , The Great Artiste , along with William L. Laurence , a correspondent for the New York Times . Leonard Cheshire and William Penney were on the observation plane Big Stink . Project Alberta 's Robert Serber was supposed to be on board but was left behind by the aircraft commander , Group Operations Officer Major James I. Hopkins , Jr . , because he had forgotten his parachute . Since Serber was the only crew member who knew how to operate the high @-@ speed camera , the whole point of the aircraft 's mission , Hopkins had to be instructed by radio from Tinian on its use . 
 The weather that forced the mission to be advanced by two days also dictated a change in rendezvous to Yakushima , much closer to the target , and an initial cruise altitude of 17 @,@ 000 feet ( 5 @,@ 200 m ) instead of 9 @,@ 300 feet ( 2 @,@ 800 m ) , both of which considerably increased fuel consumption . Pre @-@ flight inspection discovered an inoperative fuel transfer pump in the 625 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 2 @,@ 370 l ) aft bomb bay fuel tank , but a decision was made to continue anyway . The plutonium bomb did not require arming in flight , but did have its safeties removed 30 minutes after the 03 : 45 takeoff when Bockscar reached 5 @,@ 000 feet ( 1 @,@ 500 m ) of altitude . 
 It was discovered that the red arming light on the black box connected to Fat Man was lit , indicating that the firing circuit had closed . It took Ashworth and Barnes half an hour to isolate the failed switch that had caused the malfunction and correct the problem . When the daylight rendezvous point was reached at 09 : 10 , the photo plane failed to appear . The weather planes reported both targets within the required visual attack parameters while Bockscar circled Yakushima waiting for the photo plane because Ashworth did not want to proceed without The Great Artiste and under radio silence it was not certain that it was that aircraft that had rendezvoused with them . Finally the mission proceeded without the photo plane , thirty minutes behind schedule . 
 When Bockscar arrived at Kokura 30 minutes later , cloud cover had increased to 70 % of the area , and three bomb runs over the next 50 minutes were fruitless in bombing visually . The commanders decided to reduce power to conserve fuel and divert to Nagasaki , bombing by radar if necessary . The bomb run began at 11 : 58 ( two hours behind schedule ) using radar ; but the Fat Man was dropped visually when a hole opened in the clouds at 12 : 01 . The photo plane arrived at Nagasaki in time to complete its mission , and the three aircraft diverted to Okinawa , where they arrived at 13 : 00 Trying in vain for 20 minutes to contact the control tower at Yontan Airfield to obtain landing clearance , Bockscar nearly ran out of fuel . 
 = = Later activities = = 
 Project Alberta still had three test assemblies , F101 , F102 and <unk> , but the damaged F32 was unserviceable , so new explosive blocks would have to be flown in from Project Camel . There were also shortages of some components , notably detonator chimneys . These were fabricated on Tinian . Seven B @-@ 29s of the 509th Composite Group flew Pumpkin bomb missions on 14 August . Word that Japan had surrendered reached Tinian the following day . 
 Farrell organized a mission to assess the damage done at Hiroshima and Nagasaki , which included personnel from Project Alberta , the 1st Technical Service Detachment , and the 509th Composite Group . The remainder of Project Alberta began packing up . The unused F101 , F102 and <unk> assemblies were packed along with spare components and shipped back to Los Alamos . For security reasons , components not returned to the United States were dumped at sea . 
 Project Alberta 's scientific and technical personnel departed Tinian for the United States on 7 September . Kirkpatrick and Ashworth remained behind to supervise the disposal of Manhattan Project property . Project Alberta was then discontinued . Most of its personnel were transferred to the new Z Division , which began moving to Sandia Base . 
 = Paul London = 
 Paul Michael London ( born April 16 , 1980 ) is an American professional wrestler , best known for his time with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . 
 After being trained at the Texas Wrestling Academy , London began competing for Ring of Honor where his high risk offensive moves made him a fan favorite . He later competed for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling , Pro Wrestling Zero @-@ One , and various independent promotions , winning numerous championships and won the ECWA Super 8 Tournament in 2003 . 
 London made his debut in WWE in late 2003 and immediately began teaming with fellow cruiserweight Billy Kidman . After Kidman retired from active competition , London formed a tag team with Brian Kendrick , with whom he won the WWE Tag Team Championship . After their split , London began competing in the cruiserweight division and won the WWE Cruiserweight Championship . In late 2006 , Kendrick returned and the two reformed as a team . London and Kendrick were managed by Ashley Massaro . London and Kendrick won the WWE Tag Team Championship , becoming the longest reigning WWE Tag Team Champions since the title 's creation and the World Tag Team Championship . The team split when Kendrick was drafted to the SmackDown brand in June 2008 and London was released later that year . In 2009 , he returned to the independent circuit , competing for Pro Wrestling Guerrilla , where he was one half of the former PWG World Tag Team Champions with partner El Generico under the team name ¡ Peligro Abejas ! . 
 = = Early life = = 
 London was born in Austin , Texas , and has two older brothers , Daniel and Jonathan . In 1996 , Daniel was killed by a drunk driver at the age of nineteen . Jonathan is a music video director . London attended Westlake High School in Texas . He helped create the school 's first @-@ ever wrestling team where he was the captain , first varsity letterman and still holds the record for the fastest pinfall time of 7 @.@ 4 seconds . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 After graduating from high school , London trained at several wrestling schools , including a trailer park in West Memphis , Arkansas and a school run by Ivan <unk> in North Austin , Texas . He debuted in 2000 . He later enrolled in Shawn Michaels ' wrestling school , the Texas Wrestling Academy , where he was trained by Rudy Gonzales . 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2002 – 2003 , 2013 ) = = = 
 He made his debut in Ring of Honor ( ROH ) on March 30 , 2002 in a match against Chris Marvel . He began a lengthy feud with Michael Shane during a tag team match for ROH contracts on July 27 , 2002 . During the bout , both Shane and London made simultaneous pinfalls on their opponent 's partners . The referee only counted for Shane , giving his team the victory , which led to London and Shane brawling . The two continued to feud over the next several months in matches such as Street Fights ( where the crowd chanted " please don 't die " due to London 's high risk offense ) , a Triple Threat match and a Gauntlet match . 
 On December 7 , 2002 , London won a tournament to capture the ROH Number One Contender 's Trophy , guaranteeing a match for the ROH Championship . He lost the match three weeks later to then @-@ champion Xavier . On February 8 , 2003 , London competed in a Triple Threat match for the Number One Contender 's Trophy , pinning A.J. Styles for the win . After the match , Xavier informed London that he would compete for the title immediately . London again lost to the champion . London 's final match in ROH was for the title against Samoa Joe on July 19 , 2003 , in which he lost . 
 On May 4 , 2013 , London made his first appearance for ROH in a decade , facing Davey Richards in a losing effort at Border Wars 2013 . London suffered a stinger and concussion during the match and was as a result forced to pull out of the following day 's tapings of Ring of Honor Wrestling . London returned to ROH on August 3 , losing to Michael Elgin in the first round of a tournament for the ROH World Championship . London returned once again at Glory By Honor XII to defeat Roderick Strong . 
 = = = Other promotions ( 2003 ) = = = 
 During his time in ROH , London made brief appearances in Japanese promotion Pro Wrestling Zero @-@ One ( Zero1 ) and Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) . London competed in Zero1 for several months on a match @-@ by @-@ match basis , beginning in January 2003 , before turning down a contract . London was contacted by TNA after ROH 's one @-@ year anniversary show , and told that they were interested in him doing some matches on a try @-@ out basis . On February 12 , 2003 he made his TNA debut in a Gauntlet match against Jerry Lynn , which he lost . London competed mainly in the company 's X Division , even earning shots at the NWA TNA X Division Championship . His last appearance in TNA was on June 18 , 2003 at the TNA Anniversary show . He wrestled X Division Champion Chris Sabin for the title , only to lose due to interference from CM Punk . London has said that he viewed his time in TNA as a " stepping stone " , but knew that he didn 't want to be there long @-@ term . London also made several appearances for East Coast Wrestling Association and won the 7th Annual ECWA Super 8 Tournament . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Cruiserweight division ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = = 
 London signed with World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) in mid – 2003 , working a few dark matches before being sent to the company 's developmental territory , Ohio Valley Wrestling , on August 30 . London made his official WWE television debut on the SmackDown ! brand , losing to Brock Lesnar in a match for the WWE Championship on October 9 . After the match , Lesnar continued to attack London until fellow cruiserweight Spanky ( Brian Kendrick ) made the save . The two competed as a tag team on SmackDown ! ' s sister show Velocity until Spanky left the company in January 2004 . 
 London then began a tag team with Billy Kidman on January 29 , 2004 . On the July 8 episode of SmackDown ! , the duo won the WWE Tag Team Championship from the Dudley Boyz . They defended the title against the Dudleys and the Basham Brothers on several occasions before losing the championship to René Duprée and Kenzo Suzuki on September 9 , due to Kidman leaving London to fight by himself . Kidman 's heel turn led to a feud between the two , which culminated at No Mercy where Kidman defeated London with a shooting star press . After the match , London was bleeding from the mouth and being stretchered when Kidman pulled him back into the ring with the stretcher and delivered another shooting star press to London 's injured ribs . This storyline was put in place after London had broken his nose wrestling Booker T and needed time off to recuperate . London returned on November 25 , wrestling on Velocity until the end of the year . 
 On March 10 , 2005 , London became the number one contender for Chavo Guerrero 's WWE Cruiserweight Championship , which he later won in a cruiserweight battle royal . Guerrero challenged London for the title at Judgment Day , where London emerged victorious . During another title match with Guerrero on June 23 , The Mexicools stormed the ring , attacking both London and Guerrero . On the July 14 episode of SmackDown ! , London teamed with Scotty 2 Hotty and Funaki to face The Mexicools . The ending of the match saw Juventud perform the 450 ° splash on London for the win , but landed his knee onto London 's face and legitimately broke his nose in the process . London lost the Cruiserweight Title on the August 4 episode of Velocity to Nunzio . Later in the night , London cut a heel promo encouraging the fans to protest his title loss . London went on a losing streak before returning as a face and teaming with the newly rehired Brian Kendrick . 
 = = = = Teaming with Brian Kendrick ( 2005 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 On the December 16 episode of Velocity London and Kendrick remade their image , wearing theatrical masks to the ring and matching vests and shorts . On the April 7 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , London and Kendrick defeated WWE Tag Team Champions MNM in a non @-@ title match . They developed a winning streak over the champions , including singles victories for both Kendrick and London over Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury , respectively . London and Kendrick won the WWE Tag Team Championship at Judgment Day , marking consecutive victories for London and Kendrick over MNM . On August 11 , K. C. James and Idol Stevens defeated the champions in a non @-@ title match , igniting a feud between the two teams . During the rivalry , WWE Diva Ashley Massaro began accompanying London and Kendrick to the ring to act as a valet and combat the actions of James and Stevens ' manager Michelle McCool . 
 They soon began a losing streak to the team of William Regal and Dave Taylor . Regal defeated both team members in singles matches and on the December 8 episode of SmackDown ! , Kendrick and London lost a tag team match to the pair . As a result , they were scheduled to defend the championship against Regal and Taylor at Armageddon ; at the event , the match was changed to a four @-@ way ladder match also involving MNM and The Hardys . London and Kendrick won the match and retained the championship . On the January 12 , 2007 , episode of SmackDown ! London and Kendrick successfully retained their championship against Regal and Taylor in a traditional tag team match . 
 On February 2 , London and Kendrick suffered a non @-@ title loss to the rookie team Deuce ' n Domino . A further tag team match loss and a singles loss for Kendrick to Deuce led to a championship match at No Way Out , in which London and Kendrick were victorious . They retained the championship against MNM on SmackDown in March , and then retained the championship against Deuce ' n Domino again in April , after Deuce ' n Domino were disqualified . In a rematch the following week on the April 20 episode of SmackDown ! , London and Kendrick lost the championship to Deuce ' n Domino . During the match London missed a moonsault from the ring apron to the floor kayfabe injuring his ribs , leaving Kendrick to battle Deuce ' n Domino alone . London and Kendrick 's reign is the longest in the championship 's history at 331 days . Selling his storyline injured ribs , London was absent from physical action until the May 11 episode of SmackDown , when he defeated Domino in singles competition . London and Kendrick unsuccessfully competed for the title on June 1 in a triple threat tag team match , which also involved Regal and Taylor , and lost a rematch on June 15 in a standard tag team match . 
 Both London and Kendrick were drafted to the Raw brand on June 17 , 2007 , during the Supplemental Draft . They won their debut match on Raw against The World 's Greatest Tag Team on June 18 . Throughout July and August , they wrestled against The World 's Greatest Tag Team and Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch on Raw , and on September 3 , they won a number one contender 's match for Cade and Murdoch 's World Tag Team Championship . At a house show in South Africa on September 5 , London and Kendrick defeated Cade and Murdoch to win the World Tag Team Championship , only to lose it back in a rematch three days later . At the end of 2007 , he was inactive due to a foot injury . London returned on the February 4 , 2008 , episode of Raw , when he and Kendrick lost to the team of Carlito and Santino Marella . On the March 17 episode of Raw , London and Kendrick faced Umaga in a handicap match . During the match , Kendrick walked out and left London to get pinned ; no dissension came of the incident , and London and Kendrick continued to team together . They unsuccessfully challenged Hardcore Holly and Cody Rhodes for the World Tag Team Championship on May 26 . 
 The team came to an end when Kendrick was drafted back to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2008 WWE Supplemental Draft in June . The following month , London was briefly involved in a storyline between Shawn Michaels , and Chris Jericho and Lance Cade , when Jericho and Cade used London as an example of what happened to those who idolized Michaels . London lost singles matches to both Jericho and Cade on Raw , before disappearing from television . London was released from his WWE contract on November 7 , 2008 . 
 = = = Independent circuit = = = 
 London made his debut in Big Time Wrestling on February 28 , 2009 , defeating the <unk> Champion Jason Styles by disqualification . At the event , he also debuted a new gimmick , described as " a nerdy blend of 1970s band Devo and a nerdy Air Force cadet with flight jacket and goofy , oversized sunglasses " . On November 13 , 2009 , London defeated Jason Blade to win the Northeast Wrestling Championship . On July 10 , 2010 , London defeated Joey Silvia in a two out of three falls match to become the new Pro Wrestling Xperience Heavyweight Champion . 
 On March 26 , 2010 , London made his debut for Dragon Gate USA in a tag team match , where he and Jimmy Jacobs were defeated by Brian Kendrick and Jon Moxley . After the match , Kendrick turned on Moxley and re @-@ formed his team with London , which led to a Loser Leaves Company tag team match between London and Kendrick and Jacobs and Jack Evans at the following day 's tapings of the Mercury Rising pay @-@ per @-@ view . In the end Jacobs forced Kendrick to tap out and as a result he was forced to leave Dragon Gate USA for good . After the match London was assaulted by Teddy Hart . 
 In December 2010 , London began working for Lucha Libre USA as the masked Sydistiko , taking over the role previously held by T.J. Perkins . He teamed up with Rellik to defeat <unk> ( El Oriental and Tinieblas Jr . ) on December 12 , 2010 . The pair participated in three way match to decide the new LLUSA Tag Team Championship but this time El Oriental and Tinieblas Jr. would get the better of the pair . As Sydistiko , he would go on to lose all his matches including LLUSA Championship number one contendership lucha roulette elimination . 
 On July 30 , 2011 , London competed at Vanguard Championship Wrestling ( VCW ) ' s Liberty Lottery 2011 event . He faced John <unk> , the VCW Liberty Champion , and defeated him to become the Liberty Champion . On February 16 , 2013 , London defeated Brian Kendrick at Family Wrestling Entertainment 's No Limit , winning a title match against the Tri @-@ <unk> Champion Damian Darling . The same night , London defeated Darling , winning the title . On June 21 , 2013 , London defeated Akio to retain the title . The next day , Londrick were defeated by The Young Bucks at House of Hardcore 2 . 
 London spent the majority of 2014 wrestling abroad , including in Australia , Europe , and South America . In Scotland 's Insane Championship Wrestling ( ICW ) , London and Brian Kendrick won the ICW Tag Team Championship in October 2014 . After a 28 day reign , they lost the championship to Polo Promotions ( Mark Coffey and Jackie Polo ) on November 2 . Following this title loss , London would then unsuccessfully challenge Kenny Williams for the ICW Zero @-@ G Championship . 
 = = = = Pro Wrestling Guerrilla ( 2009 – 2010 , 2013 ) = = = = 
 London made his return to the independent circuit by making his Pro Wrestling Guerrilla ( PWG ) debut on February 21 , 2009 at Express Written Consent . He wrestled in a six man tag team main event where he and The Young Bucks ( Nick and Matt Jackson ) defeated The Dynasty ( Joey Ryan , Scott Lost and Karl Anderson ) . He later formed an alliance with Bryan Danielson and Roderick Strong , known as the " Hybrid Dolphins " . On January 30 , 2010 , London re @-@ formed his partnership with Brian Kendrick in PWG and together the two of them defeated the PWG World Tag Team Champions Generation Me in a non @-@ title match . 
 On April 10 , 2010 , London defeated PWG mainstay El Generico in a singles match . On May 9 , the two men teamed up to form a duo introduced as ¡ Peligro Abejas ! ( literally translated as The Danger Bees ) in the fourth annual <unk> eight @-@ team tag tournament . After defeating " The Professional " Scott Lost and Chuck Taylor in the first round and Jay and Mark Briscoe in the semifinals , London and Generico defeated the Young Bucks in the finals of the tournament to win both <unk> and the PWG World Tag Team Championship . Later in the year on December 11 , 2010 , ¡ Peligro Abejas ! successfully defended the PWG World Tag Team Championship against the ROH World Tag Team Champions The Kings of Wrestling ( Chris Hero and Claudio Castagnoli ) . On April 9 , 2011 , London was forced to miss a PWG event , during which El Generico and London 's replacement , Ricochet , lost the PWG World Tag Team Championship back to The Young Bucks . 
 After a two @-@ year absence from PWG , London returned to the promotion on March 22 , 2013 , defeating Kevin Steen during the first night of the All Star Weekend 9 . During the second night , he defeated Trent ? in another singles match . At PWG 's tenth anniversary show TEN he teamed with long @-@ time partner Brian Kendrick in a loss to Chuck Taylor and Johnny Gargano . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 He is half @-@ Mexican on his mother 's side . He is also bilingual , speaking both English and Spanish . London has dated former WWE Diva Ashley Massaro . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 As Paul London 
 450 ° splash 
 <unk> DDT – ROH 
 London Calling ( WWE ) / London Star Press ( ROH ) / Shooting star press , sometimes while running or standing ( Independent circuit ) 
 Waffle Face ( <unk> facebuster ) – WWE ; 2004 – 2005 
 As Sydistiko 
 Totally <unk> ( Shooting star press ) 
 Signature moves 
 Arm wrench inside cradle 
 Elbow smash 
 Diving crossbody 
 Frankensteiner 
 Multiple kick variations 
 Dropsault 
 Spinning heel 
 Super 
 Mushroom stomp 
 Northern Lights suplex 
 Plancha , sometimes while performing a somersault 
 Slingshot Oklahoma roll 
 Springboard moonsault 
 Tornado DDT 
 Managers 
 Ashley 
 Finnegan the Space Owl 
 Nicknames 
 " The Excellence of Innovation " 
 " The Intrepid Traveler " 
 " The Dolphin Master " 
 Entrance themes 
 " South Texas Deathride " by The Union Underground ( ROH ) 
 " Pompeii " by E.S. Posthumus ( ROH ) 
 " Battle Without Honor or Humanity " by <unk> <unk> ( ROH ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 All Action Wrestling 
 <unk> Championship ( 1 time ) 
 East Coast Wrestling Association 
 ECWA Super 8 Tournament ( 2003 ) 
 Extreme Texas Wrestling 
 ETW Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Family Wrestling Entertainment 
 FWE Tri @-@ Borough Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 Funking Conservatory 
 FC United States Championship ( 1 time ) 
 FC Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 FC Hardcore Championship ( 1 time ) 
 FC Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Adam Windsor 
 Insane Championship Wrestling 
 ICW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Brian Kendrick 
 Insane Wrestling League 
 <unk> World Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 Northeast Wrestling 
 NEW Championship ( 3 time ) 
 NWA Wrestling Revolution 
 NWA Grand Warrior Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NWA Southwest 
 NWA Texas Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Bushido 
 <unk> Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Guerrilla 
 PWG World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with El Generico 
 Dynamite <unk> Tag Team Title Tournament ( 2010 ) – with El Generico 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2007 ) with Brian Kendrick 
 PWI ranked him 36 of the top 500 singles wrestlers of the PWI 500 in 2005 
 Pro Wrestling Xperience 
 PWX Heavyweight Championship ( 1 time , current ) 
 Vanguard Championship Wrestling 
 VCW United States Liberty Championship ( 1 time ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Brian Kendrick 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 2 times ) – with Billy Kidman ( 1 ) and Brian Kendrick ( 1 ) 
 WWE Cruiserweight Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Most Underrated ( 2004 ) 
 = Ascocoryne sarcoides = 
 Ascocoryne sarcoides is a species of fungus in the family Helotiaceae . Formerly known as Coryne sarcoides , its taxonomical history has been complicated by the fact that it may adopt both sexual and asexual forms . Colloquially known as jelly drops or the purple <unk> , this common fungus appears as a gelatinous mass of pinkish or purple @-@ colored discs . Distributed widely in North America , Europe and Asia , A. sarcoides is a saprobic fungus and grows in clusters on the trunks and branches of a variety of dead woods . Field studies suggest that colonization by A. sarcoides of the heartwood of black spruce confers some resistance to further infection by rot @-@ causing fungi . A. sarcoides contains the antibiotic compound <unk> , shown in the laboratory to inhibit the growth of several Gram @-@ positive bacteria . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The taxonomical history of this fungus has been complicated by the fact that its life cycle allows for both an imperfect ( making asexual spores , or conidia ) or perfect ( making sexual spores ) form ; at various times authors have assigned names to one or the other form , but these names have often been at odds with the accepted rules of fungal nomenclature . It was originally described in 1781 by the Dutch scientist Nikolaus Joseph von Jacquin as Lichen sarcoides . Christian Hendrik Persoon called it Peziza sarcoides in 1801 . Elias Magnus Fries , in his 1822 publication Systema Mycologicum , described the imperfect state of the fungus under the name Tremella sarcoides . The genus name Coryne was first used in 1851 by <unk> , who proposed Coryne sarcoides for the imperfect state ; in 1865 the Tulasne brothers ( Charles and Louis René ) used Coryne to refer to both the perfect and imperfect forms . It was designated the type species for the genus in a 1931 publication by Clements and Shear . 
 Several decades later it became apparent that the name Coryne sarcoides violated the naming conventions imposed by fungal taxonomists — specifically , the species was named after the imperfect state , so in 1967 , Groves and Wilson proposed the new genus name Ascocoryne to accommodate the perfect state . The conidial state of this fungus is Coryne dubia Persoon ex S.F. Gray ( synonymous with <unk> sarcoides von <unk> ) . The specific epithet is derived from Greek and means " fleshy , flesh @-@ like " , from <unk> ( sarx , <unk> in compounds ) , " flesh " , and the common adjectival ending <unk> ( <unk> ) , " similar , -like " . 
 = = Description = = 
 This fungus is characterized by a fruiting body ( technically an apothecia ) with a pinkish @-@ purple color and more or less gelatinous consistency . The apothecia , typically 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , start with a roughly spherical shape , then eventually flatten out to become shallowly cup @-@ shaped with a wavy edge and smooth upper surface . The lower surface may be covered with small particles ( granular ) , and the apothecia are either attached directly to the growing surface ( sessile ) , or have a rudimentary stem . The apothecia are accompanied by a conidial form , where non @-@ sexual spores are generated . The conidial form consists of <unk> , a cushion @-@ like asexual fruiting body mass consisting of short conidiophores ( specialized stalks that bear conidia ) . The <unk> are similar in color and consistency to the apothecia but very variable in shape , typically club- , spoon- , or tongue @-@ shaped , and bearing minute , cylindrical , straight or curved conidia . As the fungus matures and the apothecia enlarge and press against each other , the apothecia coalesce to form a gelatinous , irregular mass . The flesh , similar to the appearance of the fungus , is pinkish @-@ purple and gelatinous . The odor and taste of A. sarcoides are not distinctive . Ascocoryne sarcoides is not considered edible . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 The spores are translucent ( hyaline ) , smooth , have an ellipsoid shape , with dimensions of 12 – 16 by 3 – 5 µm . Spores contain one or two oil droplets . The imperfect ( conidial ) form of the fungus produces smooth , hyaline spores that are 3 – 3 @.@ 5 by 1 – 2 µm . The asci – sexual spore @-@ bearing cells – have a cylindrical shape , with dimensions of 115 – 125 by 8 – 10 µm . The paraphyses ( sterile filamentous cells interspersed among the asci ) are cylindrical with slightly swollen tips , and few branches . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Ascocoryne <unk> , another small and gelatinous violet @-@ colored species , has apothecia that are more often cup @-@ shaped , and has larger spores — 20 – 24 by 5 @.@ 5 – 6 µm . Because of its resemblance to the jelly fungi , A. sarcoides has been mistaken for the basidiomycete species Auricularia auricula and Tremella foliacea . T. foliacea is larger , brown , and leafy in appearance . Auricularia auricula is also larger , typically brown , is disc- or ear @-@ shaped , with a ribbed undersurface . Microscopically , Tremella foliacea and Auricularia auricula are easily distinguished from A. sarcoides by the presence of basidia ( rather than asci ) . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 This species has a broad distribution in forested areas of North America and Europe . A saprobic fungus , it derives nutrients from decaying organic matter , and as such is usually found growing on the stumps and logs of fallen deciduous trees . However , it is also found on a variety of living trees as well . For example , in Europe it has been found on the stems of living spruce ( Picea abies ) in Finland , France , Great Britain , Norway , and Germany . 
 Other collections sites include Australia , Chile , China , Cuba , Iceland , Korea , and Taiwan . In Hawaii , it grows on trunks of fallen Cibotium and Aleurites trees . A. sarcoides occurs most frequently in late summer and autumn . 
 = = Role in tree decay = = 
 A number of field studies conducted in the boreal forest region of Northern Ontario ( Canada ) showed that A. sarcoides was found to be frequently associated with various deciduous and coniferous tree hosts that had been affected by the fungal disease known as heart rot ; this discovery was noted as unusual , as most fungal tree infections are known to be caused by Basidiomycetes , not Ascomycetes . In the case of the commercially valuable tree species black spruce ( Picea <unk> ) , it was determined that prior colonization by A. sarcoides reduces the incidence of subsequent infection by common fungal pathogens , such as Fomes <unk> and <unk> <unk> ; furthermore , A. sarcoides can exist in the wood with no noticeable harmful effects on the host . A similar relationship was shown later to exist with jack pine trees ( species Pinus banksiana ) , whereby A. sarcoides inhibited Peniophora <unk> , but had little effect on the subsequent growth of Fomes <unk> . The study also showed that A. sarcoides is isolated more frequently from defective wood as the age of the tree increases ( trees examined in the study were over 80 years old ) , and that it can infect both uninfected heartwood as well as previously decayed wood ; in the latter case it usually coexists with the causal fungi . 
 = = Bioactive compounds = = 
 <unk> are chemical compounds that are widely distributed among the Basidiomycetes division of fungi . Ascocoryne sarcoides has been shown to contain a <unk> named <unk> — a chemical derivative of the compound benzoquinone . This pigment , when in alkaline solution , turns a dark violet , similar in color to the fruit bodies of the fungus . <unk> has moderate antibiotic activity , and was shown in laboratory tests to inhibit the growth of several Gram @-@ positive bacteria , including the widely distributed food spoilage organism Bacillus <unk> ; however , it has no effect on the growth on Gram @-@ negative bacteria , nor does it have any anti @-@ fungal activity . 
 = = Volatile Organic Compounds = = 
 In 2008 , an isolate of A. sarcoides was observed to produce a series of volatiles including 6 to 9 carbon alcohols , ketones and alkanes . This mixture was called " <unk> " because of its similarity to some existing fuel mixtures . The isolate was originally identified at <unk> <unk> but its taxonomy was later revised to <unk> sarcoides . Its genome was sequenced in 2012 in an effort to determine the genetic basis for the production of these volatiles . 
 = William Anderson ( RAAF officer ) = 
 Air Vice @-@ Marshal William Hopton ( Bill ) Anderson , CBE , DFC ( 30 December 1891 – 30 December 1975 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) . He flew with the Australian Flying Corps in World War I , earning the Distinguished Flying Cross and the Belgian Croix de guerre , and leading Nos. 3 and 7 Squadrons . Anderson commanded the Australian Air Corps during its brief existence in 1920 , before joining the fledgling RAAF the following year . The service 's third most senior officer , he primarily held posts on the Australian Air Board in the inter @-@ war years . He was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1934 , and promoted to air commodore in 1938 . 
 When World War II broke out , Anderson was Air Member for Supply . In 1940 he acted as Chief of the Air Staff between the resignation of Air Vice @-@ Marshal Stanley Goble in January and the arrival of Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , RAF , the next month . He led the newly formed Central and Eastern Area Commands between December 1940 and July 1943 , briefly returning to the Air Board as Air Member for Organisation and Equipment in 1941 – 42 . Anderson was founding Commandant of the RAAF Staff School from July to November 1943 , and held this post again from October 1944 until his retirement in April 1946 . Known to his colleagues as " Andy " or " Mucker " , he died on his birthday in 1975 . 
 = = Early life and World War I = = 
 Born on 30 December 1891 in Kew , Victoria , Bill Anderson was the third son of surveyor Edward Anderson , from England , and his wife Florence , a native Victorian . The youth was educated at Melbourne Church of England Grammar School , where he joined the cadet corps . He began his professional military career as a Royal Australian ( Garrison ) Artillery officer in December 1910 , before transferring to the Australian Naval and Military Expeditionary Force , based at Rabaul in what was then German New Guinea , in March 1915 . The following January , Anderson joined the Australian Flying Corps ( AFC ) as a captain , serving with No. 1 Squadron in Palestine . He was posted to No. 3 Squadron ( designated No. 69 Squadron Royal Flying Corps by the British ) in August 1917 , operating Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8 two @-@ seat reconnaissance aircraft on the Western Front . 
 From October 1917 , No. 3 Squadron was heavily involved in artillery ranging , activity that left the slow R.E.8s vulnerable to attack by German fighters . Twice that month Anderson 's plane was dived upon by multiple enemy aircraft . He was , in his own words , " too scared to think " on the first occasion , but both times held his nerve and manoeuvred his plane so that his observer could hold off their opponents with Lewis Gun fire while other R.E.8s came to their aid . Anderson was spotting for artillery near the Messines Ridge on 6 December when he engaged a German two @-@ seat DFW that observer John Bell was able to shoot down ; it was No. 3 Squadron 's first confirmed aerial victory . In January 1918 , Anderson was given the temporary rank of major and posted to England to take charge of No. 7 ( Training ) Squadron AFC . He was recommended for the Military Cross ( MC ) on 12 March for his achievements with No. 3 Squadron in France , the citation noting his " resolute fight " and " cool and capable flying " in evading attacks by enemy aircraft and successfully carrying out his reconnaissance missions . In the event , he was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross ( DFC ) in the King 's Birthday Honours promulgated in the London Gazette on 3 June , becoming the first Australian to receive the newly created decoration . He was also awarded the Belgian Croix de guerre , gazetted on 9 July . Anderson went back to France in October 1918 as commanding officer of No. 3 Squadron . His service earned him a mention in despatches on 11 July 1919 . 
 = = Inter @-@ war years = = 
 Anderson relinquished command of No. 3 Squadron in January 1919 and returned to Australia two months later . In December that year the Australian Flying Corps was disbanded , to be replaced on 1 January 1920 by the short @-@ lived Australian Air Corps ( AAC ) , which was , like the AFC , a branch of the Army . The AFC 's senior officer , Lieutenant Colonel Richard Williams , was still in England , and Major Anderson was appointed commander of the AAC , a position that also put him in charge of Central Flying School ( CFS ) at Point Cook , Victoria . On 31 March 1921 , he joined the newly formed Australian Air Force ( the " Royal " prefix being added in August ) as a squadron leader , becoming its third most senior officer after Williams and former Royal Naval Air Service pilot Stanley Goble , both now wing commanders . During 1921 , Anderson headed up the RAAF 's Point Cook base and its two major units , No. 1 Flying Training School ( No. 1 FTS ) — the successor to CFS — and the newly established No. 1 Aircraft Depot ( No. 1 AD ) . Over the next four years he acted as Director of Personnel and Training , Chief of the Administrative Staff , and Second Air Member on the RAAF 's controlling body , the Air Board , when Goble was away on overseas postings . In April 1922 , he took part in the new service 's first army co @-@ operation exercise , piloting an Airco <unk> with Flight Lieutenant Adrian Cole , who spotted for artillery firing from an emplacement at Queenscliff , Victoria . A year later , Anderson proposed a special RAAF workshop for research and development , which was duly formed at Point Cook later that year . 
 The young Air Force staged numerous public displays in its early years ; on one such occasion over the Melbourne suburb of Essendon in September 1924 , Anderson , Ray Brownell and another pilot took part in a mock dogfight while ace Harry Cobby gave a demonstration of balloon busting . During 1925 – 26 , Anderson again took command of No. 1 FTS , as well as occupying a position on the Air Board as Air Member for Personnel . He was posted to England between 1927 and 1929 , attending RAF Staff College , Andover , and serving as Air Liaison Officer ( <unk> ) to the British Air Ministry . On 23 March 1927 he was promoted to wing commander . As <unk> in 1928 , he provided information to the Air Board concerning shortcomings of the de Havilland Hound light day bomber , then being strongly considered for the RAAF , that led to the Westland Wapiti being ordered instead . Returning to Australia in mid @-@ 1929 , Anderson was for a short time in charge of No. 1 AD , now based at RAAF Station Laverton , Victoria , before appointment to the Air Board as Air Member for Supply in October . He spent most of the 1930s in this position , aside from an acting role as Air Member for Personnel in 1933 – 34 , and attendance at the Imperial Defence College , London , the following year . Anderson had no formal training in the supply field , and though regarded with affection was variously considered " not quite on the same wave length as others " and " so immersed in the minutiae of administration that some important policy matters languished " . His chronic shyness with women other than his unmarried sister also made him an object of fun in some quarters . He was raised to group captain in December 1932 and air commodore in January 1938 . Appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the 1933 King 's Birthday Honours , he was promoted Commander in the same order ( CBE ) in the 1934 New Year Honours . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Anderson was still serving as Air Member for Supply when Australia declared war in September 1939 . On 9 January 1940 he was appointed acting Chief of the Air Staff ( CAS ) , following the resignation of the incumbent , Air Vice @-@ Marshal Goble . Anderson remained in the position until 10 February , when Air Chief Marshal Sir Charles Burnett , seconded from the Royal Air Force , arrived to take over . The Australian government at this stage had so little faith in the leadership of its Air Force that it had briefly considered offering temporary command of the service to a Royal Australian Navy officer , Second Naval Member Commodore Maitland Boucher , before deciding against such a " monumental slight to the senior ranks of the RAAF " and settling on Anderson . After relinquishing his temporary position as CAS , Anderson briefly reverted to his previous role as Air Member for Supply before taking over as Air Member for Personnel ( AMP ) in March 1940 ; he was succeeded in November by Air Vice @-@ Marshal Henry Wrigley . The next month , Anderson took over from Air Commodore Cole as Air Officer Commanding Central Area , with responsibility for air defence , protection of adjacent sea lanes , and aerial reconnaissance for most of New South Wales ; he remained at this post until it was disbanded in August the following year . 
 Promoted acting air vice @-@ marshal in September 1941 , Anderson resumed his position on the Air Board by replacing Air Marshal Williams as Air Member for Organisation and Equipment . In May 1942 , he assumed command of the newly established Eastern Area , which was headquartered in Sydney and controlled seven squadrons from southern Queensland to southern New South Wales . One of the area 's main roles was anti @-@ submarine warfare ; its squadrons also included fighters and army co @-@ operation aircraft . In July 1943 Anderson became the inaugural Commandant of the RAAF Staff School at Mount Martha , Victoria . The school was instituted to further the training of officers at the squadron leader and wing commander level , whose basic education standards Anderson , among others , found sadly lacking . In December 1943 he was again appointed Air Member for Personnel , taking over from Air Commodore Frank Lukis , before returning to command the RAAF Staff School in September 1944 . He continued in the latter role until being forcibly retired , along with a number of other senior Air Force commanders , in April 1946 , ostensibly to make way for younger and equally qualified officers . A confidential report in September 1944 had found him " hard working , conscientious and loyal " but lacking in " constructive capacity and organising ability " . He was still four years below the statutory retirement age of fifty @-@ seven for his substantive rank of air commodore . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Following his discharge from the RAAF as an honorary air vice marshal , Anderson lived in East Melbourne . A lifelong bachelor , he shared a house with his sister , who also never married . From 1947 until 1971 , he served as honorary chairman of the Victorian branch of the Services Canteens Trust Fund . On 31 March 1971 , he was among a select group of surviving founder members of the RAAF who attended a celebratory dinner at the Hotel Canberra to mark the service 's Golden Jubilee ; his fellow guests included Air Marshal Williams , Air Vice @-@ Marshal Wrigley , Air Commodore Hippolyte ( Frank ) De La Rue , and Wing Commander Sir Lawrence Wackett . Bill Anderson died on his birthday in 1975 , and was buried in Boroondara Cemetery , Kew . 
 = Typhoon Nina ( 1987 ) = 
 Typhoon Nina , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Sisang , was the most intense typhoon to strike the Philippines since Typhoon Irma in 1981 . Typhoon Nina originated from an area of convection near the Marshall Islands in mid @-@ November 1987 . It gradually became better organized , and on November 19 , was first classified as a tropical cyclone . Moving west @-@ northwest , Nina attained tropical storm intensity that evening . Late on November 20 , Nina passed through the Chuuk Lagoon . After a brief pause in intensification , Nina intensified into a typhoon on November 22 . Two days later , the typhoon intensified suddenly , before attaining its peak 10 minute intensity of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . During the afternoon of November 25 , Nina moved ashore in southern Luzon at the same intensity . It gradually weakened over land , before entering the South China Sea and turning to the north . By November 30 , Nina dissipated . 
 Across the Chuuk Lagoon , four people were killed and damage ranged from $ 30 – $ 40 million ( 1987 USD ) . In the capital of Weno , 85 % of dwellings and 50 % of government buildings were damaged . Throughout the atoll , at least 1 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless , approximately 1 @,@ 000 houses were damaged , and 39 injuries were reported . While crossing the Philippines , Nina brought extensive damage to the northern portion of the island group . The town of <unk> sustained the worst damage from the typhoon , where 287 people died . Sixty @-@ one lives were lost in the nearby city of <unk> , where 98 % of all structures were either damaged or destroyed . Four hundred people died , 80 % of all crops were destroyed , and 90 % of all homes were either damaged or destroyed in the Sorsogon province . Nearby , in the Albay province , 73 people were killed . Throughout both the Albay and Sorsogon provinces , four @-@ fifths of all schools and half of all public infrastructure were destroyed . Elsewhere , in Boac , 80 % of homes lost their roofs . In <unk> , 18 of the village 's 200 homes were destroyed . However , the capital city of Manila avoided the brunt of the typhoon . Throughout the Philippines , approximately 114 @,@ 000 people sought shelter , approximately 90 @,@ 000 houses were destroyed , leaving more than 150 @,@ 000 homeless . Nationwide , damage from the storm totaled $ 54 @.@ 5 million and 808 people perished . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An area of convection developed within near the Marshall Islands in mid @-@ November . Initially , convection waxed and waned , but on November 17 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) started tracking the system . At this time , the system developed deep convection as well as good outflow . The JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) at 0100 UTC on November 19 due to a significant increase in organization . Five hours later , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started monitoring the system . Continuing to rapidly become better organized while moving west @-@ northwest , the cyclone was classified as a tropical depression by the JTWC at midday . On the evening of November 19 , both the JTWC and the JMA upgraded the system to Tropical Storm Nina , shortly after developing banding features . Initially forecast by the JTWC to move slowly , instead , Nina accelerated while gradually intensifying . At 1600 UTC on November 20 , Tropical Storm Nina passed 75 km ( 45 mi ) south of Weno Island in the Chuuk Lagoon . Two hours later , the JMA upgraded Nina to a severe tropical storm . After moving away from the island on the morning of November 21 , the JTWC upgraded Nina to a typhoon at 1200 UTC , with the JMA following suit early on November 22 . Shortly thereafter , Nina made its closest approach to Ulithi , passing 110 km ( 70 mi ) to the north . At 1600 UTC , Nina tracked about 175 km ( 110 mi ) north of Yap . 
 Typhoon Nina accelerated slightly as it traversed the open waters of the Philippine Sea . The storm continued to slowly deepen , though early on November 23 , the system leveled off in intensity . That day , the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration ( PAGASA ) also monitored the storm and assigned it with the local name Sisang . However , midday on November 24 , Nina entered a phase of explosive intensification , at a rate of 1 @.@ 33 mbar ( 0 @.@ 039 inHg ) an hour . Despite this , the JMA only increased the intensity slightly to 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . After developing a well @-@ defined eye , the JTWC reported that Nina attained its peak intensity of 270 km / h ( 170 mph ) , making it a low @-@ end Category 5 system on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . At 1500 UTC on November 25 , Nina moved ashore along the southern tip of Luzon at its peak intensity . 
 Despite interacting with land , little change in strength occurred until 0000 UTC on November 26 , at which time , the system began to weaken . After traversing Luzon and Mindoro , the JTWC reduced the wind speed of the typhoon to 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) . Although no eye was visible on satellite imagery , radar imagery indicted that an eye was present , but cloud @-@ filed ; henceforth , the JTWC increased the intensity of Nina to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , equivalent to a weak Category 3 hurricane . According to the JMA , however , Nina never re @-@ intensified . By 0000 UTC on November 27 , the low and mid level circulations began to decouple , deeply frustrating many forecasters at the JTWC . During this time , the cyclone posed a serious threat to Southern China and Hong Kong . Instead , Nina veered northward while gradually weakening ; by midday on November 27 , the JMA had reduced the intensity of Nina to 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) . Early on November 28 , an eye once again became visible on satellite imagery . However , no re @-@ intensification occurred . By the afternoon , increased wind shear took toll on the cyclone , causing Nina to become less organized due to deep convection being sheared off to the east @-@ northeast . Thus , the JTWC expected Nina to move into the Luzon Straits and rapidly transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . After meandering within the South China Sea , Nina turned south , before dissipating on November 29 , though the JMA continued to monitor its remnants until 0000 UTC on November 30 . 
 = = Preparation , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Federated States of Micronesia = = = 
 While passing near Truk , which has a population of 42 @,@ 000 , Typhoon Nina inflicted heavy crop damage on the area . In the capital of Weno , 85 % of homes and 50 % of government buildings were damaged . There , communication lines were downed and hundreds of people were evacuated . Throughout the atoll , four lives were lost , including a woman and a 14 @-@ year @-@ old boy killed by a falling breadfruit tree and an 11 @-@ year @-@ old girl died after her leg was struck by a piece of flying metal . One person was reported missing . Over 1 @,@ 000 people were rendered homeless while roughly 1 @,@ 000 homes were damaged . Damaged from the storm ranged from $ 30 – 40 million ( 1987 USD ) and 39 were wounded . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 Prior to landfall , around 10 provinces , including most of Luzon , was placed under a typhoon alert . However , many fisherman ignored the alerts and refused to flee to higher ground . Furthermore , Philippine Air Lines cancelled 21 domestic flights and three international flights . Numerous other flights were delayed . Local authorities also suspended school classes . 
 Typhoon Nina brought widespread damage to much of the northern Philippines . It was the strongest system to strike the archipelago since Typhoon Irma in 1981 . The capital city of Manila was spared the worst of Nina . There , only minor damage and power outages were reported , though 800 were evacuated to shelters due to flooding and the city 's airport closed . Two men were crushed to death in Lucena City . The worst effects of the storm were felt in <unk> , where 287 people drowned due to storm surge . In nearby <unk> , 61 fatalities occurred , where 98 % of the city 's buildings were damaged or destroyed and its supply of drinking water was cut off . Throughout the Sorsogon province , 80 % of all crops were destroyed and 90 % of all homes were either damaged or destroyed . Province @-@ wide , 400 people died . In the Albay province , 73 people were killed . Throughout both the Albay and Sorsogon provinces combined , 80 % of all schools and 50 % of all public buildings were demolished . 
 Elsewhere , seven casualties occurred in the Laguna province , while one person perished each in San Pablo , Batangas , Marinduque and Mindoro Oriental . Thirty @-@ two people were killed in the Camarines Sur province and 23 other lives were lost in Camarines Norte . Five others were killed in the Masbate province , and one died in Marinduque . In Boac , the capital of Marinduque , 80 % of all dwellings lost their roofs and damage was severe to churches , schools and city buildings . In <unk> , situated to the southeast of Legaspi , all but 15 of the town 's 200 dwellings were leveled . Although there were no deaths , Samar Island also suffered severe damage . Offshore , five fisherman perished and a tugboat and cargo ship were rendered missing due to rough seas . Nina also brought widespread power outages to most of Luzon ; consequently , trading on the nation 's two biggest stock exchange was suspended for November 26 . 
 Overall , around 114 @,@ 000 persons were evacuated to shelters , 153 @,@ 339 were listed homeless , and 1 @,@ 075 were wounded . A total of 90 @,@ 173 homes were demolished due to Nina while an additional 109 @,@ 633 were partially destroyed . Nationwide , 808 people were killed . In all , damage from the storm totaled $ 54 @.@ 5 million ( 1987 USD ) , $ 7 @.@ 9 million of which occurred along the Bicol Region . 
 Due to the damage wrought by Nina , President Corazon Aquino declared four Luzon provinces a disaster area . Initially , only 11 provinces were declared a state of emergency , but by November 29 , this total increased to 17 . United States Ambassador Nicholas Platt released $ 25 @,@ 000 in emergency aid and sent officials to help with relief efforts . The American Red Cross also provided $ 24 @,@ 000 worth of aid to post @-@ storm victims . The Roman Catholic Church also provided $ 160 @,@ 000 worth of food to the nation . Additionally , Social Welfare and Development Secretary Mita Pardo de Tavera donated $ 50 @,@ 000 for emergency disaster relief , though many locals complained that this aid was too little and too late . Around 11 @,@ 000 lb ( 5 @,@ 000 kg ) of rice was donated for use in eight provinces , and on December 1 , an additional 35 @,@ 000 lb ( 16 @,@ 000 kg ) pounds of aid was airlifted to the region . Belgium also launched a four @-@ month program to help 380 @,@ 000 post @-@ storm victims . Most flights in and out of Manila had returned to a normal schedule by November 28 . In all , nine countries and several foreign Red Cross organizations responded by providing aid , totaling roughly $ 700 @,@ 000 worth of value , mostly from Japan . PAGASA later retired the name Sisang on the list of tropical cyclones in the country ; it was replaced by <unk> . 
 = = = China = = = 
 Although Nina was rapidly weakening over the South China Sea , the storm brought 4 @.@ 7 mm ( 0 @.@ 19 in ) of rain to Hong Kong , prompting a tropical cyclone signal for nearby Macau . 
 = Operation Tonga = 
 This article summarises British airborne operations during the Normandy landings . For American airborne operations , see American airborne landings in Normandy . 
 Operation Tonga was the codename given to the airborne operation undertaken by the British 6th Airborne Division between 5 June and 7 June 1944 as a part of Operation Overlord and the D @-@ Day landings during the Second World War . 
 The paratroopers and glider @-@ borne airborne troops of the division , commanded by Major @-@ General Richard Nelson Gale , landed on the eastern flank of the invasion area , near to the city of Caen , tasked with a number of objectives . The division was to capture two strategically important bridges over the Caen Canal and Orne River which were to be used by Allied ground forces to advance once the seaborne landings had taken place , destroy several other bridges to deny their use to the Germans and secure several important villages . The division was also assigned the task of assaulting and destroying the Merville Gun Battery , an artillery battery that Allied intelligence believed housed a number of heavy artillery pieces , which could bombard Sword Beach and possibly inflict heavy casualties on the Allied troops landing on it . Having achieved these objectives , the division was then to create and secure a bridgehead focused around the captured bridges until they linked up with advancing Allied ground forces . 
 The division suffered from a combination of bad weather and poor pilot navigation which caused many of the airborne troops to be dropped inaccurately throughout the divisional operational area , causing a number of casualties and making conducting operations much more difficult . In particular , the 9th Parachute Battalion , which was assigned the task of destroying the Merville artillery battery , was only able to gather up a fraction of its strength before it had to attack the battery , with the result that the depleted force suffered a number of casualties . However , the battery was successfully assaulted and the guns inside it disabled , and the division 's other objectives were also achieved despite the problems encountered . A small force of glider @-@ borne airborne troops secured the two bridges over the Caen Canal and River Orne , the other bridges were destroyed , and a number of towns were occupied . A bridgehead was formed by the division , and it successfully repulsed a number of German counter @-@ attacks until Allied ground forces from the invasion beaches reached its positions . The actions of the division severely limited the ability of the German defenders to communicate and organise themselves , ensuring that the seaborne troops could not be attacked during the first few hours after landing when they were most vulnerable . 
 = = Background = = 
 Operation Tonga originated in the planning of Operation Overlord , the plan for the eventual invasion of France and the opening of a Second Front in North @-@ Western Europe . Planning for the invasion of Europe by the Allies had begun in May 1943 when President of the United States Franklin Delano Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Winston Churchill had met at the Washington Conference . The two Allied leaders decided that all available Allied forces in the theatre should be concentrated in Great Britain , and that planning for the invasion of North @-@ Western Europe should begin . A provisional target date of May 1944 was set , the code @-@ name Overlord decided upon , and a joint Anglo @-@ American planning staff created under Lieutenant @-@ General Frederick E. Morgan , who was given the title of Chief of Staff to the Supreme Allied Commander ( COSSAC ) . Planning then began for the invasion of Europe , and even early plans for Overlord called for the commitment of airborne forces to support the ground forces and protect their landing areas . Operation Skyscraper , for example , called for the deployment of two airborne divisions to land near Caen on the east coast of the Cotentin Peninsula in support of an invasion of Normandy by five divisions , whose objective would be the capture of Cherbourg and then breaking out to the east of Normandy . One ambitious proposal , " Plan C " , was put forward by General George Marshall that would have involved a large airborne drop on the Seine , aiming to cut the German forces in half during D @-@ Day itself . 
 A number of plans were eventually drawn up by Morgan and his cadre of staff officers for the invasion of Normandy , finally deciding that the invasion should take place on a thirty @-@ mile front west of the River Orne , rejecting the need to capture the Pas De Calais and the ports there by calling for the creation of prefabricated artificial ports to ferry equipment and troops ashore once the initial landings had occurred . Morgan 's final plan would utilise three divisions in the first assault , with airborne forces being dropped onto the town of Caen early on the first day to seize the first breakout route . 
 Following the appointment of General Bernard Montgomery to the command of the 21st Army Group , the plan underwent a number of further revisions , and on 21 January 1944 a revised Overlord plan was presented to General Dwight D. Eisenhower , who had been chosen as the Supreme Allied Commander for the invasion . The updated and revised plan widened the landing area to include all of the coastline between the River Orne and the eastern coast of the Cotentin Peninsula , to be taken with five divisions , with airborne divisions to land either side of the landing areas to secure their flanks and protect the landing troops from counterattack . The British airborne forces were to land in the east and the American airborne forces to land to the west of Bayeux to protect the flanks of the infantry and armoured units moving inland from the beaches . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = British Preparation = = = 
 The British 6th Airborne Division , which was under the command of Major @-@ General Richard Nelson Gale , was chosen to conduct airborne operations on the eastern flank of the invasion area . The division was new , having been activated in April 1943 . Operation Overlord would be its first experience of combat . It had been the first to be established for the purpose of undertaking division @-@ level airborne operations , rather than contributing to a range of smaller operations , and there was considerable debate over what the unit should do in practice . 
 As late as January 1944 , Gale noted that he had ‘ no indication as yet of a definite airborne task ' for his unit and continued to keep all options open , reflecting the ongoing discussions at the strategic level over the wider plan for D @-@ Day . On 17 February 1944 Major @-@ General Frederick Arthur Montague Browning , commander of all British airborne forces , arrived at the headquarters of the division to brief General Gale on what the division was expected to achieve during Operation Tonga . The original plan for Tonga did not involve the entire division , however , instead only calling for a single parachute brigade and an anti @-@ tank battery to be attached to the British 3rd Infantry Division . This force would be tasked with seizing bridges over the Caen Canal and the River Orne near the towns of Benouville and Ranville . Gale , however , objected to this small @-@ scale operation , arguing that a single brigade would not be able to achieve these objectives with such limited manpower , and asked for the entire division to be deployed . After consultation with his superiors , Browning agreed to the request and ordered Gale to begin planning for the operation . 
 The division was allotted three specific tasks to achieve as a part of Operation Tonga , apart from protecting the eastern flank of the Allied seaborne landings and taking control of the areas of strategic importance to the east of Caen . First , it was to capture intact the two bridges over the Caen Canal and the Orne River at Benouville and Ranville . The bridges then would be defended against counterattacks . Before D @-@ Day , Gale knew that the capture of the bridges would be critical for the resupply and reinforcement of 6th Airborne but he did not know that the bridges were incapable of supporting tanks . Second , the division was to destroy the heavily fortified Merville coastal artillery battery located at Franceville Plage , to ensure that it could not shell the British forces landing on Sword Beach . A third task was to destroy several bridges which spanned the River Dives , located near the towns of Varaville , Robehomme , Bures and Troarn . The division would then hold the territory that it had seized until it could be relieved by advancing Allied ground forces . 
 Planning for the operation began in February , starting with the number of transport aircraft assigned to the operation being expanded rapidly to accommodate the entire division . Two Royal Air Force air groups were provided for the operation to ensure that the division could be deployed into Normandy in just two airlifts . The pilots and crew of these transport aircraft then began a campaign of formation flying training and specialised aircrew training to ensure that they were as familiar with what the operation required of them as was possible . The 6th Airborne Division carried out several large @-@ scale airborne exercises , using them to find the most efficient way to deploy a brigade group on one or multiple landing @-@ zones . On 6 February the 3rd Parachute Brigade undertook an exercise in which the entire brigade was dropped by some 98 transport aircraft , and at the end of March 284 aircraft were used in Exercise ' Bizz II ' in which the entire division was deployed by parachute or glider . Finally , between 21 April and 26 April , Exercise ' Mush ' utilised approximately 700 aircraft to deploy the British 1st Airborne Division and the Polish 1st Parachute Brigade against the 6th Airborne Division , who moved by road , in a simulation of a full @-@ scale airborne operation . 
 As the date of the operation approached , training became more intensive . Glider units spent hours aloft every day circling over airfields as they practiced the manoeuvers required to land the airborne forces next to the bridges over the Orne and Dive and the Merville artillery battery . Once the pilots had practiced this sufficiently during the day , they were then switched to night operations . In the landing grounds used by the division for their operations , dozens of poles similar to those in Normandy were erected , with engineering units then timed on how fast they could demolish the obstacles . The units tasked with destroying the Merville artillery battery spent two weeks at a special camp where they built a replica of the battery and carried out several rehearsal exercises in and around it . The units that were to be used to capture the Orne bridges were transferred to Exeter , where they conducted intensive exercises around the River Exe and the nearby canal . The pilots of the gliders and transport aircraft were also constantly briefed with thousands of maps and photographs of the landing zones and the surrounding areas , as well as dozens of scale models of the zones and the primary objectives , such as the bridges and the Merville artillery battery . A coloured film was produced from aerial reconnaissance photographs which , when played at the correct speed and height over the scale models , realistically simulated the paths the glider pilots would take towards their landing @-@ zones . 
 = = = German Preparation = = = 
 The airborne troops of the 6th Airborne Division would be opposed by the Wehrmacht formations stationed in the area around Caen and the River Orne , which by June 1944 consisted of the 709th and 716th Infantry Divisions , both of which were static formations whose manpower consisted of medically downgraded troops and conscripts recruited from the Soviet Union or Eastern Europe . Both divisions also had a miscellaneous collection of anti @-@ tank guns and artillery pieces , as well as a small number of German and French tanks and self @-@ propelled guns . Neither division was rated as being highly efficient , with Allied intelligence rating them at a forty per @-@ cent efficiency compared to a first @-@ class line infantry division in a static role , and fifteen percent in a counter @-@ attack role . Allied intelligence also indicated that two companies of armour were in the area , as were a number of ad hoc infantry formations formed from training establishments . The 12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend was also considered to be a threat to the airborne forces as it was based in nearby Rennes and possessed a large number of tanks and self @-@ propelled guns , including the Panther . It was believed that the armoured division would be able to arrive east of Caen within twelve hours of the airborne landing , and that a nearby infantry division , the 352nd , would be able to arrive within eight hours . 
 The British airborne troops would also face a large number of static defensive positions and obstacles which had been erected under the orders of Field Marshal Erwin Rommel . Rommel had been appointed Inspector General of Coastal Defences and commander of Army Group B in November 1943 by order of Adolf Hitler . On his arrival he had assessed the existing defences in the region and had immediately begun the process of improving them , particularly those situated inland as he believed no more than thirty percent of the German defences were adequate . These anti @-@ airborne measures consisted of planting a large number of mines to create minefields as well as the erection of so @-@ called " Rommel 's asparagus " , a system of wire @-@ braced poles up to two metres in height , a great many of which were laced with mines or other booby @-@ traps aimed at destroying gliders and killing or wounding airborne troops . Rommel noted in his diary during an inspection of one area that a division had placed over 300 @,@ 000 stakes in the ground to deter airborne landings , and a corps had erected over 900 @,@ 000 . The Merville artillery battery , the destruction of which was one of the main objectives of the 6th Airborne Division , was a particularly heavily fortified position . From the beach it was protected by two strongpoints , which included approximately thirty bunkers as well as an observation post , and the battery itself consisted of a bunker containing the battery 's command post , two blockhouses , a light flak emplacement and four casemates able to contain artillery pieces up to dimensions of 150 mm . The entire battery covered an area roughly four hundred metres in diameter and was surrounded by an inner perimeter of barbed wire , a minefield , and an outer perimeter of barbed wire as well as an anti @-@ tank ditch . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Operation Tonga began at 22 : 56 on the night of 5 June , when six Handley Page Halifax heavy bombers took off from Tarrant Rushton airfield towing six Horsa gliders carrying the coup @-@ de @-@ main force consisting of D Company , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry reinforced with two extra platoons from B Company and a party of sappers , who were tasked with capturing the bridges over the Caen Canal and the River Orne . A few minutes later , between 23 : 00 and 23 : 20 , six Armstrong Whitworth Albemarle transports took off carrying pathfinders of the 22nd Independent Parachute Company , who were to mark the three drop @-@ zones to be used by the airborne troops of the division . Another sixteen Albemarles followed the transports carrying the pathfinders , these transporting elements of the 9th Parachute Battalion , 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion and 3rd Parachute Brigade Headquarters . After this small group , the remainder of the transports carrying 6th Airborne Division began to take off thirty minutes after the pathfinders , this ' lift ' being divided into three groups . The first consisted of 239 Douglas Dakota and Short Stirling transports and seventeen Horsa gliders carrying the bulk of the 3rd and 5th Parachute Brigades and their heavy equipment . These forces were due to land in their respective drop @-@ zones at 00 : 50 . The second part of the lift was destined to land at 03 : 20 and consisted of sixty @-@ five Horsa and four Hamilcar gliders transporting 6th Airborne Division headquarters and an anti @-@ tank battery . The final part of the lift was formed of three Horsa gliders carrying sappers and men from the 9th Parachute Battalion , who were to land atop Merville Battery at 04 : 30 . A second ' lift ' of 220 Horsa and Hamilcar gliders carrying the 6th Air @-@ landing Brigade and other units were to land at another drop @-@ zone at 21 : 00 . 
 = = = 5th Parachute Brigade = = = 
 The first unit of the 6th Airborne Division to land in Normandy , as part of Operation Deadstick , was a coup @-@ de @-@ main force from the 2nd Battalion , Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Light Infantry , under the command of Major John Howard ; although separated from the rest of the Brigade geographically , the small unit did form a part of 5th Parachute Brigade , commanded by Brigadier Nigel Poett . Their mission , codenamed Operation Deadstick , was to capture the bridges over the Caen canal and Orne River . Although the three gliders carrying the coup @-@ de @-@ main force targeting the Caen Canal bridge were supposed to land at 00 : 20 at LZ X , the lead glider was actually released slightly earlier , at 00 : 07 , and landed at 00 : 15 , using a specially designed parachute which deployed from the rear of the glider ( fitted to compensate for heavily laden troopers ) to slow its speed and ensure it was not destroyed by the impact . However , the glider still impacted at considerable speed against an earth bank near to the bridge , the resulting impact throwing both pilot and co @-@ pilot through the windscreen and knocking them unconscious and stunning the passengers . The second glider landed precisely sixty seconds later , swerving to avoid hitting the first and breaking in two as a result . The third glider landed successfully at 00 : 18 , but skidded into a pond , causing several injuries and a single fatality amongst the occupants . The airborne troops emerged from the gliders and formed up , the noise of the gliders landing having been ignored by the sentry on patrol , who believed the sound to be that of a bomber crashing . One platoon opened fire on the sentry and threw grenades into a concrete bunker believed to hold the triggering equipment for the bridge demolition charges , a second platoon began to assault a number of trenches and gun @-@ pits on the eastern bank of the canal , and a third began moving towards the bridge . One sentry fired a flare @-@ gun , whilst a second was killed when he opened fire at the airborne troops and a third retreated . 
 After a brief fire @-@ fight with an NCO who appeared on the scene and who retreated unhurt after expending all his ammunition , the airborne troops were able to secure the bridge , which they discovered was not rigged with explosives as had been believed . The bridge was secured by 00 : 24 . The second coup @-@ de @-@ main force suffered more difficulties than the first in their attempt to capture the Orne River Bridge . Whilst two gliders landed intact at 00 : 20 at LZ Y , the third glider was released off @-@ target when the aircraft towing the glider mistook the River Dives for the Orne , and the glider landed eight miles ( 13 km ) east of its intended target . However , the occupants captured the bridge and then headed for the Orne River . At the Orne River bridge , a machine @-@ gun nest was suppressed with mortar fire but no other defenders were found , and the two platoons captured the bridge before radioing Major Howard and informing him of their success . Both bridges had been secured within fifteen minutes by the coup @-@ de @-@ main forces at the cost of only a small number of casualties . The forces held the bridges until the arrival of reinforcements from 7th Parachute Battalion , but in the meantime had to repel several spontaneous attempts by the Germans to re @-@ take the bridges ; at 01 : 30 two German tanks attempted to drive onto the bridge , but were repelled with the loss of one tank to a PIAT anti @-@ tank weapon . 
 The coup @-@ de @-@ main unit had been followed closely by the pathfinders of the 22nd Independent Parachute Company , tasked with marking out the drop @-@ zones and landing @-@ zones to be used by the division during the operation , but due to a combination of heavy cloud cover and poor navigation only one pathfinder team was dropped correctly , and the aircraft carrying the remainder had to make between two and three runs over their respective drop @-@ zones . Pathfinders assigned to DZ N were dropped wide and did not manage to get to the drop @-@ zone for thirty minutes , whilst another team destined for DZ K accidentally dropped onto DZ N without realising their error , and set up radio beacons and markers that caused a number of airborne troops to drop in the wrong area . Another pathfinder team belonging to 9th Parachute Battalion , assigned to mark out the drop @-@ zone area for the unit tasked with destroying the Merville artillery battery , was all but wiped out when an air @-@ raid by RAF Avro Lancaster heavy bombers missed the artillery battery itself and bombed the area the team was in . 
 As such , when the rest of the 5th Parachute Brigade began to land , many of the units were scattered and dropped incorrectly . The constituent units of 7th Parachute Battalion were so badly scattered that by 03 : 00 the battalion ’ s commander could only command around forty percent of the battalion , although more men arrived throughout the night and day . Relatively few supply containers had been found by the airborne troops , meaning that they possessed few heavy weapons or radio sets . However , the Battalion managed to rendezvous with the coup @-@ de @-@ main forces at the Caen and Orne bridges , and were able to set up a defence against German counter @-@ attacks . The first organised German responses to the capture of the bridges came between 05 : 00 and 07 : 00 and consisted of isolated and often uncoordinated attacks by tanks , armoured cars and infantry , which grew in intensity throughout the day . The Luftwaffe attempted to destroy the Caen bridge with a 1 @,@ 000 lb ( 450 kg ) bomb which failed to detonate , and two German coastal craft which attempted to attack the bridge were also repelled . Despite the ferocity of the attacks , the battalion and the coup @-@ de @-@ main forces were able to hold the bridges until 19 : 00 , when leading elements of the British 3rd Infantry Division arrived and began to relieve the airborne troops , a process that was completed around 01 : 00 
 The other two battalions that made up 5th Parachute Brigade were the 12th and 13th Parachute Battalions , and much like the 7th Parachute Battalion , both were badly scattered when they were dropped at 00 : 50 ; when both units moved away from their rendezvous points neither had more than sixty percent of their strength , although individual airborne troops and small groups would join the battalions throughout the day . Both of the battalions had been tasked with securing the area around DZ N and the two bridges captured by the coup @-@ de @-@ main forces , a task which was made much more difficult by being scattered throughout the area . 12th Parachute Battalion had been tasked with securing the village of Le Bas de Ranville , which it did so by 04 : 00 , whilst 13th Parachute Battalion was to secure the town of Ranville , which it achieved around the same time , albeit against heavier resistance than that encountered by the other battalion . One company from 13th Parachute Battalion was detailed to remain at the landing @-@ zone the battalion had used to provide protection for a company of Royal Engineer sappers , who were to demolish the poles and explosives that were present in the area so that 6th Airborne Division headquarters could safely land . The two battalions held their respective areas until relieved by ground forces advancing from the beaches , although 12th Parachute Battalion was bombarded with heavy mortar and artillery fire , and repelled two German counter @-@ attacks by the 125th Panzer Grenadier Regiment ; the first was defeated after destroying a tank and taking a number of prisoners , and the second was repulsed with the help of an air @-@ landed anti @-@ tank battery which had recently arrived . 
 = = = 3rd Parachute Brigade = = = 
 The 3rd Parachute Brigade , commanded by Brigadier James Hill , began to land at the same time as the main elements of 5th Parachute Brigade , and suffered from the same problems . All of its constituent units being scattered throughout the area due to poor navigation and heavy cloud cover and several of the drop @-@ zones either not being marked correctly or marked correctly but incorrectly positioned due to pathfinder error . One of the first units to land was 9th Parachute Battalion , which had been given a number of objectives ; not only was it to destroy the Merville artillery battery , it was also tasked with holding the village of Le Plein , blocking roads leading to that village , and capturing a German naval headquarters at Sallenelles near the River Orne . However , the battalion scattered throughout the area , with a number of paratroopers landing a considerable distance from the designated DZ ; Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Terence Otway , the commander of the battalion , landed with the rest of his stick 400 yards ( 370 m ) away from the drop @-@ zone in a farmhouse being used as a command post by a German battalion , and after a brief fire @-@ fight and helping other scattered paratroopers , only arrived at the drop @-@ zone at 01 : 30 . By 02 : 35 only 110 paratroopers had arrived at the drop @-@ zone , and only a single machine @-@ gun and a small number of Bangalore torpedoes had been recovered . This was a significant set @-@ back for the battalion , as the plan to assault the artillery battery relied on having the entire battalion present with a number of sappers , as well as a large quantity of heavy equipment . Under strict orders that the battery was to be destroyed no later than 05 : 30 , Otway felt that he could no longer wait for any more reinforcements and set off for the battery at 02 : 50 , the under @-@ strength battalion having been increased to around 150 paratroopers after a small group of stragglers arrived at 02 : 45 . 
 The battalion arrived at the battery at 04 : 00 , where it linked up with the survivors of the pathfinder group who had been hit by the RAF raid against the battery , and began readying for an assault on the battery whilst the pathfinders marked out areas for the Bangalore torpedoes to be placed . The battalion was divided into four assault groups , one for each of the casemates of the battery , and was ready by 04 : 30 , when the gliders carrying the Royal Engineer sappers arrived over the battery . Only two arrived , one having been forced to land immediately after take @-@ off because of mechanical complications , and both were engaged by anti @-@ aircraft and machine @-@ gun fire , causing one to land fifty yards short of the battery and setting the second alight which landed 400 yards ( 370 m ) away . Otway launched the assault as soon as the first glider overshot the battery , ordering the explosives to be detonated to form two paths through the outer perimeter , through which the paratroopers attacked . The defenders were alerted by the explosions and opened fire , inflicting heavy casualties ; only four men assigned to assault Casemate Four survived long enough to reach it , which they disabled by firing into apertures and throwing grenades into air vents . The other casemates were cleared with fragmentations and white phosphorus grenades as the crews had neglected to lock the doors leading into the battery . A number of prisoners were taken by the paratroopers , and explosives were then readied to disable the artillery pieces inside the battery . However , it was discovered that the pieces were not modern 150 mm calibre weapons , but were instead Czechoslovakian First World War @-@ era 100 mm field howitzers . The paratroopers did the best with the explosives they had , using Gammon grenades to disable one gun and jamming shells into the muzzles of other guns , but the job was less than thorough , as at least one gun went back into action when the Germans later reoccupied the battery . Having completed the assault , the paratroopers gathered the German prisoners and their wounded and retreated , having no wish to remain by the battery ; the battalion possessed no radio , and if no signal were received by the light cruiser HMS Arethusa by 05 : 30 it would begin shelling the battery as a back @-@ up plan . The paratroopers had achieved their primary objective , but at a heavy cost , with fifty paratroopers dead and twenty @-@ five wounded , a casualty rate of exactly fifty percent . The battalion then attacked Le Plein , securing the village by expelling the platoon @-@ sized enemy garrison . The survivors retired to a planned rendezvous point at 05 : 30 , the battalion too understrength to achieve its other secondary objectives . 
 The 8th Parachute Battalion , tasked with destroying two bridges near Bures and a third by Troarn , was dropped at the same time as 9th Parachute Battalion and was also widely scattered with a number of its paratroopers landing in the operational area of 5th Parachute Brigade . When the commanding officer of the battalion arrived at the battalion rendezvous point at 01 : 20 he found only thirty paratroopers and a small group of sappers with a Jeep and trailer . By 03 : 30 this number had increased to just over 140 paratroopers , but there were still no other signs of the sappers who would be required to demolish the bridges . The commanding officer therefore decided to send a small force to demolish the bridges at Bures and lead the rest of the battalion to a crossroad north of Troarn where it would await more reinforcements before it attacked Troarn itself . However , the small force sent to Bures discovered that the two bridges had already been demolished by a group of sappers who had reached the bridges a few hours earlier , and so rejoined the battalion at the crossroads , which had increased in numbers after another fifty men had arrived . A reconnaissance party was sent into Troarn to ascertain the status of the bridge there , alongside a party of sappers , which came under fire from a house near the bridge . After a brief fire @-@ fight the paratroopers captured a number of Germans from the 21st Panzer Division and then made their way to the bridge , which they discovered had been demolished already . Once the sappers had widened the length of bridge demolished using their explosives , the party retreated back to the battalion at the crossroad . Having achieved its objective , the battalion then moved north and took up positions near Le <unk> to widen the airborne bridgehead formed by the division . 
 The third unit in the 3rd Parachute Brigade was the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , which was allotted as its primary tasks the demolition of two bridges , one at Varaville and another at Robehomme . Much like the rest of the units in the division , the battalion was scattered throughout the operational area , with one stick of paratroopers landing ten miles ( 16 km ) away from their drop @-@ zone , and another group landing only a short distance from the invasion beaches . A number of paratroopers were dropped in flooded areas around Varaville and several drowned when they were dragged under the surface of the water due to the weight of their equipment . A group of paratroopers under a Lieutenant moved towards the Robehomme bridge , encountering and gathering together several other groups of airborne troops and sappers en route , before reaching the bridge where they discovered it was still intact . However , after waiting several hours the sappers tasked with the demolition of the bridge had failed to arrive , and so at 03 : 00 the paratroopers gathered together the small amount of explosives they possessed and set them off , weakening the bridge . The sappers finally arrived at 06 : 00 and completed the demolition of the bridge whilst the paratroopers protected them . Meanwhile , another company of the battalion had been attempting to complete the tasks it had been ordered to fulfil ; it was to clear the enemy garrison from Varaville and destroy a gun emplacement , demolish a bridge over the Rive <unk> and also destroy a radio transmitter near Varaville . However , the company was highly understrength , with only a fraction of its normal strength of 100 men available . A small group of paratroopers under the company commander assaulted the fortifications outside Varaville which were manned by approximately ninety @-@ six Germans as well as several machine @-@ gun nests and an artillery piece . The artillery piece inflicted a number of casualties on the small group , killing the company commander , and a stalemate ensued until 10 : 00 when the enemy garrison surrendered after being subjected to mortar bombardment . The paratroopers were then relieved by British Commandos from the 1st Special Service Brigade . 
 = = = 6th Airlanding Brigade & 6th Airborne Division Headquarters = = = 
 The Headquarters of the 6th Airborne Division landed by glider in the landing @-@ zone cleared by the sappers and the company from 13th Parachute Battalion at 03 : 35 hours , with only a few gliders missing the landing @-@ zone due to the poor weather and errors in navigation . Once the headquarters staff and accompanying airborne troops had been gathered together , the headquarters was moved to the Le Bas de Ranville area and set up there . Contact was established with the headquarters of 5th Parachute Brigade at 05 : 00 , and with the headquarters of 3rd Parachute Brigade at 12 : 35 , and linked up with 1st Special Service Brigade as it advanced from the invasion beaches at 13 : 53 . At 21 : 00 Operation Mallard the gliders transporting 6th Airlanding Brigade arrived at their landing @-@ zone , coming under heavy small @-@ arms and mortar fire from nearby German positions as they landed . However , casualties were light and within ninety minutes the glider @-@ borne troops had gathered at their rendezvous points . By 00 : 00 the entire 6th Airborne Division was fully deployed on the eastern flank of the invasion beaches , with the exception of 12th Battalion of the Devonshire Regiment which formed a part of 6th Airlanding Brigade but was due to arrive by sea the next day . 3rd Parachute Brigade was holding a four @-@ mile ( 6 km ) front , with 9th Parachute Battalion at Le Plein , 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion at Les <unk> and 8th Parachute Battalion in the southern part of the Bois de Bavent . 5th Parachute Brigade had 12th Parachute Battalion occupying Le Bas de Ranville and 13th Parachute Battalion holding Ranville , whilst 7th Parachute Battalion was retained as a reserve formation . 6th Airlanding Brigade was ready to use its two battalions to extend the bridgehead held by the division and 1st Special Service Brigade , which temporarily came under the command of the division was holding villages to the north and north @-@ east of DZ N. 
 = = Ground role = = 
 Operation Tonga was a successful airborne operation , with all of the tasks allotted to 6th Airborne Division being achieved within the time limits imposed on the individual units of the division . These tasks had been achieved despite the problems caused by a large number of the airborne troops being scattered throughout the operational area assigned to the division due to a combination of bad weather and poor navigation on the part of the pilots of the transport aircraft carrying them . Glider @-@ borne airborne troops also suffered from navigational errors , with ten of the eighty @-@ five gliders assigned to the division landing more than two miles ( 3 km ) from their landing @-@ zone . However , an unintended but beneficial result of these scattered drops was that the German defenders were greatly confused as to area and extent of the airborne landings . The division suffered 800 casualties between 5 June and 7 June as a result of Operation Tonga , out of the 8 @,@ 500 airborne troops who made up the strength of the division when it was deployed . The division maintained its bridgehead after it had linked up with Allied ground forces advancing from the invasion beaches , and was then deployed in a purely ground @-@ based role as infantry . Between 7 June and 10 June , the division would repulse a number of German attacks , with 9th Battalion coming under particularly heavy enemy bombardment in its positions and being the focus of a number of German assaults . 
 From 7 June until 16 August , it first consolidated and then expanded its bridgehead . On 10 June the decision was taken to expand the bridgehead to the east of the River Orne , with 6th Airborne Division tasked with achieving this ; however , it was deemed not to be strong enough , and 5th Black Watch ( Royal Highland Regiment ) was placed under 3rd Parachute Brigade 's command ; the battalion launched an attack on the town of Breville on 11 June , but was met with extremely heavy resistance and was repulsed after suffering a number of casualties . The next day 3rd Parachute Brigade 's entire front was subjected to fierce artillery bombardment and assaults by German tanks and infantry , with the Germans particularly focusing on the positions held by 9th Parachute Battalion . Both 9th Parachute Battalion and the remnants of the Black Watch defended the Chateau Saint Come but were gradually forced to retreat ; however , after Lieutenant Colonel Otway stated that his battalion would be unable to defend its position for much longer , Brigadier Hill gathered together a number of paratroopers from 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion and led a counter @-@ attack that forced the Germans to withdraw . 
 From then until mid @-@ August the division remained in static positions , holding the left flank of the Allied bridgehead and conducting vigorous patrolling . It was a difficult period for the division , as most of the airborne troops had expected to be withdrawn from Normandy at an early point ; as the static role continued , disappointment and frustration were often in evidence , and " great attention had to be paid to maintaining an aggressive spirit . " On 7 August the division was ordered to prepare to move over to the offensive , and on the night of 16 / 17 August it began to advance against stiff German opposition . This advance continued until 26 August , when the division reached its objective - the mouth of the River Seine . In nine days of fighting it had advanced 45 miles , despite , as Gale put it , his infantry units being " quite inadequately equipped for a rapid pursuit , " captured 400 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) of German territory and taken prisoner over 1 @,@ 000 German soldiers . Its casualties for the period were 4 @,@ 457 , of which 821 were killed , 2 @,@ 709 wounded and 927 missing . It was finally withdrawn from the frontline on 27 August , and embarked for England at the beginning of September . 
 = Cambodian Rocks = 
 Cambodian Rocks is a compilation of 22 uncredited , untitled Cambodian psychedelic and garage rock songs from the late 1960s and early 1970s . When the tracks were recorded , musicians in the thriving music scene were combining Western rock and pop genres with their own styles and techniques . When the Khmer Rouge came to power in 1975 , artists were among those viewed as a threat to the regime 's agrarian socialist vision , and several of the performers on the album are believe to have been among those killed during the ensuing Cambodian Genocide of 1975 @-@ 1979 . Little information about them or their creative output has survived . 
 The compilation was assembled from cassette tapes purchased by an American tourist in 1994 and released on the Parallel World label in 1996 . The album has been lauded for its music as well as its historical and cultural significance , though the label has been criticized for reissuing it years later without working to identify those involved . Through collaboration on the Internet , the songs have all been identified . In 2015 a documentary film about Cambodian music was released , inspired by Cambodian Rocks . 
 = = Historical context = = 
 In the years before the Khmer Rouge came to power in 1975 , Cambodia had a flourishing music scene . Particularly in Phnom Penh , artists were combining traditional and native styles with those from the West . 
 The Khmer Rouge regime , led by Pol Pot , wanted to return the nation of Cambodia to an idyllic notion of the past by implementing a radical form of agrarian socialism while simultaneously shunning outside aid and influence . In order to build and protect their utopian goals , the regime perceived enmity in anyone tied to the previous Cambodian governments , ethnic and religious minorities , intellectuals , and members of certain professions . Artists posed a threat due to their own influence on culture , incompatibility with an agrarian lifestyle , or exhibiting foreign influence . Between 1975 and 1979 , about 2 million people ( 25 % of the country 's population ) were killed during the ensuing Cambodian Genocide . Several of the artists on Cambodian Rocks are thought to have been among those killed , and information about them destroyed along with much of their creative output . 
 = = Production = = 
 While a tourist in Cambodia in 1994 , American Paul Wheeler became interested in music he had been hearing around Siem Reap . He purchased " about six tapes " of music from a market vendor and assembled a mixtape of his favorite tracks . His friend at the Parallel World label in New York City , upon hearing the mixtape , agreed to release 1 @,@ 000 copies on vinyl . When they sold out , the label issued the much more widely known CD version , containing 22 songs instead of the original 13 . 
 Several reviewers have likened the album to a bootleg . Neither Wheeler nor Parallel World provided any information about the artists or names of the tracks . When re @-@ issued in 2003 , reviewer Mack <unk> criticized Parallel World for <unk> its bootleg status by retaining the anonymous tracklist rather than working to look for surviving artists or their families , who would likely benefit greatly from royalties . With information more widely available on the Internet and the opportunity to collaborate , all tracks have since been identified . 
 The cover art since the first release has been a charcoal rubbing taken from one of the bas reliefs in the Angkor Wat temple . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The recordings reflect the influence of Western rock and pop music in general and that of the United States in particular due to its heavy involvement in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War . The compilation is varied , combining a range of popular Western genres like garage , psychedelic , and surf rock , with Khmer vocal techniques , instrumental innovations , and the popular <unk> " circle dance music " trend . Several reviews describe the uncanny quality of the songs using words like " mystery " and " familiarity " , to help account for the album 's wide appeal at a time of its release when such compilations were less common . Yol <unk> 's " <unk> <unk> Jet " , for example , has been noted as sounding like a " fuzzed @-@ out , reverb @-@ soaked " " go @-@ go organ and fuzz @-@ guitar " cover of Them 's " Gloria " . Reviewers also noted similarities between Sinn Sisamouth 's " <unk> <unk> Touch " and Santana 's cover of Fleetwood Mac 's " Black Magic Woman " . Other tracks have been likened to Booker T. & the M.G. ' s and The Animals . 
 Several of the artists on Cambodian Rocks had been quite successful before the Khmer Rouge , while others achieved fame posthumously . 
 Sinn Sisamouth ( 1932 @-@ 1976 ) was a prolific singer @-@ songwriter with a crooning voice that has been likened to that of Nat King Cole . He got his start singing on the radio while in medical school in his early 20s , and was admitted to the Royal Treasury 's classical ensemble , with whom he performed at state functions . By the late @-@ 1950s and early @-@ 1960s he was one of the most popular musicians in the country . As a solo artist in the 1960s he performed with a rock band rather than traditional wind instrument backing , experimenting with combining Khmer music with Western sounds . Sometimes called the " King of Khmer music " , the Cambodian Elvis " , or the " golden voice " , his lasting cultural impact is difficult to overstate . He was killed by execution squad during the genocide in 1976 , but his voice remains one of the country 's most recognizable . 
 The " King of Khmer music " is credited with discovering " the queen of Cambodian rock ' n ' roll " , Ros Sereysothea , who had been singing at weddings . Coming from a poor rural background , she moved to Phnom Penh and found success singing on national radio . She was known for her take on traditional folk songs but increasingly incorporated Western genres and instrumentation , even issuing cover versions of a number of Western hits . Under the Khmer Rouge , she was forced to perform for political leaders and to marry a party official , though accounts of her fate differ and no specifics have been confirmed . 
 The other artists did not achieve the same degree of success as Sisamouth or Sereysothea , and even less information about them survives . The Sydney Morning Herald called Pan Ron " the most risque of Cambodian singers of the 1960s to mid @-@ 1970s [ who ] hopped genres from traditional Khmer music to covers or localised takes on western rock , twist , cha cha , mambo , jazz and folk . " According to an unconfirmed account , she died sometime after the 1978 Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia , probably killed by the Khmer Rouge . Yol <unk> was one of the subjects of the 2015 documentary Don 't Think I 've Forgotten . In a review of the film , The New York Times described him as " a <unk> proto @-@ punk who mocked conformist society . " 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The album has received praise for its musical content as well as historical and cultural significance . Rolling Stone called it " a marvel of cultural appropriation " and said it exhibits " all manner of virtuosity " . Far East Audio ascribed it the label " instant classic " , while Allmusic said the album is " an incredible historical document of late- ' 60s to early- ' 70s Cambodian rock " . Nick Hanover called it an " unpredictably playful " mix with " each track ... a continuous surprise , a fusion of elements that should be contradictory but somehow strike a balance of West and East – organ hooks swerving between fierce guitar riffs that antagonize vocals that frequently sound closer to ghostly siren wails than traditional pop melodies " . The New York Times said the album and the circumstances of its release " established a lasting aura of mystery around the music " . 
 Cambodian Rocks was the first release of its kind , followed by a number of similar compilations like Cambodian Cassette Archives and other unrelated titles by the same or similar names , inspired by the original or exploiting its weak standing with regard to intellectual property . It also gave rise , in part , to a broader trend of Western interest in obscure psychedelic and progressive rock from the rest of the world . 
 The California band Dengue Fever , known for its Khmer rock performances , has recorded a number of covers of tracks from Cambodian Rocks . The album inspired founding member Ethan Holtzman to travel to Cambodia , forming the band upon his return to California . The band 's singer is Cambodian emigrant <unk> <unk> , who lived in a refugee camp in Thailand during the Khmer Rouge . 
 Filmmaker John Pirozzi received a copy of the album while in Cambodia filming City of Ghosts and began researching the stories of the artists . Eventually , he tracked down material to create Don 't Think I 've Forgotten , a 2015 documentary about pre @-@ Khmer Rouge Cambodian music which takes its name from a Sinn Sisamouth song . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Cambodian Rocks includes 22 songs . Although the album provides no track information , fans and researchers have identified the artists and song names . The table below includes both the original romanized Khmer titles and English translations . 
 = Half @-@ Life : Decay = 
 Half @-@ Life : Decay is a multiplayer @-@ only expansion pack for Valve Software 's first @-@ person shooter Half @-@ Life . Developed by Gearbox Software and published by Sierra Entertainment , Decay was released as part of the PlayStation 2 version of Half @-@ Life in 2001 . It is the third expansion pack for Half @-@ Life , and like its predecessors , Decay returns to the setting and timeline of the original story , albeit portraying the story from the viewpoint of a different set of protagonists : two women scientists working in the Black Mesa Research Facility . Decay is a cooperative multiplayer game , designed to be played by two people working together to pass through the game 's levels . 
 Decay was not a critical success , but was received with some positivity by video game journalists . Many reviewers felt the game was fun to play through with a friend , but that its more puzzle @-@ oriented gameplay somewhat detracted from the overall experience . A number of reviews stated that the game simply felt little more than an extra add @-@ on for the PlayStation 2 version of Half @-@ Life . A group of Ukrainian developers unofficially ported the game to Windows as a modification of the PC version of Half @-@ Life in 2008 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As is the case with the other games in the Half @-@ Life series , Decay is a first @-@ person shooter . Like the original title it is based on , Decay requires players to engage in combat with hostile non @-@ player characters and complete various puzzle solving tasks to advance through the game . However , Decay differs from Half @-@ Life and its first two expansion packs , Opposing Force and Blue Shift , in that it is designed for cooperative multiplayer gameplay . This requires players to work together to progress through the game 's levels and complete puzzles as they arise in @-@ game . Although intended to be played by two people in split screen mode , Decay can still be played by a single player . In this case , the player can only control one character at a time , and can switch between the two characters quickly . When not in use , a character has sufficient artificial intelligence to defend themselves , but otherwise does not move from where they have been left by the player . 
 In Half @-@ Life , players usually fight alone and only occasionally encounter friendly non @-@ player characters who assist them , such as security guards and scientists . While Decay still features levels where this is the case , significant sections in Decay are dedicated to working with friendly non @-@ player characters , usually escorting them to various objectives and protecting them in firefights . An array of enemy characters from Half @-@ Life populate the game , including alien lifeforms such as headcrabs and Vortigaunts , as well as human soldiers sent in to contain the alien threat . The players have access to a limited selection of Half @-@ Life 's weaponry to assist them in the game . Although developed after Opposing Force , no non @-@ player characters or weapons from the earlier expansion appear in Decay . 
 The game is unique in the context of the Half @-@ Life series in that it is the only game divided into separate missions , each with a specific objective to pursue , instead of consisting of a single unbroken narrative . How players perform in each mission is ranked at the conclusion of the level as a grade from " A " to " F " . This score is based on each player 's accuracy with weapons , the number of kills they acquired and the amount damage they sustained during the course of the mission . Should players successfully complete the game 's nine missions with " A " grades on every level , they are given access to a bonus cooperative mission , in which they can play as a pair of Vortigaunts , as well as the ability to play through the PlayStation 2 version of the original Half @-@ Life as a Vortigaunt . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Decay is set in the same location and timeframe as Half @-@ Life . Half @-@ Life takes place at a laboratory called the Black Mesa Research Facility , situated in a remote desert in New Mexico . In Half @-@ Life , the player takes on the role of Gordon Freeman , a scientist involved in an accident that opens an inter @-@ dimensional portal to the borderworld of Xen , allowing the alien creatures of Xen to attack the facility . The player guides Freeman in an attempt to escape the facility and close the portal , ultimately traveling to Xen to do so . Like the previous expansions , Decay shows the story of Half @-@ Life from the perspective of a different set of protagonists . In Decay , players assume the roles of Colette Green and Gina Cross , two doctors who work in the same labs as Freeman , analyzing anomalous materials and specimens retrieved from Xen in prior teleportation experiments . After the experiment that causes the alien invasion takes place , Green and Cross must work with two ranking members of the science team , Dr. Richard Keller and Dr. Rosenberg , to contain and stabilize the deteriorating situation in Black Mesa . 
 Decay begins with Gina Cross and Colette Green arriving at the Anomalous Materials Labs at Black Mesa and reporting to Dr. Keller , who is readying the day 's analysis of an unknown specimen . Despite the objections of Dr. Rosenberg to pushing the analysis equipment beyond its design capacities , Cross and Green are assigned to assist setting up the experiment for Gordon Freeman . When Freeman inserts the specimen into the scanning beam , however , it triggers a " resonance cascade " , causing massive damage to the facility and teleporting alien creatures into the base . Keller and Rosenberg agree that Black Mesa cannot deal with the situation on its own , and so decide to call for military assistance . Cross and Green escort Rosenberg to the surface , where he sends a distress signal to the military . However , the military are ordered not only to contain the situation , but to silence the base by killing its employees . Rosenberg elects to stay behind to meet with the military on arrival and Cross and Green return to Keller . 
 Once reunited with Keller , Cross and Green work to seal the dimensional tear to stop the invasion . The military arrive and try to remove all personnel as well as the alien force . After resetting key equipment to prevent a second dimensional rift , the two are tasked with preparing a satellite for launch . The satellite , which is launched by Freeman in Half @-@ Life , is used in tandem with ground @-@ based equipment to significantly weaken the effects of the resonance cascade . Keller tasks Cross and Green with activating this set of prototype equipment , a displacement beacon , which through the satellite may be able to seal the dimensional rift . However , after activating the beacon , both characters are caught up in a " harmonic reflux " , a distortion caused by the rift . Despite this , Cross and Green are able to return safely and Keller congratulates them on their success . 
 The unlockable vortigaunt mission provides background information explaining how the orange crystals used by the rift @-@ sealing machine in Half Life : Decay are acquired and used by the Nihilanth during the final boss battle in Half Life . The two player @-@ controlled vortigaunts battle through Marines and Black Ops in the underground Black Mesa complex to find the orange crystals in the back of a military van . At this point the screen fades and the mission is declared a success ; it is presumed that the Nihilanth warps them back to Xen and installs the crystals in his cave . 
 = = Development = = 
 A cooperative Half @-@ Life game was first alluded to by publisher Sierra Entertainment in November 2000 with the announcement of a PlayStation 2 version of Half @-@ Life . At the time , however , it was unclear how a cooperative version of Half @-@ Life would be implemented ; the developers , Gearbox Software , were still experimenting with finding the most balanced amount of players to build a cooperative game around . By E3 2001 , the game had acquired the title Decay , named after the scientific concept of exponential decay for consistency with the scientific names used by previous Half @-@ Life titles . While the E3 convention only provided a demonstration of the main Half @-@ Life PlayStation 2 game , further details were released relating to Decay 's premise and story , as well as confirming that the cooperative mode was to be designed for two players . The game 's use of new model sets were also showcased . These new models were updated versions of Gearbox 's High Definition pack for Blue Shift , featuring higher numbers of polygons and animation features such as facial expressions . The enhanced models were around twice as detailed as those in the High Definition pack , which itself was of a much higher quality than the original models in Half @-@ Life . Media updates through the months following E3 showed various screenshots and the trailer to the game . On August 18 , 2001 , Sierra announced that Decay was nearly complete , and would be submitted to PlayStation 2 manufacturer Sony for verification within days . The entire Half @-@ Life for PlayStation 2 package achieved gold status on October 30 , 2001 , and the game was released on November 14 , 2001 . 
 In October 2005 , work was begun by a group of Ukrainian developers to port Decay over to Windows , as a modification for both the old World Opponent Network and current Steam versions of Half @-@ Life . The port relied on the discovery of a method that allowed Decay 's PS2 game files to be deciphered , thereby allowing the files to be ported to Windows . The port went into the beta development stage in December 2007 and was released publicly on September 23 , 2008 . The port was received well by the journalists in the industry ; GameSpy site Planet Half @-@ Life noted that it was a shame that an official PC version of Decay never emerged , while British journalist Alec Meer stated that it was " fantastic to have this short but sweet lost Half @-@ Life episode on PC at last , and it even has something the PS2 version didn 't — online play " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Decay received a weak but overall positive reception from the video games industry 's critics . Writing for GameSpot , Doug Radcliffe argued that Decay was " impressive " , praising the design of puzzles required players to work together , as well as the way in which the ranking system discouraged players from competing against each other . GameSpy 's David Hodgson was more reserved in his views of the game ; although describing it as " great fun " , he noted that it could become " tedious , with one member waiting for minutes at a time , while the other scratches their head , then completes an objective " . In addition , Hodgson felt that the more puzzle @-@ orientated nature of Decay left the action elements " a little muted compared to Gordon 's single player quest " . Allgame described Decay as an " added bonus " for the PlayStation 2 version of Half @-@ Life , but noted that as the game was designed for two players , it significantly suffered when a single player attempts to play it by switching between two characters , a point that both GameSpy and GameSpot agreed on . In his review for IGN , <unk> Doug Perry felt that Decay was " neat in its own limited way " , but that it was more of a distraction from the main game , " a complementary cup of vegetable soup than a piping hot main dish of New York steak " . While The Electric Playground reviewer Steve Smith stated that the control scheme for the PlayStation 2 version of Half @-@ Life " is about the best we have seen on the PS2 or any console " , he concluded that although Decay was a " nice add @-@ on " , it was " no reason to buy this port " . 
 = Swedish heraldry = 
 Swedish heraldry encompasses heraldic achievements in modern and historic Sweden . Swedish heraldic style is consistent with the German @-@ Nordic heraldic tradition , noted for its multiple helmets and crests which are treated as inseparable from the shield , its repetition of colours and charges between the shield and the crest , and its scant use of heraldic furs . Because the medieval history of the Nordic countries was so closely related , their heraldic individuality developed rather late . Swedish and Finnish heraldry have a shared history prior to the Diet of Porvoo in 1809 ; these , together with Danish heraldry , were heavily influenced by German heraldry . Unlike the highly stylized and <unk> language of English blazon , Swedish heraldry is described in plain language , using ( in most cases ) only Swedish terminology . 
 The earliest known achievements of arms in Sweden are those of two brothers , Sigtrygg and Lars Bengtsson , from 1219 . The earliest example of Swedish civic heraldry is the city arms of Kalmar , which originated as a city seal in 1247 . The seal ( Swedish <unk> ) , used extensively in the Middle Ages , was instrumental in spreading heraldry to churches , local governments , and other institutions , and was the forerunner of the coat of arms in medieval Sweden . Armorial seals of noblewomen appeared in the 12th century , burghers and artisans began adopting arms in the 13th century , and even some peasants took arms in the 14th century . 
 Heraldry in Sweden today is used extensively by corporations and government offices ; the rights of these private entities and of official bodies are upheld by Swedish law . In order to become legally registered and protected under Swedish law , an official coat of arms must be registered with the Swedish Patent and Registration Office ( PRV ) , and is subject to approval by the National Herald ( <unk> ) and the bureaucratic Heraldic Board of the National Archives of Sweden . Heraldic arms of common citizens ( burgher arms ) , however , are less strictly controlled . These are recognised by inclusion in the annually published Scandinavian Roll of Arms . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Swedish heraldry has a number of characteristics that distinguish the Swedish style from heraldry in other European countries . Common features of Swedish heraldry are similar to those of other Nordic countries and Germany , placing it in the German @-@ Nordic heraldic tradition , distinguished from Gallo @-@ British heraldry and other heraldic traditions by several key elements of heraldic style . One of these is the use of multiple helmets and crests , which cannot be displayed separately from the main shield . These helmets and crests are considered to be as important as the shield , each denoting a fief over which the bearer holds a right . In Scandinavia ( as distinct from the German custom ) , when an even number of helmets is displayed , they are usually turned , with their crests , to face outward ; when an odd number , the center helmet is turned <unk> and the rest turned outward ( whereas in Germany the helmets are turned inward to face the center of the escutcheon ) . Additionally , the crests are often repetitive of charges used on the main shield , and marks of cadency typically occur in the crest , rather than on the shield as in Gallo @-@ British heraldry . Also , the use of heraldic furs on the shield , while common in Gallo @-@ British heraldry , is rare in German @-@ Nordic heraldry . Furs in Scandinavia are generally limited to ermine and <unk> , which sometimes appear in mantling , supporters , or the trimmings of crowns , but rarely on the <unk> 
 Consistent with German @-@ Nordic heraldry , the most common charges in Swedish heraldry include lions and eagles . Additional animals that frequently appear in Swedish heraldry include griffins and ( especially in the northern provinces ) reindeer . Stars are common and are usually depicted with six points and straight sides , in contrast to the Gallo @-@ British tradition , which typically depicts stars as either a five @-@ pointed straight @-@ sided star ( mullet ) or as a six @-@ pointed wavy @-@ sided star ( <unk> ) . In Swedish , these stars are usually described as " six @-@ pointed stars " ( <unk> stjärna ) . In terms of <unk> , Swedish heraldry is described in plain terms using common Swedish language , rather than using specialized language such as Blazon . <unk> arms occur <unk> 
 = = Terminology = = 
 In English , achievements of arms are usually described ( blazoned ) in a specialized jargon that uses derivatives of French terms . In Swedish , however , achievements of arms are described in relatively plain language , using only Swedish terms and tending to avoid specialized jargon . Examples include the use of Swedish <unk> and <unk> for blue and green , as compared to the French @-@ derived azure and vert used in English blazon . Rather than argent , the Swedish words silver or vit ( white ) are used , and white , while rare , may be a different color than silver . Purpur ( purple ) is used in the lining of crowns and in the royal canopy of the greater national coat of arms . Traditionally , purple was rarely used as a tincture on the shield , though it does appear on the shields of some ( especially modern ) burgher arms . Ermine likewise appears in the lining of the mantling over the greater national coat of arms , but is otherwise virtually unknown in Swedish <unk> Vair is also rare in Scandinavian heraldry , and other furs are <unk> 
 = = Officers of arms = = 
 In the Middle Ages , heraldic arms in Sweden were granted by the Royal Council ( <unk> <unk> ) , but this role was turned over to the College of Antiquities ( <unk> ) in 1660 . Prior to 1953 , the office of the National Herald ( <unk> ) was responsible for preparing municipal arms and the royal arms of Sweden , but today these duties are carried out by the Heraldry Board of the National Archives , including the State Herald ( <unk> ) . In order to register new municipal arms , a municipality must submit its proposal to both the National Archives Heraldry Board , which consults and renders an opinion , and to the PRV for registration . Once the board has completed its consultation process and provided a warrant of arms , the arms thus warranted may then be registered by the PRV and implemented by the municipality . Apart from municipal arms , heraldic arms registered by counties and by military and other government bodies are also handled by the National Archives Heraldry Board and the PRV . 
 The National Archives Heraldry Board , established under Swedish statute 2007 : 1179 , is the highest heraldic body in Sweden . The board is chaired by the National Archivist and includes three other officials , three deputies , the State Herald ( who acts as secretary ) , the National Archives jurist and the National Archives heraldic artist . This board convenes as needed , which in recent years has been once or twice a year . 
 The first National Herald was Conrad Ludvig <unk> ( died 1766 ) , who served as <unk> 1734 @-@ 1765 . Subsequent National Heralds included Daniel <unk> ( 1768 @-@ 1772 ) , Anders Schönberg ( 1773 @-@ 1809 ) , Jonas Carl <unk> ( 1809 @-@ 1829 ) , Niklas Joakim af <unk> ( 1829 @-@ 1855 ) , August Wilhelm <unk> ( 1855 @-@ 1880 ) , Carl Arvid <unk> ( 1880 @-@ 1903 ) , Adam Lewenhaupt ( 1903 @-@ 1931 ) and Harald Fleetwood ( 1931 @-@ 1953 ) , and State Heralds ( since the 1953 reform ) have included Carl Gunnar Ulrik Scheffer ( 1953 @-@ 1974 ) , Lars @-@ Olof <unk> ( 1975 ) , Jan von <unk> ( 1975 @-@ 1981 ) , Bo <unk> ( 1981 @-@ 1983 ) , and Clara <unk> ( 1983 @-@ 1999 ) . Since 1999 , the State Herald of Sweden has been Henrik <unk> . 
 The Swedish Collegium of Arms , operating under the Swedish Heraldry Society , is responsible for reviewing and registering burgher arms . The Swedish Heraldry Society is a non @-@ profit association founded in 1976 , and is not affiliated with the National Archives or their Heraldry Board , which registers arms of municipalities and other public entities . 
 = = National heraldry = = 
 The greater national arms ( stora <unk> ) originated in 1448 and has remained unchanged in Swedish law since 1943 . The first legislation of state arms in Sweden was in 1908 , and prior to that the state arms were changed by royal decree . It is also the personal coat of arms of the king of Sweden ; as such he can decree its use as a personal coat of arms by other members of the Royal House , with the alterations and additions decided by him . Since the beginning of the reign of Gustav Vasa in 1523 it has been customary in Sweden to display the arms of the ruling dynasty as an inescutcheon in the centre of the greater arms . 
 The coat of arms of Queen Silvia of Sweden is similar to the greater arms of Sweden , but without the ermine mantling , and with the central inescutcheon exchanged for her personal arms : Per pale gules and Or , a fleur @-@ de @-@ lis <unk> . The shield is encircled by an azure ribbon with dependent cross of the Order of the Seraphim . 
 The lesser coat of arms of Sweden ( <unk> <unk> ) is emblazoned : Azure , with three coronets Or , ordered two above one ; Crowned with a royal <unk> This is the emblem used by the government of Sweden and its agencies ; it is , for example , embroidered on all Swedish police uniforms . Any representation consisting of three crowns ordered two above one is considered to be the lesser coat of arms , and its usage is therefore restricted by Swedish Law , Act 1970 : 498 . 
 The three crowns have been a national symbol of Sweden for centuries ; historians trace the use of the symbol back to the royal seal of Albrecht of Mecklenburg , and even earlier . The three crowns have been recognized as the official arms of Sweden since the 14th century . The earliest credible attribution of the three crowns is to Magnus Eriksson , who reigned over Norway and Sweden , and in 1330s , bought Scania from Denmark . Written in 1378 , Ernst von Kirchberg 's <unk> depicted Magnus Eriksson with a national banner of dark blue , charged with three crowns , although this banner did not ultimately become the national flag of Sweden . 
 = = Military heraldry = = 
 Swedish military heraldry made news headlines in Sweden and overseas in 2007 , when a controversial change was made to the arms of the Nordic Battlegroup at the behest of a group of female soldiers who demanded that the lion 's genitals be removed from the arms . Vladimir <unk> , heraldic artist at the National Archives since 1994 , was critical of the decision , saying , " once upon a time coats of arms containing lions without genitalia were given to those who betrayed the Crown . " The Times in London noted a recent trend toward heraldic " castration " , pointing to the lions passant on the royal coat of arms of England , as well as the lions rampant on those of Norway , Finland , Belgium , Luxembourg and Scotland , all of which have been depicted without genitals ; in conclusion , The Times wrote , " some crests are ambiguous , but the message remains clear : the lions are supposed to display courage and nothing else . " Officials at the National Archives treat this as a change in artistic style , rather than a heraldic change , and the lion remains in its original form on the rolls of the National Archives , g while the castrated lion appears on the unit 's sleeve patches . The Nordic Battle Group 's coat of arms was originally designed to incorporate heraldic elements and colours from all member nations , including " a lion that did not look Finnish , Norwegian , Estonian or Swedish . " In an unusual move , the Armed Forces Heraldry Council authorised the Nordic Battle Group commander 's use of a command sign . This consisted of a bunting divided into fields of blue , gold and blue with a Roman numeral V in the gold field , since the unit would be the fifth mobilized combat unit of the European Union . 
 = = = Swedish Army = = = 
 The coat of arms of the Swedish Army consists of two crossed golden swords on a blue field . This motif is repeated in the flag of the Inspector General of the Army , and a blue field with a single upright golden sword appears on the flag of Military Region Command infrastructure , with three gold crowns in the canton . 
 = = = Swedish Navy = = = 
 The coat of arms of the Swedish Navy , which consists of a blue field with two cannons in saltire and a cabled anchor , topped with a crown , and has been used on the flags of naval commanders , including on the flag of the Inspector General of the Navy , the most senior representative of the Swedish Navy ’ s combat forces . 
 = = Regional heraldry = = 
 Each of Sweden 's 21 counties ( <unk> ) , 25 provinces ( <unk> ) and 290 municipalities ( <unk> ) has its own coat of arms . The Instrument of Government ( 1634 ) introduced the modern counties of Sweden , superseding the 25 medieval <unk> Although many of these counties have been the subject of more recent reforms , many of them occupy broadly similar regions . ( See comparative maps at Counties of Sweden . ) Most of the counties that have remained largely intact ( Dalarna , Gotland , Skåne , Södermanland , Uppsala , Värmland , etc . ) retain the respective province 's coat of arms , while the redistricting of other lands has been reflected heraldically ( e.g. the newly created <unk> <unk> , occupying parts of Hälsingland and <unk> , bears their arms quarterly ) . By royal decree on 18 January 1884 , King Oscar II granted all provinces the rights to the rank of duchy and to display their arms with a ducal coronet . While more exhaustive lists can be found elsewhere , i this article only discusses the arms of a few of these regions , selected for their heraldic notability . The arms of Gotland , Västerbotten , Uppland , Södermanland , Skåne and Lappland will be considered here in further detail . 
 = = Municipal heraldry = = 
 There are 290 municipalities in Sweden , each with its own coat of arms . A local government reform in the 1960s – 1970s made all cities part of a municipality . The city arms often — but not always — became the coat of arms of the new municipality . As some municipalities were created at this time by merging smaller communities , this led in some cases to arms consisting of two parts , each derived from one of the communities . Some new municipalities also lacked historical cities within , and therefore created wholly new coats of arms . Municipalities which carry the name of a city ( with a few exceptions — see below ) traditionally display a mural crown on top of their coat of arms . While no law forbids other municipalities from using the mural crown , it is customarily reserved for those bearing former city arms . Kalmar was the first to establish city arms in 1247 , and Stockholm , Skara and Örebro were also among the first cities in Sweden to establish city arms . As recently as 2007 , <unk> Municipality was among the last municipalities in Sweden to replace its logo with a newly registered coat of arms . Municipal arms may not use any colors ( tinctures ) other than argent , Or , gules , azure , sable and vert . As in other heraldic traditions , the rule of tincture applies and it is the blazon — not the image — that is legally registered . 
 = = = Former city arms = = = 
 The following is not an exhaustive list of the 133 historic cities in Sweden , but a brief list of cities that are notable and bear heraldic significance within the context of Swedish heraldry . Each is listed by the city name , in general chronological order with the approximate year of settlement or city charter . Note that most city arms originated in the Middle Ages as a city seal , and all were registered as municipality ( <unk> ) arms in the 1970s . 
 = = = Other municipal arms = = = 
 The following examples do not represent an exhaustive list of Swedish municipal arms . See the list of municipalities of Sweden for a complete listing of these . 
 = = Ecclesiastical heraldry = = 
 The Church of Sweden ( Svenska <unk> ) is the national church ( <unk> ) and , until 2000 , was the state church ( <unk> ) of Sweden . The arms of the church have been found displayed on a 14th @-@ century heraldic flag discovered in Uppsala cathedral , and are blazoned : Or , upon a cross gules , a crown <unk> The crown has long been said to represent St. Erik , but in early 2005 , the church issued a press release adopting " a new interpretation of the 600 @-@ year @-@ old coat of arms which was found in Uppsala cathedral , " calling it the victory crown of Christ ( Kristi <unk> ) . The Church of Sweden also has many dioceses and parishes with their own coats of arms . 
 According to tradition , bishops may use the arms of their diocese marshalled with their own personal arms , with a mitre in place of the helmet and a crosier displayed behind the shield , but these are removed when the bishop retires . These arms may take the form of a shield divided per pale or quartered with the arms of the diocese in the first and third quarters and the bishop 's personal arms in the second and fourth <unk> The cross staff or " primate cross " is used only by the Archbishop of Uppsala and the Bishop of Lund , crossed with the crosier behind the shield . Antje Jackelén , Bishop of Lund , uses the traditional oval shield of a woman 's arms , and her arms were designed by the diocese 's heraldist , Jan <unk> . <unk> also designed the arms of Jackelén 's predecessor , Christina <unk> , who was the first woman to be a bishop in the Church of Sweden . 
 = = Personal heraldry = = 
 = = = Noble arms = = = 
 Noble arms ( <unk> <unk> ) , together with royal and municipal heraldry , are protected under Swedish law since 1970 . In the 17th and 18th century , the nobility fought to ban burgher arms ( <unk> <unk> ) . The result in 1767 was a compromise in that granted the nobility the exclusive right to barred or open helmets , coronets , and supporters , while " the Town law of 1730 stated that burgher arms are accepted since they are not forbidden . " A coronet of eleven pearls denotes a baron 's arms in Sweden ( the ancient nobility does also have the right to have the baronet crown by tradition ) , which also typically includes two barred helmets , each wearing this coronet , and a third such coronet is placed above the shield , although some baronial arms feature three helmets or only one , and not every baron uses supporters . A Swedish <unk> ( Count ) bears three barred helmets , each crowned with a coronet showing five leaves , and supporters are usually — though not always — present . The arms of Swedish counts also , from the late 17th century , began using <unk> ( see the Greater Coat of Arms of Sweden , pictured above ) in place of the traditional mantling , although this practice has since been deprecated . Untitled nobility ( others granted noble status by letters patent ) also bore a barred helm and a coronet showing two pearls between three leaves . 
 The earliest known achievements of heraldry in Sweden were the noble arms of two brothers , Sigtrygg and Lars Bengtsson , of the Boberg family , dating to 1219 . Other noble arms may have been adopted into civic heraldry within their bearers ' areas of influence , such as the adoption of the arms of Bo Jonsson ( Grip ) by Södermanland ; the direct adoption of Jonsson 's arms is disputed , but at the least , a certain heraldic influence is <unk> The last charter of nobility in Sweden was issued by King Oskar II to Swedish explorer Sven Hedin in 1902 ; this may well be the last charter ever . The 1974 constitution does not mention charters nor the nobility , and the Royal orders of the State ( not including , however , the Order of Carl XIII ) can not be conferred to Swedes according to a special ordinance . The house of nobility lost the last of its official privileges in 2003 . 
 = = = Burgher arms = = = 
 Throughout the Middle Ages , heraldry in Sweden was primarily the domain of the high nobility , but burgher arms came to Sweden in the 14th century by way of the Hansa trade . This may have been especially true in Stockholm , where there was a large German population . While burgher arms became popular among the merchants of the Middle Ages , by the 16th and 17th century their use was " common among the non @-@ noble officers , judges and priests ... while the merchants tended to give up the tradition of heraldic seals and replace them with owner ’ s marks . " In contrast to noble arms , burgher arms are allowed only a shield with one tilting or closed helmet without a necklace or coronet . A wreath and crest must be placed on the helmet , and a motto or war cry can be used . Unlike noble arms , few burgher arms were handed down through the generations . 
 Burgher arms are not required to be registered with the PRV , and so they are not protected under Swedish law ( 1970 : 498 ) . According to the Swedish Heraldry Society , the most common way of obtaining recognition of burgher arms is by inclusion in the annually published Scandinavian Roll of Arms ( <unk> <unk> ) , which was first published in 1963 and currently includes over 400 Swedish family coats of arms , along with arms from the other Scandinavian countries . Upon submission to the Swedish Heraldry Society , burgher arms are reviewed by the Swedish Collegium of Arms , whose decisions are published in the Scandinavian Roll of Arms . Approximately 3000 burgher arms are known today in Sweden . Swedish law protects " arms of the nobility as well as civic bodies , while burgher arms are not [ protected ] , unless registered as a logotype . " 
 = = Crowns and helmets used in Swedish heraldry = = 
 = Obesity hypoventilation syndrome = 
 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome ( also known as Pickwickian syndrome ) is a condition in which severely overweight people fail to breathe rapidly enough or deeply enough , resulting in low blood oxygen levels and high blood carbon dioxide ( CO2 ) levels . Many people with this condition also frequently stop breathing altogether for short periods of time during sleep ( obstructive sleep apnea ) , resulting in many partial awakenings during the night , which leads to continual sleepiness during the day . The disease puts strain on the heart , which eventually may lead to the symptoms of heart failure , such as leg swelling and various other related symptoms . The most effective treatment is weight loss , but it is often possible to relieve the symptoms by nocturnal ventilation with positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) or related methods . 
 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome is defined as the combination of obesity ( body mass index above 30 kg / m2 ) , hypoxemia ( falling oxygen levels in blood ) during sleep , and hypercapnia ( increased blood carbon dioxide levels ) during the day , resulting from hypoventilation ( excessively slow or shallow breathing ) . The disease has been known since the 1950s , initially as " Pickwickian syndrome " in reference to a Dickensian character but currently under a more descriptive name . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome is a form of sleep disordered breathing . Two subtypes are recognized , depending on the nature of disordered breathing detected on further investigations . The first is OHS in the context of obstructive sleep apnea ; this is confirmed by the occurrence of 5 or more episodes of apnea , hypopnea or respiratory @-@ related <unk> per hour ( high apnea @-@ hypopnea index ) during sleep . The second is OHS primarily due to " sleep hypoventilation syndrome " ; this requires a rise of CO2 levels by 10 mmHg ( 1 @.@ 3 kPa ) after sleep compared to awake measurements and overnight drops in oxygen levels without simultaneous apnea or hypopnea . Overall , 90 % of all people with OHS fall into the first category , and 10 % in the second . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Most people with obesity hypoventilation syndrome have concurrent obstructive sleep apnea , a condition characterized by snoring , brief episodes of apnea ( cessation of breathing ) during the night , interrupted sleep and excessive daytime sleepiness . In OHS , sleepiness may be worsened by elevated blood levels of carbon dioxide , which causes drowsiness ( " CO2 narcosis " ) . Other symptoms present in both conditions are depression , and hypertension ( high blood pressure ) that is difficult to control with medication . The high carbon dioxide can also cause headaches , which tend to be worse in the morning . 
 The low oxygen level leads to excessive strain on the right side of the heart , known as cor pulmonale . Symptoms of this disorder occur because the heart has difficulty pumping blood from the body through the lungs . Fluid may therefore accumulate in the skin of the legs in the form of edema ( swelling ) , and in the abdominal cavity in the form of ascites ; decreased exercise tolerance and exertional chest pain may occur . On physical examination , characteristic findings are the presence of a raised jugular venous pressure , a palpable <unk> heave , a heart murmur due to blood leaking through the <unk> valve , <unk> ( an enlarged liver ) , ascites and leg edema . Cor pulmonale occurs in about a third of all people with OHS . 
 = = Mechanism = = 
 It is not fully understood why some obese people develop obesity hypoventilation syndrome while others do not . It is likely that it is the result of an interplay of various processes . Firstly , work of breathing is increased as adipose tissue restricts the normal movement of the chest muscles and makes the chest wall less compliant , the diaphragm moves less effectively , respiratory muscles are fatigued more easily , and airflow in and out of the lung is impaired by excessive tissue in the head and neck area . Hence , people with obesity need to expend more energy to breathe effectively . These factors together lead to sleep @-@ disordered breathing and inadequate removal of carbon dioxide from the circulation and hence hypercapnia ; given that carbon dioxide in aqueous solution combines with water to form an acid ( CO2 [ g ] + H2O [ l ] + excess H2O [ l ] -- > H2CO3 [ aq ] ) , this causes acidosis ( increased acidity of the blood ) . Under normal circumstances , central chemoreceptors in the brain stem detect the acidity , and respond by increasing the respiratory rate ; in OHS , this " ventilatory response " is blunted . 
 The blunted ventilatory response is attributed to several factors . Obese people tend to have raised levels of the hormone leptin , which is secreted by adipose tissue and under normal circumstances increases ventilation . In OHS , this effect is reduced . Furthermore , episodes of nighttime acidosis ( e.g. due to sleep apnea ) lead to compensation by the kidneys with retention of the alkali bicarbonate . This normalizes the acidity of the blood . However , bicarbonate stays around in the bloodstream for longer , and further episodes of hypercapnia lead to relatively mild acidosis and reduced ventilatory response in a vicious circle . 
 Low oxygen levels lead to hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction , the tightening of small blood vessels in the lung to create an optimal distribution of blood through the lung . <unk> low oxygen levels causing chronic vasoconstriction leads to increased pressure on the pulmonary artery ( pulmonary hypertension ) , which in turn puts strain on the right ventricle , the part of the heart that pumps blood to the lungs . The right ventricle undergoes remodeling , becomes distended and is less able to remove blood from the veins . When this is the case , raised hydrostatic pressure leads to accumulation of fluid in the skin ( edema ) , and in more severe cases the liver and the abdominal cavity . 
 The chronically low oxygen levels in the blood also lead to increased release of erythropoietin and the activation of <unk> , the production of red blood cells . This results in polycythemia , abnormally increased numbers of circulating red blood cells and an elevated hematocrit . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Formal criteria for diagnosis of OHS are : 
 Body mass index over 30 kg / m2 ( a measure of obesity , obtained by taking one 's weight in kilograms and dividing it by one 's height in meters squared ) 
 Arterial carbon dioxide level over 45 mmHg or 6 @.@ 0 kPa as determined by arterial blood gas measurement 
 No alternative explanation for hypoventilation , such as use of narcotics , severe obstructive or interstitial lung disease , severe chest wall disorders such as <unk> , severe hypothyroidism ( underactive thyroid ) , neuromuscular disease or congenital central hypoventilation syndrome 
 If OHS is suspected , various tests are required for its confirmation . The most important initial test is the demonstration of elevated carbon dioxide in the blood . This requires an arterial blood gas determination , which involves taking a blood sample from an artery , usually the radial artery . Given that it would be complicated to perform this test on every patient with sleep @-@ related breathing problems , some suggest that measuring bicarbonate levels in normal ( venous ) blood would be a reasonable screening test . If this is elevated ( 27 mmol / l or higher ) , blood gases should be measured . 
 To distinguish various subtypes , <unk> is required . This usually requires brief admission to a hospital with a specialized sleep medicine department where a number of different measurements are conducted while the subject is asleep ; this includes electroencephalography ( electronic registration of electrical activity in the brain ) , electrocardiography ( same for electrical activity in the heart ) , pulse oximetry ( measurement of oxygen levels ) and often other modalities . Blood tests are also recommended for the identification of hypothyroidism and polycythemia . 
 To distinguish between OHS and various other lung diseases that can cause similar symptoms , medical imaging of the lungs ( such as a chest X @-@ ray or CT / CAT scan ) , spirometry , electrocardiography and echocardiography may be performed . <unk> and electrocardiography may also show strain on the right side of the heart caused by OHS , and spirometry may show a restrictive pattern related to obesity . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 In people with stable OHS , the most important treatment is weight loss — by diet , through exercise , with medication , or sometimes weight loss surgery ( bariatric surgery ) . This has been shown to improve the symptoms of OHS and resolution of the high carbon dioxide levels . Weight loss may take a long time and is not always successful . Bariatric surgery is avoided if possible , given the high rate of complications , but may be considered if other treatment modalities are ineffective in improving oxygen levels and symptoms . If the symptoms are significant , nighttime positive airway pressure ( PAP ) treatment is tried ; this involves the use of a machine to assist with breathing . PAP exists in various forms , and the ideal strategy is uncertain . Some medications have been tried to stimulate breathing or correct underlying abnormalities ; their benefit is again uncertain . 
 While many people with obesity hypoventilation syndrome are cared for on an outpatient basis , some deteriorate suddenly and when admitted to hospital may show severe abnormalities such as markedly deranged blood acidity ( pH < 7 @.@ 25 ) or depressed level of consciousness due to very high carbon dioxide levels . On occasions , admission to an intensive care unit with intubation and mechanical ventilation is necessary . Otherwise , " bi @-@ level " positive airway pressure ( see the next section ) is commonly used to stabilize the patient , followed by conventional treatment . 
 = = = Positive airway pressure = = = 
 Positive airway pressure , initially in the form of continuous positive airway pressure ( CPAP ) , is a useful treatment for obesity hypoventilation syndrome , particularly when obstructive sleep apnea co @-@ exists . CPAP requires the use during sleep of a machine that delivers a continuous positive pressure to the airways and preventing the collapse of soft tissues in the throat during breathing ; it is administered through a mask on either the mouth and nose together , or if that is not tolerated on the nose only ( nasal CPAP ) . This relieves the features of obstructive sleep apnea , and is often sufficient to remove the resultant accumulation of carbon dioxide . The pressure is increased until the obstructive symptoms ( snoring and periods of apnea ) have disappeared . CPAP alone is effective in more than 50 % of people with OHS . 
 In some occasions , the oxygen levels are persistently too low ( oxygen saturations below 90 % ) . In that case , the hypoventilation itself may be improved by switching from CPAP treatment to an alternate device that delivers " bi @-@ level " positive pressure : higher pressure during inspiration ( breathing in ) and a lower pressure during expiration ( breathing out ) . If this too is ineffective in increasing oxygen levels , addition of oxygen therapy may be necessary . As a last resort , tracheostomy may be necessary ; this involves making a surgical opening in the trachea to bypass obesity @-@ related airway obstruction in the neck . This may be combined with mechanical ventilation with an assisted breathing device through the opening . 
 = = = Other treatments = = = 
 <unk> acetate , a progestin , has been shown to improve the ventilatory response , but this has been poorly studied and is associated with an increased risk of thrombosis . Similarly , the drug acetazolamide can reduce bicarbonate levels , and thereby augment to normal ventilatory response , but this has been researched insufficiently to recommend wide application . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Obesity hypoventilation syndrome is associated with a reduced quality of life , and people with the condition incur increased healthcare costs , largely due to hospital admissions including observation and treatment on intensive care units . OHS often occurs together with several other disabling medical conditions , such as asthma ( in 18 – 24 % ) and type 2 diabetes ( in 30 – 32 % ) . Its main complication of heart failure affects 21 – 32 % of patients . 
 Those with abnormalities severe enough to warrant treatment have an increased risk of death , reported to be 23 % over 18 months and 46 % over 50 months . This risk is reduced to less than 10 % in those receiving treatment with PAP . Treatment also reduces the need for hospital admissions and reduces healthcare costs . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 The exact prevalence of obesity hypoventilation syndrome is unknown , and it is thought that many people with symptoms of OHS have not been diagnosed . About a third of all people with morbid obesity ( a body mass index exceeding 40 kg / m2 ) have elevated carbon dioxide levels in the blood . 
 When examining groups of people with obstructive sleep apnea , researchers have found that 10 – 20 % of them meet the criteria for OHS as well . The risk of OHS is much higher in those with more severe obesity , i.e. a body mass index ( BMI ) of 40 kg / m2 or higher . It is twice as common in men compared to women . The average age at diagnosis is 52 . American Black people are more likely to be obese than American whites , and are therefore more likely to develop OHS , but obese Asians are more likely than people of other ethnicities to have OHS at a lower BMI as a result of physical characteristics . 
 It is anticipated that rates of OHS will rise as the prevalence of obesity rises . This may also explain why OHS is more commonly reported in the United States , where obesity is more common , than in other countries . 
 = = History = = 
 The discovery of obesity hypoventilation syndrome is generally attributed to the authors of a 1956 report of a professional poker player who , after gaining weight , became somnolent and fatigued and prone to fall asleep during the day , as well as developing edema of the legs suggesting heart failure . The authors coined the condition " Pickwickian syndrome " after the character Joe from Dickens ' The Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club ( 1837 ) , who was markedly obese and tended to fall asleep uncontrollably during the day . This report , however , was preceded by other descriptions of hypoventilation in obesity . In the 1960s , various further discoveries were made that led to the distinction between obstructive sleep apnea and sleep hypoventilation . 
 = Patti Smith = 
 Patricia Lee " Patti " Smith ( born December 30 , 1946 ) is an American singer @-@ songwriter , poet , and visual artist who became a highly influential component of the New York City punk rock movement with her 1975 debut album Horses . 
 Called the " punk poet laureate " , Smith fused rock and poetry in her work . Smith 's most widely known song is " Because the Night " , which was co @-@ written with Bruce Springsteen . The song reached number 13 on the Billboard Hot 100 chart in 1978 . In 2005 , Patti Smith was named a Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Ministry of Culture , and in 2007 , she was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame . On November 17 , 2010 , she won the National Book Award for her memoir Just Kids . The book fulfilled a promise she had made to her former long @-@ time roommate and partner , Robert Mapplethorpe . In Rolling Stone magazine 's list of 100 Greatest Artists published in December 2010 , she was in 47th place . She is also a recipient of the 2011 Polar Music Prize . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = 1946 – 1967 : Early life = = = 
 Patricia Lee Smith was born in Chicago . Her mother , Beverly , was a waitress , and her father , Ian and her much younger brother Christopher Ian worked at the Honeywell plant . Her father and brother moved to England in 1958 following a divorce . The family was of Irish ancestry . She spent her early childhood in the Germantown neighborhood of Philadelphia , before her family moved to Pitman , New Jersey and later to The Woodbury Gardens section of Deptford <unk> . New Jersey . Her mother was a Jehovah 's Witness . Patti had a strong religious upbringing and a Bible education , but left organized religion as a teenager because she felt it was too confining ; much later , she wrote the line " Jesus died for somebody 's sins , but not mine " in her cover version of Them 's " Gloria " in response to this experience . She has described having an avid interest in Tibetan Buddhism around the age of eleven or twelve , saying " I fell in love with Tibet because their essential mission was to keep a continual stream of prayer , " but that as an adult she sees clear parallels between different forms of religion , and has come to the conclusion that religious dogmas are " ... man @-@ made laws that you can either decide to abide by or not . " At this early age Smith was exposed to her first records , including Shrimp Boats by Harry Belafonte , Patience and Prudence doing The Money Tree , and Another Side of Bob Dylan , which her mother gave to her . Smith graduated from Deptford Township High School in 1964 and went to work in a factory . She gave birth to her first child , a daughter , on April 26 , 1967 , and chose to place her for adoption . 
 = = = 1967 – 1973 : New York = = = 
 In 1967 , she left Glassboro State College ( now Rowan University ) and moved to Manhattan . She met photographer Robert Mapplethorpe there while working at a book store with a friend , poet Janet Hamill . She and Mapplethorpe had an intense romantic relationship , which was tumultuous as the pair struggled with times of poverty , and Mapplethorpe with his own sexuality . Smith considers Mapplethorpe to be one of the most important people in her life , and in her book Just Kids refers to him as " the artist of my life " . Mapplethorpe 's photographs of her became the covers for the Patti Smith Group LPs , and they remained friends until Mapplethorpe 's death in 1989 . In 1969 she went to Paris with her sister and started busking and doing performance art . When Smith returned to Manhattan , she lived in the Hotel Chelsea with Mapplethorpe ; they frequented Max 's Kansas City and CBGB . Smith provided the spoken word soundtrack for Sandy Daley 's art film Robert Having His Nipple Pierced , starring Mapplethorpe . The same year Smith appeared with Wayne County in Jackie Curtis 's play Femme Fatale . Afterward , she also starred in Tony Ingrassia 's play Island . As a member of the St. Mark 's Poetry Project , she spent the early 1970s painting , writing , and performing . In 1971 she performed – for one night only – in Cowboy Mouth , a play that she co @-@ wrote with Sam Shepard . ( The published play 's notes call for " a man who looks like a coyote and a woman who looks like a crow " . ) She wrote several poems , " for sam <unk> " and " Sam Shepard : 9 Random Years ( 7 + 2 ) " about her relationship with Shepard . 
 Smith was briefly considered for the lead singer position in Blue Öyster Cult . She contributed lyrics to several of the band 's songs , including " Debbie Denise " ( inspired by her poem " In Remembrance of Debbie Denise " ) , " Baby Ice Dog " , " Career of Evil " , " Fire of Unknown Origin " , " The Revenge of Vera Gemini " ( on which she performs duet vocals ) , and " Shooting Shark " . She was romantically involved at the time with the band 's keyboardist , Allen Lanier . During these years , Smith also wrote rock journalism , some of which was published in Rolling Stone and Creem . 
 = = = 1974 – 1979 : Patti Smith Group = = = 
 By 1974 , Patti Smith was performing rock music herself , initially with guitarist , bassist and rock archivist Lenny Kaye , and later with a full band comprising Kaye , Ivan Kral on guitar and bass , Jay Dee Daugherty on drums and Richard <unk> on piano . Ivan Kral was a refugee from Czechoslovakia , he moved to the USA in 1966 with his parents who were diplomats . After the Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 , Kral decided not to return . Financed by Sam Wagstaff , the band recorded a first single , " Hey Joe / Piss Factory " , in 1974 . The A @-@ side was a version of the rock standard with the addition of a spoken word piece about fugitive heiress Patty Hearst ( " Patty Hearst , you 're standing there in front of the Symbionese Liberation Army flag with your legs spread , I was wondering were you gettin ' it every night from a black revolutionary man and his women ... " ) . The B @-@ side describes the helpless anger Smith had felt while working on a factory assembly line and the salvation she discovered in the form of a shoplifted book , the 19th century French poet Arthur Rimbaud 's Illuminations . In a 1996 interview which discusses artistic influences during her young years , Smith said , " I had devoted so much of my girlish daydreams to Rimbaud . Rimbaud was like my boyfriend . " 
 Later that same year , she performed spoken poetry on " I Wake Up Screaming " from Ray Manzarek 's The Whole Thing Started with Rock & Roll Now It 's Out of Control album . 
 The Patti Smith Group was signed by Clive Davis of Arista Records , and in 1975 recorded their first album , Horses , produced by John Cale amid some tension . The album fused punk rock and spoken poetry and begins with a cover of Van Morrison 's " Gloria " , and Smith 's opening words : " Jesus died for somebody 's sins but not mine " ( an excerpt from " Oath " , one of her early poems ) . The austere cover photograph by Mapplethorpe has become one of rock 's classic images . As the popularity of punk rock grew , Patti Smith Group toured the United States and Europe . The rawer sound of the group 's second album , Radio Ethiopia , reflected this . Considerably less accessible than Horses , Radio Ethiopia initially received poor reviews . However , several of its songs have stood the test of time , and Smith still performs them regularly in concert . She has said that Radio Ethiopia was influenced by the band MC5 . 
 On January 23 , 1977 , while touring in support of Radio Ethiopia , Smith accidentally danced off a high stage in Tampa , Florida , and fell 15 feet into a concrete orchestra pit , breaking several neck vertebrae . The injury required a period of rest and an intensive round of physical therapy , during which time she was able to reassess , re @-@ energize and reorganize her life . Patti Smith Group produced two further albums before the end of the 1970s . Easter ( 1978 ) was her most commercially successful record , containing the single " Because the Night " co @-@ written with Bruce Springsteen . Wave ( 1979 ) was less successful , although the songs " Frederick " and " Dancing Barefoot " both received commercial airplay . 
 = = = 1980 – 1995 : Marriage = = = 
 Before the release of Wave , Smith , now separated from long @-@ time partner Allen Lanier , met Fred " Sonic " Smith , former guitar player for Detroit rock band MC5 and his own Sonic 's Rendezvous Band , who adored poetry as much as she did . ( Wave 's " Dancing Barefoot " and " Frederick " were both dedicated to him . ) The running joke at the time was that she married Fred only because she would not have to change her name . They had a son , Jackson ( b . 1982 ) who would go on to marry The White Stripes drummer , Meg White in 2009 ; and a daughter , Jesse ( b . 1987 ) . Through most of the 1980s Patti Smith was in semi @-@ retirement from music , living with her family north of Detroit in St. Clair Shores , Michigan . In June 1988 , she released the album Dream of Life , which included the song " People Have the Power " . Fred Smith died on November 4 , 1994 , of a heart attack . Shortly afterward , Patti faced the unexpected death of her brother Todd . When her son Jackson turned 14 , Smith decided to move back to New York . After the impact of these deaths , her friends Michael Stipe of R.E.M. and Allen Ginsberg ( whom she had known since her early years in New York ) urged her to go back out on the road . She toured briefly with Bob Dylan in December 1995 ( chronicled in a book of photographs by Stipe ) . 
 = = = 1996 – 2003 : Re @-@ emergence = = = 
 In 1996 , Smith worked with her long @-@ time colleagues to record Gone Again , featuring " About a Boy " , a tribute to Kurt Cobain . That same year she collaborated with Stipe on " E @-@ Bow the Letter " , a song on R.E.M. ' s New Adventures in Hi @-@ Fi , which she has also performed live with the band . After release of Gone Again , Patti Smith recorded two new albums : Peace and Noise in 1997 ( with the single " 1959 " , about the invasion of Tibet ) and Gung Ho in 2000 ( with songs about Ho Chi Minh and Smith 's late father ) . Songs " 1959 " and " Glitter in Their Eyes " were nominated for Grammy Award for Best Female Rock Vocal Performance . A box set of her work up to that time , The Patti Smith Masters , came out in 1996 , and 2002 saw the release of Land ( 1975 – 2002 ) , a two @-@ CD compilation that includes a cover of Prince 's " When Doves Cry " . Smith 's solo art exhibition Strange Messenger was hosted at The Andy Warhol Museum in Pittsburgh on September 28 , 2002 . 
 = = = 2004 – present = = = 
 On April 27 , 2004 , Patti Smith released <unk> ' which included several songs about motherhood , partly in tribute to Smith 's mother , who had died two years before . It was her first album on Columbia Records , soon to become a sister label to her previous home Arista Records . Smith curated the Meltdown festival in London on June 25 , 2005 , the penultimate event being the first live performance of Horses in its entirety . Guitarist Tom Verlaine took Oliver Ray 's place . This live performance was released later in the year as Horses / Horses . 
 On July 10 , 2005 , Smith was named a Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French Ministry of Culture . In addition to Smith 's influence on rock music , the Minister also noted her appreciation of Arthur Rimbaud . In August 2005 , Smith gave a literary lecture about the poems of Arthur Rimbaud and William Blake . On October 15 , 2006 , Patti Smith performed at the CBGB nightclub , with a 3 ½ -hour tour de force to close out Manhattan 's music venue . She took the stage at 9 : 30 p.m. ( EDT ) and closed for the night ( and forever for the venue ) at a few minutes after 1 : 00 a.m. , performing her song " <unk> " , and finally reading a list of punk rock musicians and advocates who had died in the previous years . 
 On November 10 , 2005 , Smith received the Woman of Valor Award from <unk> Magazine at the <unk> Music Conference , marking the 30th Anniversary of the release of " Horses . " 
 Smith was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on March 12 , 2007 . She dedicated her award to the memory of her late husband , Fred , and gave a performance of The Rolling Stones staple " Gimme Shelter " . As the closing number of the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame Induction Ceremony , Smith 's " People Have the Power " was used for the big celebrity jam that always ends the program . 
 From November 2006 - January 2007 , an exhibition called ' Sur les Traces ' at Trolley Gallery , London , featured polaroid prints taken by Patti Smith and donated to Trolley to raise awareness and funds for the publication of Double Blind , a book on the war in Lebanon in 2006 , with photographs by Paolo <unk> , a member of Magnum Photos . She also participated in the DVD commentary for Aqua Teen Hunger Force Colon Movie Film for Theaters . From March 28 to June 22 , 2008 , the Fondation Cartier pour l 'Art <unk> in Paris hosted a major exhibition of the visual artwork of Patti Smith , Land 250 , drawn from pieces created between 1967 and 2007 . At the 2008 Rowan Commencement ceremony , Smith received an honorary doctorate degree for her contributions to popular culture . 
 Smith is the subject of a 2008 documentary film , Patti Smith : Dream of Life . A live album by Patti Smith and Kevin Shields , The Coral Sea was released in July 2008 . On September 10 , 2009 , after a week of smaller events and exhibitions in the city , Smith played an open @-@ air concert in Florence 's Piazza Santa Croce , commemorating her performance in the same city 30 years earlier . In the meantime , she contributed with a special introduction to Jessica Lange 's book 50 Photographs ( 2009 ) . In 2010 , Patti Smith 's book , Just Kids , a memoir of her time in 1970s Manhattan and her relationship with Robert Mapplethorpe , was published ; it later won the National Book Award for Nonfiction . On April 30 , 2010 , Patti Smith headlined a benefit concert headed by band @-@ mate Tony Shanahan , for The Court Tavern of New Brunswick . Smith 's set included " Gloria " , " Because the Night " and " People Have the Power . " She has a brief cameo in Jean @-@ Luc Godard 's 2010 Film Socialisme , which was first screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 2010 Cannes Film Festival . 
 On May 17 , 2010 , Patti Smith received an honorary doctorate in fine arts from Pratt Institute , along with architect Daniel Libeskind , MoMA director Glenn Lowry , former NYC Landmarks Commissioner <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> , novelist Jonathan Lethem , and director Steven Soderbergh . Following the conferral of her degree , Smith delivered the commencement address and sang / played two songs accompanied by long @-@ time band member Lenny Kaye . In her remarks , Smith explained that in 1967 when she moved to New York City ( Brooklyn ) , she would never have been accepted into Pratt , but most of her friends ( including Mapplethorpe ) were students at Pratt and she spent countless hours on the Pratt campus . She added that it was through her friends and their Pratt professors that she learned much of her own artistic skills , making the honour from the institute particularly poignant for Smith 43 years later . 
 Smith is currently working on a crime novel set in London . " I 've been working on a detective story that starts at the St Giles in the Fields church in London for the last two years , " she told NME adding that she " loved detective stories " having been a fan of Sherlock Holmes and US crime author Mickey Spillane as a girl . Part of the book will be set in Gothenburg , Sweden . 
 On May 3 , 2011 , it was announced that Patti Smith is one of the winners of the Polar Music Prize : " By devoting her life to art in all its forms , Patti Smith has demonstrated how much rock 'n'roll there is in poetry and how much poetry there is in rock 'n'roll . Patti Smith is a Rimbaud with Marshall amps . She has transformed the way an entire generation looks , thinks and dreams . With her inimitable soul of an artist , Patti Smith proves over and over again that people have the power . " 
 On June 19 , 2011 , Patti Smith made her television acting debut on the TV series Law & Order : Criminal Intent , appearing in an episode called " Icarus " . 
 Smith has recorded a cover of Buddy Holly 's classic " Words of Love " for the CD Rave On Buddy Holly , a tribute album tied to Holly 's seventy @-@ fifth birthday year which was released June 28 , 2011 . 
 Smith also contributed a track to " AHK @-@ toong BAY @-@ bi Covered " , a U2 covers album released through Q Magazine on October 25 , 2011 . Smith recorded a cover of " Until The End Of The World " for the compilation . 
 More recently , Smith has devoted her time to what she terms ' pure photography ' ( a method of capturing still objects without using a flash ) , which she began to pursue following the death of her husband in 1994 . In 2011 , Smith announced the first museum exhibition of her photography in the United States , Camera Solo . She named the project after a sign she saw in the abode of Pope Celestine V , which translates as ' a room of one 's own ' , and which Smith felt best described her solitary method of photography . The exhibition featured artifacts which were the everyday items or places of significance of artists whom Smith admires , including Rimbaud , Baudelaire , Keats and Blake . 
 In February 2012 , she was a guest at the Sanremo Music Festival . 
 Patti Smith 's 11th studio album , Banga , was released in June 2012 . Music Journalist Hal Horowitz wrote : " These songs aren 't as loud or frantic as those of her late 70s heyday , but they resonate just as boldly as she moans , chants , speaks and spits out lyrics with the grace and determination of Mohammad Ali in his prime . It 's not an easy listen — the vast majority of her music never has been — but if you 're a fan and / or prepared for the challenge , this is as potent , heady and uncompromising as she has ever gotten , and with Smith 's storied history as a musical maverick , that 's saying plenty . " The critical aggregator website Metacritic awarded the album a score of 81 , indicating " universal acclaim " . 
 Smith provides lead vocals on the title track to Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea 's 2012 debut solo EP titled Helen Burns . 
 Smith was honored by Bryn Mawr College by receiving the 2013 Katharine Hepburn Medal on February 7 , 2013 . 
 Pope Francis greeted Smith , among other officials , visitors , and faithful , in St. Peter 's Square on April 11 , 2013 . Although Smith maintains she is not Catholic , she says she followed the Conclave after Benedict XVI 's resignation . 
 Smith recorded the song Capitol Letter for the official soundtrack of the second film of the Hunger Games @-@ series The Hunger Games : Catching Fire . 
 As of late December 2013 Smith was working on her second book and still performing . 
 The Vatican announced that Smith would play at the Concerto di Natale , the official Vatican Christmas Concert , on December 13 , 2014 ; the performance , held at Rome 's Auditorium Conciliazione , was also broadcast live on television . 
 On August 23 , 2015 , Smith sang " Aqua Teen Dream " , the closing theme song to the final episode of Aqua Teen Hunger Force on Adult Swim . 
 On September 26 , 2015 , Smith performed during the American Museum of Tort Law convocation ceremony . 
 On October 29 , 2015 , Smith sang " People have the power " with U2 as the closing song during their <unk> + <unk> tour . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Smith has been a great source of inspiration for Michael Stipe of R.E.M. Listening to her album Horses when he was 15 made a huge impact on him ; he said later , " I decided then that I was going to start a band . " In 1998 , Stipe published a collection of photos called Two Times Intro : On the Road with Patti Smith . Stipe sings backing vocals on Smith 's songs " Last Call " and " Glitter in Their Eyes . " Patti also sings background vocals on R.E.M. ' s songs " E @-@ Bow the Letter " and " Blue " . 
 The Australian alternative rock band , The Go @-@ Betweens dedicated a track ( When She Sang About Angels ) off their 2000 album , The Friends of Rachel Worth , to Smith 's long time influence . 
 In 2004 , Shirley Manson of Garbage spoke of Smith 's influence on her in Rolling Stone 's issue " The Immortals : 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " , in which Patti Smith was counted number 47 . The Smiths members Morrissey and Johnny Marr shared an appreciation for Smith 's Horses , and reveal that their song " The Hand That Rocks the Cradle " is a reworking of one of the album 's tracks , " Kimberly " . In 2004 , Sonic Youth released an album called <unk> 3 ( to Patti Smith ) . U2 also cites Patti Smith as an influence . In 2005 Scottish singer @-@ songwriter KT Tunstall released the single " Suddenly I See " as a tribute of sorts to Patti Smith . Canadian actress Ellen Page frequently mentions Smith as one of her idols and has done various photo shoots replicating famous Smith photos , as well as Irish actress Maria Doyle Kennedy who often refers to Smith as a major influence . In 1978 and 1979 , Gilda Radner portrayed a character called Candy Slice on Saturday Night Live based on Smith . 
 Alternative rock singer @-@ songwriter Courtney Love of Hole heavily credited Smith as being a huge influence on her ; Love received Smith 's album Horses in juvenile hall as a teenager , and " realized that you could do something that was completely subversive that didn 't involve violence [ or ] felonies . I stopped making trouble , " said Love . " I stopped . " Hole 's classic track " Violet " features the lyrics " And the sky was all violet / I want it again , but violent , more violent " , alluding to lyrics from Smith 's " Kimberly " . Love later stated that she considered " Rock n Roll Nigger " the greatest rock song of all time . 
 American pop @-@ dance singer Madonna has also named Smith as one of her biggest influences . 
 Anglo @-@ Celtic rock band The Waterboys ' debut single , " A Girl Called Johnny " , was written as a tribute to Smith . 
 The influence of Smith 's music is featured in two award @-@ winning young adult novels by Meagan Brothers , Debbie Harry Sings in French and especially Supergirl Mixtapes . 
 = = Activism = = 
 In 1993 , Smith contributed " Memorial Tribute ( Live ) " to the AIDS @-@ Benefit Album No Alternative produced by the Red Hot Organization . 
 Furthermore , Smith has been a supporter of the Green Party and backed Ralph Nader in the 2000 United States presidential election . She led the crowd singing " Over the Rainbow " and " People Have the Power " at the campaign 's rallies , and also performed at several of Nader 's subsequent " Democracy Rising " events . Smith was a speaker and singer at the first protests against the Iraq War as U.S. President George W. Bush spoke to the United Nations General Assembly . Smith supported Democratic candidate John Kerry in the 2004 election . Bruce Springsteen continued performing her " People Have the Power " at Vote for Change campaign events . In the winter of 2004 / 2005 , Smith toured again with Nader in a series of rallies against the Iraq War and called for the impeachment of George W. Bush . 
 Smith premiered two new protest songs in London in September 2006 . Louise Jury , writing in The Independent , characterized them as " an emotional indictment of American and Israeli foreign policy " . The song " Qana " was about the Israeli airstrike on the Lebanese village of Qana . " Without Chains " is about Murat Kurnaz , a Turkish citizen who was born and raised in Germany , held at Guantanamo Bay detainment camp for four years . Jury 's article quotes Smith as saying : 
 I wrote both these songs directly in response to events that I felt outraged about . These are injustices against children and the young men and women who are being incarcerated . I 'm an American , I pay taxes in my name and they are giving millions and millions of dollars to a country such as Israel and cluster bombs and defense technology and those bombs were dropped on common citizens in Qana . It 's terrible . It 's a human rights violation . 
 In an interview , Smith stated that Kurnaz 's family has contacted her and that she wrote a short preface for the book that he was writing . Kurnaz 's book , " Five Years of My Life , " was published in English by Palgrave Macmillan in March 2008 , with Patti 's introduction . 
 On March 26 , 2003 , ten days after Rachel Corrie 's death , Smith appeared in Austin , Texas , and performed an anti @-@ war concert . She subsequently wrote a song " Peaceable Kingdom " which was inspired by and is dedicated to Rachel Corrie . 
 In 2009 , in her Meltdown concert in Festival Hall , she paid homage to the Iranians taking part in post @-@ election protests by saying " Where is My Vote ? " in a version of the song " People Have the Power " . 
 On September 26 , 2015 , Smith appeared with Ralph Nader , spoke and performed the songs " Wing " and " People Have the Power " during the American Museum of Tort Law convocation ceremony in Winsted , Connecticut . 
 On May 24 , 2016 , Smith spoke , read poetry , and performed several songs accompanied by her daughter Jesse at Ralph Nader 's Breaking Through Power conference at DAR Constitution Hall in Washington , D.C. 
 On June 19 , 2016 , Smith sang " Wing " in homage to Julian Assange and Wikileaks during the " First they came for Assange ... " event at Centre Pompidou , Paris , France , to mark the 4th year of Julian Assange 's forced hiding at the Ecuadorean embassy in London . 
 = = Band members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 Horses ( 1975 ) 
 Radio Ethiopia ( 1976 ) 
 Easter ( 1978 ) 
 Wave ( 1979 ) 
 Dream of Life ( 1988 ) 
 Gone Again ( 1996 ) 
 Peace and Noise ( 1997 ) 
 Gung Ho ( 2000 ) 
 <unk> ' ( 2004 ) 
 Twelve ( 2007 ) 
 Banga ( 2012 ) 
 = Canberra = 
 Canberra ( / <unk> / or / <unk> / ) is the capital city of Australia . With a population of 381 @,@ 488 , it is Australia 's largest inland city and the eighth @-@ largest city overall . The city is located at the northern end of the Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) , 280 km ( 170 mi ) south @-@ west of Sydney , and 660 km ( 410 mi ) north @-@ east of Melbourne . A resident of Canberra is known as a " <unk> " . 
 The site of Canberra was selected for the location of the nation 's capital in 1908 as a compromise between rivals Sydney and Melbourne , Australia 's two largest cities . It is unusual among Australian cities , being an entirely planned city outside of any state , similar to Washington , D.C. , in the United States or Brasília in Brazil . Following an international contest for the city 's design , a blueprint by the Chicago architects Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin was selected and construction commenced in 1913 . The Griffins ' plan featured geometric motifs such as circles , hexagons and triangles , and was centred on axes aligned with significant topographical landmarks in the Australian Capital Territory . 
 The city 's design was influenced by the garden city movement and incorporates significant areas of natural vegetation that have earned Canberra the title of the " bush capital " . The growth and development of Canberra were hindered by the World Wars and the Great Depression , which exacerbated a series of planning disputes and the ineffectiveness of a procession of bodies that were created in turn to oversee the development of the city . The national capital emerged as a thriving city after World War II , as Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies championed its development and the National Capital Development Commission was formed with executive powers . Although the Australian Capital Territory is now self @-@ governing , the Commonwealth Government retains some influence through the National Capital Authority . 
 As the seat of the government of Australia , Canberra is the site of Parliament House , the official residence of the Monarch 's representative the Governor @-@ General , the High Court and numerous government departments and agencies . It is also the location of many social and cultural institutions of national significance , such as the Australian War Memorial , Australian National University , Royal Australian Mint , Australian Institute of Sport , National Gallery , National Museum and the National Library . The Australian Army 's officer corps is trained at the Royal Military College , Duntroon and the Australian Defence Force Academy is also located in the capital . 
 The ACT is independent of any state to prevent any one state from gaining an advantage by hosting the seat of Commonwealth power . The ACT has voting representation in the Commonwealth Parliament , and has its own independent Legislative Assembly and government , similar to the states . 
 As the city has a high proportion of public servants , the Commonwealth Government contributes the largest percentage of Gross State Product and is the largest single employer in Canberra , although no longer the majority employer . Compared to the national averages , the unemployment rate is lower and the average income higher ; tertiary education levels are higher , while the population is younger . Property prices are relatively high , in part due to comparatively restrictive development regulations . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The word " Canberra " is popularly claimed to derive from the word <unk> or Canberry which is claimed to mean " meeting place " in the old Ngunnawal language , one of several Indigenous languages spoken in the district by Aboriginal people before European settlers arrived , although there is no hard evidence to support this . An alternative definition has been claimed by numerous local commentators over the years , including Ngunnawal Elder , Don Bell , whereby " Canberra " or " Nganbra / <unk> " means " woman 's breasts " and is the Indigenous name for the two mountains , Black Mountain and Mount Ainslie , which lie almost opposite each other . In the 1860s , the name was reported by Queanbeyan newspaper owner John Gale to be an interpretation of the name ' <unk> ' or ' <unk> ' , meaning " hollow between a woman 's breasts " , and referring to the Sullivans Creek floodplain between Mount Ainslie and Black Mountain . An 1830s map of the region by Major Mitchell indeed does mark the Sullivan 's Creek floodplain between these two mountains as " Nganbra " . " Nganbra " or " <unk> " could readily have been anglicised to the name " Canberry " , as the locality soon become known to European settlers . 
 R. H. Cambage in his 1919 book Notes on the Native Flora of New South Wales , Part X , the Federal Capital Territory noted that Joshua John Moore , the first settler in the region , named the area Canberry in 1823 stating that " there seems no doubt that the original was a native name , but its meaning is unknown . " Survey plans of the district dated 1837 refer to the area as the Canberry Plain . In 1920 , some of the older residents of the district claimed that the name was derived from the Australian Cranberry which grew abundantly in the area , noting that the local name for the plant was <unk> . Although popularly pronounced / <unk> / or / <unk> / , the original pronunciation at its official naming in 1913 was / <unk> / . 
 = = History = = 
 Before European settlement , the area in which Canberra would eventually be constructed was seasonally inhabited by Indigenous Australians . Anthropologist Norman Tindale suggested the principal group occupying the region were the Ngunnawal people , while the <unk> lived immediately to the south of the ACT , the <unk> to the east , the <unk> also to the south , Gandangara people to the north , and Wiradjuri to the north west . Archaeological evidence of settlement in the region includes inhabited rock shelters , rock paintings and engravings , burial places , camps and quarry sites , and stone tools and arrangements . Artefacts suggests early human activity occurred at some point in the area 21 @,@ 000 years previously . 
 European exploration and settlement started in the Canberra area as early as the 1820s . There were four expeditions between 1820 and 1824 . White settlement of the area probably dates from 1823 , when a homestead or station was built on what is now the Acton peninsula by stockmen employed by Joshua John Moore . He formally applied to purchase the site on 16 December 1826 , naming the property " Canberry " . On 30 April 1827 , Moore was told by letter that he could retain possession of 1 @,@ 000 acres ( 405 ha ) at Canberry . 
 The European population in the Canberra area continued to grow slowly throughout the 19th century . Among them was the Campbell family of " Duntroon " ; their imposing stone house is now the officers ' mess of the Royal Military College , Duntroon . The Campbells sponsored settlement by other farmer families to work their land , such as the <unk> of " <unk> " . Other notable early settlers included the inter @-@ related Murray and Gibbes families , who owned the Yarralumla estate — now the site of the official residence of the Governor @-@ General of Australia — from the 1830s through to 1881 . 
 The oldest surviving public building in the inner @-@ city is the Anglican Church of St John the Baptist , in the suburb of Reid , which was consecrated in 1845 . St John 's churchyard contains the earliest graves in the district . As the European presence increased , the indigenous population dwindled , mainly from disease such as smallpox and measles . 
 = = = Decisions to start and locate a capital = = = 
 The district 's change from a rural area in New South Wales to the national capital started during debates over Federation in the late 19th century . Following a long dispute over whether Sydney or Melbourne should be the national capital , a compromise was reached : the new capital would be built in New South Wales , so long as it was at least 100 miles ( 160 km ) from Sydney , with Melbourne to be the temporary seat of government ( but not referred to as the " capital " ) while the new capital was built . Newspaper proprietor John Gale circulated a pamphlet titled ' Dalgety or Canberra : Which ? ' advocating Canberra to every member of the Commonwealth 's seven state and federal parliaments . By many accounts , it was decisive in the selection of Canberra as the site in 1908 , as was a result of survey work done by the government surveyor Charles Scrivener . The NSW government ceded the Federal Capital Territory ( as it was then known ) to the federal government . In an international design competition conducted by the Department of Home Affairs , on 24 May 1911 , the design by Walter Burley Griffin and Marion Mahony Griffin was chosen for the city , and in 1913 Griffin was appointed Federal Capital Director of Design and Construction and construction began . 
 = = = History of Canberra as a capital city = = = 
 At midday on 12 March 1913 , the city was officially given its name by Lady Denman , the wife of Governor @-@ General Lord Denman , at a ceremony at Kurrajong Hill , which has since become Capital Hill and the site of the present Parliament House . Canberra Day is a public holiday observed in the ACT on the second Monday in March to celebrate the founding of Canberra . After the ceremony , bureaucratic disputes hindered Griffin 's work ; a Royal Commission in 1916 ruled his authority had been usurped by certain officials . Griffin 's relationship with the Australian authorities was strained and a lack of funding meant that by the time he was fired in 1920 , little work had been done . By this time , Griffin had revised his plan , overseen the earthworks of major avenues , and established the <unk> Cork Plantation . 
 The Commonwealth parliament moved to Canberra on 9 May 1927 , with the opening of the Provisional Parliament House . The Prime Minister , Stanley Bruce , had officially taken up residence in The Lodge a few days earlier . Planned development of the city slowed significantly during the depression of the 1930s and during World War II . Some projects planned for that time , including Roman Catholic and Anglican cathedrals , were never completed . 
 From 1920 to 1957 , three bodies , successively the Federal Capital Advisory Committee , the Federal Capital Commission , and the National Capital Planning and Development Committee continued to plan the further expansion of Canberra in the absence of Griffin ; however , they were only advisory , and development decisions were made without consulting them , increasing inefficiency . 
 The largest event in Canberra up to World War II was the 24th Meeting of <unk> in January 1939 . The Canberra Times described it as " a signal event ... in the history of this , the world 's youngest capital city " . The city 's accommodation was not nearly sufficient to house the 1 @,@ 250 delegates , and a tent city had to be set up on the banks of the Molonglo River . One of the prominent speakers was H. G. Wells , who was a guest of the Governor @-@ General Lord Gowrie for a week . This event coincided with a heatwave across south @-@ eastern Australia , during which the temperature in Canberra reached 108 @.@ 5 degrees on 11 January . On Friday 13 January the Black Friday bushfires caused 71 deaths in Victoria , and Wells accompanied the Governor @-@ General on his tour of areas threatened by fires . 
 Immediately after the end of the war , Canberra was criticised for resembling a village , and its disorganised collection of buildings was deemed ugly . Canberra was often derisively described as " several suburbs in search of a city " . Prime Minister Sir Robert Menzies regarded the state of the national capital as an embarrassment . Over time his attitude changed from one of contempt to that of championing its development . He fired two ministers charged with the development of the city for poor performance . Menzies remained in office for over a decade , and in that time the development of the capital sped up rapidly . The population grew by more than 50 per cent in every five @-@ year period from 1955 to 1975 . Several Government departments , together with public servants , were moved to Canberra from Melbourne following the war . Government housing projects were undertaken to accommodate the city 's growing population . 
 The National Capital Development Commission ( NCDC ) , formed in 1957 with executive powers , ended four decades of disputes over the shape and design of Lake Burley Griffin — the centrepiece of Griffin 's design — and construction was completed in 1964 after four years of work . The completion of the lake finally laid the platform for the development of Griffin 's Parliamentary Triangle . Since the initial construction of the lake , various buildings of national importance have been constructed on its shores . 
 The newly built Australian National University was expanded , and sculptures and monuments were built . A new National Library was constructed within the Parliamentary Triangle , followed by the High Court and the National Gallery . Suburbs in Canberra Central ( often referred to as North Canberra and South Canberra ) were further developed in the 1950s , and urban development in the districts of Woden Valley and Belconnen commenced in the mid and late 1960s respectively . Many of the new suburbs were named after Australian politicians , such as Barton , Deakin , Reid , Braddon , Curtin , Chifley and Parkes . 
 On 9 May 1988 , a larger and permanent Parliament House was opened on Capital Hill as part of Australia 's bicentenary celebrations , and the Commonwealth Parliament moved there from the Provisional Parliament House , now known as Old Parliament House . 
 In December 1988 , the ACT was granted full self @-@ government through an Act of the Commonwealth Parliament . Following the first election on 4 March 1989 , a 17 @-@ member Legislative Assembly sat at temporary offices at 1 Constitution Avenue , Civic , on 11 May 1989 . Permanent premises were opened on London Circuit in 1994 . The Australian Labor Party formed the ACT 's first government , led by the Chief Minister Rosemary Follett , who made history as Australia 's first female head of government . 
 Parts of Canberra were engulfed by bushfires on 18 January 2003 that killed four people , injured 435 , and destroyed more than 500 homes and the major research telescopes of Australian National University 's Mount Stromlo Observatory . 
 Throughout 2013 , several events celebrated the 100th anniversary of the naming of Canberra . On 11 March 2014 , the last day of the centennial year , the Canberra Centenary Column was unveiled in City Hill . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Canberra covers an area of 814 @.@ 2 square kilometres ( 314 @.@ 4 sq mi ) and is located near the Brindabella Ranges , approximately 150 kilometres ( 93 mi ) inland from Australia 's east coast . It has an elevation of approximately 580 metres ( 1 @,@ 900 ft ) AHD ; the highest point is Mount Majura at 888 m ( 2 @,@ 913 ft ) . Other large hills include Mount Taylor 855 m ( 2 @,@ 805 ft ) , Mount Ainslie 843 m ( 2 @,@ 766 ft ) , Mount Mugga Mugga 812 m ( 2 @,@ 664 ft ) and Black Mountain 812 m ( 2 @,@ 664 ft ) . 
 The native forest in the Canberra region was almost wholly eucalypt species and provided a resource for fuel and domestic purposes . By the early 1960s , logging had depleted the eucalypt , and concern about water quality led to the forests being closed . Interest in forestry began in 1915 with trials of a number of species including Pinus radiata on the slopes of Mount Stromlo . Since then , plantations have been expanded , with the benefit of reducing erosion in the Cotter catchment , and the forests are also popular recreation areas . 
 The urban environs of the city of Canberra straddle the Ginninderra plain , Molonglo plain , the Limestone plain , and the Tuggeranong plain ( Isabella 's Plain ) . The Molonglo River which flows across the Molonglo plain has been dammed to form the national capital 's iconic feature Lake Burley Griffin . The Molonglo then flows into the Murrumbidgee north @-@ west of Canberra , which in turn flows north @-@ west toward the New South Wales town of Yass . The Queanbeyan River joins the Molonglo River at Oaks Estate just within the ACT . 
 A number of creeks , including Jerrabomberra and Yarralumla Creeks , flow into the Molonglo and Murrumbidgee . Two of these creeks , the Ginninderra and Tuggeranong , have similarly been dammed to form Lakes Ginninderra and Tuggeranong . Until recently the Molonglo River had a history of sometimes calamitous floods ; the area was a flood plain prior to the filling of Lake Burley Griffin . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Canberra has a relatively dry continental climate ; under Köppen @-@ Geiger classification it has an oceanic climate ( Cfb ) . In January , the warmest month , the average high is approximately 28 ° C ( 82 ° F ) ; however , in July , the coldest month , the average high is only about 11 ° C ( 52 ° F ) . Frost is common in the winter months . Snow is rare in the CBD ( central business district ) , but the surrounding areas get annual snowfall through winter and often the snow @-@ capped mountains can be seen from the CBD — the last significant snowfall in the city centre was in 1968 . The highest recorded maximum temperature is variously reported as 42 @.@ 2 ° C ( 108 @.@ 0 ° F ) on 1 February 1968 , or as 42 @.@ 8 ° C ( 109 @.@ 0 ° F ) at Acton on 11 January 1939 . 
 The lowest recorded minimum temperature was − 10 @.@ 0 ° C ( 14 @.@ 0 ° F ) on 11 July 1971 . Light snow falls only once or twice per year , and it is usually not widespread and quickly dissipates . Canberra is protected from the west by the Brindabellas which create a slight rain shadow in Canberra 's valleys . Canberra gets 100 @.@ 4 clear days annually . 
 Annual rainfall is the third lowest of the capital cities ( after Adelaide and Hobart ) but is spread fairly evenly over the seasons , with late spring bringing the highest rainfall . Thunderstorms occur mostly between October and April , owing to the effect of summer and the mountains . The area is not very windy and the breeze is at its strongest from August to November . Canberra is less humid than the nearby coastal areas . 
 = = = Urban structure = = = 
 Canberra is a planned city and the inner @-@ city area was originally designed by Walter Burley Griffin , a major 20th @-@ century American architect . Within the central area of the city near Lake Burley Griffin , major roads follow a wheel @-@ and @-@ spoke pattern rather than a grid . Griffin 's proposal had an abundance of geometric patterns , including concentric hexagonal and octagonal streets emanating from several radii . However , the outer areas of the city , built later , are not laid out geometrically . 
 Lake Burley Griffin was deliberately designed so that the orientation of the components was related to various topographical landmarks in Canberra . The lakes stretch from east to west and divided the city in two ; a land axis perpendicular to the central basin stretches from Capital Hill — the eventual location of the new Parliament House on a mound on the southern side — north northeast across the central basin to the northern banks along Anzac Parade to the Australian War Memorial . This was designed so that looking from Capital Hill , the War Memorial stood directly at the foot of Mount Ainslie . At the southwestern end of the land axis was <unk> Peak , the highest mountain in the ACT , approximately 52 km ( 32 mi ) south west of Canberra . 
 The straight edge of the circular segment that formed the central basin of Lake Burley Griffin was perpendicular to the land axis and designated the water axis , and it extended northwest towards Black Mountain . A line parallel to the water axis , on the northern side of the city , was designated the municipal axis . The municipal axis became the location of Constitution Avenue , which links City Hill in Civic Centre and both Market Centre and the Defence precinct on Russell Hill . Commonwealth Avenue and Kings Avenue were to run from the southern side from Capital Hill to City Hill and Market Centre on the north respectively , and they formed the western and eastern edges of the central basin . The area enclosed by the three avenues was known as the Parliamentary Triangle , and formed the centrepiece of Griffin 's work . 
 The Griffins assigned spiritual values to Mount Ainslie , Black Mountain , and Red Hill and originally planned to cover each of these in flowers . That way each hill would be covered with a single , primary color which represented its spiritual value . This part of their plan never came to fruition , as World War I slowed construction and planning disputes led to Walter 's dismissal by Prime Minister Billy Hughes after the war ended . 
 The urban areas of Canberra are organised into a hierarchy of districts , town centres , group centres , local suburbs as well as other industrial areas and villages . There are seven residential districts , each of which is divided into smaller suburbs , and most of which have a town centre which is the focus of commercial and social activities . The districts were settled in the following chronological order : 
 Canberra Central , mostly settled in the 1920s and 1930s , with expansion up to the 1960s , 25 suburbs 
 Woden Valley , first settled in 1964 , 12 suburbs 
 Belconnen , first settled in 1966 , 25 suburbs ( 1 not yet developed ) 
 Weston Creek , settled in 1969 , 8 suburbs 
 Tuggeranong , settled in 1974 , 18 suburbs 
 Gungahlin , settled in the early 1990s , 18 suburbs ( 5 not yet developed ) 
 Molonglo Valley , development began in 2010 , 13 suburbs planned . 
 The Canberra Central district is substantially based on Walter Burley Griffin 's designs . In 1967 the then National Capital Development Commission adopted the " Y Plan " which laid out future urban development in Canberra around a series of central shopping and commercial area known as the ' town centres ' linked by freeways , the layout of which roughly resembled the shape of the letter Y , with Tuggeranong at the base of the Y and Belconnen and Gungahlin located at the ends of the arms of the Y. 
 Development in Canberra has been closely regulated by government , both through planning processes and the use of crown lease terms that have tightly limited the use of parcels of land . Land in the ACT is held on 99 @-@ year crown leases from the national government , although most leases are now administered by the Territory government . There have been persistent calls for constraints on development to be liberalised . 
 Many of Canberra 's suburbs are named after former Prime Ministers , famous Australians , early settlers , or use Aboriginal words for their title . Street names typically follow a particular theme ; for example , the streets of Duffy are named after Australian dams and reservoirs , the streets of Dunlop are named after Australian inventions , inventors and artists and the streets of Page are named after biologists and naturalists . Most diplomatic missions are located in the suburbs of Yarralumla , Deakin and O 'Malley . There are three light industrial areas : the suburbs of Fyshwick , Mitchell and Hume . 
 = = Governance = = 
 Outside Canberra , the Australian Capital Territory has no settlements larger than a village . The Australian Capital Territory Legislative Assembly performs the roles of both a city council and territory government . The assembly consists of 17 members , elected from three districts using proportional representation . The three districts are Molonglo , Ginninderra and Brindabella , which elect seven , five and five members , respectively . 
