 Stein , Jeff ( 18 August 1999 ) . " Uncle Sam wants you -- in the dark " . Salon.com. Retrieved 9 May 2007 . 
 Supreme Court of South Carolina . " Published opinion and orders " . Supreme Court of South Carolina . Retrieved 9 May 2007 . - Record of suit brought by Fred Moosally , Joseph Miceli , John Morse and Robert D. Finney against Charles C. Thompson , II , author of the book , A Glimpse of Hell . 
 Thompson , Charles ( July 1999 ) . " Cover @-@ up aboard the USS Iowa " . Investigative Reporters and Editors ( BNET ) . Retrieved 19 October 2008 . 
 Trainor , Bernard E. ( 20 April 1989 ) . " Explosion and Fire Kill at Least 47 on Navy Warship " ( Newspaper article ) . The New York Times . Retrieved 2 January 2008 . 
 Trainor , Bernard E. ( 25 May 1989 ) . " Iowa Blast Inquiry Turns to Possibility of Foul Play " . New York Times . Retrieved 9 May 2007 . 
 Trippett , Frank ( 5 June 1989 ) . " Mystery Aboard the Iowa " . Time . Retrieved 9 May 2007 . 
 Trost , C. A. H. ( 16 April 1990 ) . " Navy Investigation of Iowa Explosion Was Thorough and Sound " ( Letter to newspaper editor ) . The New York Times . Retrieved 2 January 2008 . 
 United States Court of Appeals , Sixth Circuit ( 26 January 1996 ) . " Earl V. <unk> , et al . , Plaintiffs @-@ <unk> , v. NATIONAL <unk> CO , INC . , Defendant @-@ Appellee " ( Web document ) . Public . <unk> Retrieved 19 October 2008 . 
 Weinraub , Bernard ( 25 April 1989 ) . " Bush Joins In the Grief Over Iowa " ( Newspaper article ) . The New York Times . Retrieved 2 January 2008 . 
 <unk> , David ( December 1993 ) . " The suicide files : Death in the military ( third of four parts ) " ( Newspaper article ) . Philadelphia Inquirer . Retrieved 2 January 2008 . 
 = = Further information = = 
 = = = Audio / visual = = = 
 A & E Network ( 2001 ) . History Undercover : USS Iowa Explosion ( Documentary video ) . A & E Home Video . 
 Salomon , Mikael ( Director ) ( 2001 ) . A Glimpse of Hell ( Television production ) . 20th Century Fox Television . Independent review 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 Michaud , Stephen G. ; Roy Hazelwood ( 1999 ) . The Evil That Men Do : FBI Profiler Roy Hazelwood 's Journey into the Minds of Sexual Predators . St. Martin 's True Crime . ISBN 0 @-@ 312 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . - Roy Hazelwood , a former member of the FBI 's Behavioral Science Unit , in this book defends his work as a member of the FBI team which concluded in an " equivocal death analysis " that Hartwig had likely intentionally caused the Iowa explosion . 
 Milligan , Richard D. ( 1989 ) . Investigation to inquire into the explosion in number two turret on board USS Iowa ( BB 61 ) which occurred in the vicinity of the Puerto Rico operating area on or about 19 April 1989 . Secretary of the Navy . ASIN <unk> . - The official report on the US Navy 's first investigation into the explosion conducted by Milligan . Excerpts from this report are reprinted in Schwoebel 's book listed above . 
 = 24 ( TV series ) = 
 24 is an American television series produced for the Fox network , created by Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran , and starring Kiefer Sutherland as Counter Terrorist Unit ( CTU ) agent Jack Bauer . Each season , comprising 24 episodes , covers 24 hours in Bauer 's life , using the real time method of narration . Premiering on November 6 , 2001 , the show spanned 192 episodes over eight seasons ; the series finale broadcast on May 24 , 2010 . In addition , a television film , 24 : Redemption , was broadcast between seasons six and seven , on November 23 , 2008 . 24 returned as a 12 @-@ episode series titled 24 : Live Another Day , which aired from May 5 to July 14 , 2014 . 24 : Legacy , a spin @-@ off series featuring new characters is scheduled to premiere on February 5 , 2017 , after Super Bowl LI . 
 The series begins with Bauer working for the Los Angeles – based Counter Terrorist Unit , in which he is a highly proficient agent with an " ends justify the means " approach , regardless of the perceived morality of some of his actions . Throughout the series most of the main plot elements unfold like a political thriller . A typical plot has Bauer racing against the clock as he attempts to thwart multiple terrorist plots , including presidential assassination attempts , weapons of mass destruction detonations , bioterrorism , cyber attacks , as well as conspiracies which deal with government and corporate corruption . 
 24 garnered critical acclaim , winning numerous awards over its eight seasons , including Best Drama Series at the 2003 Golden Globe Awards and Outstanding Drama Series at the 2006 Primetime Emmy Awards . At the conclusion of its eighth season , 24 became the longest @-@ running U.S. espionage / counterterrorism @-@ themed television drama ever , surpassing both Mission : Impossible and The Avengers . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Premise = = = 
 24 is a serial drama which stars Kiefer Sutherland as Jack Bauer , focusing on the efforts of the fictional Counter Terrorist Unit , and their efforts to protect America from terrorism plots . Each episode typically follows Bauer , officials in the U.S. government , and the conspirators behind the events of the day , often simultaneously . The episodes take place over the course of one hour , depicting events as they happen , in real time . To emphasize the real @-@ world flow of events , a clock is prominently displayed on @-@ screen during the show , and there is a regular use of split screens , a technique used to depict multiple scenes occurring at the same time . 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Season 1 begins at midnight on the day of the California presidential primary . Jack Bauer 's protocol is to protect Senator David Palmer from an assassination plot and rescue his own family from those responsible for the plot , who seek retribution for Jack and Palmer 's involvement with a covert American mission in the Balkans . 
 Season 2 , set 18 months later , begins at 8 : 00 a.m. Jack must stop a nuclear bomb from detonating in Los Angeles , then assist President David Palmer in proving who is responsible for the threat . This is necessary to avoid an unfounded war between the U.S. and three Middle Eastern countries . 
 Season 3 , set three years later , begins at 1 : 00 p.m. Jack must again infiltrate a Mexican drug cartel to seize a deadly virus being marketed underground . Meanwhile , Palmer attempts to be devoid of further political scandal which could cost him his presidency . Later , Jack and Palmer must cooperate with terrorist Stephen Saunders , who eventually gains possession of the virus , and stop him from releasing it in several American cities . 
 Season 4 , set 18 months later , begins at 7 : 00 a.m. Jack must save the lives of his new boss , Secretary of Defense James Heller , and Heller 's daughter Audrey Raines ( with whom Jack is romantically involved ) when they are kidnapped by terrorists . However , Habib Marwan uses this as a disguise to launch further attacks against America , and Jack is forced to use unorthodox methods to stop him , which results in long @-@ term consequences for both Jack and the United States . 
 Season 5 , set 18 months after , begins at 7 : 00 a.m. Jack is believed to be dead by everyone except a few of his closest friends . He is forced to resurface when some of those friends are murdered and he is framed by terrorists with connections to the American government . The acquisition of nerve gas to protect U.S. oil interests in Asia backfires , and Jack discovers an insidious conspiracy while trying to stop those responsible . 
 Season 6 , set 20 months later , begins at 6 : 00 a.m. Jack is released after being detained in a Chinese prison following the events of Season 5 . Terrorists who hold a vendetta against Jack plot to set off suitcase nuclear devices in America and he must secure them . Later , Jack is forced to choose between those he loves and national security when the Chinese set their sights on sensitive circuitry that could trigger a war between the U.S. and Russia . 
 Redemption , set three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years later , begins at 3 : 00 p.m. Jack finds himself caught up in a military coup in the fictional African nation of Sangala . Militants are being provided assistance from officials within the United States , where Allison Taylor is being sworn into office as President . Due to the 2007 – 08 Writers ' Strike , season seven was delayed one year . To bridge the one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year gap between seasons , Redemption was produced . This television film aired on November 23 , 2008 . 
 Season 7 , set 65 days after the end of Redemption , begins at 8 : 00 a.m. Jack is assisted by the FBI and covert operatives when the firewall for America 's federal computer infrastructure is breached by the same people responsible for a conflict in Sangala . Jack must uncover who is corrupted within President Taylor 's administration , which has allowed for the <unk> to raid the White House and capture Taylor . She is later blackmailed by a fictional private military company in an attempt to release biological weapons on U.S. soil . Jack must thwart these attacks so the conspirators will fail to cement their power at a government level . 
 Season 8 , set 18 months later , begins at 4 : 00 p.m. Jack is brought in by CTU to uncover a Russian plot to assassinate Islamic leader Omar Hassan during peace negotiations with U.S. President Taylor . Russia 's contingency plan involves engineering a dirty bomb , which Islamic extremists threaten to detonate unless Hassan is handed over . Jack seeks retribution for personal losses suffered after Charles Logan convinces Taylor to cover up these crimes to protect the peace agreement . Jack becomes a fugitive from Russian and American governments and disappears . 
 Live Another Day , set four years later , begins at 11 : 00 a.m. and finds fugitive Jack in London trying to stop an assassination attempt on President James Heller by terrorist Margot Al @-@ <unk> . Later , Jack must prevent an old enemy and a Russian diplomat from sparking a war between the U.S. and China . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 The idea for the series first came from executive producer Joel Surnow , who initially had the idea of a TV show with 24 episodes in a season . Each episode would be an hour long , taking place over the course of a single day . He discussed the idea over the phone with producer Robert Cochran , whose initial response was " Forget it , that 's the worst idea I 've ever heard , it will never work and it 's too hard " . They met the next day at the International House of Pancakes in Woodland Hills , Los Angeles , to discuss the idea of this action @-@ espionage series that used the format of real time to create dramatic tension with a race against the clock . 
 The pilot for 24 was pitched to Fox who immediately bought it , saying they felt that the idea for the series was one that would " move the form of television forward " . The episode had a $ 4 million budget with filming in March 2001 . The set of CTU was initially done in a Fox Sports office , with the set reproduced once the series was picked up for the season . The series was supposed to be filmed in Toronto , but due to the variability of Canadian weather , Los Angeles was chosen as a filming location . 
 The pilot of the series was well received by critics , and was signed on for an initial thirteen episodes . Production began in July 2001 , and the premiere was planned for October 30 , but because of the September 11 attacks , delayed until November 6 . After the first three episodes , Fox greenlit the remaining filmed 11 episodes and following Kiefer Sutherland 's Golden Globe win , Fox ordered the second half of the season . 
 = = = Design = = = 
 Although not the first to do so , 24 embraced the concept of real time . This idea started when producer Joel Surnow thought of the idea of doing " 24 episodes in a season , with each episode lasting an hour " . They decided that the idea of real time had to make the show a " race against the clock " . Each episode takes place over the course of one hour , with time continuing to elapse during the commercial breaks . The exact time is denoted by the digital clock display at the beginning and end of each segment . The protocol is that mundane events , such as travel , sometimes occur during commercial breaks and thus these events are largely unseen . The story time correlates with elapsed viewing time if episodes are broadcast with commercial breaks of set duration inserted at the points prescribed by the episode . In line with the depiction of events in real time , 24 does not use slow motion techniques . The series also does not use flashbacks , except once during the first season finale . Watched continuously without advertisements , each season would run approximately 17 hours . As a result of the timing nature of the series , a number of visual cues were projected onto the screen . 
 Another idea was the use of split screens , which was born out of the number of phone calls there were , and because of the element of real time , was used to trace parallel adventures of different characters , and aid in the connecting of characters . It was used by producers to point the audience to where to pay attention , as secondary stories often take place outside of the main plot . The idea of using boxes came later which made shooting more flexible , as the shot could be cropped and reshaped inside the box . It was from here that the idea of using split screens as an artistic element came into the series . 
 A major concept used in the series was the idea of a running clock . This initially came from Joel Surnow , who wanted the audience to always know what time it was in the show 's fictional timeline . This was done by an on @-@ screen digital clock which appears before and after commercial breaks , and a smaller clock also appears at other points in the narrative . The time shown is the in @-@ universe time of the story . When the running clock is shown full screen , an alternating pulsating beeping noise ( like the kind seen on a time bomb ) for each second can usually be heard . On rare occasions , a silent clock is used . This usually follows the death of a major character or an otherwise dramatic event . 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The first six seasons of the show were mostly based in Los Angeles and nearby California locations — both real and fictional . Other locations have also been featured , such as Washington , D.C. , for parts of the fourth , sixth , and seventh seasons . The eighth season took place in New York City , and the TV film Redemption , filmed in South Africa , was set mainly in the fictional African nation of Sangala . 
 The main setting of the show is the fictional Counter Terrorist Unit . Its office consists of two main departments : Field Operations , which involves confronting and apprehending suspects , and Communications , which gathers intelligence and assists those that work in Field Operations . CTU offices are established in various cities with these units reporting to " Divisions " , and Divisions reporting to the " District " . While CTU itself is a fictional agency , several entities with similar names or duties , like the National Counterterrorism Center , have emerged since the show 's debut on television . 
 The set of CTU was initially filmed in a Fox Sports office , with the set recreated in an old pencil factory in Chatsworth . The same set was used for the first three seasons , but was redesigned before the start of the fourth season , and again before the start of the eighth season . Other sets were also constructed here , such as Charles Logan 's presidential retreat shown in seasons five and six , and the White House bunker shown in seasons four and six . 
 = = = Series conclusion = = = 
 On March 26 , 2010 , a statement was issued from Fox which explained that season eight would conclude the original series . Kiefer Sutherland gave a statement : 
 Executive producer and showrunner Howard Gordon was also a part of the decision . He was quoted saying : 
 Peter Rice , Chairman of Entertainment at Fox Networks Group said , " 24 is so much more than just a TV show – it has redefined the drama genre and created one of the most admired action icons in television history . " Kevin Reilly , President of Entertainment at Fox Broadcasting Company added , " We are extremely proud of this groundbreaking series and will be forever thankful to Kiefer , the producers , the cast and crew for everything they 've put into 24 over the years . It 's truly been an amazing and unforgettable eight days . 
 The final episode of season 8 aired on May 24 , 2010 . 
 = = = Relation to other productions = = = 
 Immediately prior to 24 , series co @-@ creators Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran executive @-@ produced La Femme Nikita for its entire five @-@ year run on USA Network . Both series deal with anti @-@ terrorist operations , and the lead characters of both series are placed in situations where they must make a tragic choice in order to serve the greater good . There are numerous on- and off @-@ screen creative connections between 24 and La Femme Nikita . Several actors from La Femme Nikita have portrayed similar roles on 24 , a number of story concepts from La Femme Nikita have been revisited on 24 , and many of the creative personnel from La Femme Nikita worked on 24 in their same role . 
 Similar to the 1997 film , Air Force One , 24 featured the president 's personal jumbo @-@ jet ( Air Force One ) . Air Force One was featured in 24 seasons 2 and 4 . Air Force Two ( carrying the Vice President but not the President ) was featured in season 6 . Several actors featured in 24 , such as Xander Berkeley , Glenn Morshower , Wendy <unk> , Timothy Carhart , Jürgen <unk> , Tom Everett and Spencer Garrett also appeared in the film Air Force One . The 25th amendment , which deals with succession to the Presidency and establishes procedures for filling a vacancy in the office of the Vice President and responding to Presidential disabilities , was also a shared theme between the film and the television series . 24 used the same Air Force One set from another television series , The West Wing . 
 = = = Feature film development = = = 
 A feature film adaptation of 24 was originally planned for the hiatus between the sixth and seventh seasons . Series co @-@ creators Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran were set to write the script with showrunner Howard Gordon working on story . Filming was going to take place in London , Prague , and Morocco . Plans for the film were later put on hold . Kiefer Sutherland explained , " It 's impossible to ask writers to work on the show and then come up with an amazing film we can shoot in the break between seasons . " 
 It was later decided that the film would begin after the conclusion of the eighth and final season . It was to be set and shot on @-@ location in Europe . Joel Surnow , Robert Cochran , Howard Gordon , and Kiefer Sutherland were going to be executive producers on the film , and Billy Ray was going to write the screenplay . Shooting was planned to start in late 2010 or early 2011 . 
 In April 2010 , Kiefer Sutherland said in an interview at a BAFTA event in London that the script was finished and he would be reading it upon his return to the United States . He also said that the film will be a two @-@ hour representation of a twenty @-@ four @-@ hour time frame . Sutherland described the film production as " exciting " because , " It 's going to be a two @-@ hour representation of a 24 hour day , so we were not going to be restrained by the real time aspect of the TV show . " 
 In June 2010 , it was reported that plans were made to create a film titled Die Hard 24 / 7 , which would serve as a crossover between 24 and the Die Hard franchise , with Kiefer Sutherland to reprise his role as Jack Bauer alongside Bruce Willis ' John McClane . However these plans never came to fruition , with the studio instead opting to create the film A Good Day to Die Hard . 
 In November 2010 , executive producer Howard Gordon revealed that a " work in progress " screenplay was being read by Fox , but that the film did not yet have a green light or fixed schedule . In December 2010 , Howard Gordon revealed that Fox turned down the script by Billy Ray , saying , " It wasn 't strong enough or compelling enough " . By that time , Gordon was no longer involved with the project , but stated that director Tony Scott would pitch an idea to Sutherland , an involvement ending with Scott 's death in August 2012 . 
 Executive producer Brian Grazer tweeted in April 2011 that the film was planned for a 2012 release . At the 2011 Television Critics Association press tour , former showrunner Howard Gordon stated that " conversations are definitely happening " about the film , and that they are just looking for the right script before moving forward . In September 2011 , Sutherland indicated the script was almost complete . After some small script alterations by screenwriter Mark Bomback , filming was announced to begin in spring 2012 , after Sutherland became available in April . 
 In March 2012 , 20th Century Fox stopped production before filming could begin . Budgetary issues remained unresolved and Sutherland 's narrow time frame for filming were cited as reasons for halting production . However , in July 2012 , Sutherland assured the film was still in plans and that they would begin filming in summer 2013 . The film was eventually suspended in May 2013 after the announcement that the show would return as a limited series . 
 Sutherland said in January 2014 that " the film is an ongoing situation . " After Live Another Day received highly positive reception , a new idea for the feature film surfaced in September 2014 , spearheaded by Grazer . In January 2016 , Sutherland stated that he has " no idea if the 24 movie will ever happen , or Jack Bauer might end up finding his way into an episode one day and clarifying all of that , or ending all of that . " This was in reference to concluding his character 's story arc in either a feature film or the spin @-@ off series , 24 : Legacy , of which Sutherland is an executive producer . 
 = = = Live Another Day = = = 
 In May 2013 , Deadline.com first reported that Fox was considering a limited @-@ run " event series " for 24 based on a concept by Howard Gordon , after failed efforts to produce the 24 feature film and the cancellation of Kiefer Sutherland 's series Touch . The following week , Fox officially announced 24 : Live Another Day , a limited @-@ run series of twelve episodes that would feature the return of Jack Bauer . Fox CEO Kevin Reilly said that the series would essentially represent the twelve " most important " hours of a typical 24 season , with jumps forward between hours as needed . As with the rest of Fox 's push into event programming , the production was said to have " a big scope and top talent and top marketing budgets . " 
 In June 2013 , it was announced that Jon Cassar was signed to executive produce and direct multiple episodes of Live Another Day , including the first two . Executive producers and writers Robert Cochran , Manny Coto and Evan Katz were also announced to return with Sean Callery returning as the music composer for the series . 
 Mary Lynn Rajskub was announced as the second official cast member in August 2013 , reprising her role as Chloe O 'Brian . In October 2013 , it was confirmed that Kim Raver and William Devane would reprise their roles as Audrey Raines and James Heller , respectively . New actors joining the cast included Michael Wincott as Adrian , an infamous hacker ; <unk> <unk> and Giles Matthey as CIA agents Erik Ritter and Jordan Reed , respectively ; Benjamin Bratt as Steve Navarro , the head of CIA operations tracking Jack Bauer in London ; Yvonne Strahovski as Kate Morgan , a " brilliant but impulsive CIA field operative in London " ; and Stephen Fry as Alistair Davies , the British Prime Minister . In October 2013 , it was confirmed the series would be set and filmed in London , England . 
 24 : Live Another Day premiered on May 5 , 2014 , on Fox . The series is set four years after the events of season 8 , and adheres to the original real time concept : The main plot is set between 11 : 00 a.m. and 10 : 50 p.m. , with each episode corresponding to an hour ; however , the concluding episode 's final part features a 12 @-@ hour time jump enabling the show to join up the full 24 hour period back to 11 : 00 a.m. 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 In January 2015 , another installment of the franchise was pitched by executive producers Howard Gordon , Evan Katz , Manny Coto and Brian Grazer , which would revolve around a stable of supporting characters rather than Kiefer Sutherland in the lead role . In January 2016 , Fox announced it had ordered a pilot for a spin @-@ off series titled 24 : Legacy , which would feature a new cast , with no returning characters . The series retains the real @-@ time format , however , consists of 12 episodes , using time jumps to cover the events of a single day . Stephen Hopkins , who directed the original 24 pilot and several first season episodes , directed the Legacy pilot . Corey Hawkins and Miranda Otto play the two lead characters ; Hawkins as Eric Carter , a military hero returning home ; and Otto as Rebecca Ingram , a former head of CTU . The pilot was officially ordered to series in April 2016 and is scheduled to premiere on February 5 , 2017 . 
 = = = Other media = = = 
 A significant amount of additional media relating to the series has been created , including Internet @-@ distributed spin @-@ off series such as The Rookie and 24 : Conspiracy , as well as a video game . Other media includes action figures of some of the main characters , soundtracks from both the series and the video game , and a number of novels covering different events not covered in the series . Additionally , a number of in @-@ universe books were created , as well as behind the scenes books containing information on how the series was created . 
 = = = Cast appearances = = = 
 24 makes major changes to its main cast every season , with the only regular cast member of all seasons being Kiefer Sutherland . He is the only actor to appear in all of the show 's 204 episodes and the television film , 24 : Redemption . Glenn Morshower , who plays Aaron Pierce , made appearances in the first seven seasons , while Mary Lynn Rajskub , who plays Chloe O 'Brian , has appeared in the last seven seasons . 
 1 . ^ Was moved from guest star to main cast member mid @-@ season . 
 = = = Notable recurring characters = = = 
 24 features a number of recurring characters every season . Below , in order of appearance , are the recurring characters who have appeared in at least 5 episodes . 
 = = Impact and reception = = 
 = = = Reaction = = = 
 Throughout its run , 24 was frequently cited by critics as one of the best shows on television . Its fifth season was its most critically acclaimed season , scoring universally positive reviews from critics , with the last three seasons each receiving generally favorable reviews . 24 has been called groundbreaking and innovative with Time stating that the show took " the trend of serial story ' arcs ' , which began with ' 80s dramas like Hill Street Blues and Wiseguy and which continues on The West Wing and The Sopranos " to the " next level " and another critic saying that it " feels like no TV show you 've ever seen " . The production and quality of the series has been frequently called " <unk> " and better than most films . The series has been compared to old @-@ fashioned film serials , like The Perils of Pauline . 
 The quality of the acting was particularly celebrated by critics . Robert Bianco of USA Today described Kiefer Sutherland as indispensable to the series , and that he had a " great , under @-@ sung performance " . Dennis Haysbert 's " commanding " performance as David Palmer was hailed by critics , with some believing the character helped the campaign of Barack Obama . David Leonhart of The New York Times praised Gregory Itzin 's portrayal of President Charles Logan , comparing his character to former U.S. President Richard Nixon . The New York Times characterized Logan 's administration as " a projection of our very worst fears " of the government . Jean Smart 's portrayal of Martha Logan in the fifth season was equally acclaimed . The character 's opening scene ( in which she , unsatisfied with her hairdo , dunks her head into a sink ) was called " the most memorable character debut in 24 history " . 
 Critics were often disappointed by the series ' reliance on poor subplots , specifically Teri 's amnesia in season one , Kim Bauer 's storyline in season two , and Dana Walsh 's storyline in season eight . Later seasons were criticized for increasingly outlandish or repetitive plotlines and the deaths of key cast members . The finale of season one is seen by many critics as one of the best episodes of the series and is frequently cited as one of the best television season finales of all @-@ time . Teri Bauer 's death at the end of the finale was voted by TV Guide as the second most shocking death in television history . 
 Towards the middle of 24 's run , the series attracted significant criticism for its depictions of torture , as well as its negative portrayal of Muslims . The frequent use of ticking time bomb scenarios in storylines , as well as the main character , Jack Bauer portraying torture as normal , effective , acceptable and glamorous , was criticized by human rights activists , military officials , and experts in questioning and interrogation , with concerns raised that junior U.S. soldiers were imitating techniques shown on the series . In response to these concerns , members of the U.S. military met with the creators of the show . Partly as a result of these discussions , and the military 's appeal to the creators of the show to tone down the scenes of torture since it was having an impact on U.S. troops , there was a reduction in torture in subsequent seasons of the series . 
 The issue of torture on the series was discussed by President Bill Clinton who stated that he does not feel there is a place in U.S. policy for torture , but " If you 're the Jack Bauer person , you 'll do whatever you do and you should be prepared to take the consequences . " Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia , during a discussion about terrorism , torture and the law , took offense at a Canadian judge 's remark that Canada , " thankfully " , did not consider what Jack Bauer would do when setting policy . He reportedly responded with a defense of Bauer , arguing that law enforcement officials deserve latitude in times of great crisis , and that no jury would convict Bauer in those types of situations . 
 The use of torture and the negative portrayal of Muslims affected the decisions of some actors who intended to join the series . Janeane Garofalo , who portrayed Janis Gold on the series , initially turned down the role because of the way the series depicted torture , but later took up the role , saying that " being unemployed and being flattered that someone wanted to work with me outweighed my stance . " <unk> Aghdashloo , who portrayed Dina Araz , initially had reservations about taking on the role , as she initially felt that taking on the role of a Muslim terrorist would alienate people who support her as an activist , as she had spent many years in Iran advocating for women 's rights and fought against the stereotyping of Muslim @-@ Americans . However , she took on the role as she felt that people would understand that the show was fiction . 
 During an interview for his new television series Homeland , 24 executive producer Howard Gordon addressed the impact of the series , describing it as " stunning - everyone from Rush Limbaugh to Bill Clinton would talk about it , and we knew they were among our fans . I guess when people used it as propaganda for their own ideas — you know , when Justice Scalia mentioned Jack Bauer — that would make me feel uncomfortable . " On the topic of torture and Islamophobia within the series , Gordon said , " I think the one thing that we all felt very confident about — although we had a vigorous behind @-@ the @-@ scenes debate — was at what point are we loyal and beholden to good storytelling , and at what level do you hold yourself accountable for things like stoking Islamophobia or promoting torture as a policy ? There were just certain things that we needed to portray in order to make it feel thrilling — and real , even . When discussing his regrets , he referred to an advertisement for the show for its fourth season ( though mistakenly quoted it as an advertisement for the second season , saying " I actually do have regrets about one particular moment , which had more to do with the promotion of the show . In season two , the story involved a Muslim American family , and the father and the mother — and the son — were party to a terror plot . It was sort of a purple conceit in a way . But it was maybe a year and a half after 9 / 11 , and on the 405 freeway there 's this giant electronic billboard , and I think the line was : " They could be next door . " The writers and the producers were not party to that campaign , but we quickly put an end to it , and realized how dangerous and potentially incendiary this show could be . And I think our awareness of that changed the way we approached the series . So I guess you could call it a regret , but it was really an epiphany . 
 After the series finale , the Los Angeles Times characterized the series as " an epic poem , with Jack Bauer in the role of Odysseus or Beowulf . Which means he needed to be fighting monsters , not essentially decent people who have made one very bad decision . " The critic went on to say that villain Charles Logan encapsulated all that " Jack and 24 fought against for so long : political corruption and cowardice , narcissism and megalomania , ruthlessness and stupidity . " One reviewer for BuddyTV said that " I 'll remember the legacy of 24 as an action drama that redefined what serialized television can do and provided many shocking twists and turns along the way — the biggest one being the very real impact the show had on American foreign policy . " The New York Times said " 24 will live on , possibly as a feature film , and surely in classrooms and in textbooks . The series enlivened the country 's political discourse in a way few others have , partly because it brought to life the ticking time @-@ bomb threat that haunted the Cheney faction of the American government in the years after 9 / 11 . " The show was declared the sixth highest rated show for the first ten years of IMDb.com Pro ( 2002 – 2012 ) . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Seasonal rankings were based on average total viewers per episode of 24 on Fox . Most U.S. network television seasons start in mid @-@ September and end in late May , which coincides with the completion of May sweeps . 24 aired during both February and May sweeps periods in all of its seasons , and during the November sweeps period in its first three seasons . Beginning with its fourth season , 24 began its season in January and aired new episodes non @-@ stop until May . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 24 was nominated for and won several other television awards including the Emmy Awards , Golden Globe Awards , and Screen Actors Guild Awards . It is one of only five TV series ( along with NYPD Blue , The West Wing , Breaking Bad and Homeland ) ever to have won the Emmy Award , the Golden Globe and the Satellite Award for Best Drama Series . 
 24 was nominated in categories for acting , directing , writing , editing , sound , music score , and stunt coordination . The American Film Institute included 24 in its 2005 list of 10 Television Programs of the Year . 
 The series received 68 Emmy nominations , with 20 wins . It received nominations for Outstanding Drama Series at the Primetime Emmys in 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , and won the award in 2006 . Kiefer Sutherland received nominations in 2002 , 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2007 , and 2009 ( for 24 : Redemption ) and won in 2006 . Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran won for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series in 2002 for the pilot episode . Composer Sean Callery received nine nominations for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series , nominated for every season and 24 : Redemption ; he won in 2003 , 2006 , and 2010 . 
 The series ' fifth season was its most successful for awards , earning twelve Emmy nominations and five wins , including Outstanding Drama Series and Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama for Kiefer Sutherland ( after being nominated every year previous ) . Jon Cassar won for Outstanding Directing in a Drama Series , and Gregory Itzin and Jean Smart received Best Supporting Actor / Actress in a Drama Series nominations . In 2009 , Cherry Jones won for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Drama . 
 The series received twelve Golden Globe nominations with two wins . It received nominations for Best Drama Series at the Golden Globes in 2001 , 2002 , 2004 , and 2006 , winning in 2003 , and Kiefer Sutherland received nominations at the Golden Globes in 2002 , 2003 , 2005 , 2006 , and 2008 ( for 24 : Redemption ) , winning in 2001 . Dennis Haysbert received a nomination for Best Supporting Role in 2002 . 
 The series received ten Screen Actors Guild nominations with four wins . It was nominated for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series in 2003 , 2005 , and 2007 at the Screen Actors Guild Awards . Kiefer Sutherland was nominated in 2003 , 2004 , 2005 , 2006 , and 2007 , winning in 2004 and 2006 . The series won for Outstanding Performance by a Stunt Ensemble in a TV Series in 2008 and 2010 . In 2008 , Empire magazine ranked 24 as the sixth greatest television show of all @-@ time . In 2013 , the series was listed as # 71 in the Writers Guild of America 's list of the 101 Best Written TV Series . 
 = = Distribution = = 
 24 was distributed across the globe . Kiefer Sutherland attributed the show 's strong support from Fox to its early success in the UK . Its viewership in the UK decreased significantly when the BBC lost the rights to subscription channel Sky1 after the second season . 
 The release of 24 on DVD had a significant impact on the success of the television series . In an interview with IGN in 2002 , Sutherland revealed , " [ 24 's ] success in [ the UK ] was phenomenal . It was the biggest show the BBC has ever had . It was the number one DVD there , knocking off The Lord of the Rings , which is unheard of for a television show DVD to actually knock @-@ out every feature DVD available . And that 's because they showed it without commercials . " The U.S. sales of the season one DVDs increased the audience size of season two by 25 % . 
 A special edition of the first season was released on May 20 , 2008 . The new set includes a seventh disc of bonus features , while discs 1 – 6 contain all 24 episodes with deleted scenes , audio commentaries , and 5 extended episodes . The set was packaged in a steel box . 
 The television film 24 : Redemption was released on DVD in Region 1 on November 25 , 2008 , and in Region 2 on December 1 , 2008 . The DVD contains the broadcast version as well as an extended version with optional audio commentary , a making @-@ of featurette , child soldiers in Africa featurette , a season 6 recap , and the first 17 minutes of the season 7 premiere episode . 
 The seventh season was the first season to be released on Blu @-@ ray format . The eighth season , also on Blu @-@ ray , was released simultaneously with the complete series set on DVD . 
 All eight seasons and 24 : Redemption are also available for purchase or rental on iTunes , Netflix , Amazon Video on Demand , and the Zune Marketplace . 
 The series was pulled from Netflix on April 1 , 2014 in the U.S. , however the series is still available on Netflix in the UK . 
 = = Indian adaptation = = 
 In November 2011 , Anil Kapoor purchased the rights to 24 to make an Indian adaptation of the series . Kapoor , who played Omar Hassan in season eight of the original series , is playing the lead role in the adaptation which is based on Jack Bauer , as well as producing the series . The series debuted in India on the television channel Colors on October 4 , 2013 . 
 = Asif Ali Zardari = 
 Asif Ali Zardari ( Urdu : <unk> علی <unk> ) Sindhi : <unk> علي <unk> ) ; born 26 July 1955 ) is a Pakistani politician and current co @-@ chairperson of Pakistan People 's Party . He served as the 11th President of Pakistan from 2008 to 2013 . 
 A landowner from Sindh , Zardari rose to prominence after his marriage to Benazir Bhutto in 1987 , becoming the First Gentleman after his wife was elected Prime Minister in 1988 . When Bhutto 's government was dismissed by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan in 1990 , Zardari was widely criticized for involvement in corruption scandals that led to its collapse . When Bhutto was reelected in 1993 , Zardari served as Federal Investment Minister and Chairperson Pakistan Environmental Protection Council in her second administration . Following increasing tensions between Bhutto 's brother Murtaza and Zardari , Murtaza was killed in a police encounter in Karachi on 20 September 1996 . Bhutto 's government was dismissed a month later by President Farooq Leghari , while Zardari was arrested and indicted for Murtaza 's murder as well as corruption charges . 
 Although incarcerated , he nominally served in Parliament after being elected to the National Assembly in 1990 and Senate in 1997 . He was released from jail in 2004 and went into self @-@ exile to Dubai , but returned when Bhutto was assassinated on 27 December 2007 . As the new Co @-@ Chairman of the PPP , he led his party to victory in the 2008 general elections . He spearheaded a coalition that forced military ruler Pervez Musharraf to resign , and was elected President on 6 September 2008 . He was acquitted of various criminal charges the same year . 
 As president , Zardari remained a strong U.S. ally in the war in Afghanistan , despite prevalent public disapproval of the United States following the Raymond Davis incident and the Nato attack in Salala in 2011 . Domestically , Zardari achieved the passage of the Eighteenth Amendment in 2010 , which constitutionally reduced his presidential powers . His attempt to prevent the reinstatement of Supreme Court judges failed in the face of massive protests led by his political rival Nawaz Sharif . The restored Supreme Court dismissed the PPP 's elected Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gillani for contempt in 2012 , after Gillani refused to write to the Government of Switzerland to reopen corruption cases against Zardari . Zardari 's tenure was also criticized for mishandling nationwide floods in 2010 , and growing terrorist violence . Following multiple bombings of Hazaras in Quetta in early 2013 , Zardari dismissed his provincial government in Balochistan . 
 Towards the end of his term , Zardari recorded abysmally low approval ratings , ranging from 11 to 14 % . After the PPP was heavily defeated in the 2013 general election , Zardari became the country 's first elected president to complete his constitutional term on 8 September 2013 . The Zardari @-@ led PPP continues to form the provincial government in Sindh . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Zardari was born on 26 July 1955 in Karachi , Sindh in the Zardari family . He is a Sindhi of Baloch origin , belonging to a Jat clan of the Sindhi @-@ Baloch Zardari tribe . He is the only son of Hakim Ali Zardari , a tribal chief and prominent landowner , and <unk> Zardari . 
 In his youth , he enjoyed polo and boxing . He led a polo team known as the Zardari Four . His father owned Bambino — a famous cinema in Karachi — and donated movie equipment to his school . He also appeared in a movie , <unk> , as a child artist . Zardari 's academic background remains a question mark . He received his primary education from Karachi Grammar School . His official biography says he graduated from Cadet College , <unk> in 1972 . He went to St Patrick 's High School , Karachi from 1973 – 74 ; a school clerk says he failed his final examination there . In March 2008 , he claimed he had graduated from the London School of Business Studies with a bachelor of education degree in the early 1970s . Zardari 's official biography states he also attended <unk> School in Britain . His British education , however , has not been confirmed , and a search did not turn up any <unk> School in London . The issue of his diploma was contentious because a 2002 rule required candidates for Parliament to hold a college degree , but the rule was overturned by Pakistan 's Supreme Court in April 2008 . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 Zardari 's initial political career was unsuccessful . In 1983 , he lost an election for a district council seat in <unk> , a city of Sindh , where his family owned thousands of acres of farmland . He then went into real estate . 
 = = Benazir Bhutto era = = 
 = = = Marriage to Bhutto = = = 
 He married Benazir Bhutto on 18 December 1987 . The arranged marriage , done in accordance with Pakistani culture , was initially considered an unlikely match . The lavish sunset ceremony in Karachi was followed by immense night celebrations that included over 100 @,@ 000 people . The marriage enhanced Bhutto 's political position in a country where older unmarried women are frowned upon . Zardari deferred to his wife 's wishes by agreeing to stay out of politics . 
 In 1988 , General Muhammad Zia @-@ ul @-@ Haq died in a plane crash . A few months later , Bhutto became Pakistan 's first female Prime Minister when her party won 94 of 207 seats contested in the 1988 elections . 
 = = = Involvement in the first Bhutto Administration and first imprisonment = = = 
 He generally stayed out of his wife 's first administration , but he and his associates became entangled in corruption cases linked to the government . He was largely blamed for the collapse of the Bhutto administration . 
 After the dismissal of Bhutto 's government in August 1990 , Benazir Bhutto and Zardari were prohibited from leaving the country by security forces under the direction of the Pakistan Army . During the interim government between August and October , caretaker Prime Minister Ghulam Mustafa <unk> , a Bhutto rival , initiated investigations of corruption by the Bhutto administration . <unk> accused Zardari of using his wife 's political position to charge a ten percent commission for obtaining permission to set up any project or to receive loans . He was tagged with the nickname " Mr. Ten Percent " . 
 He was arrested on 10 October 1990 on charges relating to kidnapping and extortion . The charges alleged an extortion scheme that involved tying a supposed bomb to a British businessman 's leg . The Bhutto family considered the indictment politically motivated and fabricated . In the October 1990 elections , he was elected to the National Assembly while in jail . Bhutto and the PPP staged a walkout from the inaugural session of the National Assembly to protest Zardari 's incarceration . He posted $ 20 @,@ 000 bail , but his release was blocked by a government ordinance that removed a court 's power to release suspects being tried in the terrorist court , which fast @-@ track trials for alleged terrorists . The ordinance was later revoked and a special court acquitted him of bank fraud and conspiracy to murder political opponents . He was freed in February 1993 . In March 1994 , Zardari was acquitted of bank fraud charges . All other corruption charges relating to Bhutto 's first term were dropped or thrown out of the courts . 
 On March 25 , 1991 , the hijackers aboard Singapore Airlines Flight 117 demanded Zardari 's release among other demands . The hijackers were killed by Singapore Commandos . 
 = = = Political involvement in the second Bhutto Administration = = = 
 In April 1993 , he became one of the 18 cabinet ministers in the caretaker government that succeeded Nawaz Sharif 's first abridged premiership . The caretaker government lasted until the July elections . After Bhutto 's election , he served as her Investment Minister , chief of the intelligence bureau , and the head of the Federal Investigation Agency . In February 1994 , Benazir sent Zardari to meet with Saddam Hussein in Iraq to deliver medicine in exchange for three detained Pakistanis arrested on the ambiguous Kuwait @-@ Iraq border . In April 1994 , Zardari denied allegations that he was wielding unregulated influence as a spouse and acting as " de @-@ facto Prime Minister " . In March 1995 , he was appointed chairman of the new Environment Protection Council . 
 During the beginning of the second Bhutto Administration , a Bhutto family feud between Benazir and her mother , Nusrat Bhutto , surfaced over the political future of Murtaza Bhutto , Nusrat 's son and Benazir 's younger brother . Benazir thanked Zardari for his support . In September 1996 , Murtaza and seven others died in a shootout with police in Karachi , while the city was undergoing a three @-@ year civil war . At Murtaza 's funeral , Nusrat accused Benazir and Zardari of being responsible and vowed to pursue prosecution . <unk> Bhutto , Murtaza 's widow , also accused Zardari of being behind his killing . President Farooq Leghari , who would dismiss the Bhutto government seven weeks after Murtaza 's death , also suspected Benazir and Zardari 's involvement . Several of Pakistan 's leading newspapers alleged that Zardari wanted his brother @-@ in @-@ law out of the way because of Murtaza 's activities as head of a breakaway faction of the PPP . 
 In November 1996 , Bhutto 's government was dismissed by Leghari primarily because of corruption and Murtaza 's death . Zardari was arrested in Lahore while attempting to flee the country to Dubai . 
 = = Jail and exile = = 
 = = = New York Times report = = = 
 A major report was published in January 1998 by The New York Times detailing Zardari 's vast corruption and misuse of public funds . The report discussed $ 200 million in kickbacks to Zardari and a Pakistani partner for a $ 4 billion contract with French military contractor Dassault Aviation , in a deal that fell apart only when the Bhutto government was dismissed . It contained details of two payments of $ 5 million each by a gold bullion dealer in return for a monopoly on gold imports . It had information from Pakistani investigators that the Bhutto family had allegedly accrued more than $ 1 @.@ 5 billion in illicit profits through kickbacks in virtually every sphere of government activity . It also reported Zardari 's mid @-@ 1990s spending spree , which included hundreds of thousands of dollars spent on jewellery . The arrangements made by the Bhutto family for their wealth relied on Western property companies , Western lawyers , and a network of Western friends . The report described how Zardari had arranged secret contracts , painstaking negotiations , and the dismissal of anyone who objected to his dealings . 
 Citibank , already under fire for its private @-@ banking practices , got into further trouble as a result of the report . Zardari 's financial history was one case study in a 1999 U.S. Senate report on vulnerabilities in banking procedures . 
 = = = Second imprisonment and conviction = = = 
 In March 1997 , Zardari was elected to the Senate while in a Karachi jail . In December 1997 , he was flown to Islamabad under tight security to take his oath . 
 In July 1998 , he was indicted for corruption in Pakistan after the Swiss government handed over documents to Pakistani authorities relating to money laundering . The Swiss had also indicted him for money laundering . At the same time , in a separate case , he and 18 others were indicted for conspiracy to murder Murtaza Bhutto . After criminal prosecutions began , Citibank closed Zardari 's account . 
 In April 1999 , Bhutto and Zardari were convicted for receiving indemnities from a Swiss goods inspection company that was hired to end corruption in the collection of customs duties . The couple received a fine of $ 8 @.@ 6 million . Both were also sentenced to five years imprisonment , but Bhutto could not be extradited back to Pakistan from her self @-@ imposed exile . Zardari was already in jail awaiting trial on separate charges . The evidence used against them had been gathered by Swiss investigators and the Pakistani Bureau of Accountability . 
 In May 1999 , he was hospitalised after an alleged attempted suicide . He claimed it was a murder attempt by the police . 
 In August 2003 , a Swiss judge convicted Bhutto and Zardari of money laundering and sentenced them to six months imprisonment and a fine of $ 50 @,@ 000 . In addition , they were required to return $ 11 million to the Pakistani government . The conviction involved charges relating to kickbacks from two Swiss firms in exchange for customs fraud . In France , Poland , and Switzerland , the couple faced additional allegations . 
 In November 2004 , he was released on bail by court order . A month later , he was unexpectedly arrested for failing to show up for a hearing on a murder case in Islamabad . He was placed under house arrest in Karachi . A day later , he was released on $ 5 @,@ 000 bail . His release , rearrest , and then release again was regarded as a sign of growing reconciliation between Musharraf 's government and the PPP . After his second release in late 2004 , he left for exile in Dubai . 
 = = = Exile and legal problems = = = 
 He returned to Lahore in April 2005 . Police prevented him from holding rallies by escorting him from the airport to his home . He criticised Musharraf 's government , but rumours of reconciliation between Musharraf and the PPP grew . Zardari went back to Dubai in May 2005 . 
 In June 2005 , he suffered a heart attack and was treated in the United Arab Emirates . A PPP spokesman stated he underwent angioplasty in the United States . In September 2005 , he did not show up for a Rawalpindi hearing on corruption charges ; the court issued an arrest warrant . His lawyers stated he could not come because he was recovering from his treatment . Following a request by the Rawalpindi court , Interpol issued a red notice in January 2006 against the couple which called on member nations to decide on the couple 's extradition . 
 When Bhutto announced in September 2007 her upcoming return to Pakistan , her husband was in New York City undergoing medical treatment . After the October 2007 bombing in Karachi that tainted Bhutto 's return , he accused Pakistani intelligence services of being behind the attacks and claimed " it was not done by militants " . He had not accompanied Bhutto , staying in Dubai with their daughters . Bhutto called for the removal of the chief investigator of the attacks because she claimed he had been involved in Zardari 's alleged torture in prison in 1999 . 
 In November 2007 , Musharraf instituted emergency rule for six weeks ( see Pakistani state of emergency , 2007 ) , under the pretext of rising Islamist militancy , a few days after Bhutto 's departure for Dubai to meet with Zardari . Immediately after the state of emergency was invoked , Bhutto returned to Pakistan , while Zardari again stayed behind in Dubai . Emergency rule was initiated right before the Supreme Court of Pakistan began deliberations on the legality of Musharraf 's U.S.-backed proposal — the National Reconciliation Ordinance ( <unk> ) — to drop corruption charges against Bhutto and Zardari in return for a joint Bhutto @-@ Musharraf coalition to govern Pakistan . Bhutto and Zardari sympathised with Musharraf on his feud with the Supreme Court , but simultaneously criticised the imposition of martial law . Before the Supreme Court could issue a decision , Musharraf replaced its members with his supporters . 
 In the midst of his exile , Zardari had several different legal problems . In Pakistan , Musharraf granted him amnesty for his alleged offences through the National Reconciliation Ordinance , drafted in October 2007 . However , the ordinance faced mounting public pressure and an uncompromising judiciary . In addition , it only dealt with charges up to 1999 . This left open the possibility of investigations into his alleged involvement in about $ 2 million in illegal kickbacks to Saddam Hussein , discovered in October 2005 , under the oil @-@ for @-@ food program . If the ordinance was rescinded , he would have had to deal with charges relating to evading duties on an armoured BMW , commissions from a Polish tractor manufacturer , and a kickback from a gold bullion dealer . In Switzerland , Bhutto and Zardari appealed the 2003 Swiss conviction , which required the reopening of the case in October 2007 . In November 2007 , Swiss authorities returned the frozen $ 60 million to him through offshore companies because of the National Reconciliation Ordinance . In Spain , a criminal investigation was opened over the money laundering for the oil @-@ for @-@ food program because of the illicit profits handled through Spanish firms . In Britain , he was fighting a civil case against the Pakistani government for the proceeds from the liquidation sale of a Surrey mansion . He successfully used his medical diagnosis to postpone a verdict on his British manor trial . 
 In exile , he shifted between homes in New York , London , and Dubai , where his three children lived . 
 On the night of 27 December 2007 , he returned to Pakistan following his wife 's assassination . 
 = = Co @-@ chairperson of the PPP = = 
 = = = Bhutto 's assassination and succession = = = 
 Zardari prevented Bhutto 's autopsy in accordance with Islamic principles . He and their children attended her funeral , which was held the next day . He denied government allegations that the assassination was sponsored by Al @-@ Qaida . He called for an international inquiry into her death and stated that she would still be alive if Musharraf 's government had provided adequate protection . He and his family offered to accept Musharraf 's demand to exhume Bhutto 's body in exchange for a United Nations inquiry , but Musharraf rejected the proposal . 
 In Bhutto 's political will , she had designated Zardari her successor as party leader . However , their nineteen @-@ year @-@ old son , Bilawal Bhutto Zardari , became Chairman of the PPP because Zardari favoured Bilawal to represent Bhutto 's legacy , in part to avoid division within the party due to his own unpopularity . He did , however , serve as Co @-@ Chairman of the PPP for at least three years until Bilawal completed his studies overseas . 
 = = = February parliamentary elections and coalition formation = = = 
 Zardari called for no delays to the 8 January parliamentary elections and for the participation of all opposition parties . Other major political parties quickly agreed to participate , ending any chance of a boycott . Because of the turmoil after the Bhutto assassination , the elections were postponed six weeks to 18 February . In January 2008 , he suggested that if his party did win a majority , it might form a coalition with Musharraf 's Pakistan Muslim League @-@ Q ( PML @-@ Q ) . He and Nawaz Sharif , leader of the Pakistan Muslim League ( N ) party ( PML @-@ N ) , threatened national protests if any vote @-@ rigging was attempted . He himself could not run for Parliament because he had not filed election papers in November 2008 , back when he had no foreseeable political ambition while Bhutto was alive . 
 The PPP and the PML @-@ N won the largest and second largest number of seats respectively in the February elections . He and Sharif agreed to form a coalition government , ending American hopes of a power @-@ sharing deal between him and Musharraf . They agreed to restore the judiciary , but Zardari took a less stringent stance than Sharif . He met with U.S. ambassador Anne W. Patterson , who pushed for a pact with Musharraf . To strengthen the new coalition , he reached out to Awami National Party , the Muttahida Qaumi Movement , and Baloch nationalist leaders , who had all boycotted the elections . 
 After weeks of speculation and party infighting , he said he did not want to become Prime Minister . In mid @-@ March 2008 , he chose Yousaf Raza Gillani for Prime Minister in a snub to the more politically powerful <unk> Amin <unk> . 
 = = = Coalition government = = = 
 He and Sharif agreed in a 9 March 2008 agreement , known as the Murree Declaration , to the reinstatement by 30 April 2008 of 60 judges previously sacked by Musharraf . The deadline was later extended to 12 May . He and Sharif held unsuccessful talks at London in May . After the coalition failed to restore the judiciary , the PML @-@ N withdrew from the government in mid @-@ May , pulling its ministers out of the cabinet . The coalition regrouped , again with the PML @-@ N , and proposed a constitutional amendment that would remove the power of the President to dismiss Parliament . By late May , the coalition was set in a confrontation with Musharraf . At the same time , the government was successful in getting Pakistan readmitted to the Commonwealth . 
 He and Sharif met in Lahore in June 2008 to discuss Musharraf 's removal and the constitutional amendments , which the PML @-@ N viewed as not going far enough to fulfill the Murree declaration . He opposed impeachment calls because he claimed the coalition did not have the two @-@ thirds majority in both legislative bodies — National Assembly and Senate . He was unwilling to restore the judiciary as divisions in the coalition grew and popular sentiment shifted towards Sharif . The coalition criticised the government for barring Sharif from competing in the June by @-@ elections . Because of the <unk> over Musharraf and the judiciary , the coalition could not address rising food shortages and spiraling inflation , which was the highest in 30 years . 
 In August 2008 , Zardari relented , and the coalition agreed to proceed full speed towards Musharraf 's impeachment by drafting a charge @-@ sheet against him . The coalition charged him with high treason for the 1999 coup and the imposition of martial law . He warned Musharraf against dismissing Parliament , and the coalition selected Gillani instead of Musharraf to represent Pakistan at the 2008 Beijing Olympics . On 18 August , Musharraf resigned in order to avoid impeachment . Although Zardari favoured granting Musharraf immunity from prosecution , the coalition could not agree on a decision . The coalition also could not reach a united stance on the future of the judiciary . 
 = = = Rise to presidency = = = 
 Presidential elections were held within three weeks after the departure of Musharraf . Zardari vowed to pursue an unpopular campaign against tribal militancy in Pakistan and had the support of the United States . He claimed he had a London business school degree to satisfy a prerequisite for the presidency , but his party did not produce a certificate . He was endorsed by the PPP and the Muttahida Qaumi Movement ( MQM ) for the presidency . The PML @-@ N nominated former justice Saeed @-@ uz @-@ Zaman Siddiqui , while the PML @-@ Q put forth <unk> Hussain Sayed . Zardari won a majority in the Electoral College with 481 of 702 votes . He was elected President on 6 September 2008 . 
 = = President of Pakistan = = 
 = = = Initial days = = = 
 At the inauguration on 9 September 2008 , Afghan President Hamid Karzai was a guest of honour , which was a signal for much closer cooperation between the two nations in addressing the tribal insurgency along the Afghanistan @-@ Pakistan border . After the election , Zardari promised to approve the constitutional provision that removed the President 's power to dismiss Parliament , but public scepticism remained on whether he would actually carry out his promise . His economic competence was questioned after allegations that he had raised grain procurement prices through inflationary subsidies and scrapped the capital gains tax . His first parliamentary speech was overshadowed by 20 September Islamabad Marriott Hotel bombing . A few days later , he went to the United Nations Headquarters in New York City on his first overseas trip as President . 
 = = = United Nations visit = = = 
 From 23 to 26 September 2008 , he met with various foreign leaders , including U.S. President George W. Bush and Chinese President Hu Jintao . He suffered political embarrassment by flirting with U.S. Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin and making tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek comments about her . Although , at the United Nations General Assembly , he publicly condemned U.S drone attacks in Pakistan , the Washington Post reported that he had signed a " secret deal " when he met with senior American officials that arranged for the coordination of Predator strikes and a jointly approved list of prominent targets . He and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh agreed to resume peace talks by the end of 2008 . 
 = = = Economic crises = = = 
 From 14 to 17 October 2008 , he was in China to negotiate foreign aid , as Pakistan faced the possibility of defaulting on its payments . China refused to offer any aid commitments , but instead promised to provide assistance in the development of two nuclear power plants and more future business investments . 
 After Saudi Arabia , Britain , China , the United States , and the United Arab Emirates refused to provide any bailout , he officially asked the International Monetary Fund ( IMF ) for assistance in solving Pakistan 's balance of payments problem on 22 October . 
 He went to Saudi Arabia from 4 to 6 November in hopes of obtaining financial aid and securing trade agreements . However , leaked cables revealed increasingly strained relations between Zardari and Saudi royalty , primarily because of Saudi distrust of Zardari and preference for Sharif . Weaker cooperation led to decreased oil subsidies as part of a broader Saudi policy of withholding monetary assistance . 
 In mid @-@ November 2008 , Zardari 's government officially sent a letter of intent to the IMF regarding a bailout to help increase its foreign exchange reserves . In a $ 11 @.@ 3 billion multi @-@ year loan package , Pakistan received a $ 7 @.@ 4 billion loan for 2008 – 10 . The IMF stipulated stringent reform conditions , which included rebuilding the tax structure and privatising state enterprises . The World Bank and Asian Development Bank withheld a combined $ 3 billion aid in the 2010 – 11 fiscal year and the IMF withheld since May 2010 the last segment of its aid package . 
 In January 2011 , the MQM withdrew from the government . Zardari 's ruling coalition averted a government collapse by accepting the opposition 's economic proposals , which restored gas subsidies and abandoned many of the IMF 's suggested reforms . 
 In an effort to curb government expenditures , Zardari swore in an " austerity cabinet " in February 2011 which reduced the cabinet from 60 ministers to 22 . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 = = = = Relationship with India = = = = 
 In early October 2008 , he received fierce domestic criticism for repeatedly calling Kashmiri nationalists ( see Kashmir conflict ) in India " terrorists " . In mid @-@ November 2008 , he suggested Pakistan was ready for a no @-@ first @-@ use nuclear policy and called for closer economic ties . 
 The relationship between the two nations was damaged by the November 2008 Mumbai attacks . He initially denied any links between the perpetrators and Pakistan , but the government soon pursued military action against Lashkar @-@ e @-@ Taiba leaders in a 7 December raid . India cleared Zardari 's government of any direct involvement in the attacks , but simultaneously demanded the extradition of 20 Pakistanis which it alleged had taken part in them . Zardari offered to send Inter @-@ Services Intelligence Director @-@ General Ahmed Shuja Pasha to assist in the investigation . 
 In June 2009 , Zardari met Singh for the first time since the Mumbai attacks at a Shanghai Cooperation Organization summit in Yekaterinburg , Russia . 
 On 8 April 2012 , President Zardari , along with his son Bilawal Zardari Bhutto , visited Dargah Sharif in Ajmer , India on a private visit . He also met with the Indian Prime Minister Dr Manmohan Singh . 
 = = = = War in Afghanistan = = = = 
 The government has had a longstanding conflict in the Federally Administered Tribal Areas ( FATA ) and Khyber Pakhtunkhwa ( KP ) , Pakistani regions bordering Afghanistan . Diplomatic relations with Afghan President Hamid Karzai improved after Musharraf 's departure and Zardari 's rise to power . The Obama administration 's AfPak policy , through AfPak envoy Richard Holbrooke , reflected the unified approach the United States took in dealing with Afghanistan and Pakistan . 
 In his first visit to Afghanistan as President in early January 2009 , Zardari promised a renewed relationship to improve cooperation . In late March , Obama announced a civilian aid package of $ 7 @.@ 5 billion over five years in return for cooperation in the AfPak conflict . In late April , British Prime Minister Gordon Brown visited Zardari and promised $ 1 billion over the next four years . In May , Obama held a trilateral summit in Washington D.C with Karzai and Zardari , where they discussed further cooperation . At Brussels in mid @-@ June , Zardari unsuccessfully sought trade concessions from the European Union ; it instead pledged $ 90 million development aid to curtail tribal influence by insurgents . After the U.S. Congress passed Obama 's civilian aid package in October , army generals in the Pakistani military establishment widened the growing rift with Zardari 's government and openly criticised U.S. interference . 
 In February 2009 , FATA 's provincial government officially declared Islamic law in Swat to achieve a ceasefire with the northwestern Pashtun tribes . Because the United States and Britain opposed the measure , Zardari did not sign the Swat ceasefire until mid @-@ April , when domestic pressure from Parliament mounted . By the end of April , the agreement collapsed as the Pakistani military pursued an unpopular offensive in the neighbouring Dir district . 
 In September 2010 , Zardari and Karzai met in Islamabad and both advocated fighting insurgents rather than trying to end the war with diplomacy . Zardari went to the United States in January 2011 to attend Special Envoy Holbrooke 's funeral . Following Osama bin Laden 's death in a compound in Abbottabad in May 2011 , Obama called Zardari and collaborated on the events . 
 = = = Reinstatement of the judiciary = = = 
 In February 2009 , Zardari and the Musharraf @-@ appointed Supreme Court attempted to disqualify Nawaz Sharif from running in any elections and tried to force his brother Shahbaz Sharif to resign as Chief Minister of Punjab province . Zardari dismissed the Punjab provincial government and only partially reinstated the judiciary by restoring 56 other judges deposed by Musharraf — but not their former leader , Chief Justice Iftikhar Chaudhry . After Nawaz Sharif defied house arrest and rallied with thousands of his supporters , the Sharif brothers vowed to join forces with the Lawyers ' Movement in the " Long March " . Zardari 's government gave in to popular pressure and Prime Minister Gilani in an early morning speech on 16 March 2009 promised to reinstate Chaudhry by 21 March . Ten judges were reinstated on 16 March , and Chaudry assumed his position on 22 March . Zardari 's month @-@ long direct control of the Punjab ended on 30 March . 
 = = = Nizam @-@ e @-@ Adl Regulation = = = 
 In April 2009 , President Asif Ali Zardari signed the Nizam @-@ e @-@ Adl Regulation into law . The regulation formally established Sharia law in the Malakand division . 
 = = = Reduction of presidential powers = = = 
 In late November 2009 , Zardari ceded to Prime Minister Gillani the chairmanship of the National Command Authority , Pakistan 's nuclear arsenal oversight agency . 
 In December 2009 , the Supreme Court ruled that the National Reconciliation Ordinance amnesty was unconstitutional , which cleared the way for the revival of corruption cases against Zardari . Though Zardari had immunity from prosecution because he was President , the end of <unk> and his earlier corruption cases challenged the legality of his presidency . Calls for his resignation escalated . Zardari , who rarely left the <unk> @-@ e @-@ Sadr presidential palace , responded with a nationwide spurt of speeches in January 2011 . In January 2010 , the Supreme Court ordered Pakistan 's government to reopen Zardari 's corruption charges in Switzerland . However , Zardari prevented the MQM @-@ leaning Attorney General , Anwar Mansoor , from filing charges , so Mansoor resigned in protest in early April . That same month , Zardari won a key victory against the judiciary over his corruption trials when Geneva Attorney General Daniel <unk> stated that Zardari can not be prosecuted under international laws because of his presidential immunity . Zardari was supported by Prime Minister Gilani , who defied the Supreme Court order . 
 In February 2010 , Zardari sparked a standoff by attempting to appoint a Supreme Court candidate without the court 's approval , but the confrontation ended after he backed down and nominated a candidate acceptable by the court . 
 In April 2010 , after months of political pressure , the government passed the 18th Amendment , which reduced the President to a ceremonial figurehead by stripping the office of the power to dissolve Parliament , to dismiss the Prime Minister , and to appoint military chiefs . The amendment also lifted the restriction of two terms as Prime Minister , which enabled Zardari 's foremost political rival , Nawaz Sharif , to seek a third term . The amendment was passed with virtually unanimous support in Parliament and Zardari himself espoused the legislation because of political pressure . After the 18th Amendment , Zardari 's main power derived from his position as leader of the PPP , which controls the largest bloc in Parliament . 
 In late September 2010 , the Supreme Court considered removing presidential immunity . In October , Chief Justice Chaudry met with his colleagues to discuss troubling media rumours that Zardari 's government was planning to fire them ; Chaudry requested government assurance that the stories were unfounded . In early January 2011 , Zardari signed the 19th Amendment , which lessened the likelihood of future clashes between the President and the judiciary by strengthening the power of the Chief Justice in deciding judicial appointments . 
 In March 2011 , Zardari delivered his annual parliamentary address to a half @-@ empty chamber because of an opposition walkout . 
 In November 2012 , the Pakistan government in response to the court orders , finally wrote to the Swiss authorities seeking to reopen the corruption cases against Zardari . The Swiss government responded by saying that the corruption cases being time barred cannot be reopened . 
 = = = 2010 Pakistan floods and Europe tour = = = 
 The 2010 Pakistan floods began in late July with rain in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa and soon submerged a fifth of Pakistan and afflicted 20 million people , resulting in one of the nation 's largest natural catastrophes . Simultaneously , British Prime Minister David Cameron sparked a serious diplomatic row with Pakistan during his visit to India by stating that elements within Pakistan were promoting the " export of terror " a week before a planned visit by Zardari to Britain . Zardari ignored domestic pressure and began his European trip in Paris on 1 August , meeting French President Sarkozy . In France , he drew a rebuke from the U.S. after stating that NATO had " lost the battle for hearts and minds " in the Afghan war . As the flood 's devastation became increasingly evident , he was widely criticised for flying in a helicopter to his Normandy chateau and dining at Cameron 's Chequers countryside home . Protests within Britain , mainly among the British Pakistani community , grew against his visit . The widely expected maiden speech by his son Bilawal was cancelled , as Zardari faced criticism for using the trip to advance Bilawal 's political aspirations . 
 Zardari returned to Pakistan on 10 August . He first visit to an area affected by the flooding was in <unk> on 12 August . He cancelled the 14 August Independence Day celebrations and instead visited <unk> . He flew over devastated areas with United Nations Secretary @-@ General Ban Ki @-@ moon on 15 August . He left the country on 18 August and attended the four @-@ way Russian summit at Sochi , which included Tajikistan and Afghanistan . On 19 August , he visited <unk> with U.S. Senator John Kerry . He ordered local authorities to concentrate efforts to save <unk> from inundation on 24 August . 
 = = = 2011 Dubai hospitalisation = = = 
 In early December 2011 Zardari flew to Dubai undergoing medical tests and treatment , reportedly for a " small stroke " . According to the prime minister , Yousuf Raza Gilani , Zardari sought medical treatment outside of Pakistan because of " threats to his life " . He finds himself currently in the midst of the " <unk> " controversy . Zardari left the hospital on 14 December to recuperate at the Persian Gulf , while his son , Bilawal Bhutto Zardari , the chairman of Pakistan Peoples Party , assumed a more prominent role in Pakistan . By 19 December , Zardari had returned to Pakistan . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Zardari and Benazir Bhutto had one son and two daughters . His son , Bilawal Bhutto Zardari , is the current Chairman of the Pakistan Peoples Party . His older daughter , <unk> , was born on 25 January 1990 , and his younger daughter , <unk> , was born on 2 February 1993 . After Benazir Bhutto 's death , his sister <unk> <unk> became the guardian of his children and he changed Bilawal Zardari 's name to Bilawal Bhutto Zardari . He also has a second sister , Azra <unk> . 
 Pakistani news media , including the nation 's largest Urdu newspaper ( from the Jang Group ) , reported that Zardari had married <unk> Zamani in January 2011 . Zardari and Zamani denied the rumours . Zardari threatened legal action against the Jang Group . 
 His father Hakim Ali Zardari died in May 2011 . Zardari decided not to assume leadership ( <unk> ) of the Zardari tribe and instead crowned Bilawal as the tribe 's chieftain . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 His mental health has been a subject of controversy . He has repeatedly claimed he was tortured while in prison . He was diagnosed with dementia , major depressive disorder , and post @-@ traumatic stress disorder from 2005 to 2007 , which helped influence the verdict of one of his corruption trials . He now claims he is completely healthy , with only high blood pressure and diabetes . 
 Zardari is said to have a belief in occult and superstitions . According to a report by the Dawn newspaper , " a black goat is slaughtered almost daily to ward off the ' evil eye ' and protect President Zardari from ' black magic . ' " It has been an old practice of Zardari to offer <unk> ( charity ) of animal sacrifice and distribute meat to the poor . He has been doing this for a long time , " the newspaper quoted the Pakistan president ’ s spokesman <unk> Babar as saying . 
 = = Wealth = = 
 In 2005 , Daily Pakistan reported he was the second richest man in Pakistan with an estimated net worth of $ 1 @.@ 8 billion . He amassed great wealth while his wife was Prime Minister . In 2007 , he received $ 60 million in his Swiss bank account through offshore companies under his name . He was reported to have estates in Surrey , West End of London , Normandy , Manhattan ( a condominium in Belaire Apartments ) , and Dubai , as well as a 16th @-@ century chateau in Normandy . In Britain , he used a common legal device — the purchase of property through nominees with no family link to the <unk> . His homes in Karachi , Lahore , and Islamabad are called Bilawal House I , Bilawal House II , and Zardari House respectively . 
 = = = Surrey estate = = = 
 He bought a 365 @-@ acre ( 148 @-@ hectare ) 20 @-@ bedroom luxury estate in Rockwood , Surrey in 1995 through a chain of firms , trusts , and offshore companies in 1994 . The country home 's refurbishment abruptly ended in October 1996 , shortly before the end of his wife 's second term . He initially denied for eight years that he owned the property and no one paid the bills for the work on the unoccupied mansion . Creditors forced a liquidation sale in 2004 and the Pakistani government claimed the proceeds because the home had been bought with money obtained through corruption . However , he stepped in to claim that he actually was the beneficial owner . As of November 2008 , the proceeds were in a liquidator bank account while a civil case continues . 
 The estate includes two farms , lodgings , staff accommodation , and a basement made into an imitation of a local pub . The manor has nine bedrooms and an indoor swimming pool . 
 He had sent large shipments from Karachi in the 1990s for the refurbishment of Surrey Palace . He has faced allegations from various people , including the daughter of Laila <unk> , that he acquired stolen art to decorate the palace . He earlier had plans for a helipad , a nine @-@ hole golf course , and a polo pony paddock . 
 = = Completion of presidential tenure = = 
 Zardari completed his five @-@ year term on 8 September 2013 , becoming the first democratically @-@ elected President in the 66 @-@ year @-@ long history of Pakistan . He received a guard of honour while leaving the <unk> @-@ e @-@ Sadr . He then attended a party worker gathering at his residence in Lahore . According to his party workers he will settle in Lahore and will take part in politics He is succeeded by <unk> Hussain . 
 = = = Works = = = 
 Full text of 2008 Sarah Palin @-@ Zardari exchange 
 President Zardari 's 2008 address to the 63rd session of the United Nations General Assembly 
 The Terrorists Want to Destroy Pakistan , Too 
 Partnership With Pakistan 
 Pakistan Is Steadfast Against Terror 
 " Democracy Is the Greatest Revenge " 
 Pakistan 's Project of Renewal 
 Pakistan Did Its Part 
 = God of War II = 
 God of War II is a third person action @-@ adventure video game developed by Santa Monica Studio and published by Sony Computer Entertainment ( SCE ) . First released for the PlayStation 2 console on March 13 , 2007 , it is the second installment in the God of War series , the sixth chronologically , and the sequel to 2005 's God of War . The game is loosely based on Greek mythology and set in ancient Greece , with vengeance as its central motif . The player controls the protagonist Kratos , the new God of War who killed the former , Ares . Kratos is betrayed by Zeus , the King of the Olympian Gods , who strips him of his godhood and kills him . Slowly dragged to the Underworld , he is saved by the Titan Gaia , who instructs him to find the Sisters of Fate , as they can allow him to travel back in time , avert his betrayal , and take revenge on Zeus . 
 The gameplay is very similar to the previous installment , and focuses on combo @-@ based combat , achieved through the player 's main weapon — Athena 's Blades — and secondary weapons acquired throughout the game . It features quick time events that require the player to complete various game controller actions in a timed sequence to defeat stronger enemies and bosses . The player can use up to four magical attacks and a power @-@ enhancing ability as alternative combat options . The game also features puzzles and platforming elements . In addition to its vastly similar gameplay , God of War II features improved puzzles and four times as many bosses as the original . 
 God of War II has been acclaimed as one of the best PlayStation 2 and action games , and was 2007 's " PlayStation Game of the Year " at the Golden Joystick Awards . In 2009 , IGN listed it as the second @-@ best PlayStation 2 game of all time , and both IGN and GameSpot consider it the " swan song " of the PlayStation 2 era . In 2012 , Complex magazine named God of War II the best PlayStation 2 game of all time . It was the best @-@ selling game in the UK during the week of its release and went on to sell 4 @.@ 24 million copies worldwide , making it the fourteenth best @-@ selling PlayStation 2 game of all time . God of War II , along with God of War , was remastered and released on November 17 , 2009 , as part of the God of War Collection for the PlayStation 3 . The remastered version was re @-@ released on August 28 , 2012 , as part of the God of War Saga , also for the PlayStation 3 . A novelization of the game was published in February 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 God of War II is a third @-@ person single @-@ player video game viewed from a fixed camera perspective . The player controls the character Kratos in combo @-@ based combat , platforming , and puzzle game elements , and battles foes who primarily stem from Greek mythology , including harpies , minotaurs , Gorgons , griffins , cyclopes , cerberuses , Sirens , satyrs , and nymphs . Other monsters were created specifically for the game , including undead legionnaires , ravens , undead barbarians , beast lords , rabid hounds , wild boars , and the army of the Fates , including sentries , guardians , juggernauts , and high priests . Many of the combination attacks used in God of War reappear , and the game features more than double the amount of boss fights and more difficult puzzles than the original . Platforming elements require the player to climb walls and ladders , jump across chasms , swing on ropes , and balance across beams to proceed through sections of the game . Some puzzles are simple , such as moving a box so that the player can use it as a jumping @-@ off point to access a pathway unreachable with normal jumping , while others are more complex , such as finding several items across different areas of the game to unlock one door . 
 In addition to the regular health , magic , and experience chests that are found throughout the game world , there are three Uber Chests to be found . Two of these chests provide an additional increment to the Health and Magic Meters , respectively , and the third chest contains an abundance of red and gold orbs . Several urns are also hidden in the game ( e.g. , the Urn of Gaia ) , which , upon completion of the challenge mode , unlocks special abilities ( e.g. , unlimited magic ) for use during bonus play . 
 = = = Combat = = = 
 Kratos ' main weapon is a pair of blades attached to chains that are wrapped around the character 's wrists and forearms . Called Athena 's Blades ( also known as the Blades of Athena ) in this game , they can be swung offensively in various maneuvers . As the game progresses , Kratos acquires new weapons — the Barbarian Hammer , the Spear of Destiny , and periodically , the Blade of Olympus — offering alternative combat options . Although Kratos begins the game with Athena 's Blades and the magic ability Poseidon 's Rage ( both at maximum power ) , the blade 's power is reduced and the magic is relinquished after an encounter with Zeus . As with previous games , Kratos learns to use up to four magical abilities , such as Typhon 's Bane that acts as a bow and arrow for distant targets , giving him a variety of ways to attack and kill enemies . Other new magical abilities include Cronos ' Rage , Head of Euryale , and Atlas Quake . The special ability , Rage of the Gods , featured in the previous game is replaced by Rage of the Titans , and unlike the previous game , the Rage meter — which allows usage of the ability — does not have to be full in order to use the ability , and can be switched on and off at will . 
 Kratos retains the relic Poseidon 's Trident from the original installment , and gains new relics ; the Amulet of the Fates , the Golden Fleece , and Icarus ' Wings , each being required to advance through certain stages of the game . For example , the Amulet of the Fates slows time , but this does not affect Kratos and allows puzzle @-@ solving that can not be achieved in normal game time . The Amulet of the Fates has limited usage before needing to be recharged ( which occurs automatically and is represented by the Amulet of the Fates Meter ) . The Golden Fleece deflects enemy projectiles back at the enemies ( used to solve certain puzzles ) . Icarus ' Wings allows Kratos to glide across large chasms that cannot be crossed with normal jumping . 
 This game 's challenge mode is called the Challenge of the Titans ( seven trials ) , and requires players to complete a series of specific tasks ( e.g. , kill all enemies without being attacked ) . The player may unlock bonus costumes for Kratos , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes videos , and concept art of the characters and environments , as rewards , as well as usage of the abilities found in the urns during the first playthrough . Completion of each difficulty level unlocks additional rewards , as does collecting twenty eyes from defeated cyclopes . A new mode , called Arena of the Fates , allows players to set difficulty levels and choose their own opponents to improve their skills . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 As with its predecessor , God of War II is set in an alternate version of ancient Greece , populated by the Olympian Gods , Titans , heroes , and other beings of Greek mythology . With the exception of flashbacks , the events are set between those of the games Betrayal ( 2007 ) and God of War III ( 2010 ) . Several locations are explored , including a real world setting in the ancient city of Rhodes , and several fictional locations , including a brief scene in the Underworld , the Lair of Typhon , the Island of Creation and its locales , Tartarus , and a brief scene of Mount Olympus . 
 Rhodes , its skyline dominated by the massive statue , the Colossus of Rhodes , is a war @-@ torn city under assault by Kratos , the God of War , and his Spartan army . The Lair of Typhon , hidden in an unknown location , is a snow @-@ topped mountain and prison of the Titans Typhon and Prometheus . The Island of Creation is a vast island located at the edge of the world and home to the Sisters of Fate . The island is host to deadly traps , puzzles , and monsters . On the outskirts of the island are the Steeds of Time , and on the island itself are the Temples of Lakhesis and Atropos , and the Bog of the Forgotten , which hides the Gorgon Euryale and is the site of Jason of the Argonauts ' last battle . Beyond the Bog are the Lowlands and the Great Chasm : a huge divide that blocks the way to the Palace of the Fates . At the base of the Chasm is the realm of Tartarus — prison of the Titan Atlas , condemned to hold the world on his shoulders . The Temple of the Fates is also filled with traps and monsters , while the final battle occurs on Mount Olympus , home to the gods . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 The protagonist of the game is Kratos ( voiced by Terrence C. Carson ) , a Spartan warrior who became the God of War after killing the former , Ares . Other characters include Athena ( Carole Ruggier ) , the Goddess of Wisdom ; Zeus ( Corey Burton ) , the King of the Gods and the main antagonist ; several Titans — including Gaia ( Linda Hunt ) , Atlas ( Michael Clarke Duncan ) , Prometheus ( Alan Oppenheimer ) , Typhon ( Fred Tatasciore ) , and Cronos ( Lloyd Sherr ) — heroes Theseus ( Paul Eiding ) and Perseus ( Harry Hamlin ) ; the insane Icarus ( Bob <unk> ) ; the Gorgon Euryale ( Jennifer Martin ) ; an undead version of the Barbarian King ( Bob <unk> ) ; and the Sisters of Fate — Lakhesis ( Leigh @-@ Allyn Baker ) , Atropos ( Debi Mae West ) , and Clotho ( Susan Silo ) . Minor characters include the boat captain ( Keith Ferguson ) and a loyal Spartan soldier ( Josh Keaton ; credited as the Last Spartan ) . Kratos ' wife Lysandra , their daughter Calliope , and the Titan Rhea appear in flashbacks . The gods Hades and Poseidon appear in flashbacks of the Great War , and in the final cutscene alongside Zeus and Hermes on Olympus . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Kratos , the God of War , is still haunted by nightmares of his past and is shunned by the other gods for his destructive ways . Ignoring Athena 's warnings , Kratos joins the Spartan army in an attack on Rhodes , during which a giant eagle suddenly drains him of his powers and animates the Colossus of Rhodes . While battling the statue , Zeus offers Kratos the Blade of Olympus in order to defeat it , requiring Kratos to infuse the blade with the remainder of his godly power . Although now human , Kratos defeats the Colossus but is mortally wounded . The eagle reveals itself to be Zeus , who states he was forced to intervene as Athena refused to do so . Zeus then grants Kratos a final opportunity to be loyal to the gods , but Kratos refuses . Zeus kills him with the blade and destroys the Spartan army . 
 Kratos is slowly dragged to the Underworld but is saved by the Titan Gaia . Gaia tells Kratos that she once raised the young Zeus , who eventually betrayed the Titans as vengeance for the cruelty inflicted on his siblings by Zeus ' father , Cronos . She instructs Kratos to find the Sisters of Fate , who can alter time , prevent his death , and allow him his revenge on Zeus . With the aid of Pegasus , Kratos finds the lair of Gaia 's brother Typhon . Imprisoned under a mountain , Typhon is angered at the intrusion and traps Pegasus , forcing Kratos to explore on foot . Kratos encounters the Titan Prometheus , who is chained in mortal form and tortured at Zeus ' directive for giving fire to mankind . Prometheus begs to be released from his torment , so Kratos confronts Typhon to steal his magical bow . He blinds the massive Titan with it to escape and then uses it to free Prometheus , who falls into a fire and dies , finally free of eternal torture . The <unk> releases the power of the Titans which Kratos absorbs , using it to free Pegasus and then fly to the Island of Creation . 
 Just before reaching the island , Kratos fights and kills Theseus to awaken the gigantic stone Steeds of Time — a gift to the Sisters of Fate from Cronos in an attempt to change his own fate — which grants Kratos access to the island . There , Kratos encounters and defeats several foes , some of whom are also seeking the Sisters of Fate , including an undead version of his old foe the Barbarian King , the Gorgon Euryale , Perseus , and Icarus . He eventually encounters the imprisoned Titan Atlas , who initially resents Kratos for his current predicament . After Kratos explains his intent , Atlas reveals that Gaia and the other Titans also seek revenge on Zeus for their defeat in the Great War . Atlas also reveals that the Blade of Olympus is the key to defeating Zeus and helps Kratos to reach the Palace of the Fates . 
 After evading traps and defeating more enemies , including the Kraken , Kratos encounters an unseen foe , revealed to be a loyal Spartan soldier also in search of the Sisters . Before he dies , the soldier tells Kratos that Zeus has destroyed Sparta in Kratos ' absence . Outraged , Kratos is further motivated and frees a phoenix , riding the creature to the Sisters ' stronghold where he confronts two , Lakhesis and Atropos . After they refuse his request to alter time , Kratos battles them . During this , the Sisters try to change the outcome of Kratos ' battle with Ares , but Kratos kills them both , then confronts Clotho , the remaining Sister . He kills her using her traps and acquires the Loom of Fate in order to return to the point at which Zeus betrayed him . 
 Kratos surprises Zeus , seizes the Blade of Olympus , and finally incapacitates him . Athena intervenes and begs Kratos to stop , as by killing Zeus , he will destroy Olympus . Kratos ignores Athena 's pleas and attempts to kill Zeus , but Athena sacrifices herself by impaling herself upon the blade as Zeus escapes . Before she dies , Athena reveals that Kratos is Zeus ' son . Zeus was afraid Kratos would usurp him , just as Zeus usurped his father , Cronos . Kratos declares that the rule of the gods is at an end , then travels back in time and rescues the Titans just before their defeat in the Great War . He returns with the Titans to the present , and the gods watch as their former foes climb Mount Olympus . Kratos , standing on the back of Gaia , declares that he has brought the destruction of Olympus , setting up the events of God of War III . 
 = = Development = = 
 A sequel to God of War was first teased at the end of its credits , which stated , " Kratos Will Return " . God of War II was officially announced at the 2006 Game Developers Conference ( GDC ) . God of War Game Director David Jaffe stepped down and became the Creative Director of its sequel . God of War 's lead animator Cory Barlog assumed the role of Game Director . In an interview with Computer and Video Games ( CVG ) in June 2006 , Barlog said that while working on the first few drafts of script , he studied the mythology extensively . He said that the mythology is so large that " the real difficulty is picking things that really fit within the story of Kratos as well as being easy to swallow for audiences . " Although he loves the idea of teaching things through storytelling ( in this case Greek mythology ) , Barlog said , " you can 't let your story get bogged down by that . " He said that in the game , players would see " a larger view of Kratos ' role within the mythological world . " He also said that he liked the idea of a trilogy , but there were no plans " as of right now . " 
 Like God of War , the game uses Santa Monica 's Kinetica engine . Senior combat designer Derek Daniels said that for God of War II , they were basing the magical attacks on elements ( e.g. , air and earth ) . He said the combat system was updated so that it flowed smoothly between attacks and switching between weapons and magic . He said that they were working for a similar balance of puzzle solving , exploration , and combat seen in the first game , and they used elements that worked in that game as a base for the overall balance . Unlike God of War where magic had a small role , Daniels said that for God of War II , their goal was to make magic an integral part of the combat system and to make it more refined . Barlog said the game would feature new creatures and heroes from the mythology , and he wanted to put more boss battles in it . Commenting on multiplayer options , Barlog said that " there are possibilities for that but it is not something we are doing right now . " He said that he felt that God of War is a single @-@ player experience , and although multiplayer " would be cool , " it did not appeal to him to work on . As for a PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) installment , he said that he thought it " would be freaking awesome , " but not something he had time to work on and it was Sony 's decision whether or not to make a PSP installment . 
 In an interview with IGN in February 2007 , Barlog said that his goals for God of War II were to continue the previous game 's story , expand on several elements , and to feature more epic moments as opposed to cinematics during gameplay . He said there were many additions to the game , but they did not differ greatly from the style of the previous game . Set @-@ pieces and large scale epic moments were reworked " so that each battle you have really feels epic and unique . " Barlog also hinted that another sequel would be made ; he said , " The story has not yet been completed . The end has only just begun . " 
 In another interview with IGN , both Jaffe and Barlog said that they did not view God of War II as a sequel , but rather a continuation of the previous game . Jaffe said that they did not want to include the Roman numeral number two ( II ) in the title for this reason , but they did not want the title to convey the impression it was an expansion pack . Both Jaffe and Barlog said that the reason God of War II appeared on the PlayStation 2 instead of the PlayStation 3 — which was released four months prior to God of War II — was because " there 's a 100 million people out there that will be able to play God of War II as soon as it launches . " Barlog assured that the game would be playable on the newer platform , which had PlayStation 2 backwards @-@ compatibility . 
 Four of the voice actors from the previous installment returned to reprise their roles , including Terrence C. Carson and Keith Ferguson , who voiced Kratos and the boat captain , respectively . Linda Hunt returned as the narrator , who was revealed to be the Titan Gaia , and Carole Ruggier returned in her final voicing of the character Athena . Both Paul Eiding , who had voiced Zeus and the gravedigger , and Fred Tatasciore , who had voiced Poseidon , returned , but did not reprise those roles , and instead , voiced the characters Theseus and Typhon , respectively . Corey Burton assumed the role of Zeus , who had voiced the character in the 1998 Disney animated film , Hercules : Zero to Hero , and in the subsequent animated series , Hercules . Famed actors Michael Clarke Duncan and Leigh @-@ Allyn Baker lent their voices for the characters Atlas and Lakhesis , respectively . Actor Harry Hamlin was chosen to voice the character Perseus because of his previous portrayal of the same character in the 1981 feature film , Clash of the Titans . Although removed early in the game 's development , Cam Clarke is credited for the voice of Hercules . Keythe Farley was the voice director alongside Kris Zimmerman and Gordon Hunt . 
 = = Release = = 
 God of War II was released in North America on March 13 , 2007 , in Europe on April 27 , and May 3 in Australia . It was released in Japan on October 25 by Capcom , under the title God of War II : <unk> no <unk> ( ゴッド ・ オブ ・ <unk> <unk> ) . The North American version was packaged in a two @-@ disc set . The first disc contains the game , and the second disc is dedicated to the game 's development , including a diary of the game 's production . The European / Australian PAL version was released as two different editions : a single @-@ disc standard edition and a two @-@ disc " Special Edition " with different box art and a bonus DVD . On April 6 , 2008 , it became available in the PlayStation 2 line up of Greatest Hits . 
 Upon release , God of War II was commercially successful in multiple markets . In North America , it sold 833 @,@ 209 copies by the end of March 2007 , twice as many copies as the next @-@ best selling game . It was the best @-@ selling game in the UK in the first week of release . It sold over one million copies in the first three months after release , and in June 2012 , Sony reported it sold more than 4 @.@ 24 million copies worldwide . 
 The game and its predecessor , God of War , were released in North America on November 17 , 2009 , as part of the God of War Collection , featuring remastered ports of both games for the PlayStation 3 platform , with upscaled graphics and support for PlayStation 3 Trophies . It became available in Japan on March 18 , 2010 , Australia on April 29 , and the UK on April 30 . The " God of War II Bonus Materials " — content included on the second disc of the original North American PlayStation 2 version — was included with the retail version of the collection . God of War Collection was released as a digital download on the PlayStation Store on November 2 , 2010 , and was the first product containing PlayStation 2 software available via download . PlayStation Plus subscribers can download a one @-@ hour trial of each game . The bonus materials , however , are not included in the digital download version . A PlayStation Vita version of God of War Collection was released on May 6 , 2014 . By June 2012 , God of War Collection had sold more than 2 @.@ 4 million copies worldwide . On August 28 , 2012 , God of War Collection , God of War III , and God of War : Origins Collection were included in the God of War Saga under Sony 's line of PlayStation Collections for the PlayStation 3 in North America . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 As a pre @-@ order incentive , the demo disc of God of War II was made available to all customers who pre @-@ ordered the game . On March 1 , 2007 , Sony held a media event that featured scantily clad women and a dead goat in Athens as part of the game 's marketing campaign . The following month , the Daily Mail learned of the event from the UK Official PlayStation Magazine , called it a " depraved promotion stunt " , and reported that Member of Parliament and anti @-@ video game violence campaigner Keith Vaz said he would understand if the incident resulted in a boycott of Sony products . In response , Sony said the event had been sensationalized with hyperbole and that the article contained several inaccuracies , but apologized for the event . 
 = = Other media = = 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 God of War II : Original Soundtrack from the Video Game , composed by Gerard K. Marino , Ron Fish , Mike Reagan , and Cris Velasco , was released on CD by Sony Computer Entertainment on April 10 , 2007 . Dave Valentine of Square Enix Music Online gave the soundtrack an 8 out of 10 , and said that it features a wide variety of ominous orchestral pieces , and each composer 's contributions seem slightly more distinctive than the previous installment . Spence D. of IGN wrote that the score , " is an impressive orchestral accomplishment within the ever @-@ growing and constantly changing arena of videogame composition , " but that it was aimed more towards the gaming experience of God of War II , rather than being a stand @-@ alone musical experience . At the 2007 Spike Video Game Awards , the score was nominated for " Best Original Score " . In March 2010 , the soundtrack was released as downloadable content as part of the God of War Trilogy Soundtrack in the God of War III Ultimate Edition . 
 = = = Novel = = = 
 An official novelization of the game , titled God of War II , was announced in July 2009 , along with a novelization of the original God of War . It was written by Robert E. Vardeman and published on February 12 , 2013 , by Del Rey Books in North America , and on February 19 , 2013 , in Europe by Titan Books . It is available in paperback , Kindle , and audio formats . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Regarded as one of the best PlayStation 2 and action games of all time , God of War II received critical acclaim , with aggregate scores of 92 @.@ 79 % from GameRankings and 93 out of 100 from Metacritic , who describe their score as " universal acclaim " . It has been praised for its story and improvements over its predecessor , such as gameplay and graphics . Chris Roper of IGN said that God of War II is " one of gaming 's most intense and engaging experiences available . " He said it " is practically devoid " of the minor flaws of the original , citing an example that players can now quickly navigate wall climbing , such as being able to vertically slide down walls . Furthering his praise of the gameplay , he said that it is one of the most " polished and refined experiences ... in gaming . " Although he said that the combat mechanics were practically identical to the original , he had no complaints , stating it is " for good reason as it was already perfect the first time out . " 
 Kristan Reed of Eurogamer said that " God of War II sports one of the most satisfyingly honed game designs we 've ever come across . " He said that it would not overwhelm players and that it motivates them to improve their skills . He said that the balance " always feels spot @-@ on , " and the " learning curve is just right , " adding that the magic attacks are more useful than those in God of War . He also said that God of War II 's gameplay , like the original , " finds a comfortable middle ground " between hardcore and casual players . Alex Navarro of GameSpot praised the pace of the game and the puzzle designs , and said the " scale of some of the levels is unbelievably massive . " He also said that the story is interesting because it is more about what happens around Kratos , than what happens to him . Matt Leone of 1UP said that the strongest aspect " is how it excels as both a story and an action game , " and it is the story that " allows the game to feel like a true sequel . " Roper praised the scale of the levels , as well as the variety in environments , in comparison to the original installment , and said the art direction is " once again absolutely outstanding . " 
 Reed praised the amount of detail and said that " at no stage did we ever see even a hint of frame @-@ rate drop or v @-@ syncing glitches . " He also said that playing the game on the PS3 sharpens up the visuals . Navarro said that both the sound and graphics were " superb " and the technical graphics are impressive for the PlayStation 2 . GameTrailers said that in terms of visuals , " there aren 't that many PlayStation 2 games in the same league as God of War II . " GameZone said that despite the issue of clipping , the game is " unbelievably gorgeous " . 
 Roper said that there were a couple of puzzles " that seemed a little rough around the edges and whose otherwise straightforward solution suffered a bit from imperfect implementation . " He also criticized the difficulty of unlocking some of the bonus content , as some requirements are " <unk> hard for most everyone . " Reed , however , said if players can find any flaws , they are based on " personal taste " , but he did state that regardless of refinement , " you can never quite replicate the wow factor of the original — even if it ends up being a better game . " Navarro said that at times , the combat is " overly straightforward ... and still prone to button mashing , " and said that it was " a bit disappointing " that more was not done to the combat system . He criticized the cliffhanger ending and said a few of the bonus challenges " aren 't all that great . " GameTrailers criticized the invisible walls , stating that " There are places you should be able to go that you simply can 't . " They also cited inconsistency issues in regards to navigation . Leone said his " only real " disappointment is that he did not feel the game was evolving the series . 
 = = = Awards and accolades = = = 
 Both IGN and GameSpot consider God of War II to be the " swan song " of the PlayStation 2 era . In 2007 , it was awarded " PlayStation Game of the Year " at the 25th annual Golden Joystick Awards , and UGO awarded it " PS2 Game of the Year " . At the 2007 Spike Video Game Awards , it was a nominee for " Best Action Game " and " Best Original Score " . At the 12th Satellite Awards , God of War II received the Outstanding Platform Action / Adventure Game award . At the 2007 British Academy of Film and Television Arts ( BAFTA ) Video Game Awards , God of War II received the " Story and Character " and " Technical Achievement " awards , and was a nominee for " Action and Adventure " , " Original Score " , and " Use of Audio " . In 2009 , IGN named God of War II the second @-@ best PlayStation 2 game of all time — five ahead of its predecessor . In November 2012 , Complex magazine named God of War II the best PlayStation 2 game of all time — where God of War was named the eleventh @-@ best — and also considered it better than its successor , God of War III . 
 = Donnchadh , Earl of Carrick = 
 Donnchadh ( Latin : <unk> ; English : Duncan ) was a Gall @-@ Gaidhil prince and Scottish magnate in what is now south @-@ western Scotland , whose career stretched from the last quarter of the 12th century until his death in 1250 . His father , Gille @-@ Brighde of Galloway , and his uncle , Uhtred of Galloway , were the two rival sons of Fergus , Prince or Lord of Galloway . As a result of Gille @-@ Brighde 's conflict with Uhtred and the Scottish monarch William the Lion , Donnchadh became a hostage of King Henry II of England . He probably remained in England for almost a decade before returning north on the death of his father . Although denied succession to all the lands of Galloway he was granted lordship over Carrick in the north . 
 Allied to John de Courcy , Donnchadh fought battles in Ireland and acquired land there that he subsequently lost . A patron of religious houses , particularly Melrose Abbey and North Berwick priory nunnery , he attempted to establish a monastery in his own territory , at Crossraguel . He married the daughter of Alan fitz Walter , a leading member of the family later known as the House of Stewart — future monarchs of Scotland and England . Donnchadh was the first mormaer or earl of Carrick , a region he ruled for more than six decades , making him one of the longest serving magnates in medieval Scotland . His descendants include the Bruce and Stewart Kings of Scotland , and probably the Campbell Dukes of Argyll . 
 = = Geographic and cultural background = = 
 Donnchadh 's territory lay in what is now Scotland south of the River Forth , a multi @-@ ethnic region during the late 12th century . North of the Forth was the Gaelic kingdom of Scotland ( Alba ) , which under its partially Normanised kings exercised direct or indirect control over most of the region to the south as far as the borders of Northumberland and Cumberland . Lothian and the <unk> were the heartlands of the northern part of the old English Earldom of Northumbria , and in the late 12th century the people of these regions , as well as the people of Lauderdale , Eskdale , Liddesdale , and most of Teviotdale and Annandale , were English in language and regarded themselves as English by ethnicity , despite having been under the control of the king of the Scots for at least a century . 
 Clydesdale ( or Strathclyde ) was the heartland of the old Kingdom of Strathclyde ; by Donnchadh 's day the Scots had settled many English and Continental Europeans ( principally Flemings ) in the region , and administered it through the sheriffdom of Lanark . Gaelic too had penetrated much of the old Northumbrian and Strathclyde territory , coming from the west , south @-@ west and the north , a situation that led historian Alex Woolf to compare the region to the Balkans . The British language of the area , as a result of such developments , was probably either dead or almost dead , perhaps surviving only in the uplands of Clydesdale , Tweeddale and Annandale . 
 The rest of the region was settled by the people called Gall @-@ Gaidhil ( modern Scottish Gaelic : Gall @-@ <unk> ) in their own language , variations of <unk> in Latin , and normally Galwegians or <unk> in modern English . References in the 11th century to the kingdom of the Gall @-@ Gaidhil centre it far to the north of what is now Galloway . Kingarth ( Cenn <unk> ) and Eigg ( <unk> ) were described as " in Galloway " ( <unk> ) by the Martyrology of Óengus , in contrast to Whithorn — part of modern Galloway — which was named as lying within another kingdom , The Rhinns ( Na Renna ) . These areas had been part of the Kingdom of Northumbria until the 9th century , and afterward were transformed by a process very poorly documented , but probably carried out by numerous small bands of culturally Scandinavian but linguistically Gaelic warrior @-@ settlers moving in from Ireland and southern Argyll . " Galloway " today only refers to the lands of Rhinns , <unk> , <unk> , Desnes Mór and Desnes Ioan ( that is , Wigtownshire and the <unk> of Kirkcudbright ) , but this is due to the territorial changes that took place in and around Donnchadh 's lifetime rather than being the contemporary definition . For instance , a 12th @-@ century piece of marginalia located the island of Ailsa Craig " lying between <unk> [ Galloway ] and <unk> <unk> [ Kintyre ] " , while a charter of Máel Coluim IV ( " Malcolm IV " ) describes Strathgryfe , Cunningham , Kyle and Carrick as the four <unk> ( probably from <unk> , " quarter " s ) of Galloway ; an Irish annal entry for the year 1154 designated galleys from Arran , Kintyre , the Isle of Man as <unk> , " Galwegian " . 
 By the middle of the 12th century the former territory of the kingdom of the Rhinns was part of Galloway kingdom , but the area to the north was not . Strathgryfe , Kyle and Cunningham had come under the control of the Scottish king in the early 12th century , much of it given over to soldiers of French or Anglo @-@ French origin . Strathgryfe and most of Kyle had been given to Walter fitz Alan under King David I , with Hugh de Morville taking Cunningham . <unk> still had a Gaelic ruler ( ancestor of the famous Thomas Randolph , 1st Earl of Moray ) , but he was not part of the kingdom of Galloway . The rest of the region — the Rhinns , <unk> , Carrick , Desnes Mór and Desnes Ioan , and the sparsely settled uplands of <unk> — was probably under the control of the sons of Fergus , King of Galloway , in the years before Donnchadh 's career in the region . 
 = = Origins and family = = 
 Donnchadh was the son of Gille @-@ Brighde , son of Fergus , king of the Gall @-@ Gaidhil . Donnchadh 's ancestry cannot be traced further ; no patronymic is known for Fergus from contemporary sources , and when Fergus ' successors enumerate their ancestors in documents , they never go earlier than he does . The name Gille @-@ Brighde , used by Donnchadh 's father ( Fergus ' son ) , was also the name of the father of Somhairle , petty king of Argyll in the third quarter of the 12th century . As the original territory of the Gall @-@ Gaidhil kingdom probably adjoined or included Argyll , Alex Woolf has suggested that Fergus and Somhairle were brothers or cousins . 
 There is a " body of circumstantial evidence " that suggests Donnchadh 's mother was a daughter or sister of Donnchadh II , Earl of Fife . This includes Donnchadh 's association with the Cistercian nunnery of North Berwick , founded by Donnchadh II of Fife 's father , Donnchadh I of Fife ; close ties seem to have existed between the two families , while Donnchadh 's own name is further evidence . The historian who suggested this in 2000 , Richard Oram , came to regard this conjecture as certain by 2004 . 
 Roger of Hoveden described Uhtred of Galloway as a <unk> ( " cousin " ) of King Henry II of England , an assertion that has given rise to the theory that , since Gille @-@ Brighde is never described as such , they must have been from different mothers . Fergus must therefore , according to the theory , have had two wives , one of whom was a bastard daughter of Henry I ; that is , Uhtred and his descendants were related to the English royal family , while Gille @-@ Brighde and his descendants were not . However , according to historian <unk> Barrow , the theory is disproved by one English royal document , written in the name of King John of England , which likewise asserts that Donnchadh was John 's cousin . 
 It is unclear how many siblings Donnchadh had , but two at least are known . The first , Máel Coluim , led the forces that besieged Gille @-@ Brighde 's brother Uhtred on " Dee island " ( probably Threave ) in Galloway in 1174 . This Máel Coluim captured Uhtred , who subsequently , in addition to being blinded and castrated , had his tongue cut out . Nothing more is known of Máel Coluim 's life ; there is speculation by some modern historians that he was illegitimate . Another brother appears in the records of Paisley Abbey . In 1233 , one Gille @-@ Chonaill <unk> , " the Stammerer " ( recorded <unk> <unk> ) , gave evidence regarding a land dispute in Strathclyde ; the document described him as the brother of the Earl of Carrick , who at that time was Donnchadh . 
 = = Exile and return = = 
 In 1160 , Máel Coluim mac Eanric ( Malcolm IV ) , king of the Scots , forced Fergus into retirement , and brought Galloway under his overlordship . It is likely that from 1161 until 1174 , Fergus ' sons Gille @-@ Brighde and Uhtred shared the lordship of the Gall @-@ Gaidhil under the Scottish king 's authority , with Gille @-@ Brighde in the west and Uhtred in the east . When in 1174 the Scottish king William the Lion was captured during an invasion of England , the brothers responded by rebelling against the Scottish monarch . Subsequently , they fought each other , with Donnchadh 's father ultimately prevailing . 
 Having defeated his brother , Gille @-@ Brighde unsuccessfully sought to become a direct vassal of Henry II , king of England . An agreement was obtained with Henry in 1176 , Gille @-@ Brighde promising to pay him 1000 marks of silver and handing over his son Donnchadh as a hostage . Donnchadh was taken into the care of Hugh de <unk> , sheriff of Cumberland . The agreement seems to have included recognising Donnchadh 's right to inherit Gille @-@ Brighde 's lands , for nine years later , in the aftermath of Gille @-@ Brighde 's death , when Uhtred 's son Lochlann ( Roland ) invaded western Galloway , Roger of Hoveden described the action as " contrary to [ Henry 's ] prohibition " . 
 The activities of Donnchadh 's father Gille @-@ Brighde after 1176 are unclear , but some time before 1184 King William raised an army to punish Gille @-@ Brighde " and the other Galwegians who had wasted his land and slain his vassals " ; he held off the endeavour , probably because he was worried about the response of Gille @-@ Brighde 's protector Henry II . There were raids on William 's territory until Gille @-@ Brighde 's death in 1185 . The death of Gille @-@ Brighde prompted Donnchadh 's cousin Lochlann , supported by the Scottish king , to attempt a takeover , thus threatening Donnchadh 's inheritance . At that time Donnchadh was still a hostage in the care of Hugh de <unk> . 
 The Gesta Annalia I claimed that Donnchadh 's patrimony was defended by chieftains called Somhairle ( " Samuel " ) , Gille @-@ <unk> , and Eanric Mac <unk> ( " Henry Mac Kennedy " ) . Lochlann and his army met these men in battle on 4 July 1185 and , according to the Chronicle of Melrose , killed Gille @-@ <unk> and a substantial number of his warriors . Another battle took place on 30 September , and although Lochlann 's forces were probably victorious , killing opponent leader Gille @-@ Coluim , the encounter led to the death of Lochlann 's unnamed brother . Lochlann 's activities provoked a response from King Henry who , according to historian Richard Oram , " was not prepared to accept a fait accompli that disinherited the son of a useful vassal , flew in the face of the settlement which he had imposed ... and deprived him of influence over a vitally strategic zone on the north @-@ west periphery of his realm " . 
 According to Hoveden , in May 1186 Henry ordered the king and magnates of Scotland to subdue Lochlann ; in response Lochlann " collected numerous horse and foot and obstructed the entrances to Galloway and its roads to what extent he could " . Richard Oram did not believe that the Scots really intended to do this , as Lochlann was their dependent and probably acted with their consent ; this , Oram argued , explains why Henry himself raised an army and marched north to Carlisle . When Henry arrived he instructed King William and his brother David , Earl of Huntingdon , to come to Carlisle , and to bring Lochlann with them . 
 Lochlann ignored Henry 's summons until an embassy consisting of Hugh de Puiset , Bishop of Durham and Justiciar Ranulf de Glanville provided him with hostages as a guarantee of his safety ; when he agreed to travel to Carlisle with the king 's ambassadors . Hoveden wrote that Lochlann was allowed to keep the land that his father Uhtred had held " on the day he was alive and dead " , but that the land of Gille @-@ Brighde that was claimed by Donnchadh , son of Gille @-@ Brighde , would be settled in Henry 's court , to which Lochlann would be summoned . Lochlann agreed to these terms . King William and Earl David swore an oath to enforce the agreement , with Jocelin , Bishop of Glasgow , instructed to excommunicate any party that should breach their oath . 
 = = Ruler of Carrick = = 
 There is no record of any subsequent court hearing , but the Gesta Annalia I relates that Donnchadh was granted Carrick on condition of peace with Lochlann , and emphasises the role of King William ( as opposed to Henry ) in resolving the conflict . Richard Oram has pointed out that Donnchadh 's grant to Melrose Abbey between 1189 and 1198 was witnessed by his cousin Lochlann , evidence perhaps that relations between the two had become more cordial . Although no details are given any contemporary source , Donnchadh gained possession of some of his father 's land in the west of the kingdom of Gall @-@ Gaidhil , namely the " earldom " of Carrick . 
 When Donnchadh adopted or was given the title of earl ( Latin : comes ) , or in his own language mormaer , is a debated question . Historian Alan Orr Anderson argued that he began using the title of comes between 1214 and 1216 , based on Donnchadh 's appearance as a witness to two charters issued by Thomas de Colville ; the first , known as Melrose 193 ( this being its number in Cosmo Innes 's printed version of the cartulary ) , was dated by Anderson to 1214 . In this charter , Donnchadh has no title . By contrast Donnchadh was styled comes in a charter dated by Anderson to 1216 , Melrose 192 . 
 Oram however pointed out that Donnchadh was styled comes in a grant to Melrose Abbey witnessed by Richard de Morville ( Melrose 32 ) , who died in 1196 . If the wording in this charter is accurate , then Donnchadh was using the title before Richard 's death : that is , in or before 1196 . Furthermore , while Anderson dated Melrose 192 with reference to Abbot William III de Courcy ( abbot of Melrose from 1215 to 1216 ) , Oram identified Abbot William as Abbot William II ( abbot from 1202 to 1206 ) . Whenever Donnchadh adopted the title , he is the first known " earl " of the region . 
 Carrick was located in the Firth of Clyde , in the Irish Sea region far from the main centres of Scottish and Anglo @-@ Norman influence lying to its east and south @-@ east . Carrick was separated from Kyle in the north and north @-@ east by the river Doon , and from Galloway @-@ proper by <unk> and by the adjacent hills and forests . There were three main rivers , the Doon , the Girvan and the <unk> , though most of the province was hilly , meaning that most wealth came from animal husbandry rather than arable farming . The population of Carrick , like that in neighbouring Galloway , consisted of kin @-@ groups governed by a " chief " or " captain " ( <unk> , Latin <unk> ) . Above these captains was the Cenn <unk> ( " <unk> " ) , the " kin @-@ captain " of Carrick , a position held by the mormaer ; it was not until after Donnchadh 's death that these two positions were separated . The best recorded groups are Donnchadh 's own group ( known only as de Carrick , " of Carrick " ) and the Mac Cennétig ( Kennedy ) family , who seem to have provided the earldom 's hereditary stewards . 
 The population was governed under these leaders by a customary law that remained distinct from the common law of Scotland for the remainder of the Middle Ages . One documented aspect of Carrick and Galloway law was the power of sergeants ( an original Gaelic word Latinised as <unk> ) , officials of the earl or of other captains , to claim one night of free hospitality ( a privilege called <unk> et <unk> ) , and to accuse and arrest with little restriction . The personal demesne , or lands , of the earl was probably extensive in Donnchadh 's time ; in 1260 , during the minority of Donnchadh 's descendant Countess Marjory of Carrick , an assessment made by the Scottish king showed that the earls had estates throughout the province , in upland locations like Straiton , <unk> and <unk> , as well as in the east in locations such as Turnberry and <unk> . 
 = = Relations with the church = = 
 Records exist for Donnchadh 's religious patronage , and these records provide evidence for Donnchadh 's associates as well as the earl himself . Around 1200 Earl Donnchadh allowed the monks of Melrose Abbey use of <unk> from his land at Turnberry . Between 1189 and 1198 he had granted the church of <unk> ( " Little Maybole " ) and the lands of Beath ( Bethóc ) to this Cistercian house . The grant is mentioned by the Chronicle of Melrose , under the year 1193 : 
 Donnchadh , son of Gille @-@ Brighde , of Galloway , gave to God and St Mary and the monks of Melrose a certain part of their land in Carrick that is called Maybole , in perpetual alms , for the salvation of his soul , and the souls of all his relatives ; in presence of bishop Jocelin , and many other witnesses . 
 These estates were very rich , and became attached to Melrose 's " super @-@ grange " at Mauchline in Kyle . In 1285 Melrose Abbey was able to persuade the earl of the time to force its tenants in Carrick to use the lex Anglicana ( the " English law " ) . 
 Witness to both grants were some prominent churchman connected with Melrose : magnates like Earl Donnchadh II of Fife , the latter 's son Máel Coluim , Gille Brigte , Earl of Strathearn , as well as probable members of Donnchadh 's retinue , like Gille @-@ <unk> mac Gille @-@ <unk> , Gille @-@ nan @-@ <unk> mac <unk> , Gille @-@ <unk> <unk> ( " the Briton " ) , and Donnchadh 's chamberlain <unk> mac <unk> . <unk> son of the mormaer of Lennox also witnessed these grants , and sometime between 1208 and 1214 Donnchadh ( as " Lord Donnchadh " ) subscribed ( i.e. his name was written at the bottom , as a " witness " to ) a charter of Maol <unk> , Earl of Lennox , son and heir of Mormaer Ailean II , to the bishopric of Glasgow regarding the church of Campsie . 
 There are records of patronage towards the nunnery of North Berwick , a house founded by Donnchadh 's probable maternal grandfather or great @-@ grandfather Donnchadh I of Fife . He gave that house the rectorship of the church of St Cuthbert of Maybole sometime between 1189 and 1250 . In addition to Maybole , he gave the church of St Brigit at Kirkbride to the nuns , as well as a grant of 3 marks from a place called <unk> . Relations with the bishop of Glasgow , within whose diocese Carrick lay , are also attested . For instance , on 21 July 1225 , at Ayr in Kyle , Donnchadh made a promise of tithes to Walter , Bishop of Glasgow . 
 Donnchadh 's most important long @-@ term patronage was a series of gifts to the Cluniac Abbey of Paisley that led to the foundation of a monastery at Crossraguel ( Crois <unk> ) . At some date before 1227 he granted Crossraguel and a place called <unk> to Paisley , a grant confirmed by Pope Honorius III on 23 January 1227 . A royal confirmation by King Alexander III of Scotland dated to 25 August 1236 shows that Donnchadh granted the monastery the churches of Kirkoswald ( Turnberry ) , Straiton and <unk> ( Old Dailly ) . He may also have given the churches of Girvan and Kirkcudbright @-@ <unk> ( Ballantrae ) . 
 It is clear from several sources that Donnchadh made these grants on the condition that the Abbey of Paisley established a Cluniac house in Carrick , but that the Abbey did not fulfil this condition , arguing that it was not obliged to do so . The Bishop of Glasgow intervened in 1244 and determined that a house of Cluniac monks from Paisley should indeed be founded there , that the house should be exempt from the jurisdiction of Paisley save recognition of the common Cluniac Order , but that the Abbot of Paisley could visit the house annually . After the foundation Paisley was to hand over its Carrick properties to the newly established monastery . 
 A papal bull of 11 July 1265 reveals that Paisley Abbey built only a small oratory served by Paisley monks . Twenty years after the bishop 's ruling Paisley complained to the papacy , which led Pope Clement IV to issue two bulls , dated 11 June 1265 and 6 February 1266 , appointing <unk> to settle the dispute ; the results of their deliberations are unknown . Crossraguel was not finally founded until about two decades after Donnchadh 's death , probably by 1270 ; its first abbot , Abbot Patrick , is attested between 1274 and 1292 . 
 = = Anglo @-@ French world = = 
 In secular affairs one of the few important facts recorded about Donnchadh was his marriage to <unk> , daughter of Alan fitz Walter , lord of Strathgryfe and [ northern ] Kyle , and High Steward of Scotland . The marriage is known from Roger of Hoveden 's Chronica , which recorded that in 1200 Donnchadh : 
 Carried off ( <unk> ) <unk> , daughter of Alan fitz Walter , lord of Renfrew , before William king of Scotland returned from England to his own land . And hence that king was exceeding <unk> ; and he took from Alan fitz Walter twenty @-@ four pledges that he would preserve the peace with his and with his land , and take the law about his law . 
 The marriage bound Donnchadh closer to the Anglo @-@ French circles of the northern part of the region south of the Forth , while from Alan 's point of view it was part of a series of moves to expand his territory further into former Gall @-@ Gaidhil lands , moves that had included an alliance a few years earlier with another Firth of Clyde Gaelic prince , Raghnall mac Somhairle ( Rǫgnvaldr , son of <unk> or Somerled ) . 
 Charter evidence reveals two Anglo @-@ Normans present in Donnchadh 's territory . Some of Donnchadh 's charters to Melrose were subscribed by an Anglo @-@ Norman knight named Roger de Skelbrooke , who appears to have been Lord of <unk> . De Skelbrooke himself made grants to Melrose regarding the land of <unk> ( i.e. <unk> ) , grants confirmed by " his lord " Donnchadh . This knight gave Melrose fishing rights in the river Doon , rights confirmed by Donnchadh too and later by Roger 's son @-@ in @-@ law and successor Ruaidhri mac Gille @-@ <unk> ( <unk> mac <unk> ) . 
 The other known Anglo @-@ French knight was Thomas de Colville . Thomas ( nicknamed " the Scot " ) was the younger son of the lord of Castle <unk> , a significant landowner in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire Around 1190 he was constable of Dumfries , the royal castle which had been planted in <unk> by the Scottish king , probably overrun by the Gall @-@ Gaidhil in the revolt of 1174 before being restored afterwards . Evidence that he possessed land in the region under Donnchadh 's overlordship comes from the opening years of the 13th century when he made a grant of land around Dalmellington to the Cistercians of <unk> Abbey . Historians G. W. S. Barrow and Hector MacQueen both thought that Thomas ' nickname " the Scot " ( which then could mean " a Gael " as well as someone from north of the Forth ) , is a reflection of Thomas ' exposure to the culture of the south @-@ west during his career there . 
 It is not known how these two men acquired the patronage of Donnchadh or his family . Writing in 1980 the historian of Anglo @-@ Norman Scotland G. W. S. Barrow could find no cause for their presence in the area , and declared that they were " for the present impossible to account for " . As Richard Oram pointed out , in one of his charters Roger de Skelbrooke called Donnchadh 's father Gille @-@ Brighde " my lord " , indicating that Donnchadh probably inherited them in his territory . Neither of them left traceable offspring in the region , and even if they did represent for Carrick what could have been the embryonic stages of the kind of Normanisation that was taking place further east , the process was halted during Donnchadh 's period as ruler . <unk> Abbey transferred the land granted to it by Donnchadh to Melrose Abbey in 1223 , because it was " useless and dangerous to them , both on account of the absence of law and order , and by reason of the insidious attacks of a barbarous people " . 
 = = Ireland = = 
 The Anglo @-@ Norman John de Courcy , whose early life was probably spent just across the Irish Sea in Cumbria , invaded the <unk> ( eastern Ulster ) in 1177 with the aim of conquest . After defeating the region 's king <unk> Mac <unk> <unk> , de Courcy was able to take control of a large amount of territory , though not without encountering further resistance among the native Irish . Cumbria was only a short distance too from the lands of the Gall @-@ Gaidhil , and around 1180 John de Courcy married Donnchadh 's cousin <unk> <unk> Gofraidh , whose father Guðrøðr ( Gofraidh ) , King of the Isles , was son of Donnchadh 's aunt . Guðrøðr , who was thus Donnchadh 's cousin , had in turn married a daughter of the Meic Lochlainn ruler of Tir Eoghain , another Ulster principality . Marriage thus connected Donnchadh and the other Gall @-@ Gaidhil princes to several players in Ulster affairs . 
 The earliest information on Donnchadh 's and indeed Gall @-@ Gaidhil involvement in Ulster comes from Roger of Hoveden 's entry about the death of Jordan de Courcy , John 's brother . It related that in 1197 , after Jordan 's death , John sought vengeance and 
 Fought a battle with the petty @-@ kings of Ireland , of whom he put some to flight , slew others , and subjugated their territories ; of which he gave no small part to Donnchadh , son of Gille @-@ Brighde , the son of Fergus , who , at the time that the said John was about to engage with the Irish , came to assist him with no small body of troops . 
 No more light is shed upon Donnchadh 's involvement at this point . 
 Donnchadh 's interests in the area were damaged when de Courcy lost his territory in eastern Ulster to his rival Hugh de Lacy in 1203 . John de Courcy , with help from his wife 's brother King Rǫgnvaldr Guðrøðarson ( Raghnall mac Gofraidh ) and perhaps from Donnchadh , tried to regain his principality , but was initially unsuccessful . De Courcy 's fortunes were boosted when Hugh de Lacy ( then Earl of Ulster ) and his associate William III de Briouze , themselves fell foul of John ; the king campaigned in Ireland against them in 1210 , a campaign that forced de Briouze to return to Wales and de Lacy to flee to St Andrews in Scotland . 
 English records attest to Donnchadh 's continued involvement in Ireland . One document , after describing how William de Briouze became the king 's enemy in England and Ireland , records that after John arrived in Ireland in July 1210 : 
 [ William de Briouze 's ] wife [ Matilda ] fled to Scotland with William and Reinald her sons , and her private retinue , in the company of Hugh de Lacy , and when the king was at Carrickfergus castle , a certain friend and cousin of his of Galloway , namely Donnchadh of Carrick , reported to the king that he had taken her and her daughter the wife of Roger de Mortimer , and William junior , with his wife and two sons , but Hugh de Lacy and Reinald escaped . 
 The Histoire des <unk> de Normandie recorded that William and Matilda had voyaged to the Isle of Man , en route from Ireland to Galloway , where they were captured . Matilda was imprisoned by the king , and died of starvation . 
 Another document , this one preserved in an Irish memoranda roll dating to the reign of King Henry VI ( reigned 1422 – 1461 ) , records that after John 's Irish expedition of 1210 , Donnchadh controlled extensive territory in County Antrim , namely the settlements of Larne and Glenarm with 50 carucates of land in between , a territory similar to the later barony of Glenarm Upper . King John had given or recognised Donnchadh 's possession of this territory , and that of Donnchadh 's nephew Alaxandair ( Alexander ) , as a reward for his help ; similarly , John had given Donnchadh 's cousins Ailean and <unk> , sons of Lochlann , a huge lordship equivalent to 140 knight 's fees that included most of northern County Antrim and County Londonderry , the reward for use of their soldiers and galleys . 
 By 1219 however Donnchadh and his nephew appear to have lost all or most of his Irish land ; a document of that year related that the Justiciar of Ireland , Geoffrey de Marisco , had dispossessed ( " disseised " ) them believing they had conspired against the king in the rebellion of 1215 – 6 . The king , John 's successor Henry III , found that this was not true and ordered the Justiciar to restore Donnchadh and his nephew to their lands . By 1224 , Donnchadh had still not regained these lands and de Lacy 's adherents were gaining more ground in the region . King Henry III repeated his earlier but ineffective instructions : he ordered Henry de <unk> , Archbishop of Dublin and new Justiciar of Ireland , to restore to Donnchadh " the remaining part of the land given to him by King John in Ireland , unless anyone held it by his father 's own precept " . 
 Later in the same year Donnchadh wrote to King Henry . His letter was as follows : 
 [ Donnchadh ] Thanks him for the mandate which he directed by him to the Justiciar of Ireland , to restore his land there , of which he had been <unk> on account of the English war ; but as the land has not yet been restored , he asks the King to give by him a more effectual command to the Justiciar . 
 Henry 's response was a writ to his Justiciar : 
 King John granted to Donnchadh of Carrick , land in Ulster called <unk> [ probably <unk> , county Antrim ] . He says Hugh de Lacy <unk> him and gave it to another . The King commands the Earl to inquire who has it , and its tenure ; and if his right is insufficient , to give Donnchadh the land during the king 's pleasure . At Bedford . 
 It is unlikely that Donnchadh ever regained his territory ; after Hugh was formally restored to the Earldom of Ulster in 1227 , Donnchadh 's land was probably controlled by the Bisset family . Historian <unk> Duffy argues that the <unk> ( later known as the " <unk> of the Glens " ) helped Hugh de Lacy , and probably ended up with Donnchadh 's territory as a reward . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Donnchadh was said by the Martyrology of Glasgow to have died on 13 June 1250 . He was succeeded in the earldom by Niall . The traditional view , going back to the 19th century , is that Niall was Donnchadh 's son . This view has been undermined with more recent research by genealogist Andrew MacEwen , who has argued that Niall was not the son of Donnchadh , but rather his grandson , a view embraced by leading Scottish medievalist Professor G. W. S. Barrow . According to this argument , Donnchadh 's son and intended heir was Cailean mac <unk> ( alias Nicholaus ) , who as his son and heir , issued a charter in Donnchadh 's lifetime , but seemingly predeceased him . It was further suggested that Cailean 's wife , Earl Niall 's mother , was a daughter of the Tir Eoghain king Niall Ruadh Ó Neill , tying in with Donnchadh 's Irish activities , accounting for the use of the name Niall , and explaining the strong alliance with the Ó Neill held by Niall 's grandsons . 
 Another of Donnchadh 's sons , <unk> ( John ) , owned the land of Straiton . He was involved in the Galwegian revolt of Gille @-@ Ruadh in 1235 , during which he attacked some churches in the diocese of Glasgow . He received a pardon by granting patronage of the church of Straiton and the land of <unk> to William de Bondington , Bishop of Glasgow , which was confirmed by Alexander II in 1244 . Two other sons , Ailean ( Alan ) and Alaxandair ( Alexander ) , are attested subscribing to Donnchadh and Cailean 's charters to North Berwick . A Melrose charter mentions that Ailean was parson of <unk> . Cailean , and presumably Donnchadh 's other legitimate sons , died before their father . 
 Donnchadh 's probable grandson , Niall , was earl for only six years and died leaving no son but four daughters , one of whom is known by name . The last , presumably the eldest , was his successor Marjory , who married in turn Adam of <unk> ( died 1271 ) , a member of the Mac <unk> family of Fife , and Robert VI de Brus , Lord of Annandale . Marjorie 's son Robert VII de Brus , through military success and ancestral kinship with the Dunkeld dynasty , became King of the Scots as Robert I. King Robert 's brother , Edward Bruce , became if only for a short time and only in name , High King of Ireland . 
 Under the Bruces and their successors to the Scottish throne the title Earl of Carrick became a prestigious honorific title usually given to a son of the king or intended heir ; at some time between 1250 and 1256 Earl Niall , anticipating that the earldom would be taken over by a man from another family , issued a charter to Lochlann ( Roland ) of Carrick , a son or grandson of one of Donnchadh 's brothers . The charter granted Lochlann the title Cenn <unk> , " head of the kindred " , a position which brought the right to lead the men of Carrick in war . The charter also conferred possession of the office of <unk> of Carrick under whoever was earl . Precedent had been established here by other native families of Scotland , something similar having already taken place in Fife ; it was a way of ensuring that the kin @-@ group retained strong locally based male leadership even when the newly imposed common law of Scotland forced the comital title to pass into the hands of another family . By 1372 the office had passed — probably by marriage — to the Kennedy family of Dunure . 
 The 17th @-@ century genealogical compilation known as Ane <unk> of the <unk> of the Campbells by Robert Duncanson , minister of Campbeltown , claimed that " <unk> " ( i.e. <unk> or <unk> ) , wife of <unk> of <unk> ( fl . 1263 – 6 ) and mother of Campbell progenitor Cailean Mór , was the daughter of one Cailean ( anglicised Colin ) , " Lord of Carrick " . Partly because Ane <unk> is a credible witness to much earlier material , the claim is thought probable . Thus Donnchadh was likely the great @-@ grandfather of Cailean Mór , a lineage that explains the popularity of the names Donnchadh ( Duncan ) and Cailean ( Colin ) among later Campbells , as well as their close alliance to King Robert I during the Scottish Wars of Independence . 
 = Steve Bruce = 
 Stephen Roger " Steve " Bruce ( born 31 December 1960 ) is an English professional football manager and former player who is currently without a club , having left Hull City in July 2016 . Born in Corbridge , Northumberland , he was a promising schoolboy footballer but was rejected by several professional clubs . He was on the verge of quitting the game altogether when he was offered a trial with Gillingham . Bruce was offered an apprenticeship and went on to play more than 200 games for the club before joining Norwich City in 1984 , winning the Football League Cup in 1985 . 
 In 1987 , he moved to Manchester United , with whom he achieved great success , winning the Premier League , FA Cup , Football League Cup and European Cup Winners ' Cup . He also became the first English player of the 20th century to captain a team to the Double . Despite his success on the field , he was never selected to play for the England national team . Commentators and contemporaries have described him as one of the best English players of the 1980s and 1990s never to play for his country at full international level . 
 Bruce began his managerial career with Sheffield United , and spent short periods of time managing Huddersfield Town , Wigan Athletic and Crystal Palace before joining Birmingham City in 2001 . He twice led Birmingham to promotion to the Premier League during his tenure of nearly six years , but resigned in 2007 to begin a second spell as manager of Wigan . At the end of the 2008 – 09 season he resigned to take over as manager of Sunderland , a post he held until he was dismissed in November 2011 . Seven months later , he was appointed manager of Hull City , and has since led the club to two promotions to the Premier League , as well as the 2014 FA Cup Final . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Bruce was born in Corbridge in Northumberland , the elder of two sons of Joe and <unk> Bruce . His father was local , and his mother had been born in Bangor in Northern Ireland . The family lived in Daisy Hill near Wallsend , and Bruce attended Benfield School . 
 Bruce , a boyhood fan of Newcastle United , claims to have sneaked into St James ' Park without paying to watch the team play , saying " I have always been a Newcastle lad and when I was a kid , I crawled under the turnstiles to get in to try and save a bob or whatever it was . They were my team , I went to support them as a boy and being a Geordie it 's in @-@ bred , you follow the club still the same today . " Like several other future professionals from the area , he played football for Wallsend Boys Club . He was also selected for the Newcastle Schools representative team , and at the age of 13 was among a group of players from the team selected to serve as ball boys at the 1974 Football League Cup Final at Wembley Stadium . 
 Having been turned down by several professional clubs , including Newcastle United , Sunderland , Derby County and Southport , Bruce was about to start work as an apprentice plumber at the Swan Hunter dockyard when he was offered a trial by Third Division club Gillingham , whose manager Gerry Summers had seen him playing for Wallsend in an international youth tournament . He travelled down to Kent with another player from the Wallsend club , Peter Beardsley , but although Gillingham signed Bruce as an apprentice , they turned Beardsley away . At the time Bruce was playing as a midfielder , but he was switched to the centre of defence by the head of Gillingham 's youth scheme , Bill Collins , whom Bruce cites as the single biggest influence on his career . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Gillingham = = = 
 Bruce spent the 1978 – 79 season in Gillingham 's reserve team and , despite playing in defence , scored 18 goals to finish the season as top scorer . In January 1979 , he was selected to represent the England Youth team , and he went on to gain eight caps , participating in the 1980 UEFA European Under @-@ 18 Championship . He came close to making his debut for the club 's senior team in May 1979 , but Summers decided at the last minute that , as Gillingham were chasing promotion from the Third Division , Bruce was not yet ready to handle the pressure of the occasion . He eventually made his senior debut in a Football League Cup tie against Luton Town on 11 August 1979 , and made an immediate impact in the team , winning the club 's Player of the Year award at the end of the 1979 – 80 season . He went on to make more than 200 appearances for the club , and was twice voted into the Professional Footballers ' Association 's Third Division Team of the Year . 
 Confident that he was being targeted by clubs from higher divisions , Bruce resolved not to sign a new contract with Gillingham when his existing deal expired at the end of the 1983 – 84 season . In an April 1983 match against Newport County , he attempted , in a moment of anger , to deliberately injure opposition player Tommy Tynan , but connected awkwardly and succeeded only in breaking his own leg , leaving him unable to play again for six months . He returned in time to play a key role in Gillingham achieving two draws against Everton in the FA Cup in 1984 , attracting the attention once again of scouts from First Division clubs . Arthur Cox , manager of Bruce 's beloved Newcastle United , expressed an interest in signing the player , but resigned from his job before any further action could be taken . Bruce eventually opted to sign for Norwich City in August 1984 for a fee variously reported as £ 125 @,@ 000 or £ 135 @,@ 000 . In 2009 he was voted into Gillingham 's Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Norwich City = = = 
 Bruce began the 1984 – 85 season by scoring an own goal in the first minute of his debut for Norwich against Liverpool , but went on to score the team 's winning goal in the semi @-@ final of the Football League Cup against local rivals Ipswich Town , and was named man of the match in Norwich 's victory in the final . Bruce was voted Norwich City Player of the Year , but the team was relegated to the Second Division . Bruce played in every match as Norwich won promotion back to the top division at the first time of asking in the 1985 – 86 season , after which he was chosen to replace the departing Dave Watson as club captain . The following season he helped the club to its highest ever league finish of fifth position . 
 In 1987 , he was chosen to captain the England B team in a match against the full national team of Malta , but it was to be his only appearance in an England shirt , and he has subsequently been described as one of the best defenders of his era never to be selected for the full England team . Bruce later stated , " I bumped into former England manager Bobby Robson in Benfica ( sic ) . He came up to me and said ' I should have capped you ' . It was nice to hear but it still didn 't get me one .... I 'll always be a little disappointed I didn 't get one . " 
 Bruce began to attract the attention of big @-@ name clubs in late 1987 , with Manchester United , Tottenham Hotspur , Chelsea and Rangers all reported to be interested in signing him . Manchester United quickly emerged as the front runners for his signature , and Bruce publicly expressed his desire to sign for the club . The deal came close to collapsing when Norwich asked for a transfer fee of £ 900 @,@ 000 after initially agreeing to accept £ 800 @,@ 000 , leading to Bruce refusing to play any further matches for the club , which he felt was jeopardising his dream move . On 17 December 1987 , shortly before his 27th birthday , the deal was concluded and Bruce officially left Carrow Road , for a fee reported as £ 800 @,@ 000 or £ 825 @,@ 000 . Norwich fans remembered his contribution , and in 2002 voted him into the Norwich City Hall of Fame . 
 = = = Manchester United = = = 
 Bruce made his Manchester United debut in a 2 – 1 win over Portsmouth on 19 December 1987 , and played in 21 of United 's remaining 22 league fixtures , helping the club to a top two place in the First Division for the first time since 1980 . The team only finished in mid @-@ table in the following season , prompting manager Alex Ferguson to bring in several new players , including Gary Pallister , who joined the club in August 1989 from Middlesbrough . His partnership with Bruce in the centre of defence was described in 2006 by the then @-@ United captain , Gary Neville , as the best in the club 's history . " Dolly and Daisy " , as the pair were affectionately known , are described as " arguably the best " on the official Manchester United website . Bruce and Pallister were part of the team that won the 1990 FA Cup final against Crystal Palace in a replay . 
 Following the lifting of the five @-@ year ban on English clubs from European competitions , which had been imposed after the Heysel Stadium disaster , United became England 's first entrants into the UEFA Cup Winners ' Cup in the 1990 – 91 season . Bruce played regularly , and scored three goals , in the team 's progress to the final against FC Barcelona . He came close to scoring the first goal , only for Mark Hughes to deflect the ball over the line and claim the goal , and United went on to win the game 2 – 1 . This was a particularly high @-@ scoring season for Bruce , who found the net 13 times in the First Division and 19 times in total in all competitions . He also played again at Wembley , in the Football League Cup final , in which United were defeated by Sheffield Wednesday of the Second Division . 
 Bruce missed several weeks of the 1991 – 92 season when he underwent an operation on a longstanding hernia problem , in which Leeds United , after a season @-@ long tussle , beat Manchester United to the championship by four points . Bruce helped United win their first @-@ ever League Cup in April 1992 , captaining the team in the final in place of the injured Bryan Robson . Injuries continued to take their toll upon Robson during the 1992 – 93 season , leading to Bruce captaining the team in the majority of United 's matches during the first season of the new Premier League . Bruce scored two late goals in a win over Sheffield Wednesday which proved decisive in United winning the inaugural Premier League title , the first time the club had won the championship of English football since 1967 , and he and Robson received the trophy jointly after the home victory over Blackburn Rovers on 3 May . 
 At the height of his success with United , Bruce was contacted by Jack Charlton , manager of the Republic of Ireland national team , who had discovered that , due to his mother 's place of birth , Bruce was eligible to play for Ireland . Bruce states in his autobiography that further investigation revealed that , while his earlier appearance for England B in a friendly match was not an issue , his appearances for the England Youth team in a UEFA @-@ sanctioned tournament prohibited him from playing for the senior team of another country . He has subsequently claimed that he chose not to play for Ireland as it would have caused problems for his club at a time when the Premier League restricted the number of foreign players that a club could include in its team . 
 United dominated English football in the 1993 – 94 season , winning a second consecutive Premier League title and then defeating Chelsea in the FA Cup final to become only the fourth team , and Bruce the first English captain , to win The Double in the 20th century , The 1994 – 95 season was a disappointing one for Bruce and United , as the club failed in its bid to win a third consecutive Premier League title and lost to Everton in the FA Cup final . 
 During the following season Bruce was offered the job of manager by three different clubs , but Ferguson refused to allow him to pursue the opportunities as he felt the player still had a role to play in the United team . Bruce made a further 30 Premier League appearances , as United managed to overcome a 12 @-@ point deficit to Newcastle United to win the championship once again . A week later he was left out of United 's squad for the FA Cup final due to a slight injury . At the end of the match Eric Cantona , who had captained the team and scored the only goal in a 1 – 0 win over Liverpool , attempted to persuade Bruce to be the one to receive the trophy , but Bruce declined . Ferguson denied that Bruce 's omission was a sign that his time at the club was nearing an end , but Bruce , then 35 years old , believed that he would be unlikely to be selected for the team during the year remaining on his contract . He opted instead to join First Division club Birmingham City on a free transfer , having signed a contract valued at nearly £ 2 million over two years , which made him one of the highest @-@ paid players in the country . 
 = = = Later playing career = = = 
 Bruce was among five former Premier League players signed by Birmingham manager Trevor Francis to add experience to a squad expected to challenge for promotion . He was made captain of the team , but his Birmingham career was dogged by a series of disagreements with Francis . Director David Sullivan felt the need to publicly deny rumours that Bruce was lined up to replace Francis as manager after the club 's stock market flotation . While playing for Birmingham , Bruce was the subject of several bids from his old Manchester United colleague Bryan Robson to sign for Middlesbrough , but the transfer never happened . 
 The 1997 – 98 season saw Bruce dropped for the first time in his career , for a match against former club Gillingham , and he described himself as " hurt and unhappy " at being left out . By November 1997 he was being left out more frequently , and his omission against Nottingham Forest provoked a public war of words , which fuelled rumours that the manager was to be dismissed and that Bruce would take over as caretaker until the end of the season . At the end of the season he accepted the post of player @-@ manager of Sheffield United . Though the deal was delayed while Birmingham attempted to negotiate a transfer fee for his playing contract , he took up his new position on 2 July 1998 . He played 11 matches for the club before retiring as a player , his final appearance being in a home match against Sunderland on 28 November 1998 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 During the early part of his career , Bruce 's sometimes over @-@ enthusiastic playing style , which he later described as " rampaging " , caused him disciplinary problems . He later developed into a solid and dependable all @-@ round player , characterised as " an honest trier who made the absolute most of limited natural ability " . In his prime , he was particularly noted for his calm and deliberate passing of the ball , and his ability to control it under pressure , often with his chest . At the time , Mark Wright of Liverpool was said to be the only other centre @-@ back able to match Bruce 's level of skill in these areas . 
 Bruce was also known for his unusually high goalscoring rate for a centre @-@ back , resulting from a combination of his ability to powerfully head the ball and his effectiveness in taking penalty kicks . Although lacking poise and grace , and often criticised for his lack of pace , his bravery and willingness to take knocks from opposition players made him the " heart " of the defence during his time with Manchester United . He was well known for continuing to play even when injured , including returning to the United team at short notice in 1992 even though he was awaiting an operation on a hernia . His indomitable spirit and motivational abilities were deemed vital to the United team , and Alex Ferguson has commented on his " determination and heart " . 
 = = Playing statistics = = 
 = = Managerial career = = 
 = = = Early managerial career = = = 
 In his first season as a manager , Bruce guided Sheffield United to eighth place in the First Division , nine points away from a place in the play @-@ offs . He also caused controversy when he attempted to take his team off the pitch during an FA Cup match against Arsenal . Bruce felt that the " Gunners " had broken an unwritten rule of sportsmanship by failing to return the ball to United , who had intentionally kicked it out of play to allow an injured player to be attended to . Although the game eventually continued to a finish , it was later declared void and replayed . In May 1999 , Bruce resigned from his post after just one season in charge , citing turmoil in the club 's boardroom and a shortage of funds for transfers . He contemplated leaving football for a job in television but was persuaded by Huddersfield Town owner Barry Rubery to become the club 's manager . 
 Huddersfield were early promotion contenders in the 1999 – 2000 season , winning six consecutive matches to rise to third place in the First Division table by late November , but lost form and failed to reach the play @-@ offs . The team continued to struggle at the start of the 2000 – 01 season , gaining just six points from 11 matches , and Bruce was sacked in October 2000 . He then became involved in a dispute with Rubery , who accused him of " wasting " £ 3m on players and having " an ego to feed " . Although he was linked with the manager 's job at Queens Park Rangers , Bruce remained out of the game until he was appointed manager of Wigan Athletic in April 2001 . The team reached the Second Division play @-@ offs but lost in the semi @-@ finals , and Bruce almost immediately left the club , where he had been in charge for less than two months , to take over as manager of Crystal Palace . 
 Although his new club began the 2001 – 02 season strongly , topping the First Division table and looking well placed for regaining the Premier League place that the club had last held in the 1997 – 98 season , Bruce tendered his resignation less than three months into the season in order to return to Birmingham City as manager . Although he was initially prevented from doing so by an injunction taken out by Crystal Palace , he was eventually allowed to join the Midlands @-@ based club after a compensation package was agreed . By now he had acquired a reputation as a manager who rarely held down a job for a significant length of time . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 Upon his arrival , the Blues were in a mid @-@ table position in the First Division , but a lengthy unbeaten run saw the team qualify for the play @-@ offs . The team went on to beat Bruce 's former club Norwich City in the final after a penalty shoot @-@ out to gain promotion to the Premier League , ending a 16 @-@ year absence from the top level of English football . Birmingham spent the early part of the 2002 – 03 season struggling near the foot of the Premier League table , but Bruce 's signing of Christophe Dugarry revitalised the team , who ended the season in 13th place and finished higher than local rivals Aston Villa for the first time since the 1970s . 
 The following season began well for Birmingham , who climbed as high as fourth in the table , but the team 's fortunes declined and they could only finish in tenth place at the end of the season . Despite this disappointment , Bruce signed a new contract in June 2004 designed to keep him at St Andrew 's for a further five years , but just two months later Freddy Shepherd , chairman of Newcastle United , was reported to have made Bruce his main target in the search for a new manager to replace Bobby Robson . The club was reportedly prepared to pay Birmingham more than £ 3 million in compensation , and Bruce himself was said to be keen to take over at St James ' Park , but he ultimately remained at Birmingham . He stated that " as far as I 'm concerned , I 've got a job to do [ at Birmingham City ] and I 'm determined to get on with it " , but it was also reported that Newcastle would have been required to pay a much larger compensation fee or face legal action had he been persuaded to switch clubs . Three years later Birmingham director | David Sullivan publicly stated that the club had " priced Steve out of a move to Newcastle " and gave the level of compensation which would have been involved as £ 7 million . Initial expectations were high for the 2004 – 05 season , but the club once again finished in a mid @-@ table position , ending the season in 12th place . 
 Following the sacking of Graeme Souness as Newcastle manager in February 2006 , Bruce was again linked with the job , which ultimately went to Glenn Roeder . By this stage of the 2005 – 06 season , Birmingham were struggling in the league , and on 21 March 2006 were beaten 7 – 0 at home by Liverpool in the FA Cup quarter @-@ finals . Some supporters of the club began to call for his resignation , but Bruce insisted that he would fight on as manager . The team managed to climb out of the relegation zone for the first time in nearly six months after a win over Bolton Wanderers in early April 2006 . However , they were soon overtaken by Portsmouth , whose victory over Wigan Athletic on 29 April left Birmingham mathematically unable to match their points total and therefore relegated . 
 Although Bruce had the largest transfer budget in the division made available to him , Birmingham made a slow start to the 2006 – 07 season in the Championship and , after a 1 – 0 defeat at home to Norwich City , the team 's fifth consecutive match without a win , there were calls from fans and local journalists for the manager to be sacked . Bruce publicly accepted responsibility for the team 's poor run and admitted that he feared for his job , but the team responded with a 1 – 0 victory over Derby County , and then recorded a further five consecutive league victories to be joint leaders of the league table by late November . On 29 April 2007 , Birmingham secured promotion to the Premier League , with one match to play , by virtue of Derby County 's 2 – 0 defeat at Crystal Palace . Chairman David Gold told the press " There have been some dark days but Steve has been outstanding . He was determined to bounce back . He has rebuilt the team and now we are all back where we want to be . " 
 = = = Wigan Athletic = = = 
 In May 2007 , Birmingham 's board agreed a new contract for Bruce , but the unwillingness of the club 's prospective purchaser Carson Yeung to ratify it left his future uncertain . In October 2007 , Bolton Wanderers were refused permission to speak to him about their managerial vacancy . Later that month , Bruce and Yeung held a meeting which reportedly had positive results . Bruce later claimed that Birmingham 's managing director Karren Brady had " shafted " him on a new contract with the club , and when Wigan Athletic requested permission to speak to Bruce about their managerial vacancy , he was receptive to their approach . As required under the terms of his contract , Wigan agreed to pay Birmingham a then @-@ world record compensation for the loss of his services of around £ 3m , and they were then allowed to speak to him . On 19 November , Wigan announced the signing of Bruce for a second time . 
 On 21 November , during a press conference which was intended to formally present Bruce as the new manager of Wigan , the club 's chief executive Brenda Spencer informed the media that the deal had been put on hold by " unknown issues " between Bruce and Birmingham City , reported to centre on the advance payment of the image rights element of Bruce 's contract at St Andrew 's . On 23 November 2007 Wigan announced that Bruce had now signed his contract and would officially rejoin the Latics . His first game in charge was a 1 – 1 home draw with Manchester City on 1 December 2007 . Wigan spent the remainder of the season struggling against relegation , but the club secured Premier League survival with victory over Aston Villa in the penultimate game of the season . In September 2008 , Bruce was once again linked with the manager 's job at Newcastle United following the departure of Kevin Keegan . 
 Bruce led Wigan to an 11th @-@ place finish in the 2008 – 09 season , despite the loss of midfielder Wilson Palacios to Tottenham Hotspur in the January transfer window . 
 = = = Sunderland = = = 
 On 27 May 2009 , Bruce was reported to have been given permission to talk to Sunderland about succeeding Ricky Sbragia , who resigned as manager after the last match of the season . Bruce was confirmed as the new manager of Sunderland on 3 June after signing a three @-@ year contract . He was joined at Sunderland by three of his former Wigan Athletic coaching staff , assistant Eric Black , goalkeeping coach Nigel Spink , and reserve team coach Keith <unk> . In his first season at Sunderland , despite a run of 14 games without a win , Bruce led the Black Cats to a 13th @-@ place finish in the Premier League . 
 Bruce made wholesale changes to Sunderland 's squad , signing 13 players and selling 15 in his first 18 months at the club . On 25 February 2011 , Bruce signed an extension to his contract , keeping him at Sunderland until 2014 , with chairman Niall Quinn stating that " In only 18 months he has reshaped our squad beyond recognition , bringing in some fantastically talented players . He embodies the ethos of teamwork and the importance of camaraderie in creating a wonderful spirit of togetherness amongst the players and staff " . 
 Bruce was dismissed as manager on 30 November 2011 , with Sunderland in 16th position following a poor run of form which culminated with a 2 – 1 home defeat to bottom club Wigan four days earlier . He later linked his dismissal from the managerial post with the fact that he is a fan of Newcastle United , Sunderland 's bitter rivals . 
 = = = Hull City = = = 
 On 8 June 2012 , Bruce was appointed as manager at Championship side Hull City on a three @-@ year contract . In his first season with the club , he led them to promotion to the Premier League , clinching second place in the Championship on the final day of the season . The following season , the " Tigers " came 16th with a club record tally of 37 points , and reached the final of the FA Cup for the first time . They took a two @-@ goal lead in the first ten minutes of the final , but opponents Arsenal scored a goal in each half to take the game into extra @-@ time and then scored a third to win the trophy . Reaching the final qualified Hull for the 2014 – 15 UEFA Europa League , their first European campaign . 
 In March 2015 , Bruce signed a three @-@ year contract extension . A run of poor form left Hull near the bottom of the table going into the final game of the 2014 – 15 season and needing to defeat Bruce 's former club Manchester United to stand any chance of avoiding relegation . They could only manage a 0 – 0 draw and were relegated to the Championship . The poor performances of a numbers of players signed by Bruce , including club record signing Abel Hernández , were identified as key factors in the club 's failure to remain in the Premier League . 
 In January 2016 , Bruce won the Football League Championship Manager of the Month after leading Hull to four victories ; Hernández , who scored six times , got the players ' equivalent . Hull finished the season in fourth , qualifying for the play @-@ offs , where they defeated Derby County in the semi @-@ finals . In the final on 28 May , a 25 @-@ yard goal from Mohamed Diamé against Sheffield Wednesday won Hull promotion to the Premier League for the second time during Bruce 's spell in charge . Bruce said after the game that he had considered resignation following the team 's relegation , and would hold talks with the prospective new owners to be assured of his future . In July 2016 , with his future at Hull seemingly still uncertain , he was interviewed by officials of The Football Association concerning the vacant position of manager of England . Three days later , Bruce met with Hull City officials and announced his resignation later that day amid claims he became frustrated by a lack of transfer activity at the club . 
 = = Managerial statistics = = 
 As of match played 28 May 2016 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Playing = = = 
 = = = = Club = = = = 
 Norwich City 
 Football League Cup 
 Winner : 1985 
 Football League Second Division 
 Champion : 1985 – 86 
 Manchester United 
 Premier League 
 Champion : 1992 – 93 , 1993 – 94 , 1995 – 96 
 FA Cup 
 Winner : 1990 , 1994 , 1996 
 Runner @-@ up : 1995 
 Football League Cup 
 Winner : 1992 
 Runner @-@ up : 1991 , 1994 
 Charity Shield : 
 Winner : 1990 ( shared ) , 1993 , 1994 
 European Cup Winners ' Cup 
 Winner : 1991 
 European Super Cup 
 Winner : 1991 
 = = = = Individual = = = = 
 Premier League 10 Seasons Awards Domestic Team of the Decade 
 = = = Manager = = = 
 = = = = Club = = = = 
 Birmingham City 
 Football League Championship 
 Runner @-@ up : 2006 – 07 ( promoted to the Premier League ) 
 Play @-@ off winner : 2002 ( promoted to the Premier League ) 
 Hull City 
 FA Cup 
 Runner @-@ up : 2013 – 14 
 Football League Championship 
 Runner @-@ up : 2012 – 13 ( promoted to the Premier League ) 
 Play @-@ offs 2016 ( promoted to the Premier League ) 
 = = = = Individual = = = = 
 Hull City 
 Football League Championship Manager of the Month : December 2012 , January 2016 
 = = Life outside football = = 
 = = = Personal life = = = 
 Bruce has been married since February 1983 to Janet ( née Smith ) , who is also from the Hexham area , and went to the same school as Bruce . The couple have two children , Alex ( born 1984 ) and Amy ( born 1987 ) . Alex is also a footballer , and was signed by his father for Hull City in July 2012 . He had previously played under his father 's management at Birmingham City , but left the club in 2006 , in part due to accusations of nepotism levelled at his father . Amy was linked romantically with Aston Villa player Lee Hendrie in tabloid newspaper stories in 2004 , which provoked an angry response from her father , who described the reports as " lies " , and claimed that journalists had gone so far as to contact his doctor and examine his household waste in an attempt to uncover gossip . In September 2004 , Bruce was involved in an altercation outside his home with two men who were attempting to steal his daughter 's car . The affray left him with facial injuries but did not prevent him from travelling to a Premier League match the same day . After the incident one newspaper attempted to connect it with the allegations concerning Hendrie , leading Bruce to contemplate legal action . 
 = = = Other activities = = = 
 In addition to an autobiography , Heading for Victory , Bruce has published three novels , Sweeper ! , Defender ! and Striker ! , featuring the exploits of fictional footballer manager Steve Barnes . Sweeper ! , released in 1999 , was described by a critic for The Independent as " surprisingly punchy and pacey , although the plot is essentially ludicrous " . 
 = The Joshua Tree = 
 The Joshua Tree is the fifth studio album by Irish rock band U2 . It was produced by Daniel Lanois and Brian Eno , and was released on 9 March 1987 on Island Records . In contrast to the ambient experimentation of their 1984 release The Unforgettable Fire , the band aimed for a harder @-@ hitting sound within the limitation of conventional song structures on The Joshua Tree . The album is influenced by American and Irish roots music , and depicts the band 's love – hate relationship with the United States , using socially and politically conscious lyrics embellished with spiritual imagery . 
 Inspired by American tour experiences , literature , and politics , U2 chose America as a theme for the record . Recording began in January 1986 in Ireland , and to foster a relaxed , creative atmosphere , the group recorded in two houses , in addition to two professional studios . Several events during the sessions helped shape the conscious tone of the album , including the band 's participation in A Conspiracy of Hope tour , the death of roadie Greg Carroll , and lead vocalist Bono 's travels to Central America . Recording was completed in November 1986 ; additional production continued into January 1987 . Throughout the sessions , U2 sought a " cinematic " quality for the record , one that would evoke a sense of location , in particular , the open spaces of America . They represented this in the sleeve photography depicting them in American desert landscapes . 
 The Joshua Tree received critical acclaim , topped the charts in over 20 countries , and sold in record @-@ breaking numbers in the UK . According to Rolling Stone , the album increased the band 's stature " from heroes to superstars " . It produced the hit singles " With or Without You " , " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " , and " Where the Streets Have No Name " , the first two of which became the group 's only number @-@ one singles in the US . The album won Grammy Awards for Album of the Year and Best Rock Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal in 1988 . The group supported the record with the Joshua Tree Tour throughout 1987 . Frequently featured on critics ' lists of the greatest records , The Joshua Tree is one of the world 's best @-@ selling albums , with over 25 million copies sold . U2 released a remastered edition of the record in 2007 to commemorate its 20th anniversary . In 2014 , it was deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " by the US Library of Congress and selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry . 
 = = Background = = 
 Before The Joshua Tree , U2 had released four studio albums and were an internationally successful band , particularly as a live act having toured every year in the 1980s . The group 's stature and the public 's anticipation for a new album grew following their 1984 record The Unforgettable Fire , their subsequent tour , and their participation in Live Aid in 1985 . U2 began writing new material in mid @-@ 1985 following the Unforgettable Fire Tour . 
 Band manager Paul McGuinness recounted that The Joshua Tree originated from the band 's " great romance " with the United States , as the group had toured the country for up to five months per year in the first half of the 1980s . Leading up to the album sessions , lead vocalist Bono had been reading the works of American writers such as Norman Mailer , Flannery O 'Connor , and Raymond Carver so as to understand , in the words of Hot Press editor Niall Stokes , " those on the fringes of the promised land , cut off from the American dream " . Following a 1985 humanitarian visit to Ethiopia with his wife Ali , Bono said , " Spending time in Africa and seeing people in the pits of poverty , I still saw a very strong spirit in the people , a richness of spirit I didn 't see when I came home ... I saw the spoiled child of the Western world . I started thinking , ' They may have a physical desert , but we 've got other kinds of deserts . ' And that 's what attracted me to the desert as a symbol of some sort . " 
 In 1985 , Bono participated in Steven Van Zandt 's anti @-@ apartheid Sun City project and spent time with musicians Keith Richards and Mick Jagger . When Richards and Jagger played blues , Bono was embarrassed by his lack of familiarity with the genre , as most of U2 's musical knowledge began with punk rock in their youth in the mid @-@ 1970s . Bono realised that U2 " had no tradition " , and he felt as if they " were from outer space " . This inspired him to write the blues @-@ influenced song " Silver and Gold " , which he recorded with Richards and Ronnie Wood . Until that time , U2 had been apathetic towards roots music , but after spending time with The Waterboys and fellow Irish band Hothouse Flowers , they felt a sense of indigenous Irish music blending with American folk music . Nascent friendships with Bob Dylan , Van Morrison and Richards encouraged U2 to look back to rock 's roots and focused Bono on his skills as a songwriter and lyricist . He explained , " I used to think that writing words was old @-@ fashioned , so I sketched . I wrote words on the microphone . For The Joshua Tree , I felt the time had come to write words that meant something , out of my experience . " Dylan told Bono of his own debt to Irish music , while Bono further demonstrated his interest in music traditions in his duet with Irish Celtic and folk group Clannad on the track " In a Lifetime " . 
 The band wanted to build on the textures of The Unforgettable Fire , but in contrast to that record 's often out @-@ of @-@ focus experimentation , they sought a harder @-@ hitting sound within the limitations of conventional song structures . The group referred to this approach as working within the " primary colours " of rock music — guitar , bass , and drums . Guitarist The Edge was more interested in the European atmospherics of The Unforgettable Fire and was initially reluctant to follow the lead of Bono , who , inspired by Dylan 's instruction to " go back " , sought a more American , bluesy sound . Despite not having a consensus on musical direction , the group members agreed that they felt disconnected from the dominant synthpop and new wave music of the time , and they wanted to continue making music that contrasted with these genres . In late 1985 , U2 moved into drummer Larry Mullen , Jr . ' s newly purchased home to work on material written during The Unforgettable Fire Tour . This included demos that would evolve into " With or Without You " , " Red Hill Mining Town " , " Trip Through Your Wires " , and a song called " <unk> " . The Edge recalled it as a difficult period with a sense of " going nowhere " , although Bono was set on America as a theme for the album . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Based on their success with producers Brian Eno and Daniel Lanois on The Unforgettable Fire , U2 wanted the duo to produce their new album . Mullen was excited about working with them again , as he felt the pair , Lanois in particular , were the band 's first producers who " really [ took ] an interest in the rhythm section " . Mark " Flood " Ellis was engineer for the sessions , marking the first time he worked with U2 . The band were impressed by his work with Nick Cave , and Bono 's friend Gavin Friday recommended Flood based on their work experiences together when Friday was a member of the Virgin Prunes . The band asked Flood for a sound that was " very open ... ambient ... with a real sense of space of the environment you were in " , which he thought was a very unusual request at that time . 
 Intending to release an album in late 1986 , U2 set up a studio in January of that year in Danesmoate House , a Georgian house in Rathfarnham in the foothills of the Wicklow Mountains . Their plan was to find inspiration from the recording space and use it to musically create atmosphere , much like they did with Slane Castle for The Unforgettable Fire sessions in 1984 . A makeshift control room with tape machines , a mixing desk , and other outboard equipment was set up in the dining room , with the adjacent drawing room used for recording and performing . The large doors separating the rooms were replaced with a glass screen , and to maintain a relaxed " non @-@ studio " atmosphere for the sessions , the control room was dubbed the " lyric room " and the recording space was called the " band room " . The band found the house to have a very creative atmosphere . The large drawing room , with a tall ceiling and wooden floors , created an " ear @-@ splitting " drum sound that , while difficult to work with , produced takes that ended up on the finished album . Lanois said that it " was loud , but it was really good loud , real dense , very musical . In my opinion it was the most rock and roll room of the lot . " He thought the room sounded better than Slane Castle , and he was particularly impressed with the room 's " low mid @-@ range ... where the music lives " , a property that he believes was a major factor in the success of The Joshua Tree . 
 U2 began with their usual method of sorting through tapes from soundcheck jams , working through Bono 's lyric book , and recording jam sessions . One aspect of their recording methods changed after The Unforgettable Fire sessions ; rather than recording each instrument separately and layering them into the mix , U2 recorded all but two of The Joshua Tree 's songs " live " . U2 's songwriting methods were also developing ; not all material was being worked out in band sessions , rather Bono and The Edge often brought basic song ideas to the rest of the group . Eno and Lanois intentionally worked with the band at alternate times — one producer for a week or two , followed by the other . Eno and Lanois encouraged an interest in older songs , especially American roots music . More contemporary references included the textural guitar work of The Smiths and My Bloody Valentine . The band 's musical vocabulary improved after their previous album , facilitating communication and collaboration with the production team . One of the first songs worked on was " Heartland " , which originated during The Unforgettable Fire sessions and was later released on the band 's 1988 album Rattle and Hum . Supplementary recording sessions at STS Studios in Dublin with producer Paul Barrett saw the development of " With or Without You " and the genesis of " Bullet the Blue Sky " . The arrangements for " With or Without You " and " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " were completed early in the Danesmoate sessions , giving the band the confidence to experiment . 
 U2 interrupted the sessions to join Amnesty International 's A Conspiracy of Hope tour of benefit concerts in June 1986 . Rather than distract the band , the tour added extra intensity and power to their new music and provided extra focus on what they wanted to say . For bassist Adam Clayton , the tour validated the " rawness of content " and their attempts to capture the " bleakness and greed of America under Ronald Reagan " . In July , Bono travelled with his wife Ali to Nicaragua and El Salvador and saw firsthand the distress of peasants bullied by political conflicts and US military intervention , experiences which formed the basis of the lyrics for " Bullet the Blue Sky " and " Mothers of the Disappeared " . The group experienced a tragedy later that month when Bono 's personal assistant and roadie Greg Carroll was killed in a motorcycle accident in Dublin . The 26 @-@ year @-@ old 's death overwhelmed the U2 organisation , and the band travelled to his native New Zealand to attend his traditional Māori funeral ; an experience that inspired the lyrics to " One Tree Hill " . 
 On 1 August 1986 , U2 regrouped at Windmill Lane Studios in Dublin to resume work on the album . Writing and recording continued late into the year , with the band also using Danesmoate House and The Edge 's newly bought home , Melbeach . " Mothers of the Disappeared " and " Bullet the Blue Sky " were among the songs that evolved at Melbeach . Lanois said " the bulk of the record was done at The Edge 's house , even though the Danesmoate sessions were the backbone of the tonality of the record — we got a lot of the drums done in there . " In August , Robbie Robertson , the former guitarist and primary songwriter for The Band , visited Dublin to complete an album that Lanois was producing . Robertson recorded two tracks with U2 that appear on his self @-@ titled solo album . 
 A creative spurt in October resulted in new song ideas but they were shelved at Eno 's suggestion lest the band miss their deadline for completing the album . Recording for The Joshua Tree wrapped up in November 1986 . Rough mixes had been created throughout the sessions after each song was recorded to , in Lanois ' words , take " snapshots along the way ... because sometimes you go too far " . The Edge explained that the arrangement and production of each song was approached individually and that while there was a strong uniform direction , they were prepared to " sacrifice some continuity to get the rewards of following each song to a conclusion " . The final weeks were a frantic rush to finish , with the band and production crew all suffering from exhaustion . Lanois and Pat McCarthy mixed songs at Melbeach on an <unk> 2500 mixing desk where , without console automation , they needed three people to operate the console . Eno and Flood had minimal involvement with the final mixes . In late December , U2 hired Steve Lillywhite , producer of their first three albums , to remix the potential singles . His job was to make the songs more appealing to commercial radio , and his eleventh @-@ hour presence and changes caused discontent among the production crew , including Eno and Lanois . Lillywhite 's remixing was done on an SSL desk and extended into the new year . While the band and crew were working on the album 's mixing , Lillywhite 's wife , singer Kirsty MacColl , volunteered to set the running order for the album . The band told her to put " Where the Streets Have No Name " first and " Mothers of the Disappeared " last , with the rest sequenced according to her preference . 
 Following the completion of the album proper , U2 returned to the studio in January 1987 to complete the new material they shelved in October . These tracks , which included " Walk to the Water " , " Luminous Times ( Hold on to Love ) " , and " Spanish Eyes " , were completed as B @-@ sides for the planned singles . The song " Sweetest Thing " was left off the album and released as a B @-@ side , as the band felt it was incomplete and did not fit with the other songs . They later expressed regret that it had not been completed for The Joshua Tree . The track was re @-@ recorded as a single for the group 's 1998 compilation The Best of 1980 – 1990 . The band considered releasing The Joshua Tree as a double @-@ album that would have included the B @-@ sides . Bono was the most vocal proponent of the idea , whereas The Edge argued for the 11 @-@ track version that was ultimately released . U2 agreed that one track , " Birdland " , was too strong for a B @-@ side and they withheld it for a future album release . In 2007 , a re @-@ recorded version of the song , retitled " Wave of Sorrow ( Birdland ) " , was included with the 20th anniversary edition of the album . 
 After completing The Joshua Tree , Bono said that he was " as pleased with the record as I can ever be pleased with a record " . Although he was " very rarely pleased " with how their previous albums turned out , he thought that The Joshua Tree was their most complete record since their first . Clayton bought Danesmoate House in 1987 , and it remains his Dublin home . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 U2 is credited with composing all of The Joshua Tree 's music . The album 's sound draws from American and Irish roots music more than the group 's previous albums , following the counsel and influence of Bob Dylan , Van Morrison , and Keith Richards . " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " has strong gospel influences , with Bono singing of spiritual doubt in an upper register and Eno , Lanois , and The Edge providing choir @-@ like backing vocals . The slow piano @-@ based ballad " Running to Stand Still " exhibits traits of folk music and acoustic blues in the track 's slide acoustic guitar and harmonica . " Trip Through Your Wires " , another song on which Bono plays harmonica , was described by Niall Stokes as a " bluesy romp " . 
 The Edge 's guitar playing on The Joshua Tree is characteristic of what came to be his trademark sound . His minimalist style sharply contrasted with the emphasis placed on virtuosity and speed by heavy metal in the 1980s . The Edge views musical notes as " expensive " , preferring to play as few of them as possible and to instead focus on simpler parts that serve the moods of the songs . Much of this was achieved with a delay effect , contributing to a chiming , echo @-@ laden sound . For example , the riff in the introduction of the opening track " Where the Streets Have No Name " is a repeated six @-@ note arpeggio , with delay used to repeat notes . The riffs to " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " and " With or Without You " also prominently use delay , with Bono likening the guitar hook from the former track to " chrome bells " . Writer Derek White conducted a mathematical study of The Edge 's rhythmic delay in an attempt to explain why his playing style on the record appealed to him so much . For a given song , White found that by dividing the number of repeated delay notes per minute by the song 's tempo in beats per minute , he arrived at e , an important mathematical constant that is used to explain many natural phenomena . 
 The Edge continued to employ the ambient techniques of guitar playing that he used on The Unforgettable Fire ; for " With or Without You " , he used a prototype of the Infinite Guitar to add layers of sustained notes , an approach he first took on his 1986 solo album , the Captive soundtrack . On other songs , his guitar playing is more aggressive ; " Exit " was described by Colin Hogg as a " decidedly scary ... guitar @-@ driven barrage " , while Andrew Mueller said the guitar sounds from " Bullet the Blue Sky " evoke images of fighter planes . The Edge developed the harsh , feedback @-@ charged guitar part for the latter song at Bono 's instruction to " put El Salvador through an amplifier " , after Bono returned angry from a visit to the war @-@ torn country . Bono also contributed to songwriting on guitar ; the Spanish guitar melody in " Mothers of the Disappeared " originated from a song that he wrote in Ethiopia to teach children about basic hygiene . 
 Much like on past records , Bono exhibits an expressive , open @-@ throated vocal delivery , which many critics described as " passionate " . Spin found that the group 's exploration of roots music resulted in Bono 's style expanding , saying that he " commands the full whisper @-@ to @-@ shout range of blues mannerisms " . Bono attributes this maturation to " loosening up " , " discover [ ing ] other voices " , and employing more restraint in his singing . His vocals became , in the words of Thom Duffy , more " dynamic " than they had been on previous records . On " Where the Streets Have No Name " , his voice varies greatly in its timbre ( as writer Mark Butler describes , " he sighs ; he moans ; he grunts ; he exhales audibly ; he allows his voice to crack " ) and its timing by his usage of rubato to slightly offset the sung notes from the beat . For author Susan Fast , " With or Without You " marks the first track on which he " extended his vocal range downward in an appreciable way " . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Bono is credited as the album 's sole lyricist . Thematically , the album juxtaposes antipathy towards the United States against the band 's deep fascination with the country , its open spaces , freedoms , and ideals . Anger is directed particularly at the perceived greed of the Ronald Reagan administration and its foreign policy in Central America . Bono said , " I started to see two Americas , the mythic America and the real America " , hence the album 's working title , The Two Americas . Having toured the US extensively in the past , the group were inspired by the country 's geography . As such , the desert , rain , dust , and water appear as lyrical motifs throughout the record . In many cases , the desert is used as a metaphor for " spiritual drought " . One track that chiefly represents these themes is " In God 's Country " , which critic Barbara Jaeger interpreted as addressing America 's role as the " promised land " . Clayton explained the impact of the desert imagery : " The desert was immensely inspirational to us as a mental image for this record . Most people would take the desert on face value and think it 's some kind of barren place , which of course is true . But in the right frame of mind , it 's also a very positive image , because you can actually do something with blank canvas , which is effectively what the desert is . " 
 Political and social concerns were the basis for several tracks . Bono wrote the lyrics for " Bullet the Blue Sky " after visiting El Salvador during the Salvadoran Civil War and witnessing how the conflict between rebels and the US @-@ backed government affected local civilians . This trip also inspired " Mothers of the Disappeared " , after Bono met members of COMADRES — the Mothers of the Disappeared — a group of women whose children were killed or " disappeared " during the civil war at the hands of the local government . The 1984 UK mining strike inspired the lyrics for " Red Hill Mining Town " , which Bono wrote from the perspective of a couple affected by the strike . The story of a heroin @-@ addicted couple was the basis for " Running to Stand Still " , which Bono set in Dublin 's Ballymun Flats . For " Where the Streets Have No Name " , he wrote the lyrics in response to the idea that , in Belfast , a person 's religion and income can be deduced based on the street they live on . " Exit " portrays the thoughts of a psychotic killer , although Clayton suggests the line " He saw the hands that build could also pull down " is also a jab at the US government 's conflicting roles in international relations . 
 Bono described 1986 as " an incredibly bad year " for him , which was reflected in the lyrics . His marriage was under strain , in part due to the album 's long gestation period , the band were criticised by the Irish media for their involvement in the Self Aid event , and his personal assistant Greg Carroll was killed in a motorcycle accident in Dublin . Bono said , " That 's why the desert attracted me as an image . That year was really a desert for us . " " With or Without You " was written while he was struggling to reconcile his wanderlust as a musician with his domestic responsibilities . " One Tree Hill " , named after a volcanic peak in Carroll 's native New Zealand , describes how Bono felt at Carroll 's funeral . The album is dedicated to his memory . 
 The group 's religious faith was a source of inspiration for many lyrics . On " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " , Bono affirms this faith but sings of spiritual doubt ( " I believe in Kingdom Come " ... " But I still haven 't found what I 'm looking for " ) . Some critics surmised that the place Bono is referring to on " Where the Streets Have No Name " is Heaven . These two songs were singled out by some critics as demonstrating that the band was on a " spiritual quest " . Hot Press editor Niall Stokes and Richard Harrington of The Washington Post interpreted " With or Without You " in both romantic and spiritual manners . Biblical references are made on other songs like " Bullet the Blue Sky " ( " Jacob wrestled the angel " , images of fire and brimstone ) and " In God 's Country " ( " I stand with the sons of Cain " ) . Thom Duffy interpreted the album as an exploration of the " uncertainty and pain of a spiritual pilgrimage through a bleak and harsh world " . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The album sleeve was designed by Steve Averill , based on the band 's idea to depict the record 's " imagery , and cinematic location " in the desert . The initial concept for the sleeve was to represent where the desert met civilisation , and accordingly , one of the provisional titles for the album was The Desert Songs , in addition to The Two Americas . They asked their photographer Anton Corbijn to search for locations in the US that would capture this . From 14 – 16 December 1986 , the band travelled with Corbijn and Averill on a bus around the Mojave Desert in California for a three @-@ day photo shoot . The group stayed in small hotels and shot in the desert landscape , beginning at the ghost town of Bodie before moving to locations such as Zabriskie Point and other sites in Death Valley . For the shoot , Corbijn rented a panoramic camera to capture more of the desert landscapes , but having no prior experience with the camera , he was unfamiliar with how to focus it . This led to him focusing on the background and leaving the band slightly out of focus . Corbijn said , " Fortunately there was a lot of light . " He later recounted that the main idea of the shoot was to juxtapose " man and environment , the Irish in America " . 
 On the evening after the first day 's shooting , Corbijn told the band about Joshua trees ( Yucca brevifolia ) , hardy and twisted plants in the deserts of the American Southwest , and he suggested their use on the sleeve . Bono was pleased to discover the religious significance of the plant 's etymology ; early settlers , according to Mormon legend , named the plant after the Old Testament prophet Joshua , as the tree 's stretching branches reminded them of Joshua raising his hands in prayer . The following day , Bono declared that the album should be titled The Joshua Tree . That day , while driving on Route 190 , they spotted a lone @-@ standing tree in the desert . Corbijn had been hoping to find a single tree , as he thought it would result in better photographs than if he shot the band amongst a group of trees . They stopped the bus and photographed with the lone plant for about 20 minutes , something The Edge called " fairly spontaneous " . Despite shooting in the desert in the day , the group dealt with cold weather . Bono explained , " it was freezing and we had to take our coats off so it would at least look like a desert . That 's one of the reasons we look so grim . " Regarding the serious tone of the images , Corbijn said , " I guess people felt they took themselves too seriously . It was definitely the most serious , I think , that you can photograph a band . You couldn 't go any further down that line unless you start photographing graves . " The final day of shooting was spent in snow @-@ covered ghost towns . 
 Corbijn 's original idea for the sleeve was to have a shot of the Joshua tree on the front , with the band in a continuation of the photograph on the back . Ultimately , separate photographs were used for each side of the sleeve ; an image of the group at Zabriskie Point was placed on the front , while an image of them with the tree appears on the reverse side . Rolling Stone believes the title and the images of the tree befit an album concerned with " resilience in the face of utter social and political desolation , a record steeped in religious imagery " . In 1991 , Rolling Stone ranked the album at number 97 on its list of the " 100 Greatest Album Covers of All Time " . The tree photographed for the sleeve fell around 2000 , yet the site remains a popular attraction for U2 fans to pay tribute to the group . One person inserted a plaque into the ground reading , " Have you found what you 're looking for ? " , in reference to the album 's track " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " . It is a common misconception that the site is within Joshua Tree National Park , when in fact it is over 200 miles away from the park . In 2011 , Guus van Hove , the director of the Dutch music venue 013 , and his girlfriend died of heat exhaustion in a remote part of that park , allegedly searching for the site of U2 's tree . 
 = = Release = = 
 Just prior to the release of The Joshua Tree , Bono was stricken with a sudden panic about the quality of the completed album . He said that he contemplated calling the production plants to order a halt of the record 's pressing , but he ultimately held off . Island Records spent over $ 100 @,@ 000 on store displays advertising the album ; president Lou <unk> called it " the most complete merchandising effort ever assembled " . The Joshua Tree was released on 9 March 1987 , the first new release to be made available on the compact disc , vinyl record , and cassette tape formats on the same date . Record stores in Britain and Ireland opened at midnight to accommodate the large amount of fans who had queued outside to buy the album . 
 The Joshua Tree became , at the time , the fastest @-@ selling album in British history , selling over 300 @,@ 000 copies in two days . On 21 March 1987 , it debuted on the UK Albums Chart at number one , spending two weeks at the top position , and it remained on the chart for 163 weeks . On the US Billboard Top Pop Albums chart , the album debuted on 4 April 1987 at number seven , the highest debut for a studio album in the US in almost seven years . Within three weeks , it topped the chart , where it remained for nine consecutive weeks , the band 's longest number @-@ one reign on the chart . The album spent a total of 103 weeks on the Billboard Top Pop Albums , 35 of them in the top 10 . On 13 May 1987 , the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified the album triple @-@ platinum . All of the group 's previous albums re @-@ entered the Billboard Top Pop Albums chart in 1987 . In Canada , the album debuted at number 51 on the RPM Top 100 Albums chart on 21 March 1987 , and climbed to number one just two weeks later . Within 14 days of release , it sold 300 @,@ 000 units in Canada and was certified triple @-@ platinum . The Joshua Tree topped the albums charts in 19 other countries , including Austria , Switzerland , New Zealand , and Sweden . Rolling Stone declared that the album increased the band 's stature " from heroes to superstars " . It was the first album by any artist to sell one million copies on CD in the US . U2 became the fourth rock band to be featured on the cover of Time ( following The Beatles , The Band , and The Who ) , who declared that U2 was " Rock 's Hottest Ticket " . 
 " With or Without You " was released as the lead single on 21 March 1987 , with the B @-@ sides " Luminous Times ( Hold on to Love ) " and " Walk to the Water " . The single quickly topped the Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the band 's first number @-@ one hit in America . The song topped the singles chart in Canada , while reaching number four in the UK and number two in the Netherlands . The group originally planned to use " Red Hill Mining Town " as the second single . However , the group were unhappy with the music video filmed by Neil Jordan , and Bono and Mullen had difficulty performing the song during rehearsals . Ultimately , the group canceled the single . Instead , " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " was chosen as the second single , and it was released in May 1987 with the tracks " Spanish Eyes " and " Deep in the Heart " as B @-@ sides . Like its predecessor , it topped the Hot 100 , giving U2 consecutive number @-@ one singles in the US . The single peaked at number six in the UK , Canada , and the Netherlands . By May , sales of the album surpassed 7 million copies worldwide . 
 " Where the Streets Have No Name " was released in August 1987 as the third single , with " Sweetest Thing " , " Silver and Gold " , and " Race Against Time " as B @-@ sides . The single reached number seven in the Netherlands , number four on the UK Singles Chart , and number 13 in the US . The album 's first three singles all topped the Irish Singles Charts , while charting within the top 20 of the singles charts in the UK , the US , Canada , New Zealand , and the Netherlands . " In God 's Country " was released as a fourth single exclusively in North America in November 1987 , peaking at number 44 on the Hot 100 , and charting at number 48 as an import single in the UK . " One Tree Hill " was released as a fourth single in Australia and New Zealand in March 1988 , and having been written for the New Zealand @-@ native Carroll , it reached number one in his home country . By the end of 1988 , The Joshua Tree had sold more than 14 million copies worldwide . 
 In 1996 , Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab remastered the album and released it as a special gold CD . This edition rectified the incorrect track splitting between " One Tree Hill " and " Exit " that affected some CD releases ; the quiet coda that concludes " One Tree Hill " had previously been included in the same track as " Exit " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Joshua Tree received critical acclaim , and the best reviews of U2 's career to that point . Rolling Stone wrote , " For a band that 's always specialized in inspirational , larger @-@ than @-@ life gestures — a band utterly determined to be Important — The Joshua Tree could be the big one , and that 's precisely what it sounds like . " The review described the album 's sound as " wed [ ding ] the diverse textures of The Unforgettable Fire to fully formed songs , many of them as aggressive as the hits on War " . Steve Morse of The Boston Globe echoed these sentiments in his review , stating , " It 's another spiritual progress report , enwrapped in music that strikes a healthy balance between the lushness of their last album , 1984 's The Unforgettable Fire , and the more volcanic rock of their early years . " Morse called it " their most challenging work to date " and the " most rewarding rock record of the new year " . Q said " their reinvention of stadium rock sounds as impassioned as ever " and that the album strikes " a finely balanced mix of intimacy and power " . NME praised the album as " a better and braver record than anything else that 's likely to appear in 1987 ... It 's the sound of people still trying , still looking ... " Thom Duffy of the Orlando Sentinel said the songs have " exultant power " that , " like the Joshua Tree 's branches , stretch upward in stark contrast to their barren musical surroundings on rock radio " . He praised the musicianship of the group members , calling Bono 's vocals " wrenching " , the rhythm section of Mullen and Clayton " razor @-@ sharp " , and The Edge 's guitar playing " never ... better " . 
 The New Zealand Herald called The Joshua Tree " the most compelling collection of music yet from a band that has cut its career with passionate , exciting slashes " . It judged that the record 's " power lies in its restraint " and that there is an " urgency underlying virtually all of the 11 songs " . Spin hailed the record as U2 's " first wholly successful album because it finally breaks free from the seductive but limiting chant @-@ and @-@ drone approach of earlier material " . The review stated , " There isn 't a bad song on the record " and that " every one has a hook " . The magazine praised U2 for eschewing ambient experimentation in favour of uncomplicated but layered arrangements . Robert Hilburn of the Los Angeles Times said the album " confirms on record what this band has been slowly asserting for three years now on stage : U2 is what the Rolling Stones ceased being years ago — the greatest rock and roll band in the world " . Hilburn noted that the band showed " sometimes breathtaking signs of growth " and played more " tailored and assured " music . Hot Press editor and longtime U2 supporter Bill Graham said that " The Joshua Tree rescues rock from its decay , bravely and unashamedly basing itself in the mainstream before very cleverly lifting off into several higher dimensions , " and that U2 " must be taken very seriously indeed after this revaluation of rock " . John Rockwell of The New York Times , although complimentary of the band for expanding its musical range , was more critical of Bono 's vocals , which he said were " marred throughout by sobbing affectation " and sounded too much like other singers , resulting in a " curious loss of individuality " . The Houston Chronicle felt it has " music that both soothes and inspires , music that is anthemic , music with style " . The reviewer , however , believed the group took itself too seriously , resulting in a record that is " not a whole lot of fun , bordering on the pretentious " , which caused him to lose interest by the second side . Robert Christgau from The Village Voice found the lyrics tasteful and the music " mournful and passionate , stately and involved " , but lamented what he felt was pompous singing by Bono , calling it " one of the worst cases of significance ever to afflict a deserving candidate for superstardom " . 
 In a retrospective review , Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic said " their focus has never been clearer , nor has their music been catchier " . His review concluded , " Never before have U2 's big messages sounded so direct and personal . " Anthony DeCurtis of Rolling Stone compared the album to Bruce Springsteen 's Born in the U.S.A. , stating that both records " lifted a populist artist to mega @-@ stardom " , and that the musicians ' uplifting live shows and the " sheer aural pleasure " of the two records obscured their foreboding nature . DeCurtis summarized The Joshua Tree 's examination of America both lyrically and musically as such : 
 " The wild beauty , cultural richness , spiritual vacancy and ferocious violence of America are explored to compelling effect in virtually every aspect of The Joshua Tree — in the title and the cover art , the blues and country borrowings evident in the music ... Indeed , Bono says that ' dismantling the mythology of America ' is an important part of The Joshua Tree 's artistic objective . " 
 In voting for Rolling Stone 's 1987 end @-@ of @-@ year readers ' polls , U2 won for the categories " Best Album " , " Artist of the Year " , " Best Band " , " Best Single ( " With or Without You ) " , and " Best Male Singer " ( Bono ) . The album placed fourth on the " Best Albums " list from The Village Voice 's 1987 Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . U2 earned their first two Grammy Awards in 1988 , winning honors for Album of the Year ( beating acts such as Michael Jackson , Prince , and Whitney Houston ) and Best Rock Performance By a Duo or Group With Vocal for The Joshua Tree . 
 = = The Joshua Tree Tour = = 
 Following the release of The Joshua Tree , U2 staged the worldwide Joshua Tree Tour . Lasting from April to December 1987 , it comprised 109 shows over three legs . The first and third legs visited the US , while the second leg toured Europe . The Joshua Tree elevated the group to a new level of popularity ; the tour sold out arenas and stadiums around the world — the first time they consistently performed at venues of that size — and it played to over 3 million people . Songs from the album became staples of the tour 's setlists , as the group regularly performed eight of the record 's eleven tracks , and the only song not to be played was " Red Hill Mining Town " . 
 Like their previous tours , The Joshua Tree Tour was a minimalistic , austere production , and U2 used this outlet for addressing political and social concerns . One such issue was Arizona Governor Evan Mecham 's canceling the state 's observance of Martin Luther King , Jr . Day . Throughout the tour , the group continued to explore American roots music : they collaborated with folk artist Bob Dylan , blues musician B. B. King , and Harlem 's New Voices of Freedom gospel choir ; U2 also visited Graceland and Sun Studios in Memphis , where they recorded new material . These new songs and the band 's experiences on tour were documented for the 1988 Rattle and Hum album and Phil Joanou @-@ directed motion picture . 
 The tour grossed $ 40 million , but despite its commercial success and positive reviews , U2 were dissatisfied creatively , and Bono believed they were musically unprepared for their success . Mullen said , " We were the biggest , but we weren 't the best " , and for Bono the tour was " one of the worst times of [ their ] musical life " . On the road , the group dealt with death threats , along with injuries that Bono sustained from performing . The band hinted that the stresses of touring led them to enjoy the " rock and roll lifestyle " they previously avoided . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Joshua Tree is the band 's best @-@ selling album , and with 25 million copies sold worldwide , it is among the best @-@ selling albums worldwide . It ranks as one of the best @-@ selling albums in the US . In 1995 , the RIAA certified it 10 × platinum for shipping 10 million units , and the album subsequently received the Diamond Award for reaching this level . Similarly , the Canadian Recording Industry Association certified the album diamond in Canada . In the UK , The Joshua Tree ranks as the 36th @-@ highest @-@ selling record with 2 @.@ 79 million copies sold , having been certified 8 × platinum , with an additional silver certification for the 20th anniversary edition . In the Pacific , it is certified 5 × platinum and 14 × platinum in Australia and New Zealand , respectively . 
 The Joshua Tree has been acclaimed by writers and music critics as one of the greatest albums of all time ; according to Acclaimed Music , it is the 39th @-@ highest @-@ ranked record on critics ' lists . In 1997 , The Guardian collated worldwide data in 1997 from a range of renowned critics , artists , and radio DJs , who placed the record at number 57 in the list of the " 100 Best Albums Ever " . In 2006 , Time named it as one of the magazine 's 100 best albums , while Hot Press ranked it 11th in a similar list . Q named it one of the 40 greatest records from the 1980s , while Entertainment Weekly included the album on its list of the 100 best records released between 1983 and 2008 . In 2010 , the album appeared at number 62 on Spin 's list of the 125 most influential albums in the 25 years since the magazine launched . The publication said , " The band 's fifth album spit out hits like crazy , and they were unusually searching hits , each with a pointed political edge . " Rolling Stone magazine ranked the album at number 27 on their 2012 list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " , calling it " an album that turns spiritual quests and political struggles into uplifting stadium singalongs " . It was U2 's best position on the list . That year , in Slant Magazine 's list of the " Best Albums of the 1980s " , the publication said that The Joshua Tree 's opening trio of songs helped " the band became lords and emperors of anthemic ' 80s rock " and that " U2 no longer belonged to Dublin , but the world . " In 2014 , The Joshua Tree was selected for preservation in the National Recording Registry by the US Library of Congress for being deemed " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 The band 's penchant for addressing political and social issues , as well as their staid depiction in Corbijn 's black @-@ and @-@ white sleeve photographs , contributed to the group 's earnest and serious image as " stone @-@ faced pilgrim [ s ] " . This image became a target for derision after the band 's critically maligned Rattle and Hum project in 1988 . Various critics called them " po @-@ faced " , " pompous bores " , and " humourless " . The group 's continued exploration of American music for the project was labelled " pretentious " and " misguided and bombastic " . After Bono told fans on the 1989 Lovetown Tour that U2 would " dream it all up again " , the band reinvented themselves in the 1990s . They incorporated alternative rock , industrial music , and electronic dance music into their sound , and adopted a more self @-@ deprecating , flippant image by which they embraced the " rock star " identity they struggled with in the 1980s . The band referred to their 1991 album Achtung Baby as " chopping down the Joshua Tree " . Bill Flanagan summarised the impact of The Joshua Tree on the group 's career in his liner notes to the album 's 20th anniversary release : " The Joshua Tree made U2 into international rock stars and established both a standard they would always have to live up to and an image they would forever try to live down . " 
 = = 20th anniversary remastered edition = = 
 On 20 November 2007 , a 20th anniversary edition of The Joshua Tree was released . The album was remastered from the original analogue recordings under the direction of The Edge , and also restores the original vinyl album art , as the first CD pressings of the album had a heavily stretched out version of the band photo . The release was made available in four formats : a single CD ; a two @-@ disc deluxe edition with a bonus audio CD ; a three @-@ disc box set with bonus audio CD and DVD , photograph prints , and hardcover book ; and a double vinyl edition . All editions included a booklet with liner notes by author Bill Flanagan and " previously unseen " photographs by Anton Corbijn . 
 Manager Paul McGuinness explained , " There has been continuous demand from U2 fans to have The Joshua Tree properly re @-@ mastered . As always , the band had to make sure it was right , and now it is . " The bonus CD that was included with two of the remastered formats contains B @-@ sides and rarities / demos from The Joshua Tree . Some formats include expanded liner notes from the band members , the production team , and Anton Corbijn . In an otherwise favourable review of the remastered album , Andrew Mueller of Uncut said that " any casual listener who can perceive a meaningful difference between this and the original has i ) ears like a bat and / or ii ) needs to get out more " . 
 = = = Bonus audio CD = = = 
 The bonus audio CD features 14 additional tracks , including the B @-@ sides " Luminous Times ( Hold on to Love ) " , " Walk to the Water " , " Spanish Eyes " , " Deep in the Heart " , " Silver and Gold " , " Sweetest Thing " , and " Race Against Time " . Two versions of " Silver and Gold " are included — the B @-@ side version , and the original recording from the Sun City album , with Keith Richards and Ron Wood . The edited single version of " Where the Streets Have No Name " appears on the bonus CD . " Beautiful Ghost / Introduction to Songs of Experience " features lyrics from the introduction of William Blake 's Songs of Experience , and was previously released in The Complete U2 digital box set in 2004 . " Wave of Sorrow ( Birdland ) " , " Desert of Our Love " , " Rise Up " , and " Drunk Chicken / America " are all previously unreleased recordings from The Joshua Tree sessions . " Wave of Sorrow ( Birdland ) " is a completed version of the demo " Birdland " , and " Drunk Chicken / America " features an excerpt of Allen Ginsberg 's recitation of his poem , " America " . 
 = = = Bonus DVD = = = 
 The bonus DVD features live concert footage , a documentary , and two music videos . The disc includes Live from Paris , an 85 @-@ minute concert from 4 July 1987 that was originally broadcast on British television in celebration of the 25th anniversary of Island Records . It was later released as a live album through the iTunes Store in July 2008 ; three cover songs are excluded from both releases of the concert . The documentary , titled Outside It 's America , was a 1987 MTV production about The Joshua Tree Tour . The two music videos are an alternate version " With or Without You " and the previously unreleased video for " Red Hill Mining Town " . Footage of U2 's alter ego country band , The Dalton Brothers , is included on the disc as an Easter egg . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Bono , all music composed by U2 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Tonight , Tonight ( The Smashing Pumpkins song ) = 
 " Tonight , Tonight " is a song by American alternative rock band The Smashing Pumpkins , written by the band 's frontman , Billy Corgan . It was the third single and second track on the first disc from their third album , Mellon Collie and the Infinite Sadness , and was released in April 1996 in Europe and later in June 1996 in the United States . " Tonight , Tonight " was critically acclaimed and commercially well @-@ received upon its release . The music video accompanying the song was also successful and won several awards . 
 A shorter acoustic version of the song , titled " Tonite Reprise " , was included as a B @-@ side to the single and on the triple LP version of Mellon Collie . This single also later appeared in an extended form on the box set The Aeroplane Flies High . Additionally , the song appears on the band 's greatest hits release , Rotten Apples . 
 = = Song history = = 
 Billy Corgan began writing for the follow @-@ up to Siamese Dream after the tour in support of that album ; however , the recording of " Tonight , Tonight " first began while the Pumpkins were still on the Siamese Dream tour when Corgan booked the band into a local Chicago studio to record all of their song ideas on tape . 
 On The Howard Stern Show , Corgan has said that the song pays homage to Cheap Trick , with its black <unk> lyrics and theme , and that the song is addressed to himself , who escaped from an abusive childhood against all odds , so as to keep him believing in himself . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Tonight , Tonight " is written in the key of G , performed on instruments tuned down a half @-@ step so the actual pitch is G ♭ . In the original recording sessions , " Tonight , Tonight " was initially written in the key of C instead of G. However , since Corgan was unable to sing the song in C , he wrote a version during the Mellon Collie recording sessions to suit his range . The strings for the song were arranged by Billy Corgan & Audrey Riley , and recorded with the Chicago Symphony Orchestra . Corgan said that recording with a 30 @-@ piece string @-@ section for the song " was probably one of the most exciting recording experiences I have ever had . " 
 Lyrically , " Tonight , Tonight " hangs together with the rest of the Mellon Collie . The lyrics of the song have been compared to Robert Herrick 's poem " To the Virgins , to Make Much of Time " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Tonight , Tonight " was met with critical acclaim . Allmusic reviewer Amy Hanson stated that the song " packs an emotional punch " . Jim Alexander of NME regarded the song as " swirling [ and ] grand " . Time 's reviewer Christopher John Farley called the song " an expansive rock anthem , complete with soaring guitars and a 30 @-@ piece string section . " Entertainment Weekly 's reviewer David Browne praised the use of strings in the song , saying that it was " whipped into a frenzy by hurricane @-@ like strings " . On Mellon Collie 's entry in Rolling Stone 's The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , " Tonight , Tonight " was praised as " the Pumpkins at their finest " . 
 While " Tonight , Tonight " never approached the chart success of " 1979 " , it was among the most successful singles from Mellon Collie . Its highest position on any national chart was a number two peak on the New Zealand Singles Chart . Its highest position in the United States was at number four on Billboard Mainstream Rock Tracks . It also achieved number five on the Modern Rock Tracks and number 36 on The Billboard Hot 100 . The song also charted in other countries , peaking at number 21 on the Australian Singles Chart on June 9 , 1996 . It placed at 50th in a list of best rock songs of all time broadcast by Kerrang ! TV . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video was directed by Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris and starred Tom Kenny and Jill Talley . The original idea for the music video was for a Busby Berkeley @-@ style video , complete with " people diving into champagne glasses " . The band was set to begin production on the video when they discovered that the Red Hot Chili Peppers had done a similarly styled video for their song " Aeroplane " , which was almost identical to what they had wanted to do . The second idea for the video was that as the band played on a surreal stage , the camera would go into audience members ' eyes and the viewer would see that person 's vision of the song . The third and final concept , inspired by Georges Méliès 's silent film A Trip to the Moon , came from directors Jonathan Dayton and Valerie Faris , who got the idea for the video because the album cover for Mellon Collie reminded them of early silent films . Hence , the video was filmed in the style of a turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century silent film using theater @-@ style backdrops and primitive special effects . Most of the video 's backdrops and <unk> were created by artist Wayne White . 
 Dayton and the production crew initially had problems locating costumes for the video because the movie Titanic was being shot at the same time in Los Angeles . Titanic director James Cameron rented nearly every turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century prop and costume in the city , leaving the " Tonight , Tonight " production crew little to work with . Directors Dayton and Faris compromised by renting the leftover costumes and hiring designers to remake them into the elaborate period clothing seen in the video . The video took three days to shoot . 
 The video , which debuted in May 1996 , begins with a group of people celebrating the launch of a zeppelin to the moon . Tom Kenny 's character kisses Jill Talley 's character 's hand as the two enter the zeppelin , which was being held to the ground by people dressed as sailors using rope . The zeppelin approaches the Moon , which has a face like the Moon 's face in A Trip to the Moon . Shots of the band performing in similar , turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century attire using older , acoustic instruments are interspersed . The two characters jump off the zeppelin and fall onto the Moon 's surface . Suddenly , several hostile humanoid aliens appear , surrounding the couple . Tom Kenny 's character is restrained from a fist fight with the creatures , and Jill Talley 's character defends herself by hitting a few of creatures with her umbrella , which vaporizes them , but the two are trapped and tied . The two form a plan , and then break free of the ropes and attack the aliens with their umbrellas . The couple escapes on a rocket similar to the one in A Trip to the Moon and land in the sea , where a merman resembling the sea @-@ god Poseidon puts on a performance for them , including an octopus , singing mermaids , and starfish , before sending them back to the surface in a bubble . In the end they are rescued by a ship called " S.S. Méliès " , in reference to the movie director . 
 The music video received heavy airplay on MTV and won several awards . Corgan remarked that " I don 't think we 've ever had people react [ like this ] ... it just seemed to touch a nerve . " It won six awards at the MTV Video Music Awards in 1996 : Video of the Year , Best Direction , Best Special Effects , Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , and Breakthrough Video . " Tonight , Tonight " was nominated for Viewer 's Choice and Best Editing , and was also nominated for Best Short Form Music Video at the 1997 Grammy Awards . It is still considered one of the greatest music videos of all time , ranking number 40 on Stylus Magazine 's list of the top 100 music videos of all time . 
 Though regular 6 @-@ string acoustic guitars and electric bass guitar was used in the original studio recording of the song , in the music video , in keeping with the turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century theme , some interesting instruments were used as ' props ' ; James Iha can be seen using a Gibson harp guitar and D 'arcy Wretzky is seen playing an instrument that resembles the 1924 Gibson <unk> . 
 MTV Video Music Award 
 MTV Video Music Award for Best Editing : Alanis Morissette for Ironic ( Editor : Eric Zumbrunnen ) 
 MTV Video Music Award - Viewer 's Choice : Bush for <unk> 
 = = Single track listings = = 
 The Tonight , Tonight single was released with two different versions containing different b @-@ sides , one as a standard single and the other as a CD included in the singles box set , The Aeroplane Flies High . All songs written by Billy Corgan . 
 US single release 
 " Tonight , Tonight " - 4 : 15 
 " <unk> Magpie " - 2 : 41 
 " Rotten Apples " - 3 : 02 
 " Medellia of the Gray Skies " - 3 : 11 
 The Aeroplane Flies High track listing 
 " Tonight , Tonight " - 4 : 15 
 " <unk> Magpie " - 2 : 41 
 " Rotten Apples " - 3 : 02 
 " Jupiter 's Lament " - 2 : 30 
 " Medellia of the Gray Skies " - 3 : 11 
 " Blank " - 2 : 54 
 " Tonite Reprise " - 2 : 40 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 All information taken from Allmusic . 
 Billy Corgan – vocals , guitar , producer , artwork 
 James Iha – guitar on " Tonight , Tonight " and " Medellia of the Gray Skies " 
 D 'arcy Wretzky – bass on " Tonight , Tonight " and " Medellia of the Gray Skies " 
 Jimmy Chamberlin – drums on " Tonight , Tonight " 
 Dennis and Jimmy Flemion – instrumentation on " Medellia of the Gray Skies " 
 Jeff <unk> – engineer 
 Flood – producer of " Tonight , Tonight " 
 Alan Moulder – producer of " Tonight , Tonight " 
 Howie Weinberg – mastering 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Tonight , " Tonight " has been covered by electropop band Passion Pit , whose version was featured on Levi 's Pioneer Sessions 2010 Revival Recordings and was also featured during the season 1 , episode 3 of MTV 's Teen Wolf ( Pack Mentality . ) ; Their cover plays near the end of the movie 10 Years . Panic ! at the Disco , as a live recording , wherein they replaced the lyrics " The place where you were born " with " The place where Jon Walker [ former Panic ! at the Disco bassist ] was born " , and The Voice U.S contestant Katrina Parker , who covered this song on the show 's first live round . 
 = Tom Friendly = 
 Tom Friendly , often referred to as Tom or Mr. Friendly , is a fictional character portrayed by M. C. Gainey on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) television series Lost . The series follows the lives of around forty survivors from the crash of Oceanic Flight 815 . The survivors find themselves on a mysterious tropical island , and interact with a group known as the Others , who appear to have lived on the island since long before the crash . Tom is an influential member of the Others , and is introduced in 2005 in the season one finale " Exodus : Part 2 " , where he kidnaps one of the survivors . The character makes another fifteen appearances before being killed in the season three finale " Through the Looking Glass " . Tom appears twice in season four in the flashbacks of other characters . Gainey was initially credited as playing " bearded man " and then as " Mr. Friendly " throughout season two before the character was given a first name . In a montage of deceased characters shown at Comic @-@ Con in 2009 , the Lost producers present the character 's full name as " Tom Friendly " . 
 Gainey accepted the role despite knowing nothing about it ; his sole motivation was a chance to work again with Lost producer Carlton Cuse . Speculation over Tom 's sexuality arose when he commented to Kate that she was " not [ his ] type " . Gainey began playing the character as such , and in season four Tom is shown kissing another man on the cheek . Lost producer Damon Lindelof commented that this revelation was " not subtle , to say the least " . Tom was received positively by critics , particularly in his first appearance . 
 = = Arc = = 
 In a flashback during " The Other Woman " , set around three years before the crash of Oceanic Flight 815 , Tom has a brief conversation with newly recruited Other Juliet Burke ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) , where he mentions he is a patient of therapist Harper Stanhope ( Andrea Roth ) . Shown in flashbacks during " Maternity Leave " , when Claire Littleton ( Emilie de Ravin ) is kidnapped by the Others a few weeks after the plane crash , Tom oversees Ethan Rom 's ( William Mapother ) progress at the Others ' medical station . He criticizes Ethan for kidnapping Claire before making " the list " . After forty @-@ four days on the Island , the survivors finish building a raft , with Michael Dawson ( Harold Perrineau ) , his ten @-@ year @-@ old son Walt Lloyd ( Malcolm David Kelley ) , James " Sawyer " Ford ( Josh Holloway ) and Jin @-@ Soo Kwon ( Daniel Dae Kim ) volunteering to sail it . Tom makes his first appearance in " Exodus : Part 2 " , where he arrives in a motorboat , wearing a fake beard and old clothes , with a crew of Others who kidnap Walt and destroy the raft . When Michael goes searching for the Others in the jungle , Tom captures him , and then confronts the other survivors who are looking for Michael . Tom warns them not to come any closer to the Others and then leaves with Michael in tow . A deal is made for Michael to bring Jack Shephard ( Matthew Fox ) , Kate Austen ( Evangeline Lilly ) , Sawyer and Hugo " Hurley " Reyes ( Jorge Garcia ) to the Others in exchange for Walt . In the second season finale " Live Together , Die Alone " , Michael successfully leads Jack , Kate , Sawyer and Hurley to the ambush point ; various Others including Tom sedate them and take them to a pier . There , Tom knocks Jack , Kate and Sawyer unconscious and transports them to a small island nearby . 
 In season three , Tom supervises an operation on Ben Linus ( Michael Emerson ) , the leader of the Others , which Jack is performing , and is blackmailed into letting Kate and Sawyer escape . He loses trust in Juliet , believing her to be plotting against Ben , and expresses his views to the Others ' sheriff , before returning to the Island . Shown in a flashback during season four , Tom leaves the Island and tracks down Michael in Manhattan , where Michael is trying to kill himself . He tells Michael that the Island will not let him die and gives him the address of his hotel penthouse . There , Tom convinces Michael to work for Ben , and instructs him to get a job as a janitor on board a freighter that is about to set sail from Fiji . When Michael arrives at the port Tom tells him to wait a day or two before activating an explosive device , to kill all the freighter crew , preventing them from reaching the Island . He returns to the barracks and is seen playing football with Jack . Shortly after this , he and the Others abandon the barracks , making camp in the jungle en route to the temple . Tom is shocked when Ben agrees to take one of the survivors , John Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) , to see Jacob , Ben 's superior . His faith in Ben 's leadership is shaken , and ignores Ben 's calls to intervene when Locke begins to beat another Other , Mikhail Bakunin ( Andrew Divoff ) . When Ben returns from Jacob , he orders a raid on the survivors ' beach camp that night ; Tom is part of the party sent . In " Through the Looking Glass " , the season three finale , Jin , Sayid Jarrah ( Naveen Andrews ) and Bernard Nadler ( Sam Anderson ) are captured by the party , and Ben radios Tom to shoot them . This prearranged code is the signal for Tom to shoot three bullets into the ground , only pretending to kill the hostages , to mislead the rest of the survivors , who have been met by Ben . Afterwards Tom expresses regret at not finishing the hostages , as they killed seven of the Others . The arrival of Hurley in a van , along with Sawyer and Juliet , sees the rest of the attack party killed . Tom admits defeat and surrenders , but Sawyer shoots him in his heart , claiming his life as payment for taking Walt off the raft . Juliet later buries Tom near the jungle along with his team of deceased Others . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 When Tom is introduced in the first season finale , he wears a fake beard and old clothes . He continues to appear under this guise throughout the second season , only revealing his beard to be fake in the finale . M. C. Gainey , the actor who portrays Tom , was only informed that his character 's beard was fake near the end of season two . The producers describe Tom as " friendly " , earning him the nickname " Mr. Friendly " . One critic has described him as " sarcastic " and " bright " . Tom 's dislike of blood causes him to struggle while supervising Ben 's operation , which Emerson believes makes him " cuddly " . Gainey does not think he is very similar to Tom , commenting , " He seems to be very loyal and I 'm a very loyal person so I have that in common , but other than that , I don 't really know what he 's about . He seems much more socially awkward than I am . " After Tom was revealed to be gay during season four , M. C. Gainey stated that " anytime you 've got a group of people , somebody 's got to be marching to a different drummer - that would be Tom Friendly . " 
 = = Development = = 
 M. C. Gainey first met Lost producer Carlton Cuse while working on The Adventures of Brisco County , Jr . The opportunity to work with Cuse again was motivation enough to take the part of Tom , even without a script or description of the character . Gainey watches every episode of the series , but admits to not knowing what is happening much of the time . In his first appearance , in the season one finale " Exodus : Part 2 " , Gainey was credited as " bearded man " , and was lovingly called " Gay Tom " in season 4 @.@ then in his season two appearances as " Mr. Friendly " . In the Official Lost Podcast , Damon Lindelof confirmed Mr. Friendly is not his real name , but is how the producers refer to him internally , because " he 's so friendly " ; however , his surname was later suggested to actually be Friendly during Comic @-@ Con 2009 . He is nicknamed " Zeke " by Sawyer in " The Hunting Party " , which led to some critics using this name for him . In the season two finale " Live Together , Die Alone " , his name is revealed to be Tom . On his character 's death , Gainey noted that " just because they kill you on this show , don 't mean they don 't need you anymore ' cause everybody 's got a past . " 
 In the third season premiere " A Tale of Two Cities " , Tom tells Kate that she is not his type . This comment resulted in online discussion in regard to Tom 's sexual orientation , and Lindelof and Cuse hinted that a Lost character would later be outed . Gainey joked , " if [ Kate 's ] not your type , you 're gay " , and began playing the character as such . He tried to subtly flirt with Jack , claiming that this attraction " got [ him ] through the first half of the season . " In the fourth season episode " Meet Kevin Johnson " , Tom is seen kissing his New York lover Arturo ( Francesco Simone ) . After the broadcast of " Meet Kevin Johnson " , Lindelof and Cuse confirmed that the line from the third season premiere is an allusion to Tom 's sexuality , but felt that it needed to be explicitly confirmed in the show , although Lindelof noted that the confirmation scene in " Meet Kevin Johnson " " was not subtle , to say the least " . Lost writer Edward Kitsis stated that " It was great to see [ Tom ] and realize that ... he is a true gentleman . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Chris Carabott from IGN " loved " Tom 's first appearance because " It 's a great scene and our first introduction to The Others besides Ethan 's infiltration of the camp . " Gainey found the fan reaction to his first appearance " really tough " , because " everywhere [ he ] went people would just give [ him ] dirty looks and they were like ' What are you going to do with that boy ? ' " , but he noted this gradually improved after his appearances in season two . Erin Martell from AOL 's TV Squad listed Tom in her five " most entertaining guest roles " from the first three seasons , commenting " I am counting his first episode as my favorite . For my money , there was nothing more disturbing than when Gainey showed up out of the blue and uttered the words , ' We 're gonna have to take the boy . ' I could not get that scene out of my head for days after ' Exodus ' aired . Ben has made Tom seem relatively less menacing over time , but I have a feeling that the terrifying , bearded sea captain is still in there somewhere . " In her review of the season four episode " The Other Woman " , Nikki Stafford of Wizard called the return of her " favorite Other " ( Tom ) a " highlight " . Following his posthumous flashback appearance in " Meet Kevin Johnson " , Martell said " Now I feel even worse about his death . He wasn 't just one of Ben 's scary , Walt @-@ napping minions . He had a heart . " Tim Goodman from the San Francisco Chronicle thought the revelation that Tom is gay was a " unique and funny twist " . Jay Glatfelter of The Huffington Post noted this revelation " seemed a little oddly placed , kind of like ' Let 's make one of our characters gay just for the heck of it ' but still it 's cool that the show has a perfectly normal ( well for an ' Other ' ) not over @-@ the @-@ top gay character . " 
 = Kepler @-@ 7b = 
 Kepler @-@ 7b is one of the first five exoplanets to be confirmed by NASA 's Kepler spacecraft , and was confirmed in the first 33 @.@ 5 days of Kepler 's science operations . It orbits a star slightly hotter and significantly larger than the Sun that is expected to soon reach the end of the main sequence . Kepler @-@ 7b is a hot Jupiter that is about half the mass of Jupiter , but is nearly 1 @.@ 5 times its size ; at the time of its discovery , Kepler @-@ 7b was the second most diffuse planet known , surpassed only by WASP @-@ 17b . It orbits its host star every five days at a distance of approximately 0 @.@ 06 AU ( 9 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 km ; 5 @,@ 600 @,@ 000 mi ) . Kepler @-@ 7b was announced at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society on January 4 , 2010 . It is the first extrasolar planet to have a crude map of cloud coverage . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 = = = Mass , temperature , and orbit = = = 
 Kepler @-@ 7b is a hot Jupiter , a Jupiter @-@ like exoplanet orbiting close to its star . Its equilibrium temperature , due to its proximity to its star , is hot and is measured at nearly 1540 K. However , of the first five planets discovered by Kepler , it is the second coolest , being surpassed only by Kepler @-@ 6b . This is over twelve times hotter than Jupiter . Kepler @-@ 7b has a mass of only 0 @.@ 433 that of Jupiter but due to proximity to its star the planet has expanded to a radius of 1 @.@ 478 that of Jupiter . Because of this its mean density is only 0 @.@ 166 g / cm3 , about the same as expanded polystyrene , a substance used to manufacture lightweight , disposable commercial plastic products . Only WASP @-@ 17b ( <unk> ; <unk> ) was known to have a lower density at the time of Kepler @-@ 7b 's discovery . Such low densities are not predicted by current standard theories of planet formation . Kepler @-@ 7b orbits its host star every 4 @.@ <unk> days at a distance of 0 @.@ <unk> AU , making it the furthest @-@ orbiting planet of the first five discovered by Kepler . Mercury , in contrast , orbits at a distance of 0 @.@ 387 AU every 87 @.@ 97 days . In addition Kepler @-@ 7b has an observed orbital inclination of <unk> , which means that its orbit is almost edge @-@ on as seen from Earth . 
 = = = Cloud mapping = = = 
 Astronomers using data from NASA 's Kepler and Spitzer space telescopes have created a cloud map of the planet . It is the first cloud map to be created beyond the Solar System . Kepler 's visible @-@ light observations of Kepler @-@ 7b 's Moon @-@ like phases led to a rough map of the planet that showed a bright spot on its western hemisphere . But these data were not enough on their own to decipher whether the bright spot was coming from clouds or heat . The Spitzer Space Telescope played a crucial role in answering this question . 
 Jonathan Fortney , professor of astronomy and astrophysics at UC Santa Cruz , said : " These clouds may well be composed of rock and iron , since the planet is over 1 @,@ 000 degrees Fahrenheit ( 500 degrees Celsius ) . " Brice @-@ Olivier <unk> of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology noted that the oceans and continents cannot be detected , but a clear reflective signature has been detected which is interpreted as cloud . Thomas Barclay , Kepler scientist at NASA 's Ames Research Center , said : " Unlike those on Earth , the cloud patterns on this planet do not seem to change much over time — it has a remarkably stable climate . " 
 = = = Host star = = = 
 Kepler @-@ 7 is the largest host star of the first five planets detected by Kepler , and is situated in the Lyra constellation . The star has a radius 184 % that of the Sun . Kepler @-@ 7 also has 135 % the Sun 's mass , and thus is larger and more massive ( though less dense ) than the Sun . It is slightly hotter than the Sun , as Kepler @-@ 7 has an effective temperature of <unk> K. The star is near the end of its life on the main sequence . The star 's metallicity is [ Fe / H ] = 0 @.@ 11 , which means that Kepler @-@ 7 has 128 % the amount of iron than is detected in the Sun . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 In 2009 , NASA 's Kepler spacecraft was completing the last of tests on its photometer , the instrument it uses to detect transit events , in which a planet crosses in front of and dims its host star for a brief and roughly regular period of time . In this last test , Kepler observed 50000 stars in the Kepler Input Catalog , including Kepler @-@ 7 ; the preliminary light curves were sent to the Kepler science team for analysis , who chose obvious planetary companions from the bunch for follow @-@ up at observatories . Kepler @-@ 7 was not one of these original candidates . After a resting period of 1 @.@ 3 days , Kepler began a nonstop 33 @.@ 5 @-@ day period in which it observed 150000 targets uninterrupted until June 15 , 2009 , when the collected data was downloaded and tested for false positives . Kepler @-@ 7 's candidate was not found to be one of these false positives , such as an eclipsing binary star that may generate a light curve that mimics that of transiting planetary companions . Kepler @-@ 7 was then observed using Doppler spectroscopy using the Fibre @-@ fed Echelle Spectrograph at the Canary Islands ' Nordic Optical Telescope for ten nights in October 2009 , taken with respect to the star HD <unk> to compensate for possible telescope error . <unk> imaging of the star was taken at WIYN Observatory in Arizona to check for close companions ; when none were found , the High Resolution Echelle Spectrometer instrument at the W.M. Keck Observatory on Hawaii , the Harlan J. Smith Telescope at the McDonald Observatory in Texas , the PRISM camera at the Lowell Observatory , and the <unk> Telescope North at the Haleakala Observatory on Maui were also used to analyze Doppler spectroscopy of the planetary candidate . The radial velocity observations confirmed that a planetary body was responsible for the dips observed in Kepler @-@ 7 's light curve , thus confirming it as a planet . 
 Kepler 's first discoveries , including the planets Kepler @-@ 4b , Kepler @-@ 5b , Kepler @-@ 6b , Kepler @-@ 7b , and Kepler @-@ 8b , were first announced on January 4 , 2010 , at the 215th meeting of the American Astronomical Society in Washington , D.C. 
 In May 2011 , the planet was detected by brightness variations of the star cause by reflected starlight from the planet . It was found that Kepler @-@ 7b has a relatively high geometric albedo of 0 @.@ 3 . 
 = The Coup ( The Office ) = 
 " The Coup " is the third episode of the third season of the American comedy television series The Office . It first aired on October 5 , 2006 on NBC in the United States . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Jan Levenson ( Melora Hardin ) becomes unimpressed with how Michael Scott ( Steve Carell ) is controlling his branch , so Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) tries to take his job and an office power play ensues . Meanwhile , Pam Beesly ( Jenna Fischer ) conducts a lunchtime fashion show , and the Stamford branch plays Call of Duty as a team @-@ building exercise , something Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) does not do well in . 
 The episode was written by co @-@ executive producer Paul Lieberstein and directed by executive producer Greg Daniels . Several cast members noted that the episode contained Shakespearean elements , such as Angela Martin 's similarities with the Macbeth character Lady Macbeth . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 1 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . Critical reception was largely mixed , with several reviewers criticizing Jim 's Stamford storyline . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Jan ( Melora Hardin ) berates Michael ( Steve Carell ) when she discovers that he calls the entire office into the conference room every Monday to watch a movie . Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) prods Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) to ask Jan to give him Michael 's job . After her awkward meeting with Dwight , where he declares he can be a better boss than Michael , Jan calls Michael and demands he get his branch under control . 
 The Stamford branch plays Call of Duty under the guise of a team @-@ building exercise . New to the game , Jim ( John Krasinski ) plays poorly and draws the ire of his teammates . As he leaves for home , Jim pretends to toss a grenade at Karen ( Rashida Jones ) , who responds by creating a pretend explosion with paper clips . Karen longingly watches Jim leave . 
 Meanwhile , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) decides to revamp her wardrobe after her separation from Roy and ordered some new clothes . When Pam 's clothes are shipped to the office , Kelly ( Mindy Kaling ) insists that Pam perform a lunchtime fashion show to show off a new blouse . When it draws unwanted attention , Pam concludes that it is too revealing . 
 Michael leads Dwight to believe that he has been given control of the branch before revealing the ruse . Dwight begs for his job and for Michael 's forgiveness while Angela and the rest of the office watch . Dwight offers to do Michael 's laundry for a year . When it appears that Michael is on the verge of firing Dwight , Michael insists that they " hug it out , bitch . " Dwight quickly returns to being Michael 's loyal right @-@ hand man , but Michael is still resentful , and forces Dwight to stand atop a box in the middle of the office , wearing a sign that says " <unk> " — and then promise to do Michael 's laundry for a year . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Coup " was written by co @-@ executive producer Paul Lieberstein , who plays series regular Toby Flenderson , and was directed by executive producer and series creator Greg Daniels . Several cast members believed the episode contains Shakespearean themes , in particular elements of the Macbeth character Lady Macbeth in Angela 's storyline . Lady Macbeth was depicted as an ambitious woman who " exerted an evil influence over her husband , " characteristics that fit with Angela attempting to push her lover , Dwight , into power . In her weekly blog for TV Guide , actress Kate Flannery previewed the episode , " Behind every great man is a pushy woman . Or in this case , a pushy , short , judgmental blonde named Angela . It 's the ultimate Adam @-@ and @-@ Eve saga . Angela is about to push the apple in Dwight 's face as she persuades him to try to take Michael 's place at Dunder @-@ Mifflin [ sic ] . " 
 In preparation for some episode scenes , Rashida Jones " took some serious Call of Duty " lessons from the writers , as they all play the online game . In the DVD audio commentary , Rainn Wilson stated that he was happy that the series could " have the nuanced stuff and then the really broad stuff " ; he referred specifically to Michael confronting Dwight in this episode as well as to the season 's twenty @-@ third episode " Beach Games " , where " people are running around in inflatable outfits bashing each other . " Also in the audio commentary , Jones suggested that Dwight 's punishment – being forced to wear a " liar " sign and stand silently on some boxes in the middle of the office – was reminiscent of the iconic photo of the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse . 
 The season three DVD contains a number of deleted scenes that were edited from the episode . These include Creed revealing that he sleeps under his desk four nights a week , Dwight and Angela flirting in the break room after he tries to persuade her to join Movie Monday , Dwight responding to Angela 's initial suggestions that he should push Michael out by saying " Michael has the best sales figures in the company 's <unk> 'll never come close to his numbers " , Michael becoming suspicious when Pam interrupts to tell him that he has a phone call , Pam responding to Kevin 's unwanted attention to her neckline , and Creed reacting to having Dwight as the new boss . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Coup " first aired on October 5 , 2006 in the United States on NBC . It received a Nielsen rating of 4 @.@ 1 / 11 . This means that it was seen by 4 @.@ 1 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 11 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode placed as the 24th most @-@ watched episode for the week in that demographic . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television critics . IGN columnist Brian Zoromski rated " The Coup " 7 @.@ 8 / 10 , indicating it as a " good " episode . He felt that after the " brilliant " episode from the previous week , " The Coup " was " somewhat anticlimactic , as Jim doesn 't interact at all with the Scranton branch and the Pam @-@ Jim storyline is pretty much ignored . " Despite his disappointment with Jim 's storyline , Zoromski commented that the " best moments of the episode were the completely random ones , such as Dwight knowing that Jan wears blouses from Liz Claiborne and earrings from Ann Taylor . " AOLTV 's Michael Sciannamea was also unhappy with Jim 's scenes , writing that they were " beginning to grate on [ him ] . Is every branch office at Dunder Mifflin filled with crazies ? How then does the company stay in business ? I think it would have been funnier if Jim ended up in an office where it 's nothing but work and no play at all . The Call of Duty bits didn 't do much for me . " 
 Kath Skerry of Give Me My Remote called Dwight 's groveling " hilarious , " but was unsure about Jim and Karen 's ending scene , explaining that it " was adorable . Too adorable . And I ’ m not quite ready to handle the fact that I ’ m not <unk> the idea of Jim and Karen . I feel like I ’ m betraying Pam . I ’ m still a JAM shipper all the way , but it ’ s nice to see Jim smile again . " Skerry concluded that " there were some seriously funny , laugh out loud moments tonight , but I don ’ t think this episode is going to make my favorites list . But even when The Office isn ’ t at its best , it ’ s still hands down the best comedy on TV . " Television Without Pity graded the episode with an A- . In the audio commentary , Wilson noted that " The Coup " is " not a fan favorite , " though it was submitted for an Emmy Award . For his work on this episode , Paul Lieberstein was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award for Best Screenplay – Episodic Comedy . 
 = Supernova = 
 A supernova is an astronomical event that occurs during the last stellar evolutionary stages of a massive star 's life , whose dramatic and catastrophic destruction is marked by one final titanic explosion . For a short time , this causes the sudden appearance of a ' new ' bright star , before slowly fading from sight over several weeks or months . 
 Only three Milky Way naked @-@ eye supernova events have been observed during the last thousand years , though many have been telescopically seen in other galaxies . The most recent directly observed supernova in the Milky Way was Kepler 's Star in 1604 ( SN 1604 ) , but remnants of two more recent supernovae have been found retrospectively . Statistical observations of supernovae in other galaxies suggest they should occur on average about three times every century in the Milky Way , and that any galactic supernova would almost certainly be observable in modern astronomical equipment . 
 Supernovae are more energetic than novae . In Latin , Nova means " new " , referring astronomically to what appears to be a temporary new bright star . Adding the prefix " super- " distinguishes supernovae from ordinary novae , which are far less luminous . The word supernova was coined by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky in 1931 . It is pronounced / <unk> / with the plural supernovae / <unk> / or supernovas ( abbreviated SN , plural SNe after " supernovae " ) . 
 During maximum brightness , the total equivalent radiant energies produced by supernovae may briefly outshine an entire output of a typical galaxy and emit energies equal to that created over the lifetime of any solar @-@ like star . Such extreme catastrophes may also expel much , if not all , of its stellar material away from the star , at velocities up to 30 @,@ 000 km / s or 10 % of the speed of light . This drives an expanding and fast @-@ moving shock wave into the surrounding interstellar medium , and in turn , sweeping up an expanding shell of gas and dust , which is observed as a supernova remnant . Supernovae create , fuse and eject the bulk of the chemical elements produced by nucleosynthesis . Supernovae play a significant role in enriching the interstellar medium with the heavier atomic mass chemical elements . Furthermore , the expanding shock waves from supernova explosions can trigger the formation of new stars . Supernova remnants are expected to accelerate a large fraction of galactic primary cosmic rays , but direct evidence for cosmic ray production was found only in a few of them so far . They are also potentially strong galactic sources of gravitational waves . 
 Theoretical studies of many supernovae indicate that most are triggered by one of two basic mechanisms : the sudden re @-@ ignition of nuclear fusion in a degenerate star or the sudden gravitational collapse of a massive star 's core . In the first instance , a degenerate white dwarf may accumulate sufficient material from a binary companion , either through accretion or via a merger , to raise its core temperature enough to trigger runaway nuclear fusion , completely disrupting the star . In the second case , the core of a massive star may undergo sudden gravitational collapse , releasing gravitational potential energy as a supernova . While some observed supernovae are more complex than these two simplified theories , the astrophysical collapse mechanics have been established and accepted by most astronomers for some time . 
 Due to the wide range of astrophysical consequences of these events , astronomers now deem supernovae research , across the fields of stellar and galactic evolution , as an especially important area for investigation . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 In Latin , Nova means " new " , referring astronomically to what appears to be a temporary new bright star . Adding the prefix " super- " distinguishes supernovae from ordinary novae , which are far less luminous . The word supernova was coined by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky in 1931 . It is pronounced / <unk> / with the plural supernovae / <unk> / or supernovas ( abbreviated SN , plural SNe after " supernovae " ) . 
 = = Observation history = = 
 The earliest recorded supernova , SN 185 , was viewed by Chinese astronomers in 185 AD , with the brightest recorded supernova being SN 1006 , which occurred in 1006 AD and was described in detail by Chinese and Islamic astronomers . The widely observed supernova SN 1054 produced the Crab Nebula . Supernovae SN 1572 and SN 1604 , the latest to be observed with the naked eye in the Milky Way galaxy , had notable effects on the development of astronomy in Europe because they were used to argue against the Aristotelian idea that the universe beyond the Moon and planets was static and unchanging . Johannes Kepler began observing SN 1604 at its peak on October 17 , 1604 , and continued to make estimates of its brightness until it faded from naked eye view a year later . It was the second supernova to be observed in a generation ( after SN 1572 seen by Tycho Brahe in Cassiopeia ) . 
 Before the development of the telescope , there have only been five supernovae seen in the last millennium . In the perspective of how long a star 's lifetime is , its death is very brief . In fact , a star 's death may only last a few months . Due to this , a typical human will only experience this rarity , on average , once in their lifetime . This is a microscopic fraction in comparison to the 100 billion stars that compose a galaxy . However , since the use of modern equipment , particularly in this millennium , professional and amateur astronomers have been finding several hundreds of supernovae each year . 
 The field of supernova discovery has extended to other galaxies , starting with SN <unk> in the Andromeda galaxy . American astronomers Rudolph Minkowski and Fritz Zwicky developed the modern supernova classification scheme beginning in 1941 . In the 1960s , astronomers found that the maximum intensities of supernova explosions could be used as standard candles , hence indicators of astronomical distances . Some of the most distant supernovae recently observed appeared dimmer than expected . This supports the view that the expansion of the universe is accelerating . Techniques were developed for reconstructing supernova explosions that have no written records of being observed . The date of the Cassiopeia A supernova event was determined from light echoes off nebulae , while the age of supernova remnant RX J0852.0 @-@ 4622 was estimated from temperature measurements and the gamma ray emissions from the decay of titanium @-@ 44 . 
 The brightest observed supernova , <unk> @-@ <unk> , was detected in June 2015 . With a brightness of 570 billion Suns , <unk> @-@ <unk> 's peak luminosity was twice that of the previous record holder . 
 = = Discovery = = 
 Early work on what was originally believed to be simply a new category of novae was performed during the 1930s by Walter Baade and Fritz Zwicky at Mount Wilson Observatory . The name super @-@ novae was first used during 1931 lectures held at Caltech by Baade and Zwicky , then used publicly in 1933 at a meeting of the American Physical Society . By 1938 , the hyphen had been lost and the modern name was in use . Because supernovae are relatively rare events within a galaxy , occurring about three times a century in the Milky Way , obtaining a good sample of supernovae to study requires regular monitoring of many galaxies . 
 Supernovae in other galaxies cannot be predicted with any meaningful accuracy . Normally , when they are discovered , they are already in progress . Most scientific interest in supernovae — as standard candles for measuring distance , for example — require an observation of their peak luminosity . It is therefore important to discover them well before they reach their maximum . Amateur astronomers , who greatly outnumber professional astronomers , have played an important role in finding supernovae , typically by looking at some of the closer galaxies through an optical telescope and comparing them to earlier photographs . 
 Toward the end of the 20th century astronomers increasingly turned to computer @-@ controlled telescopes and CCDs for hunting supernovae . While such systems are popular with amateurs , there are also professional installations such as the Katzman Automatic Imaging Telescope . Recently the Supernova Early Warning System ( <unk> ) project has begun using a network of neutrino detectors to give early warning of a supernova in the Milky Way galaxy . Neutrinos are particles that are produced in great quantities by a supernova explosion , and they are not significantly absorbed by the interstellar gas and dust of the galactic disk . 
 Supernova searches fall into two classes : those focused on relatively nearby events and those looking for explosions farther away . Because of the expansion of the universe , the distance to a remote object with a known emission spectrum can be estimated by measuring its Doppler shift ( or redshift ) ; on average , more distant objects recede with greater velocity than those nearby , and so have a higher redshift . Thus the search is split between high redshift and low redshift , with the boundary falling around a redshift range of z = 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 3 — where z is a dimensionless measure of the spectrum 's frequency shift . 
 High redshift searches for supernovae usually involve the observation of supernova light curves . These are useful for standard or calibrated candles to generate Hubble diagrams and make cosmological predictions . Supernova spectroscopy , used to study the physics and environments of supernovae , is more practical at low than at high redshift . Low redshift observations also anchor the low @-@ distance end of the Hubble curve , which is a plot of distance versus redshift for visible galaxies . ( See also Hubble 's law ) . 
 = = Naming convention = = 
 Supernova discoveries are reported to the International Astronomical Union 's Central Bureau for Astronomical Telegrams , which sends out a circular with the name it assigns to that supernova . The name is the marker SN followed by the year of discovery , suffixed with a one or two @-@ letter designation . The first 26 supernovae of the year are designated with a capital letter from A to Z. Afterward pairs of lower @-@ case letters are used : aa , ab , and so on . Hence , for example , SN <unk> designates the third supernova reported in the year 2003 . The last supernova of 2005 was SN <unk> , indicating that it was the 367th supernova found in 2005 . Since 2000 , professional and amateur astronomers have been finding several hundreds of supernovae each year ( 572 in 2007 , 261 in 2008 , 390 in 2009 ; 231 in 2013 ) . 
 Historical supernovae are known simply by the year they occurred : SN 185 , SN 1006 , SN 1054 , SN 1572 ( called Tycho 's Nova ) and SN 1604 ( Kepler 's Star ) . Since 1885 the additional letter notation has been used , even if there was only one supernova discovered that year ( e.g. SN <unk> , SN <unk> , etc . ) — this last happened with SN <unk> . SN , for <unk> , is a standard prefix . Until 1987 , two @-@ letter designations were rarely needed ; since 1988 , however , they have been needed every year . 
 = = Classification = = 
 As part of the attempt to understand supernovae , astronomers have classified them according to their light curves and the absorption lines of different chemical elements that appear in their spectra . The first element for division is the presence or absence of a line caused by hydrogen . If a supernova 's spectrum contains lines of hydrogen ( known as the Balmer series in the visual portion of the spectrum ) it is classified Type II ; otherwise it is Type I. In each of these two types there are subdivisions according to the presence of lines from other elements or the shape of the light curve ( a graph of the supernova 's apparent magnitude as a function of time ) . 
 = = = Type I = = = 
 Type I supernovae are subdivided on the basis of their spectra , with type Ia showing a strong ionised silicon absorption line . Type I supernovae without this strong line are classified as Type Ib and Ic , with Type Ib showing strong neutral helium lines and Type Ic lacking them . The light curves are all similar , although Type Ia are generally brighter at peak luminosity , but the light curve is not important for classification of Type I supernovae . 
 A small number of Type Ia supernovae exhibit unusual features such as non @-@ standard luminosity or broadened light curves , and these are typically classified by referring to the earliest example showing similar features . For example , the sub @-@ luminous SN 2008ha is often referred to as SN <unk> @-@ like or class Ia @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Type II = = = 
 The supernovae of Type II can also be sub @-@ divided based on their spectra . While most Type II supernovae show very broad emission lines which indicate expansion velocities of many thousands of kilometres per second , some , such as SN <unk> , have relatively narrow features in their spectra . These are called Type IIn , where the ' n ' stands for ' narrow ' . 
 A few supernovae , such as SN <unk> and SN <unk> , appear to change types : they show lines of hydrogen at early times , but , over a period of weeks to months , become dominated by lines of helium . The term " Type IIb " is used to describe the combination of features normally associated with Types II and Ib . 
 Type II supernovae with normal spectra dominated by broad hydrogen lines that remain for the life of the decline are classified on the basis of their light curves . The most common type shows a distinctive " plateau " in the light curve shortly after peak brightness where the visual luminosity stays relatively constant for several months before the decline resumes . These are called type II @-@ P referring to the plateau . Less common are type II @-@ L supernovae that lack a distinct plateau . The " L " signifies " linear " although the light curve is not actually a straight line . 
 Supernovae that do not fit into the normal classifications are designated peculiar , or ' <unk> ' . 
 = = = Types III , IV , and V = = = 
 Fritz Zwicky defined additional supernovae types , although based on a very few examples that didn 't cleanly fit the parameters for a Type I or Type II supernova . SN <unk> in NGC <unk> was the prototype and only member of the Type III supernova class , noted for its broad light curve maximum and broad hydrogen Balmer lines that were slow to develop in the spectrum . SN <unk> in NGC 3003 was the prototype and only member of the Type IV class , with a light curve similar to a Type II @-@ P supernova , with hydrogen absorption lines but weak hydrogen emission lines . The Type V class was coined for SN 1961V in NGC 1058 , an unusual faint supernova or supernova imposter with a slow rise to brightness , a maximum lasting many months , and an unusual emission spectrum . The similarity of SN 1961V to the Eta Carinae Great Outburst was noted . Supernovae in M101 ( 1909 ) and M83 ( 1923 and 1957 ) were also suggested as possible type IV or type V supernovae . 
 These types would now all be treated as peculiar Type II supernovae , of which many more examples have been discovered , although it is still debated whether SN 1961V was a true supernova following an LBV outburst or an imposter . 
 = = Current models = = 
 The type codes , described above given to supernovae , are taxonomic in nature : the type number describes the light observed from the supernova , not necessarily its cause . For example , type Ia supernovae are produced by runaway fusion ignited on degenerate white dwarf progenitors while the spectrally similar type Ib / c are produced from massive Wolf @-@ Rayet progenitors by core collapse . The following summarizes what is currently believe to be the most plausible explanations for supernovae . 
 = = = Thermal runaway = = = 
 A white dwarf star may accumulate sufficient material from a stellar companion to raise its core temperature enough to ignite carbon fusion , at which point it undergoes runaway nuclear fusion , completely disrupting it . There are three avenues by which this detonation is theorized to happen : stable accretion of material from a companion , the collision of two white dwarfs , or accretion that causes ignition in a shell that then ignites . The dominant mechanism by which Type Ia supernovae are produced remains unclear . Despite this uncertainty in how Type Ia supernovae are produced , Type Ia supernovae have very uniform properties , and are useful standard candles over intergalactic distances . Some calibrations are required to compensate for the gradual change in properties or different frequencies of abnormal luminosity supernovae at high red shift , and for small variations in brightness identified by light curve shape or spectrum . 
 = = = = Normal Type Ia = = = = 
 There are several means by which a supernova of this type can form , but they share a common underlying mechanism . If a carbon @-@ oxygen white dwarf accreted enough matter to reach the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1 @.@ 44 solar masses ( M ☉ ) ( for a non @-@ rotating star ) , it would no longer be able to support the bulk of its mass through electron degeneracy pressure and would begin to collapse . However , the current view is that this limit is not normally attained ; increasing temperature and density inside the core ignite carbon fusion as the star approaches the limit ( to within about 1 % ) , before collapse is initiated . 
 Within a few seconds , a substantial fraction of the matter in the white dwarf undergoes nuclear fusion , releasing enough energy ( 1 – 2 × 1044 J ) to unbind the star in a supernova explosion . An outwardly expanding shock wave is generated , with matter reaching velocities on the order of 5 @,@ 000 – 20 @,@ 000 km / s , or roughly 3 % of the speed of light . There is also a significant increase in luminosity , reaching an absolute magnitude of − 19 @.@ 3 ( or 5 billion times brighter than the Sun ) , with little variation . 
 The model for the formation of this category of supernova is a closed binary star system . The larger of the two stars is the first to evolve off the main sequence , and it expands to form a red giant . The two stars now share a common envelope , causing their mutual orbit to shrink . The giant star then sheds most of its envelope , losing mass until it can no longer continue nuclear fusion . At this point it becomes a white dwarf star , composed primarily of carbon and oxygen . Eventually the secondary star also evolves off the main sequence to form a red giant . Matter from the giant is accreted by the white dwarf , causing the latter to increase in mass . Despite widespread acceptance of the basic model , the exact details of initiation and of the heavy elements produced in the explosion are still unclear . 
 Type Ia supernovae follow a characteristic light curve — the graph of luminosity as a function of time — after the explosion . This luminosity is generated by the radioactive decay of nickel @-@ 56 through cobalt @-@ 56 to iron @-@ 56 . The peak luminosity of the light curve is extremely consistent across normal Type Ia supernovae , having a maximum absolute magnitude of about − 19 @.@ 3 . This allows them to be used as a secondary standard candle to measure the distance to their host galaxies . 
 = = = = Non @-@ standard Type Ia = = = = 
 Another model for the formation of a Type Ia explosion involves the merger of two white dwarf stars , with the combined mass momentarily exceeding the Chandrasekhar limit . There is much variation in this type of explosion , and in many cases there may be no supernova at all , but it is expected that they will have a broader and less luminous light curve than the more normal Type Ia explosions . 
 Abnormally bright Type Ia supernovae are expected when the white dwarf already has a mass higher than the Chandrasekhar limit , possibly enhanced further by asymmetry , but the ejected material will have less than normal kinetic energy . 
 There is no formal sub @-@ classification for the non @-@ standard Type Ia supernovae . It has been proposed that a group of sub @-@ luminous supernovae that occur when helium accretes onto a white dwarf should be classified as type Iax . This type of supernova may not always completely destroy the white dwarf progenitor and could leave behind a zombie star . 
 One specific type of non @-@ standard Type Ia supernova develops hydrogen , and other , emission lines and gives the appearance of mixture between a normal Type Ia and a Type IIn supernova . Examples are SN <unk> and SN <unk> . These supernova have been dubbed Type Ia / IIn , Type Ian , Type IIa and Type <unk> . 
 = = = Core collapse = = = 
 Very massive stars can undergo core collapse when nuclear fusion suddenly becomes unable to sustain the core against its own gravity ; this is the cause of all types of supernova except type Ia . The collapse may cause violent expulsion of the outer layers of the star resulting in a supernova , or the release of gravitational potential energy may be insufficient and the star may collapse into a black hole or neutron star with little radiated energy . 
 Core collapse can be caused by several different mechanisms : electron capture ; exceeding the Chandrasekhar limit ; pair @-@ instability ; or photodisintegration . When a massive star develops an iron core larger than the Chandrasekhar mass it will no longer be able to support itself by electron degeneracy pressure and will collapse further to a neutron star or black hole . Electron capture by magnesium in a degenerate O / Ne / Mg core causes gravitational collapse followed by explosive oxygen fusion , with very similar results . Electron @-@ positron pair production in a large post @-@ helium burning core removes thermodynamic support and causes initial collapse followed by runaway fusion , resulting in a pair @-@ instability supernova . A sufficiently large and hot stellar core may generate gamma @-@ rays energetic enough to initiate photodisintegration directly , which will cause a complete collapse of the core . 
 The table below lists the known reasons for core collapse in massive stars , the types of star that they occur in , their associated supernova type , and the remnant produced . The metallicity is the proportion of elements other than hydrogen or helium , as compared to the Sun . The initial mass is the mass of the star prior to the supernova event , given in multiples of the Sun 's mass , although the mass at the time of the supernova may be much lower . 
 Type IIn supernovae are not listed in the table . They can potentially be produced by various types of core collapse in different progenitor stars , possibly even by type Ia white dwarf ignitions , although it seems that most will be from iron core collapse in luminous supergiants or hypergiants ( including LBVs ) . The narrow spectral lines for which they are named occur because the supernova is expanding into a small dense cloud of circumstellar material . It appears that a significant proportion of supposed type IIn supernovae are actually supernova imposters , massive eruptions of LBV @-@ like stars similar to the Great Eruption Eta Carinae . In these events , material previously ejected from the star creates the narrow absorption lines and causes a shock wave through interaction with the newly ejected material . 
 When a stellar core is no longer supported against gravity it collapses in on itself with velocities reaching 70 @,@ 000 km / s ( <unk> ) , resulting in a rapid increase in temperature and density . What follows next depends on the mass and structure of the collapsing core , with low mass degenerate cores forming neutron stars , higher mass degenerate cores mostly collapsing completely to black holes , and non @-@ degenerate cores undergoing runaway fusion . 
 The initial collapse of degenerate cores is accelerated by beta decay , photodisintegration and electron capture , which causes a burst of electron neutrinos . As the density increases , neutrino emission is cut off as they become trapped in the core . The inner core eventually reaches typically 30 km diameter and a density comparable to that of an atomic nucleus , and neutron degeneracy pressure tries to halt the collapse . If the core mass is more than about 15 M ☉ then neutron degeneracy is insufficient to stop the collapse and a black hole forms directly with no supernova explosion . 
 In lower mass cores the collapse is stopped and the newly formed neutron core has an initial temperature of about 100 billion kelvin , 6000 times the temperature of the sun 's core . At this temperature , neutrino @-@ antineutrino pairs of all flavors are efficiently formed by thermal emission . These thermal neutrinos are several times more abundant than the electron @-@ capture neutrinos . About 1046 joules , approximately 10 % of the star 's rest mass , is converted into a ten @-@ second burst of neutrinos which is the main output of the event . The suddenly halted core collapse rebounds and produces a shock wave that stalls within milliseconds in the outer core as energy is lost through the dissociation of heavy elements . A process that is not clearly understood is necessary to allow the outer layers of the core to reabsorb around 1044 joules ( 1 foe ) from the neutrino pulse , producing the visible explosion , although there are also other theories on how to power the explosion . 
 Some material from the outer envelope falls back onto the neutron star , and for cores beyond about 8 M ☉ there is sufficient fallback to form a black hole . This fallback will reduce the kinetic energy of the explosion and the mass of expelled radioactive material , but in some situations it may also generate relativistic jets that result in a gamma @-@ ray burst or an exceptionally luminous supernova . 
 Collapse of massive non @-@ degenerate cores will ignite further fusion . When the core collapse is initiated by pair instability , oxygen fusion begins and the collapse may be halted . For core masses of 40 – 60 M ☉ , the collapse halts and the star remains intact , but core collapse will occur again when a larger core has formed . For cores of around 60 – 130 M ☉ , the fusion of oxygen and heavier elements is so energetic that the entire star is disrupted , causing a supernova . At the upper end of the mass range , the supernova is unusually luminous and extremely long @-@ lived due to many solar masses of ejected 56Ni . For even larger core masses , the core temperature becomes high enough to allow photodisintegration and the core collapses completely into a black hole . 
 = = = = Type II = = = = 
