 Stars with initial masses less than about eight times the sun never develop a core large enough to collapse and they eventually lose their atmospheres to become white dwarfs . Stars with at least 9 M ☉ ( possibly as much as 12 M ☉ ) evolve in a complex fashion , progressively burning heavier elements at hotter temperatures in their cores . The star becomes layered like an onion , with the burning of more easily fused elements occurring in larger shells . Although popularly described as an onion with an iron core , the least massive supernova progenitors only have oxygen @-@ neon ( <unk> ) cores . These super AGB stars may form the majority of core collapse supernovae , although less luminous and so less commonly observed than those from more massive progenitors . 
 If core collapse occurs during a supergiant phase when the star still has a hydrogen envelope , the result is a Type II supernova . The rate of mass loss for luminous stars depends on the metallicity and luminosity . Extremely luminous stars at near solar metallicity will lose all their hydrogen before they reach core collapse and so will not form a type II supernova . At low metallicity , all stars will reach core collapse with a hydrogen envelope but sufficiently massive stars collapse directly to a black hole without producing a visible supernova . 
 Stars with an initial mass up to about 90 times the sun , or a little less at high metallicity , are expected to result in a type II @-@ P supernova which is the most commonly observed type . At moderate to high metallicity , stars near the upper end of that mass range will have lost most of their hydrogen when core collapse occurs and the result will be a Type II @-@ L supernova . At very low metallicity , stars of around 140 – 250 M ☉ will reach core collapse by pair instability while they still have a hydrogen atmosphere and an oxygen core and the result will be a supernova with Type II characteristics but a very large mass of ejected 56Ni and high luminosity . 
 = = = = Type Ib and Ic = = = = 
 These supernovae , like those of Type II , are massive stars that undergo core collapse . However the stars which become Types Ib and Ic supernovae have lost most of their outer ( hydrogen ) envelopes due to strong stellar winds or else from interaction with a companion . These stars are known as Wolf @-@ Rayet stars , and they occur at moderate to high metallicity where continuum driven winds cause sufficiently high mass loss rates . Observations of type Ib / c supernova do not match the observed or expected occurrence of Wolf Rayet stars and alternate explanations for this type of core collapse supernova involve stars stripped of their hydrogen by binary interactions . Binary models provide a better match for the observed supernovae , with the proviso that no suitable binary helium stars have ever been observed . Since a supernova explosion can occur whenever the mass of the star at the time of core collapse is low enough not to cause complete fallback to a black hole , any massive star may result in a supernova if it loses enough mass before core collapse occurs . 
 Type Ib supernovae are the more common and result from Wolf @-@ Rayet stars of type WC which still have helium in their atmospheres . For a narrow range of masses , stars evolve further before reaching core collapse to become WO stars with very little helium remaining and these are the progenitors of type Ic supernovae . 
 A few percent of the Type Ic supernovae are associated with gamma @-@ ray bursts ( GRB ) , though it is also believed that any hydrogen @-@ stripped Type Ib or Ic supernova could produce a GRB , depending on the geometry of the explosion . The mechanism for producing this type of GRB is the jets produced by the magnetic field of the rapidly spinning magnetar formed at the collapsing core of the star . The jets would also transfer energy into the expanding outer shell of the explosion to produce a super @-@ luminous supernova . 
 Ultra @-@ stripped supernovae occur when the exploding star has been stripped ( almost ) all the way to the metal core , via mass transfer in a close binary . As a result , very little material is ejected from the exploding star ( ~ 0 @.@ 1 MSun ) . In the most extreme cases , ultra @-@ stripped supernovae can occur in naked metal cores , barely above the Chandrasekhar mass limit . SN <unk> might be an observational example of an ultra @-@ stripped supernova , giving rise to a relatively dim and fast decaying light curve . The nature of ultra @-@ stripped supernovae can be both iron core @-@ collapse and electron capture supernovae , depending on the mass of the collapsing core . 
 = = = Failed = = = 
 The core collapse of some massive stars may not result in a visible supernova . The main model for this is a sufficiently massive core that the explosion is insufficient to reverse the infall of the outer layers onto a black hole . These events are difficult to detect , but large surveys have detected possible candidates . 
 = = = Light curves = = = 
 A historic puzzle concerned the source of energy that can maintain the optical supernova glow for months . Although the energy that disrupts each type of supernovae is delivered promptly , the light curves are mostly dominated by subsequent radioactive heating of the rapidly expanding ejecta . Some have considered rotational energy from the central pulsar . The ejecta gases would dim quickly without some energy input to keep it hot . The intensely radioactive nature of the ejecta gases , which is now known to be correct for most supernovae , was first calculated on sound nucleosynthesis grounds in the late 1960s . It was not until SN 1987A that direct observation of gamma @-@ ray lines unambiguously identified the major radioactive nuclei . 
 It is now known by direct observation that much of the light curve ( the graph of luminosity as a function of time ) after the explosion of a Type II Supernova such as SN 1987A is provided its energy by those predicted radioactive decays . Although the luminous emission consists of optical photons , it is the radioactive power absorbed by the ejected gases that keeps the remnant hot enough to radiate light . The radioactive decay of 56Ni through its daughters 56Co to 56Fe produces gamma @-@ ray photons , primarily of <unk> and <unk> , that are absorbed and dominate the heating and thus the luminosity of the ejecta at intermediate times ( several weeks ) to late times ( several months ) . Energy for the peak of the light curve of SN1987A was provided by the decay of 56Ni to 56Co ( half life 6 days ) while energy for the later light curve in particular fit very closely with the 77 @.@ 3 day half @-@ life of 56Co decaying to 56Fe . Later measurements by space gamma @-@ ray telescopes of the small fraction of the 56Co and 57Co gamma rays that escaped the SN 1987A remnant without absorption confirmed earlier predictions that those two radioactive nuclei were the power sources . 
 The visual light curves of the different supernova types all depend at late times on radioactive heating , but they vary in shape and amplitude on the underlying mechanisms of the explosion , the way that visible radiation is produced , the epoch of its observation , and the transparency of the ejected material . The light curves can be significantly different at other wavelengths . For example , at ultraviolet wavelengths there is an early extremely luminous peak lasting only a few hours corresponding to the breakout of the shock launched by the initial explosion , but that breakout is hardly detectable optically . 
 The light curves for type Ia are mostly very uniform , with a consistent maximum absolute magnitude and a relatively steep decline in luminosity . Their optical energy output is driven by radioactive decay of nickel @-@ 56 ( half life 6 days ) , which then decays to radioactive cobalt @-@ 56 ( half life 77 days ) . These radioisotopes from material ejected in the explosion excite surrounding material to incandescence . Studies of cosmology today rely on 56Ni radioactivity providing the energy for the optical brightness of supernovae of Type Ia , which are the " standard candles " of cosmology but whose diagnostic <unk> and <unk> gamma rays were first detected only in 2014 . The initial phases of the light curve decline steeply as the effective size of the photosphere decreases and trapped electromagnetic radiation is depleted . The light curve continues to decline in the B band while it may show a small shoulder in the visual at about 40 days , but this is only a hint of a secondary maximum that occurs in the infra @-@ red as certain ionised heavy elements recombine to produce infra @-@ red radiation and the ejecta become transparent to it . The visual light curve continues to decline at a rate slightly greater than the decay rate of the radioactive cobalt ( which has the longer half life and controls the later curve ) , because the ejected material becomes more diffuse and less able to convert the high energy radiation into visual radiation . After several months , the light curve changes its decline rate again as positron emission becomes dominant from the remaining cobalt @-@ 56 , although this portion of the light curve has been little @-@ studied . 
 Type Ib and Ic light curves are basically similar to type Ia although with a lower average peak luminosity . The visual light output is again due to radioactive decay being converted into visual radiation , but there is a much lower mass of nickel @-@ 56 produced in these types of explosion . The peak luminosity varies considerably and there are even occasional type Ib / c supernovae orders of magnitude more and less luminous than the norm . The most luminous type Ic supernovae are referred to as hypernovae and tend to have broadened light curves in addition to the increased peak luminosity . The source of the extra energy is thought to be relativistic jets driven by the formation of a rotating black hole , which also produce gamma @-@ ray bursts . 
 The light curves for type II supernovae are characterised by a much slower decline than type I , on the order of 0 @.@ 05 magnitudes per day , excluding the plateau phase . The visual light output is dominated by kinetic energy rather than radioactive decay for several months , due primarily to the existence of hydrogen in the ejecta from the atmosphere of the supergiant progenitor star . In the initial explosion this hydrogen becomes heated and ionised . The majority of type II supernovae show a prolonged plateau in their light curves as this hydrogen recombines , emitting visible light and becoming more transparent . This is then followed by a declining light curve driven by radioactive decay although slower than in type I supernovae , due to the efficiency of conversion into light by all the hydrogen . 
 In type II @-@ L the plateau is absent because the progenitor had relatively little hydrogen left in its atmosphere , sufficient to appear in the spectrum but insufficient to produce a noticeable plateau in the light output . In type IIb supernovae the hydrogen atmosphere of the progenitor is so depleted ( thought to be due to tidal stripping by a companion star ) that the light curve is closer to a type I supernova and the hydrogen even disappears from the spectrum after several weeks . 
 Type IIn supernovae are characterised by additional narrow spectral lines produced in a dense shell of circumstellar material . Their light curves are generally very broad and extended , occasionally also extremely luminous and referred to as a hypernova . These light curves are produced by the highly efficient conversion of kinetic energy of the ejecta into electromagnetic radiation by interaction with the dense shell of material . This only occurs when the material is sufficiently dense and compact , indicating that it has been produced by the progenitor star itself only shortly before the supernova occurs . 
 Large numbers of supernovae have been catalogued and classified to provide distance candles and test models . Average characteristics vary somewhat with distance and type of host galaxy , but can broadly be specified for each supernova type . 
 Notes : 
 = = = Asymmetry = = = 
 A long @-@ standing puzzle surrounding Type II supernovae is why the compact object remaining after the explosion is given a large velocity away from the epicentre ; pulsars , and thus neutron stars , are observed to have high velocities , and black holes presumably do as well , although they are far harder to observe in isolation . The initial impetus can be substantial , propelling an object of more than a solar mass at a velocity of 500 km / s or greater . This indicates an asymmetry in the explosion , but the mechanism by which momentum is transferred to the compact object remains a puzzle . Proposed explanations for this kick include convection in the collapsing star and jet production during neutron star formation . 
 One possible explanation for the asymmetry in the explosion is large @-@ scale convection above the core . The convection can create variations in the local abundances of elements , resulting in uneven nuclear burning during the collapse , bounce and resulting explosion . 
 Another possible explanation is that accretion of gas onto the central neutron star can create a disk that drives highly directional jets , propelling matter at a high velocity out of the star , and driving transverse shocks that completely disrupt the star . These jets might play a crucial role in the resulting supernova explosion . ( A similar model is now favored for explaining long gamma @-@ ray bursts . ) 
 Initial asymmetries have also been confirmed in Type Ia supernova explosions through observation . This result may mean that the initial luminosity of this type of supernova depends on the viewing angle . However , the explosion becomes more symmetrical with the passage of time . Early asymmetries are detectable by measuring the polarization of the emitted light . 
 = = = Energy output = = = 
 Although we are used to thinking of supernovae primarily as luminous visible events , the electromagnetic radiation they release is almost a minor side @-@ effect of the explosion . Particularly in the case of core collapse supernovae , the emitted electromagnetic radiation is a tiny fraction of the total energy released during the event . 
 There is a fundamental difference between the balance of energy production in the different types of supernova . In type Ia white dwarf detonations , most of the energy is directed into heavy element synthesis and the kinetic energy of the ejecta . In core collapse supernovae , the vast majority of the energy is directed into neutrino emission , and while some of this apparently powers the following main explosion 99 % + of the neutrinos escape the star in the first few minutes following the start of the collapse . 
 Type Ia supernovae derive their energy from a runaway nuclear fusion of a carbon @-@ oxygen white dwarf . The details of the energetics are still not fully understood , but the end result is the ejection of the entire mass of the original star at high kinetic energy . Around half a solar mass of that mass is 56Ni generated from silicon burning . 56Ni is radioactive and decays into 56Co by beta plus decay ( with a half life of six days ) and gamma rays . 56Co itself decays by the beta plus ( an anti @-@ electron ) path with a half life of 77 days into stable 56Fe . These two processes are responsible for the electromagnetic radiation from type Ia supernovae . In combination with the changing transparency of the ejected material , they produce the rapidly declining light curve . 
 Core collapse supernovae are on average visually fainter than type Ia supernovae , but the total energy released is far higher . In the case of supernovae , the energy of gravitational potential energy is converted into kinetic energy that compresses and collapses the core , initially producing electron neutrinos from disintegrating nucleons , followed by all flavours of thermal neutrinos from the super @-@ heated neutron star core . Around 1 % of these neutrinos are thought to deposit sufficient energy into the outer layers of the star to drive the resulting explosion , but again the details cannot be reproduced exactly in current models . Kinetic energies and nickel yields are somewhat lower than type Ia supernovae , hence the lower visual luminosity of supernovae , but energy from the de @-@ ionisation of the many solar masses of remaining hydrogen can contribute to a much slower decline in luminosity and produce the plateau phase seen in the majority of core collapse supernovae . 
 In some core collapse supernovae , fallback onto a black hole drives relativistic jets which may produce a brief energetic and directional burst of gamma rays and also transfers substantial further energy into the ejected material . This is one scenario for producing high luminosity supernovae and is thought to be the cause of type Ic hypernovae and long duration gamma @-@ ray bursts . If the relativistic jets are too brief and fail to penetrate the stellar envelope then a low luminosity gamma @-@ ray burst may be produced and the supernova may be sub @-@ luminous . 
 When a supernova occurs inside a small dense cloud of circumstellar material , it will produce a shock wave that can efficiently convert a high fraction of the kinetic energy into electromagnetic radiation . Even though the initial explosion energy was entirely normal the resulting supernova will have high luminosity and extended duration since it does not rely on exponential radioactive decay . This type of event may cause type IIn hypernovae . 
 Although pair @-@ instability supernovae are core collapse supernovae with spectra and light curves similar to type II @-@ P , the nature of that explosion following core collapse is more like that of a giant type Ia with runaway fusion of carbon , oxygen , and silicon . The total energy released by the highest mass events is comparable to other core collapse supernovae but neutrino production is thought to be very low , hence the kinetic and electromagnetic energy released is very high . The cores of these stars are much larger than any white dwarf and the amount of radioactive nickel and other heavy elements ejected from their cores can be orders of magnitude higher , with consequently high visual luminosity . 
 = = = Progenitor = = = 
 The supernova classification type is closely tied to the type of star at the time of the explosion . The occurrence of each type of supernova depends dramatically on the metallicity and hence the age of the host galaxy . 
 Type Ia supernovae are produced from white dwarf stars in binary systems and occur in all galaxy types . Core collapse supernovae are only found in galaxies undergoing current or very recent star formation , since they result from short @-@ lived massive stars . They are most commonly found in type Sc spirals , but also in the arms of other spiral galaxies and in irregular galaxies , especially starburst galaxies . 
 Type Ib / c and II @-@ L , and possibly most type IIn , supernovae are only thought to be produced from stars having near @-@ solar metallicity levels that result in high mass loss from massive stars , hence they are less common in older more distant galaxies . The table shows the expected progenitor for the main types of core collapse supernova , and the approximate proportions of each in the local neighbourhood . 
 There are a number of difficulties reconciling modelled and observed stellar evolution leading up to core collapse supernovae . Red supergiants are the expected progenitors for the vast majority of core collapse supernovae , and these have been observed but only at relatively low masses and luminosities , below about 18 M ☉ and 100 @,@ 000 L ☉ respectively . Most progenitors of type II supernovae are not detected and must be considerably fainter , and presumably less massive . It is now proposed that higher mass red supergiants do not explode as supernovae , but instead evolve back towards hotter temperatures . Several progenitors of type IIb supernovae have been confirmed , and these were K and G supergiants , plus one A supergiant . Yellow hypergiants or LBVs are proposed progenitors for type IIb supernovae , and almost all type IIb supernovae near enough to observe have shown such progenitors . 
 Until just a few decades ago , hot supergiants were not considered likely to explode , but observations have shown otherwise . Blue supergiants form an unexpectedly high proportion of confirmed supernova progenitors , partly due to their high luminosity and easy detection , while not a single Wolf @-@ Rayet progenitor has yet been clearly identified . Models have had difficulty showing how blue supergiants lose enough mass to reach supernova without progressing to a different evolutionary stage . One study has shown a possible route for low @-@ luminosity post @-@ red supergiant luminous blue variables to collapse , most likely as a type IIn supernova . 
 The expected progenitors of type Ib supernovae , luminous WC stars , are not observed at all . Instead WC stars are found at lower luminosities , apparently post @-@ red supergiant stars . WO stars are extremely rare and visually relatively faint , so it is difficult to say whether such progenitors are missing or just yet to be observed . Very luminous progenitors , despite numerous supernovae being observed near enough that such progenitors would have been clearly imaged . Several examples of hot luminous progenitors of type IIn supernovae have been detected : SN <unk> and SN <unk> were both apparently massive luminous stars , but are very distant ; and SN <unk> had a highly luminous progenitor likely to have been an LBV , but is a peculiar supernova whose exact nature is <unk> . 
 = = Interstellar impact = = 
 = = = Source of heavy elements = = = 
 Supernovae are the major source of elements heavier than oxygen . These elements are produced by nuclear fusion for nuclei up to <unk> , by silicon photodisintegration rearrangement and <unk> ( see Supernova nucleosynthesis ) during silicon burning for nuclei between 36Ar and 56Ni , and by rapid captures of neutrons during the supernova explosion for elements heavier than iron . Nucleosynthesis during silicon burning yields nuclei roughly 1000 @-@ 100 @,@ 000 times more abundant than the r @-@ process isotopes heavier than iron . Supernovae are the most likely , although not undisputed , candidate sites for the r @-@ process , which is the rapid capture of neutrons that occurs at high temperature and high density of neutrons . Those reactions produce highly unstable nuclei that are rich in neutrons and that rapidly beta decay into more stable forms . The r @-@ process produces about half of all the heavier isotopes of the elements beyond iron , including plutonium and uranium . The only other major competing process for producing elements heavier than iron is the s @-@ process in large , old , red @-@ giant AGB stars , which produces these elements slowly over longer epochs and which cannot produce elements heavier than lead . 
 = = = Role in stellar evolution = = = 
 The remnant of a supernova explosion consists of a compact object and a rapidly expanding shock wave of material . This cloud of material sweeps up the surrounding interstellar medium during a free expansion phase , which can last for up to two centuries . The wave then gradually undergoes a period of adiabatic expansion , and will slowly cool and mix with the surrounding interstellar medium over a period of about 10 @,@ 000 years . 
 The Big Bang produced hydrogen , helium , and traces of lithium , while all heavier elements are synthesized in stars and supernovae . Supernovae tend to enrich the surrounding interstellar medium with metals — elements other than hydrogen and helium . 
 These injected elements ultimately enrich the molecular clouds that are the sites of star formation . Thus , each stellar generation has a slightly different composition , going from an almost pure mixture of hydrogen and helium to a more metal @-@ rich composition . Supernovae are the dominant mechanism for distributing these heavier elements , which are formed in a star during its period of nuclear fusion . The different abundances of elements in the material that forms a star have important influences on the star 's life , and may decisively influence the possibility of having planets orbiting it . 
 The kinetic energy of an expanding supernova remnant can trigger star formation due to compression of nearby , dense molecular clouds in space . The increase in turbulent pressure can also prevent star formation if the cloud is unable to lose the excess energy . 
 Evidence from daughter products of short @-@ lived radioactive isotopes shows that a nearby supernova helped determine the composition of the Solar System 4 @.@ 5 billion years ago , and may even have triggered the formation of this system . Supernova production of heavy elements over astronomic periods of time ultimately made the chemistry of life on Earth possible . 
 = = = Effect on Earth = = = 
 A near @-@ Earth supernova is a supernova close enough to the Earth to have noticeable effects on its biosphere . Depending upon the type and energy of the supernova , it could be as far as 3000 light @-@ years away . Gamma rays from a supernova would induce a chemical reaction in the upper atmosphere converting molecular nitrogen into nitrogen oxides , depleting the ozone layer enough to expose the surface to harmful solar radiation . This has been proposed as the cause of the Ordovician – Silurian extinction , which resulted in the death of nearly 60 % of the oceanic life on Earth . In 1996 it was theorized that traces of past supernovae might be detectable on Earth in the form of metal isotope signatures in rock strata . Iron @-@ 60 enrichment was later reported in deep @-@ sea rock of the Pacific Ocean . In 2009 , elevated levels of nitrate ions were found in Antarctic ice , which coincided with the 1006 and 1054 supernovae . Gamma rays from these supernovae could have boosted levels of nitrogen oxides , which became trapped in the ice . 
 Type Ia supernovae are thought to be potentially the most dangerous if they occur close enough to the Earth . Because these supernovae arise from dim , common white dwarf stars in binary systems , it is likely that a supernova that can affect the Earth will occur unpredictably and in a star system that is not well studied . The closest known candidate is IK Pegasi ( see below ) . Recent estimates predict that a Type II supernova would have to be closer than eight parsecs ( 26 light @-@ years ) to destroy half of the Earth 's ozone layer , and there are no such candidates closer than about 500 light years . 
 = = Milky Way candidates = = 
 The next supernova in the Milky Way will likely be detectable even if it occurs on the far side of the galaxy . It is likely to be produced by the collapse of an unremarkable red supergiant and it is very probable that it will already have been catalogued in infrared surveys such as 2MASS . There is a smaller chance that the next core collapse supernova will be produced by a different type of massive star such as a yellow hypergiant , luminous blue variable , or Wolf @-@ Rayet . The chances of the next supernova being a type Ia produced by a white dwarf are calculated to be about a third of those for a core collapse supernova . Again it should be observable wherever it occurs , but it is less likely that the progenitor will ever have been observed prior to the explosion . It isn 't even known exactly what a type Ia progenitor system looks like , and difficult to detect them beyond a few parsecs . The total supernova rate in our galaxy is estimated to be about 4 @.@ 6 per century , or one every 22 years , although we haven 't actually observed one for several centuries . 
 Statistically , the next supernova is likely to be produced from an otherwise unremarkable red supergiant , but it is difficult to identify which of those supergiants are in the final stages of heavy element fusion in their cores and which have millions of years left . The most massive red supergiants are expected to shed their atmospheres and evolve to Wolf @-@ Rayet stars before their cores collapse . All Wolf @-@ Rayet stars are expected to end their lives from the Wolf @-@ Rayet phase within a million years or so , but again it is difficult to identify those that are closest to core collapse . One class that is expected to have no more than a few thousand years before exploding are the WO Wolf @-@ Rayet stars , which are known to have exhausted their core helium . Only eight of them are known , and only four of those are in the Milky Way . 
 A number of close or well known stars have been identified as possible core collapse supernova candidates : the red supergiants Antares and <unk> ; the yellow hypergiant Rho Cassiopeiae ; the luminous blue variable Eta Carinae that has already produced a supernova imposter explosion ; and the brightest component , a Wolf – Rayet star in the <unk> or Gamma Velorum system , Others have gained notoriety as possible , although not very likely , progenitors for a gamma @-@ ray burst ; for example WR 104 . 
 Identification of candidates for a type Ia supernova explosion is much more speculative . Any binary with an accreting white dwarf might produce a supernova although the exact mechanism and timescale is still debated . These systems are faint and difficult to identify , but the novae and recurrent novae are such systems that conveniently advertise themselves . One examples is U Scorpii , The nearest known type Ia supernova candidate is IK Pegasi ( HR 8210 ) , located at a distance of 150 light @-@ years , but observations suggest it will be several million years before the white dwarf can accrete the critical mass required to become a Type Ia supernova . 
 = Nord Stage = 
 The Nord Stage is a digital keyboard or stage piano , manufactured by Clavia Digital Music Instruments of Stockholm in Sweden . There have been four editions of the instrument as of 2016 – these are the original Nord Stage in 2005 , the Nord Stage EX in 2008 , the Nord Stage 2 in 2011 , and the Nord Stage 2 EX in 2015 . 
 The Nord Stage follows the success of earlier keyboard instruments from Clavia , and contains similar emulations of vintage electromechanical keyboards such as the Hammond Organ and electric pianos as found on the Nord Electro 2 , with additional functionality including a weighted piano @-@ like keyboard on certain models , a synthesizer section based on the Nord Lead , a more versatile organ section and extended effects processing . Unlike the Electro , the Stage is multitimbral , which means it can play more than one sound at once , either by splitting the internal keyboard or connecting an external MIDI controller . 
 The Nord Stage 2 also has the ability to play samples , allowing it to reproduce the functionality of a Mellotron or Chamberlin . Individual samples can be downloaded from Clavia 's website , and a community has developed that provides new instruments and sounds . 
 = = History = = 
 By 2005 , Clavia had found commercial success with the Nord Lead synthesizer , which emulated analog synthesis , and the Nord Electro virtual electromechanical keyboard , which emulated the Hammond Organ and Rhodes and Wurlitzer electric pianos . The goal of the Nord Stage was to combine these two technologies together into a flagship instrument . 
 The Nord Stage was unveiled in April 2005 at the <unk> music instrument convention in Frankfurt , Germany . A full @-@ range , 88 weighted key version , the Stage 88 , began shipping in July 2005 ; a 76 weighted key version , the Stage 76 , was announced at NAMM in January 2006 , and a 73 semi @-@ weighted key version , the Stage Compact , started shipping in August 2006 . 
 An expanded version , the Nord Stage EX , was released in November 2008 . It included an increased memory size . A revised edition , the Nord Stage 2 appeared in September 2011 , containing an improved synthesizer model and sampler functionality , as seen in the Nord Wave . The three models of the Stage 2 are the HA @-@ 88 , containing 88 fully weighted keys , the HA @-@ 76 , containing 76 weighted keys , and the SW @-@ 73 , containing 73 semi @-@ weighted keys . An updated model , the Stage 2 EX , with extended memory capacity , was announced in 2015 . 
 Like all other Nord keyboards , the Stage 's metal panel is bright red , and the Stage also features similar wood panels to the Nord Electro , also in red . 
 = = Sound sections = = 
 The Nord Stage is divided into three sound groups , the Organ Section , the Piano Section , and the Synthesizer Section . Each section can be played independently or simultaneously , divided into specific key ranges ( splitting ) , and blended with independent volume controls . 
 = = = Organ section = = = 
 The Nord Stage Organ Section provides physical models of three electric organs – the Hammond B3 , the Vox Continental , and the Farfisa Compact . Instead of physical drawbars , the Organ section features " <unk> " with a set of red LED strips to indicate the position of each drawbar from 0 ( fully in ) to 8 ( fully out ) . For the Hammond and Vox organ emulations , pressing the " down " button illuminates more LEDs to visually emulate a drawbar being pulled out , while pressing the " up " button does the reverse . Since a real Farfisa organ selects sounds via rocker tabs instead of drawbars , the <unk> behave as tabs when the Farfisa emulation is selected on the Stage . The standard set of Percussion , Chorus and Vibrato settings as found on each of the three organs are available , and a rotary speaker emulation ( similar to a Leslie speaker ) , including speed selection and overdrive , is also available . The Organ section is fully polyphonic . 
 = = = Piano section = = = 
 The Piano section uses samples of acoustic and electromechanical pianos . The Stage 's 128 MB of internal memory allow multiple sample sets to be installed . While additional sampled piano sets are available as free downloads from Clavia 's website , the Stage ships with Yamaha C7 and Steinway Concert Model D grand pianos , Svenska <unk> and Yamaha <unk> upright pianos , Yamaha <unk> Electric grand piano , Rhodes Piano , Wurlitzer Electronic Piano , and Hohner Clavinet samples . The <unk> EQ buttons allow users to adjust the sound of the Clavinet . Acoustic Piano sounds are stereo samples , which can be switched manually to " Mono Mode " , and can be played at 40 @-@ note polyphony ; electric piano samples are mono and can be played with 60 @-@ note polyphony . 
 = = = Synthesizer section = = = 
 The Stage Synthesizer combines <unk> with analog oscillators and FM operators . Featuring filter and envelope controls , the Synth Section 's timbre knob allows users to move through different sound groups . A number of programs are available to store sounds under three categories – Synth , Pad or Bass . The Synth also includes a 2 @-@ band EQ , a glide ( portamento ) function , and a unison function which is used to thicken the sound . The Synth Section is 16 @-@ note polyphonic . 
 The Nord Stage 2 introduced the additional capability to act as a sampler , playing back pre @-@ recorded instrument sounds . Samples can be downloaded from both Clavia 's and other third party websites , and installed using a software application running on a PC or a Mac . Amongst the samples included as standard with the Nord Stage 2 are those for the Mellotron and Chamberlin tape @-@ based keyboards , which have been exclusively licensed to Clavia . Users can also create their own samples , and load them into the Stage 2 using the tools supplied . 
 = = = External section = = = 
 This section , unlike the others , does not directly generate sound . Instead , it allows users to control other gear connected via MIDI . Common parameters such as zone , channel , and volume are controllable from the Stage . 
 = = Other features = = 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 The Stage 's Effects Section expands on the Electro 's effects selection . Included are the Electro 's modulation effects ( tremolo , auto @-@ pan , ring modulation , auto @-@ wah , and 2 manual wah algorithms ) , " stomp box " effects ( 2 algorithms each of phaser ( effect ) , flanger and chorus ) . The Stage adds a delay module , amplifier modeling ( Wurlitzer speaker , Fender Twin Reverb and Roland Jazz Chorus ) , overdrive , and expands the Electro 's 2 @-@ band EQ to 3 @-@ band . Piano , Organ , and Synth sections can be independently routed through these groups . Two Master Effects are included – a simple compressor , and a 5 algorithm reverb . 
 = = = Programs = = = 
 Sounds can be stored as Programs , which include the instrument source , effects types , and settings . There are 400 storage locations – 4 banks with 100 programs in each – all of which can be overwritten with user programs . There are 300 independent storage locations for Synth patches . 
 The Nord Stage is multitimbral – each of the Piano , Organ , and Synth sections can sound independently . There are two Panels – A and B – each of which provides a separate configuration of the three sections within a single Program . Panels can be played independently , with one of the panels being controlled via an external MIDI keyboard controller , or they can be layered together , allowing for a maximum of 6 part multitimbral . Most of the buttons and knobs on the Stage , such as volume , instrument selection , drawbar levels ( for organ ) or filter controls ( for synthesizer ) can also be adjusted by the external keyboard . 
 = = = Controllers and accessories = = = 
 The Nord Stage includes a spring @-@ mounted wooden pitch stick , and a ceramic mod wheel , similar to the Nord Lead and Nord Modular synthesizers . 
 Many of the parameter knobs are simple <unk> , however there are several 360 @-@ degree lighted rotary encoders . These rotary encoders control parameters that can be " morphed " . Morph Grouping is Clavia 's technology that allows users to assign multiple parameters to one control , such as the mod wheel , a control pedal , or <unk> . 
 The connectors at the back of the Stage allow the connection of a sustain pedal , a swell pedal for organ , a footswitch to select the rotary speaker emulation speed , and a control pedal to modify effects such as wah @-@ wah . A set of screw @-@ in legs are an available option for the 88 and 76 note models and a custom designed soft case is also available from Clavia . A third party company , Ocean Beach Digital , has manufactured a set of MIDI controlled drawbars for the Nord Stage , for users who prefer to use real drawbars instead of the buttons provided as standard . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Nord Stage 2 received a Platinum award from Future Music magazine ( who described it as " A huge upgrade , cementing its status as the most authentic stage piano / organ / synth available " ) , and won the 2011 MIA Award for best hardware , and the 2011 <unk> Award for best Stage Piano . 
 Derek Sherinian , already well known for using Nord keyboards , started using the Nord Stage 2 in 2011 . Other notable musicians who have used the Nord Stage include Little Feat 's Bill Payne , Scott Kinsey , The Ark 's Jens Andersson ( who played a Nord Stage 2 on the band 's final tour ) , Bryan Ferry and Elbow . 
 Sound on Sound criticised the pitch stick on the Nord Stage , noting its range is permanently fixed to two semitones and cannot be adjusted . Performing Musician magazine felt that the piano sound " is a little uneven in places " , particularly towards the lower end , and were concerned it wouldn 't work well as a music workstation , describing its External section as " useless in any real @-@ world situation " , though they did praise the quality of the organ sounds . Reviewing the Stage 2 , Keyboard Magazine criticised the lack of MIDI thru and said " even with dedicated controls for most functions , it can be difficult to grasp at first . The few hardware buttons for changing programs are shared with Live settings . " However , they also stated the acoustic pianos sounded " beautiful " . 
 = Hurricane Iwa = 
 Hurricane Iwa , taken from the Hawaiian language name for the frigatebird ( <unk> , lit . " Thief " ) , was at the time the costliest hurricane to affect the state of Hawaiʻi . Iwa was the twenty @-@ third tropical storm and the twelfth and final hurricane of the 1982 Pacific hurricane season . It developed from an active trough of low pressure near the equator on November 19 . The storm moved erratically northward until becoming a hurricane on November 23 when it began accelerating to the northeast in response to strong upper @-@ level flow from the north . Iwa passed within 25 miles of the island of Kauaʻi with peak winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) on November 23 ( November 24 Coordinated Universal Time ) , and the next day it became extratropical to the northeast of the state . 
 The hurricane devastated the islands of <unk> , Kauaʻi , and Oʻahu with wind gusts exceeding 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) and rough seas exceeding 30 feet ( 9 m ) in height . The first significant hurricane to hit the Hawaiian Islands since statehood in 1959 , Iwa severely damaged or destroyed 2 @,@ 345 buildings , including 1 @,@ 927 houses , leaving 500 people homeless . Damage throughout the state totaled $ 312 million ( 1982 USD , $ 765 million 2016 USD ) . One person was killed from the high seas , and three deaths were indirectly related to the hurricane 's aftermath . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A very active trough of low pressure persisted along the equator in the middle of November , with westerly surface winds and <unk> convection located along the trough from 140 ° W to 140 ° E. An organized circulation developed near Palmyra Atoll on November 18 , and steadily developed as it drifted westward . Though very late in the season , warm temperatures to the south of the Hawaiian Islands due to the strongest El Nino in many years allowed the disturbance to develop into Tropical Storm Iwa on November 19 while located about 970 miles ( 1 @,@ 760 km ) southwest of the southernmost point in Hawaii . The storm tracked slowly northward after forming and initially remained a weak tropical storm . After turning to the northeast , Iwa began slowly intensifying , and on November 23 after turning to the north @-@ northwest Iwa strengthened into a hurricane while located 580 miles ( 930 km ) southwest of the southern tip of Hawaii . 
 Shortly after becoming a hurricane , Iwa turned and accelerated to the northeast in response to strong upper level flow to its north . The hurricane possessed sufficient moisture , instability , and upper divergence for continued intensification , and Iwa reached peak winds of 90 mph ( 145 km / h ) late on November 23 while located 245 miles ( 395 km ) southwest of Waimea on the island of Kauai . Its forward speed increased to 30 to 40 mph , and Iwa passed just north of the island of Kauai on November 23 ( November 24 in UTC ) . The right semicircle of the storm extended across Kauai and Oahu , with gusts from 100 to 120 mph ( 161 to 193 km / h ) . After passing Hawaii , the convection of Iwa rapidly deteriorated as it gradually lost tropical characteristics . Late on November 24 , the hurricane degenerated into a tropical storm , and on November 25 Iwa became an extratropical cyclone while located about 600 miles ( 965 km ) northeast of Hawaii . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Iwa produced estimated gusts reaching 120 mph ( 193 km / h ) across Kauai and Oahu . The acceleration of the hurricane concentrated the energy of its swells , resulting in high waves and storm surge across the Hawaiian Islands , though primarily near the path of the center . It is estimated the storm surge reached eight feet ( two meters ) on the south coast of Kauaʻi . There , the surge reached 900 feet ( 275 m ) inland , exceeding a 100 @-@ year flood event for the area . The heaviest rainfall reported from the island chain was from the Intake Wainiha 1086 site , where 20 @.@ 33 inches ( 516 mm ) was measured . Possible tornadoes were reported in association with a rain squall in Oahu . Waves on the coast of Oahu reached 16 @.@ 4 feet in height ( 3 m ) , and waves on southern Kauai surpassed 30 feet ( 9 m ) in height . 
 During the worst of the storm , 5 @,@ 800 people were evacuated from shoreline areas of Kauai to temporary shelters . Strong waves sank or grounded several small vessels on the southwestern coast of Kauaʻi , with 44 of the 45 boats at Port Allen being sunk . The worst of the damage from the hurricane occurred in <unk> , where the rough surf destroyed or severely damaged several exposed luxury hotels and condominiums . Elsewhere on the island , damage was greatest in areas where there was no protective barrier reef offshore . Several small aircraft were damaged at Lihue airport from the winds , including many overturned small planes . The winds destroyed several buildings across the island , including one of Kauai 's oldest churches and a warehouse . Additionally , the winds destroyed the roof of a bank . Strong winds initially left the entire island of Kauai without power . Highway 56 on the east side of the island was obstructed by fallen telephone poles , forcing residents to drive on the unpaved , red dirt cane roads usually reserved for hauling sugar cane from the fields . Rising waters washed out multiple roads near the coastline . The strong winds destroyed nearly all papaya and banyan trees on the island . The hurricane destroyed or greatly damaged 1 @,@ 907 homes on the island and caused minor damage to 2 @,@ 983 others , leaving one @-@ eighth of the island 's homes unlivable . 
 Rough seas killed a person on a Navy Destroyer the USS Goldsborough DDG @-@ 20 in Pearl Harbor when the seaman hit a stanchion , with four others injured on the ship . One of the four injured was swept overboard two miles ( three kilometers ) from the harbor . Before the arrival of the hurricane , around 1 @,@ 000 evacuated the low @-@ lying coastline to shelters . Rough waves destroyed four and damaged two deep @-@ water communication cables between Oahu and Kauai . In Oahu , damage from wind and surf was heaviest on the southwest coast between <unk> and <unk> . The storm surge washed sand into streets in <unk> and flooded cars in areas of basement parking . Wind damage was greatest in areas where winds blew from southerly directions off of mountains . The winds damaged several small aircraft and a Douglas DC @-@ 3 plane in Honolulu . Gusty winds shattered glass windows in the Honolulu International Airport , injuring several passengers . Some flights in and out of the Honolulu airport were delayed , while other domestic airports were temporarily closed . The passage of the hurricane damaged at least 6 @,@ 391 homes , 21 hotels , and two condominium buildings on the island . Additionally , 418 buildings , including 30 businesses , were destroyed on Oahu . 
 Surf damage was reported throughout the Hawaiian islands . 120 people were treated for injuries , though most were minor . An estimated 500 people throughout Hawaii were left homeless due to the hurricane . Damage on the private island of Niihau was severe . An aerial survey indicated 20 homes were destroyed and 160 were damaged , indicating that the hurricane affected nearly all of the island 's 226 residents . Reportedly no one was injured on Niihau . At the time , Hurricane Iwa was the costliest storm to hit the state of Hawaiʻi , with damage totaling $ 312 million ( 1982 USD , $ 765 million 2016 USD ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Three days after Hurricane Iwa passed the state , Governor George Ariyoshi declared the islands of Kauai and Niihau as disaster areas and began filing papers for a federal disaster declaration . On November 28 , five days after the hurricane struck , President Ronald Reagan declared the islands of Kauai , Niihau , and Oahu as a disaster area . The declaration allocated federal funds to aid the affected citizens . The state Department of Education decided to close all schools on Kauai indefinitely . 
 The thousands of Hawaiians without power celebrated Thanksgiving by cooking turkeys on outdoor grills or smokers . Army and Air Force planes delivered 20 @,@ 000 Thanksgiving rations to the thousands left in temporary shelters . The United States military also airlifted generators to Kauai due to several days of power outages . By a week after the hurricane , utility crews restored power to nearly all major areas in Oahu , while 5 @,@ 000 remained without power in Kauai . By around a month after the hurricane passed the island , utilities were restored to most of the entire island . All roads and highways were cleared , as well . One 25th Infantry Division soldier at Schofield Barracks died while cleaning up after the hurricane . Two people died in a traffic accident due to malfunctioning traffic lights . Following the storm , significant redevelopment occurred in <unk> , where the hurricane flooded areas several hundred feet inland . Hurricane Iniki struck the same area ten years later . Officials estimate a hurricane similar to Iwa striking Oahu in 1992 could cause up to $ 7 @.@ 5 billion in damage ( USD ) . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The Central Pacific Hurricane Center retired the name Iwa subsequent to the storm and replaced it with Io . However , in 2007 the CPHC revised the four rotating lists of tropical cyclone names and replaced the name Io with Iona before it could be used . Iwa was the first retired hurricane in the Central Pacific since the modern system of using Hawaiian naming began in the early 1980s , and it remains one of only four to be retired as of 2015 . 
 = The Return ( The Office ) = 
 " The Return " ( originally titled " Oscar 's Return " ) is the fourteenth episode of the third season of the US version of The Office . In the episode , the office celebrates Oscar 's return , who had been on vacation since the first episode of the season . Meanwhile , a recently departed Dwight finds a job at Staples . 
 The episode was written by Michael Schur , Lee Eisenberg and Gene Stupnitsky , and was directed by series creator Greg Daniels . Actor Oscar Nunez returned to The Office after having left to film the television series Halfway Home . The annoying personality of Ed Helms 's character Andy was noted by multiple observers , and even irritated the actor 's own mother to such a degree that she could not watch the episode . " The Return " marked Helms ' departure from The Office until the season 's nineteenth episode " The Negotiation " . 
 For its first American broadcast on January 18 , 2007 on NBC , " The Return " aired to an estimated 10 @.@ 15 million viewers according to Nielsen Media Research . It was positively received by television critics , with several focusing on the character development of Angela . Along with " Traveling Salesmen " , NBC later re @-@ broadcast " The Return " as a combined hour @-@ long episode as part of their sweeps week . As a result , both episodes underwent editing which included the addition of four minutes of previously unseen footage . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Having quit Dunder Mifflin , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) settles for a job at Staples . Andy ( Ed Helms ) relishes the thought of becoming Michael 's ( Steve Carell ) new Number Three and begins to pester Michael for attention . When Andy begins to irritate his co @-@ workers , Jim ( John Krasinski ) , after getting no support from Karen ( Rashida Jones ) or Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) , recruits Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) to play a prank on Andy by hiding his cell phone ( which plays Rockin ' Robin , sung a capella by Andy himself ) in the ceiling and continually calling it . 
 Meanwhile , Oscar ( Oscar Nunez ) returns to the office from his leave of absence , and Michael wants to celebrate by asking the Party Planning Committee to throw a Mexican @-@ themed fiesta that includes firecrackers , a chihuahua and a donkey . Later , as Jim and Pam continue to call Andy 's hidden cell phone , he is pushed over the edge by the combination of Jim and Pam 's prank and Michael 's rejection of his friendship , and in a fit of rage puts his fist through a wall . 
 When Angela ( Angela Kinsey ) finally reveals to Michael that she was the cause of Dwight 's secret visit to Corporate , Michael realizes his error in forcing Dwight out and goes to Staples to ask him to return to Dunder Mifflin . Angela was worried that Michael would realize the two were involved in a romantic relationship , but Michael believes that Dwight saved Angela out of loyalty to the company . Dwight returns to the office and , much to his delight , thinks Oscar 's welcome party is actually meant for him . 
 Karen has noticed how much fun Jim and Pam had together during their prank on Andy ; she confronts Jim and asks him if he still has feelings for Pam . Jim nods as he quietly says yes and Karen walks out the room , visibly upset . Meanwhile , corporate sends Andy to anger management where he plans to get out of the 10 @-@ week program in five weeks through his usual charms : name repetition and personality imitation . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Return " was written by Michael Schur , Lee Eisenberg , and Gene Stupnitsky , while series creator and executive producer Greg Daniels directed and Dean Holland edited . The original title of this episode was " Oscar 's Return " , a reference to the reappearance of actor Oscar Nunez , who had temporarily left the series after the season premiere . Nunez spent the interim working on the Comedy Central series Halfway Home . It was the last episode Daniels filmed before the Thanksgiving holiday , the start of an eight @-@ week break for the cast and crew . 
 Then @-@ president of NBC Entertainment Kevin Reilly played Dwight 's first interviewer . Ed Helms noted in the audio commentary that his mother had trouble watching a string of episodes that included " The Return " because she found his character so annoying . Helms recorded the self @-@ recorded cellphone ring on his own personal computer . For the big anger scene , Helms actually bloodied his knuckles while punching the wall , something that took five or six takes . Steve Carell and Rainn Wilson had difficulty with their reuniting scene and had to stage it in several different ways . As part of the episode is set in one of their stores , office supply chain Staples Inc. watched the episode carefully to ensure they were not portrayed negatively ; they were particularly afraid that Dwight 's manner of quitting was disrespectful to the company . At the time " The Return " aired , no one was certain Helms would be returning . In early February , NBC confirmed Helms had been hired on as a series regular for the rest of the year , with the actor returning in the season 's nineteenth episode , " The Negotiation " . 
 " The Return " was later rebroadcast with " Traveling Salesmen " as a combined hour @-@ long episode , on March 15 , 2007 . NBC added previously unaired and re @-@ edited scenes into the episode , which was perceived by one commentator as a method to " boost the ratings during the content dearth known as repeat week , giving its replays a creative twist " . Greg Daniels explained that in addition to the attempt to attract a larger audience , " it 's about giving something extra to our wonderful fans … their loyalty must be rewarded somehow , and we don 't have the budget for 10 million muffin baskets . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Andy tells Michael he is going to " get my Lost on " , a reference to the ABC science fiction drama television series . Andy sings The Cranberries ' 1994 hit song " Zombie " , which was the most annoying song Helms and Krasinski could think of for Andy to sing . Dwight later returns to the office wearing a sweatshirt prominently displaying Battlestar Galactica , a Syfy military science fiction television series . When referring to Andy 's weirdness , Michael mentions radio broadcaster Marv Albert , who was convicted of sexual assault in the late 1990s . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " The Return " first aired on January 18 , 2007 in the United States on NBC . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was watched by an estimated 10 @.@ 15 million viewers . The Office and its lead @-@ in My Name is Earl finished first in the 18 – 49 demographic against its time slot competitors , though it was not enough to prevent the overall network from finishing in third place among total viewers . The same day as the episode broadcast , NBC renewed The Office for a full fourth season , which came as no surprise to media pundits . 
 Beginning his review , Buddy TV 's Oscar Dahl declared Andy was " one of the most devastatingly annoying characters on television " . Dahl liked Dwight 's scenes at Staples , and wrote that series was becoming " more and more difficult to write about . It 's really funny . Consistently funny . Great episodes , week after week , breed little in the way of discussion [ ... ] We have to appreciate greatness while it 's here . The Office is in the midst of a historic run of consistently great episodes . Bask in it . " AOL TV writer Michael Sciannamea agreed with Dahl 's initial assessment of Andy , and called him the " most obnoxious sitcom character in the last few years " . Sciannamea enjoyed seeing more of Angela 's and Michael 's personalities , and believed Andy was a " short @-@ timer " to the series . 
 Entertainment Weekly contributor Abby West praised Angela Kinsey 's performance , noting that she " brought wonderful contradictions to her prickly office <unk> " . West also enjoyed the love triangle for being " so skillfully kept as the subplot it should be . It is as much due to the light touches of the three actors as to the writers ... It 's refreshing that Jim and Karen have mostly been so mature and honest , but that 's a sure sign that the relationship will devolve , because the setup for the success for most long @-@ term TV romances requires miscommunication and no confrontation . " In his review of the third season , Travis Fickett of IGN highlighted a scene of the episode ; he commented , " Watching Andy slowly meltdown when he can 't find his cell phone is one of the better moments of the season . " 
 = 2008 ACC Championship Game = 
 The 2008 ACC Championship Game was a college football game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Boston College Eagles . The game , sponsored by Dr Pepper , was the final regular @-@ season contest of the 2008 college football season for the Atlantic Coast Conference . Virginia Tech defeated Boston College , winning the Atlantic Coast Conference football championship , 30 – 12 . 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies were selected to represent the Coastal Division by virtue of a tie @-@ breaking head @-@ to @-@ head victory against division rival Georgia Tech and came into the game with an 8 – 4 record ( 5 – 3 in ACC play ) . Representing the Atlantic Division was Boston College , which had a 9 – 3 record ( 5 – 3 ACC ) . The two teams were the victors of a closely contested season in the ACC . Neither team clinched a spot in the game until the final week before the championship , and both had to rely on conference tie @-@ breaking rules to earn a spot . The game was a rematch of the previous year 's contest , which Virginia Tech won , 30 – 16 . 
 The game was held at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa , Florida on December 6 , 2008 . Tampa had been chosen after poor attendance at the game 's previous spot ( Jacksonville , Florida ) led conference officials to move the game . The 2008 championship was the first to be played in Tampa . The game began slowly , as both teams punted after their opening possessions failed to gain a first down . Later in the quarter , Virginia Tech took a 7 – 0 lead with a five @-@ yard touchdown run by Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor . The Hokies never relinquished the lead after that point . Tech extended its lead to 14 – 0 in the second quarter , but Boston College managed to narrow Tech 's lead to 14 – 7 by halftime . In the second half , Virginia Tech scored 17 points to the Eagles ' five , and the Hokies won the game . In recognition of his game @-@ winning performance , Taylor was named the game 's most valuable player . 
 = = Selection process = = 
 The ACC Championship Game matches the winners of the Coastal and Atlantic divisions of the Atlantic Coast Conference . In the first decade of the 21st century , the league underwent an expansion to add three former Big East members : Miami and Virginia Tech in 2004 , and Boston College in 2005 . With the addition of a twelfth team , the ACC was allowed to hold a conference championship game under National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) rules . 
 The inaugural 2005 game featured a Florida State win over Virginia Tech , 27 – 22 . In 2006 , two different teams made their first appearances in the game , which was held in Jacksonville , Florida . Wake Forest defeated Georgia Tech , 9 – 6 . In 2007 , one team new to the championship game and championship @-@ game veteran featured in the contest as Virginia Tech faced off against Boston College . The game resulted in a 30 – 16 Virginia Tech victory . 
 = = = Site selection = = = 
 Before the 2007 game , cities other than Jacksonville ( site of the 2007 ACC Championship Game ) presented their plans to be the site of the 2008 ACC Championship Game . After poor attendance in the ACC Championship Game at Jacksonville for the second straight year , ACC officials and representatives of the conference 's member schools elected not to extend the Gator Bowl Association 's contract to host the game for another year . On December 12 , less than two weeks after Jacksonville had hosted the 2007 ACC Championship Game , the ACC announced that Tampa , Florida would host the game in 2008 and 2009 and Charlotte , North Carolina would host the game in 2010 and 2011 . 
 The cities were chosen based on bids presented to the ACC and its member schools . Each city requested and was granted a two @-@ year contract , locking the ACC into the locations well in advance . Tampa was chosen as the site of the 2008 game because Charlotte was scheduled to hold the annual convention of the Association for Career and Technical Education at the same time as the game , and adequate hotel space would not be ready in time for the two events . Because of this , Charlotte 's two @-@ year span of hosting the game was pushed back to 2010 . 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Before the beginning of the 2008 college football season , the annual poll by media members who cover ACC football predicted Clemson to win the Atlantic Division and Virginia Tech to win the Coastal Division . Clemson received 59 of a possible 65 first @-@ place votes in its division , while Virginia Tech received 58 . 
 From the first game of the season , however , those preseason predictions were cast into doubt . Virginia Tech lost its season opener to lightly regarded East Carolina , while Clemson lost to Alabama . Though neither loss factored into either team 's conference standings , it reflected the early stages of a conference schedule that was regarded as crazy , wacky , " a mess " , and " confusing " by members of the media and college football fans . So closely matched were the 12 teams of the conference that as late as the second @-@ to @-@ last week of the regular season , nine teams were still in the running for a place in the championship game . Heading into the final week of the regular season , four teams were still in position to potentially participate in the game : Georgia Tech and Virginia Tech from the Coastal Division , and Boston College and Florida State from the Atlantic Division . In that final week , Virginia Tech clinched the Coastal Division co @-@ championship with a 17 – 14 win over Virginia , while Boston College became co @-@ champions of the Atlantic Division with a 28 – 21 win against Maryland . 
 = = = = Boston College = = = = 
 The Boston College Eagles entered the 2008 college football season having gone 11 – 3 during the 2007 season , ending that season with a loss to Virginia Tech in the 2007 ACC Championship Game and a 24 – 21 victory over Michigan State in the 2007 Champs Sports Bowl . In the annual preseason poll of media covering the ACC , Boston College was picked to finish fourth in the Atlantic Division . 
 The Eagles opened the season by traveling to Kent State , whom the Eagles defeated , 21 – 0 . The Eagles ' home opener was their second game of the season and was also their first conference game of the year . Against Georgia Tech , the Eagles eked out a 9 – 7 halftime lead , but fell behind in the second half , eventually losing , 19 – 16 , on a Georgia Tech touchdown that came with 8 : 26 remaining in the game . Despite the loss , the Eagles recovered quickly , beating Central Florida , 34 – 7 , two weeks after the Georgia Tech game . The victory was the first in an eventual four @-@ game win streak that culminated with a 28 – 23 defeat of then @-@ No. 17 Virginia Tech . 
 The win over Virginia Tech gave the Eagles a 2 – 1 conference record , and they appeared to be destined for a bid to the ACC Championship Game . But Boston College lost its next two games , both against conference opponents , dropping its record to 2 – 3 . Despite the losses , Boston College still had a chance to win the Atlantic Division — but only if other teams lost as well . This happened on November 6 , when fellow Atlantic Division team Maryland lost to Virginia Tech , and the Eagles recovered from their losing streak with an out @-@ of @-@ conference win against Notre Dame . 
 Notre Dame was the last out @-@ of @-@ conference opponent on Boston College 's schedule , as the Eagles finished the season with three consecutive ACC games . The first of these was against Florida State which led the Atlantic Division at the time , but had had five players suspended the day before the game . The Eagles secured a victory , 27 – 17 . The second of Boston College 's final opponents was Wake Forest , which had played in the 2006 ACC Championship Game . While Boston College won , 24 – 21 , starting quarterback Chris Crane suffered a season @-@ ending injury , leaving backup Dominique Davis in charge of the Eagles ' offense . Boston College 's final game of the regular season was against Maryland and a victory against the Terrapins would push the Eagles to a tie with Florida State atop the Atlantic Division . Since Boston College had won the head @-@ to @-@ head game against Florida State , according to the ACC 's tie @-@ breaking rules , the Eagles would win the division . A 28 – 21 victory over Maryland brought Boston College to a 5 – 3 ACC record , giving it a co @-@ division championship with Florida State and a trip to the ACC Championship Game . 
 = = = = Virginia Tech = = = = 
 The Virginia Tech Hokies entered the 2008 season having won the 2007 ACC Championship Game , finishing with an 11 – 3 overall record that included a postseason loss to the Kansas Jayhawks in the 2008 Orange Bowl . Despite winning the ACC for the second time in less than four years , Virginia Tech was anticipated to spend 2008 rebuilding a team that saw 12 starters graduate or enter the NFL Draft . Though picked in a preseason poll to win the Coastal Division , the Hokies were defeated in their season opener by underdog East Carolina . 
 Following that loss , Virginia Tech head coach Frank Beamer announced that backup quarterback Tyrod Taylor , who had previously been expected to sit out the season on redshirt status , would play in the Hokies ' second game , against Furman . Both Taylor and starting quarterback Sean Glennon performed well against the Paladins , and Tech won , 24 – 7 . Tech 's third game came against the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets , who were employing a new offensive system , the option offense , under first @-@ year head coach Paul Johnson . Unlike the game against Furman , Taylor started the game and remained at quarterback throughout , guiding the Hokies to their first ACC victory of the season , a 20 – 17 win that later gave Tech a crucial head @-@ to @-@ head tiebreaker against the Yellow Jackets , fellow members of the Coastal Division . The Hokies ' fourth game of the season came against the North Carolina Tar Heels , who were defeated by the same margin of victory as Tech 's win against Georgia Tech , 20 – 17 . 
 The twin conference victories were followed by two out @-@ of @-@ conference wins : at Big 12 opponent Nebraska and against independent Western Kentucky . At the end of the four @-@ game winning streak , the Hokies had a 4 – 1 record , 2 – 0 in conference , and were ranked No. 17 in the country . On October 18 , however , the Hokies lost to unranked Boston College in Boston , 28 – 23 . The game was a rematch of the previous year 's ACC Championship Game and was a preview of the 2008 Championship Game matchup . The loss was the start of a four @-@ game skid for the Hokies that saw Tech lose three of four games , only managing a victory against Maryland , 23 – 13 . The final game of that four @-@ game drop was a 16 – 13 loss to Coastal Division rival Miami , which then held a crucial <unk> win over the Hokies in the event of any head @-@ to @-@ head tie . 
 During the last two games of the regular season , the Hokies managed two victories : a 14 – 3 win against last @-@ place ACC team Duke , and a 17 – 14 triumph over traditional rival Virginia . Miami , meanwhile , lost its final two games of the season : against Georgia Tech and North Carolina State . These losses dropped Miami to a 4 – 4 record in the ACC , one game behind the Hokies , who were tied with Georgia Tech at 5 – 3 following the end of the regular season . By virtue of the Hokies ' head @-@ to @-@ head win against the Yellow Jackets , Virginia Tech earned a spot in the ACC Championship Game . 
 = = Pre @-@ game buildup = = 
 Following the last week of the regular season , both teams moved up in the national college football polls . Boston College , which had been ranked No. 21 in the BCS Poll , No. 20 in the AP Poll , and No. 22 in the Coaches ' Poll , rose to No. 17 in the BCS , No. 18 in the AP Poll , and No. 20 in the Coaches ' Poll . Virginia Tech , which had been unranked during the final week of the regular season , remained in the " Also Receiving Votes " category outside the top 25 , except in the BCS Poll , where the Hokies rose to No. 25 . Spread bettors predicted an even game . Various betting organizations favored Boston College either by a single point or none . This close spread was due in small part to the teams ' familiarity with each other . The championship game marked the fourth time in 14 months that the two teams played each other , and this fact was prominently mentioned in media coverage before the game 's kickoff . 
 = = = Attendance concerns = = = 
 Almost immediately after the selection of Virginia Tech and Boston College , concerns about potential attendance at the 2008 ACC Championship Game arose . Because the same matchup resulted in such low attendance at the 2007 championship game in Jacksonville , it was doubted that Tampa , which is several hundred miles further south and more distant from the two schools , could attract as many spectators as the previous season 's game . Adding to the problem of selling tickets was the 2008 economic crisis , which many fans cited as a reason for not purchasing tickets . By the Wednesday before the game , Virginia Tech had sold just 3 @,@ 000 of the 10 @,@ 000 tickets it was required by contract to sell . There also were questions about how many local fans would attend . To mitigate the problems seen in Jacksonville the year before , ticket prices were lowered from $ 65 to $ 25 , and it was hoped that the lower capacity of Tampa 's Raymond James Stadium compared with Jacksonville Municipal Stadium would allow for a quicker sellout . The campaign to attract more fans was moderately successful , as 30 @,@ 000 of the 43 @,@ 000 tickets not assigned to either school were sold by December 1 , five days before the game . Team ticket sales were abysmal , however , as Virginia Tech and Boston College combined to sell just 5 @,@ 000 tickets of the 20 @,@ 000 allotted to the two teams . 
 = = = Boston College offense = = = 
 The Boston College offense , which gained 319 yards per game on average , was ranked 94th ( of 120 Football Bowl Subdivision teams ) in total offense . A key component of the offense was guard Cliff Ramsey , who was named a first @-@ team All @-@ ACC selection , signifying his status as the best player at his position in the conference . Tight end Ryan Purvis was named a second @-@ team All @-@ ACC selection . Quarterback Dominique Davis led the Eagles ' offense on the field heading into the ACC Championship . Davis had been the second @-@ string quarterback until a season @-@ ending injury to starter Chris Crane . During his limited time in the regular season , Davis had three passing and two rushing touchdowns . 
 = = = Virginia Tech offense = = = 
 Virginia Tech 's offense was criticized for a lack of production during the regular season and was ranked 103rd in total offense . The Hokies gained just 301 yards of offense on average during the regular season . Despite the meager statistical performance , Tech did have some standout players . Quarterback Tyrod Taylor , who had been expected to sit out the season in reserve , finished the year as the team 's starter . Running back Darren Evans was named a second @-@ team All @-@ ACC selection , as was guard Sergio Render . Taylor 's favorite passing targets were wide receivers Danny Coale and Jarrett Boykin . Coale entered the ACC Championship Game having caught 32 catches for 352 yards , while Boykin grabbed 27 passes for 407 yards . 
 = = = Boston College defense = = = 
 The Eagles ' defense was ranked eighth in the nation in terms of total defense , allowing an average of 277 yards per game . The Eagles led the country in interceptions , recording 25 during the course of the regular season . The Eagles also were ranked among the top 10 in run defense , pass @-@ efficiency defense , and No. 14 in scoring defense . That strong defensive effort was led by linebacker Mark Herzlich , who was selected as the ACC 's defensive player of the year for the 2008 season . Herzlich led the Eagles in tackles with 98 — fifth among all Division I players — and interceptions , with 6 . He was forecast to be a key player during the ACC Championship Game . Defensive tackle B. J. Raji recorded 33 tackles ( 11 for loss ) and a team @-@ high 7 sacks , part of a defense that allowed an average of just 87 @.@ 3 rushing yards per game . 
 = = = Virginia Tech defense = = = 
 The Hokies ' defense was ranked sixth in Division I @-@ A during the regular season , permitting 275 yards per game on average . That defensive performance was led by cornerback Victor " Macho " Harris , who was named a first @-@ team All @-@ ACC selection on defense . Heading into the ACC Championship , Harris had 6 interceptions — 2 returned for touchdowns — and 42 tackles . Harris also played on offense , catching 8 passes for 63 yards . Another defensive star for the Hokies was Orion Martin , a former walk @-@ on who was third in the ACC in sacks with 7 @.@ 5 and earned second @-@ team ACC honors . 
 = = Game summary = = 
 The 2008 ACC Championship Game kicked off on December 6 , 2008 , at 1 p.m. EST at Raymond James Stadium in Tampa , Florida . At kickoff , the weather was partly cloudy with 59 percent humidity and a temperature of 72 ° F ( 22 ° C ) . The wind was from the south @-@ southwest at 10 miles per hour ( 16 km / h ) . The official reported attendance was 53 @,@ 927 , but this number came from the number of tickets sold . The actual attendance in the stadium — measured by admittance turnstiles — was 27 @,@ 360 , the lowest ever recorded for an ACC football championship game . Ticket demand was so low that tickets were being given away for free outside the stadium before kickoff . The game was televised in the United States by the American Broadcasting Company , and Brad Nessler , Bob Griese , Paul Maguire , and Todd Harris were the announcers . Approximately 3 @.@ 3 million people watched the game , earning the broadcast a Nielsen rating of 2 @.@ 9 . The rating was the lowest ever recorded for an ACC Championship football game and represented a 41 % decline from the previous year 's rating of 4 @.@ 2 . 
 = = = First quarter = = = 
 Boston College won the ceremonial pre @-@ game coin toss to determine first possession and elected to kick off to begin the game , ensuring that the Eagles would receive the ball to begin the second half . Virginia Tech kick returner Dyrell Roberts fielded the ball at the Tech six @-@ yard line and returned it to the Tech 33 @-@ yard line before the first play of the game , a four @-@ yard pass from quarterback Tyrod Taylor to wide receiver Danny Coale . Despite that initial gain , the Hokies were unable to advance the ball further and punted after going three and out . Boston College 's Rich Gunnell fair caught the kick at the Eagles ' 16 @-@ yard line , where the Boston College offense ran its first play of the game . Running back Montel Harris ran for a one @-@ yard gain , but Boston College was unable to gain the needed ten yards for a first down , just as Virginia Tech had failed to do in the prior series . After going three and out , the Eagles punted back to Virginia Tech and the Hokies ' offense returned to the field at the Tech 39 @-@ yard line with 11 : 30 remaining in the first quarter . 
 The first play of the drive was an incomplete pass by Taylor , but the Hokies earned the initial first down of the game two plays later when Taylor completed a 14 @-@ yard throw to Roberts , advancing the ball to the 41 @-@ yard line of Boston College in the process . After a five @-@ yard penalty against the Hokies , Taylor completed two consecutive passes : one to Evans for a 12 @-@ yard gain and the other to Roberts for a 10 @-@ yard gain . Now at the 24 @-@ yard line of Boston College , Virginia Tech 's offense began running the ball instead of passing it . Evans rushed for five yards , then second @-@ string running back Josh Oglesby ran for seven more on the next two plays . The first of Oglesby 's rushes resulted in a first down inside the Eagles ' red zone , and Tech continued to advance the ball on the ground as Evans ran another five yards . Facing third down at the Boston College five @-@ yard line , Virginia Tech called a timeout to formulate its next offensive play . That play was a five @-@ yard rush by Taylor , who crossed the goal line for the game 's first score , a Virginia Tech touchdown . The subsequent extra point kick was successful , and the Hokies took a 7 – 0 lead with 6 : 27 remaining in the first quarter . 
 Virginia Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was fielded at the Boston College 13 @-@ yard line by the Eagles ' Harris , who returned it to the Boston College 28 @-@ yard line , and the Eagles ' offense began its second drive of the game . Eagles quarterback Dominique Davis completed his first pass of the game , a 19 @-@ yard catch by Brandon Robinson , who advanced the ball to the Boston College 47 @-@ yard line for a first down . Davis then scrambled for a four @-@ yard gain , and Harris ran for nine yards on the next two plays , gaining the Eagles ' second first down of the game . Once inside the Virginia Tech 40 @-@ yard line , however , the Hokies ' defense stiffened . Davis was able to gain six yards on two running plays , but after an incomplete pass , the Eagles were forced to punt for the second time in the first quarter . The kick sailed into the end zone for a touchback , and Virginia Tech 's offense began work at its 20 @-@ yard line . The Hokies ' third drive of the quarter mirrored its first , however , as Virginia Tech went three and out and punted after failing to gain a first down . The Eagles recovered the ball with 1 : 32 remaining in the quarter and committed a five @-@ yard false start penalty to begin their possession . On the first play after the penalty , Davis was sacked for a loss of two yards . Harris regained the lost yardage and more with a six @-@ yard run , but after Davis threw an incomplete pass on third down , the Eagles were forced to punt again . Before they could kick the ball , however , the quarter came to an end . With three quarters remaining in the game , Virginia Tech held a 7 – 0 lead . 
 = = = Second quarter = = = 
 The second quarter began with Boston College in possession of the ball at its 28 @-@ yard line and preparing to punt . Virginia Tech 's Harris fielded the kick at the Tech 35 @-@ yard line and returned it to the Tech 49 @-@ yard line , where the Hokies ' offense took to the field for their first play of the second quarter . Evans gained six yards on a rush , then Coale was stopped for no gain on an end @-@ around . Facing third down and needing four yards , Taylor passed for a first down to Boykin , who advanced the ball to the Boston College 39 @-@ yard line . On the next play , Evans broke free for a 30 @-@ yard gain , giving the Hokies a first down at the Eagles ' nine @-@ yard line . Three plays later , Taylor ran four yards for the Hokies ' second touchdown of the game . The extra point was good , and Tech expanded its lead to 14 – 0 with 11 : 08 remaining in the first half . 
 Virginia Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was returned to the Boston College 20 @-@ yard line , and the Eagles began their first full possession of the second quarter . Davis lost a yard on a running play , then was sacked for an eight @-@ yard loss . Facing third down and needing 19 yards for a first down , Harris gained five yards and the Eagles punted after going three and out . The kick was returned to the Eagles ' 36 @-@ yard line , and Tech began a possession deep in Boston College territory . The first Tech play lost two yards , but the Hokies regained the lost yardage on the next play , picking up four yards with a pass from Taylor to Evans . Taylor scrambled on third down , gaining eight yards and a first down . The Hokies attempted a short run , then Taylor gained another first down with a pass to the BC 14 @-@ yard line . Once there , however , Tech committed a 10 @-@ yard holding penalty , pushing the Hokies backwards . After the penalty , Taylor was tackled for a loss of seven more yards . Facing a second down and 27 yards , Taylor attempted to pass for the first down , but the ball was batted into the air and intercepted by a Boston College defender . 
 Following the turnover , the Eagles ' offense began work at their 46 @-@ yard line . Davis completed a five @-@ yard pass to Robinson , advancing into Tech territory . An incomplete pass followed , but Davis was able to gain the first down with a pass to Rich Gunnell at the 39 @-@ yard line . On the first pass after the first down , Davis and Gunnell connected on a deep pass , but Gunnell fumbled and the ball was recovered in the end zone by a Virginia Tech defender . The play resulted in a touchback , and Virginia Tech took over on offense at its 20 @-@ yard line . Following the turnover , Tech went three and out , punting back to Boston College with 2 : 11 remaining before halftime . 
 The kick was fair caught at the 34 @-@ yard line of Boston College . On the first play after the kick , Davis connected with Harris on a pass play that resulted in a 51 @-@ yard gain for the Eagles . At the Tech 15 @-@ yard line following the big gain , the Eagles lost one yard on a rushing play before Davis passed to Gunnell for a 16 @-@ yard gain and a touchdown . The extra point was good , and with 1 : 29 remaining in the first half , Virginia Tech 's lead was cut to 14 – 7 . 
 The Eagles ' post @-@ touchdown kickoff was returned to the Tech 33 @-@ yard line , and on the first play after the kick , Boston College committed a personal foul penalty when Tyrod Taylor was hit out of bounds . Following the penalty , the ball was advanced to the Tech 42 @-@ yard line and the Hokies were given a first down . Tech completed two short passes , advancing to the 50 @-@ yard line , but the Hokies punted after not gaining another first down . The kick sailed out of bounds , and the Eagles returned to offense with 19 seconds remaining in the first half . Rather than try to score quickly , Boston College elected to run out the clock with Virginia Tech leading , 14 – 7 . 
 = = = Third quarter = = = 
 Because Virginia Tech received the ball to begin the game , Boston College received the ball to begin the second half . Virginia Tech 's kickoff was returned to the Eagles ' 35 @-@ yard line , and Boston College 's offense began the first possession of the second half . An incomplete pass by Davis was followed by a short rush and another incomplete pass , and the Eagles were forced to punt after going three and out . The kick went out of bounds at Virginia Tech 's 32 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies ' offense had their first possession of the second half . Tech likewise went three and out , then returned the ball to the Eagles with a punt . The kick went out of bounds , and following the exchange , Boston College 's offense started from its 31 @-@ yard line . 
 The first Eagles ' play after the Tech punt was a 22 @-@ yard pass from Davis to Gunnell for a first down at the Tech 47 @-@ yard line . Following the long gain , the Eagles were unable to gain another first down , and punted back to the Hokies . The kick was fair caught at the Tech 16 @-@ yard line with 11 : 08 remaining in the third quarter , and the Virginia Tech offense returned to the field . Tech advanced the ball on three consecutive plays : a six @-@ yard pass to Evans , a short rush by Evans , then a first down pass to Roberts . Following the first down , Evans ran for another first down , advancing the Hokies to their 44 @-@ yard line . Two Tech plays were stopped for little or no gain , but on third and nine , Taylor scrambled for an 18 @-@ yard gain and a first down at the Boston College 37 @-@ yard line . Evans gained six yards on first down , but the Hokies were unable to gain the next four yards . Instead of punting , Tech head coach Frank Beamer sent kicker Jared Keys into the game to attempt a field goal . Keys ' 50 @-@ yard kick sailed through the uprights , and Tech extended its lead to 17 – 7 with 6 : 07 remaining in the quarter . 
 Tech 's post @-@ score kickoff was returned to the Eagles ' 30 @-@ yard line . Davis started the drive with an incomplete pass , then Harris gained seven yards with a rush up the middle . A third @-@ down pass fell incomplete , and Boston College punted . The kick was fair caught at the Tech 30 @-@ yard line , and with 5 : 01 left in the quarter , the Hokies returned to offense . On the first play , Taylor ran 11 yards for a first down . Taylor threw an incomplete pass , and the Hokies were penalized 10 yards for holding , pushing them back to the 31 @-@ yard line . Tech was unable to regain the lost yardage , and punted . The kick was 57 yards , and Boston College was further backed up by a penalty during the return . Following the kick , Boston College 's offense was forced back to its seven @-@ yard line to start . An incomplete pass was followed by a scramble by Davis . During the run , Davis fumbled the ball , which was recovered by a Boston College player . Facing third down , Davis scrambled again , this time for a first down to the 21 @-@ yard line . On the first play after the first down scramble , a deep pass downfield by Davis was intercepted by Virginia Tech 's Stephan Virgil . The interception was returned to the Boston College 10 @-@ yard line , and on the first play by Tech 's offense , Evans ran the ten yards for a touchdown . The extra point was good , and with 1 : 17 remaining , the Hokies extended their lead to 24 – 7 . 
 Tech 's post @-@ touchdown kickoff was downed in the end zone for a touchback , and the Eagles began on offense at their 20 @-@ yard line . Three consecutive incomplete passes later , Boston College punted , ending their sixth three and out of the game . Following the kick , Tech started at its 27 @-@ yard line . On first down , the Hokies ran an end @-@ around for five yards , then the quarter came to an end . With one quarter remaining , Virginia Tech led , 24 – 7 . 
 = = = Fourth quarter = = = 
 Virginia Tech began the fourth quarter in possession of the ball and facing a second down and five from their 33 @-@ yard line . The first play of the quarter was a seven @-@ yard run by Evans , who earned a first down at the Tech 40 @-@ yard line . On the next play after the first down run , Evans fumbled the ball and Boston College recovered . The Eagles ' offense started within field goal range at the Tech 30 @-@ yard line . Boston College 's first play was stopped for no gain , but the second was a 22 @-@ yard pass by Davis to Gunnell , giving the Eagles a first down inside the Tech 10 @-@ yard line . Davis threw three incomplete passes before Boston College coach Jeff Jagodzinski sent kicker Steve Aponavicius into the game to attempt a 24 @-@ yard field goal . The kick was good , and the Eagles cut Tech 's lead to 24 – 10 . 
 The post @-@ touchdown kickoff was returned to the Tech 20 @-@ yard line , and the Hokies began an offensive drive hoping to run down the clock and preserve their two @-@ touchdown lead . Because the game clock continues to run on rushing plays , the Hokies executed five consecutive rushing plays , picking up a first down in the process . The Hokies were unable to gain a second first down , however , and Tech punted from its 40 @-@ yard line . The kick rolled out of bounds at the Eagles ' 28 @-@ yard line with 9 : 28 remaining in the game , and Boston College took over on offense . On the first play after the punt , however , Tech defender Jason Worilds tackled Davis , forcing a fumble , which bounced into the hands of fellow defender Orion Martin , who ran it 17 yards for a defensive touchdown . The extra point bounced off an upright , however , and was no good . Still , with just 9 : 05 remaining in the game , Tech took a commanding 30 – 10 lead . 
 The Hokies ' kickoff after the defensive score was caught at the goal line and returned to the 28 @-@ yard line by Boston College 's Chris Fox . Following the return , Davis completed a seven @-@ yard pass to the 35 @-@ yard line , then picked up a first down to the 42 @-@ yard line with another pass . Davis then scrambled three yards and threw for another first down , this time to tight end Lars Anderson . Now at the Tech 46 @-@ yard line , Davis threw three incomplete passes before throwing another on fourth down . With 6 : 39 remaining in the game , Boston College turned the ball over on downs to the Virginia Tech offense . The Hokies again began to run out the clock . Evans ran the ball three consecutive times , but on the third rush , Evans fumbled for the second time in the game . The fumble was recovered by Boston College linebacker Mark Herzlich and Boston College 's offense returned to the field . 
 From the Tech 32 @-@ yard line , Davis threw an incomplete pass then connected on a 21 @-@ yard pass to Jarvis for a first down . After an incomplete pass , Davis threw another pass to Jarvis , who caught it at the four @-@ yard line . Facing third down , Davis attempted another pass . The ball was tipped into the air and caught by Virginia Tech defender Brent Warren . The Hokies resumed running down the clock with short rushes by Evans , who advanced the ball to the 13 @-@ yard line with 3 : 05 remaining in the game . Boston College used its allotted second @-@ half timeouts to stop the clock and preserve time for a late scoring drive . In a strategic move , Tech coach Frank Beamer ordered an intentional safety rather than attempt a punt from the Tech end zone . Any such kick has the potential to be blocked for a defensive touchdown . Thus , an intentional safety gives the defense two points while denying them the slight chance to score seven . The score cut Virginia Tech 's lead to 30 – 12 with 3 : 05 remaining , but the limited time remaining meant Tech 's lead would be sufficient to win the game without a series of unlikely events . 
 The free kick following the intentional safety was returned to near midfield , and Davis passed for a first down . Following the second down , Davis was sacked for a loss , but then scrambled for a first down to the Tech 25 @-@ yard line . From there , however , Boston College 's offense began to struggle . During the four plays that followed , the Eagles were able to gain just one yard and turned the ball over on downs again . The final Boston College play was a sack of Davis , and Virginia Tech proceeded to run out the clock by kneeling on the ball after taking the field on offense . 
 = = Statistical summary = = 
 In recognition of his winning performance during the ACC Championship , Virginia Tech quarterback Tyrod Taylor was named the game 's most valuable player . Taylor finished the game having completed 11 of his 19 pass attempts for 84 yards and one interception . He also ran the ball 11 times for 30 yards and two touchdowns . On the opposite side of the ball , Boston College quarterback Dominique Davis was the game 's leading passer , having completed 17 of his 43 pass attempts for 263 yards , one touchdown , and two interceptions . Davis also carried the ball 14 times for 12 yards on the ground . Davis ' 51 @-@ yard pass to Harris in the second quarter set an ACC Championship Game record for the longest play recorded to that point . 
 Boston College wide receiver Rich Gunnell was the game 's leading receiver , having been the primary beneficiary of Davis ' prolific passing . Gunnell finished the game having caught seven passes for 114 yards and one touchdown . Virginia Tech wide receiver Dyrell Roberts was the game 's second @-@ leading receiver . He caught four passes for 44 yards . Tech 's second @-@ most proficient receiver was running back Darren Evans , who caught three passes for 22 yards . Evans was the game 's leading rusher , having carried the ball 31 times for 114 yards and a touchdown . On the opposite side , Boston College running back Montel Harris led the Eagles on the ground with nine carries for 34 yards . 
 Defensively , Boston College linebacker Mark Herzlich led all players with nine tackles . Of the nine stops , one and a half were for negative yardage . The leading Virginia Tech defender was Cody Grimm , who had eight tackles , two and a half of which were for losses . One and a half of the tackles for loss were quarterback sacks , and Grimm also forced a fumble and broke up one Boston College pass . In total , the Hokies ' defense intercepted two passes and recovered two fumbles . The Eagles ' defense likewise caused three turnovers , recovering two fumbles and intercepting one pass . Boston College sacked Taylor twice , while Virginia Tech 's defense reached Davis five times . 
 = = Postgame effects = = 
 Virginia Tech 's win in the ACC Championship Game brought it to a 9 – 4 record , while Boston College 's loss brought it also to a 9 – 4 record . Both teams ' standings in the national polls were affected by the game . In the BCS poll , the Eagles fell from 17th to 24th , while Virginia Tech rose from 25th to 19th . In the AP Poll , Tech rose to 21st , while Boston College fell out of the poll entirely , appearing in the " also receiving votes " category at 27th . With the win , Virginia Tech was awarded the ACC 's automatic Bowl Championship Series bid to the 2009 Orange Bowl . Boston College , meanwhile , was selected to play in the 2008 Music City Bowl . The pick by the Music City Bowl represented a drop in prestige for Boston College . Had the Eagles won the championship game , they would have earned an automatic bid to the Orange Bowl and a payout of $ 17 @.@ 5 million . Instead , the Music City Bowl , which offered a payout of $ 1 @.@ 7 million , was contractually obliged to select the Eagles after Boston College was not selected by any of the three more prestigious bowl games with ACC ties . 
 The Music City Bowl took place on December 31 , and in a contest against Southeastern Conference opponent Vanderbilt , Boston College lost , 16 – 13 . The loss ended a streak of eight consecutive bowl game wins for Boston College . In the Orange Bowl , Virginia Tech emerged victorious against Big East Conference champion Cincinnati , 20 – 7 . The win was Tech 's first BCS bowl game win since 1995 , and was the first ACC BCS game win since 2000 . 
 = = = Boston College coaching changes = = = 
 Following the loss to Vanderbilt in the 2008 Music City Bowl , Boston College head coach Jeff Jagodzinski announced his intention to interview for the vacant head coaching position with the National Football League 's New York Jets . In an unusual move , Boston College athletic director Gene DeFillippo announced that if Jagodzinski went ahead with an interview , he would be fired as head coach of the Boston College football team . DeFillippo previously stated that a five @-@ year contract with Jagodzinski , signed in 2007 , was contingent on the coach staying " for the long term " . Jagodzinski proceeded with the interview and was fired by DeFillippo on January 7 . 
 To replace Jagodzinski , DeFillippo promoted Boston College defensive coordinator Frank Spaziani , who previously served as the Boston College head coach on an interim basis in 2006 . Boston College offensive coordinator Steve Logan , who was unhappy with the staff changes on the football team , resigned shortly after Spaziani 's promotion . To replace Logan , Spaziani hired former Navy head coach Gary Tranquill as Boston College 's new offensive coordinator . One week after Logan 's announcement , the Eagles ' offensive line coach , Jack Bicknell , Jr . , also announced that he was leaving the team . On January 27 , special teams and tight ends coach Don <unk> announced his resignation from the Eagles , making him the fourth coach to be fired or resign from the Boston College football team after the season . 
 = 2Shy = 
 " 2Shy " is the sixth episode of the third season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on November 3 , 1995 . It was written by Jeff Vlaming , directed by David Nutter , and featured guest appearances by Timothy Carhart and James Handy . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a spate of " lonely hearts " murders targeting overweight women . The two eventually discover a mutant killer who is extracting the body fat from his victims after seducing them over online chat rooms . 
 The episode was the first one of the series to be written by Vlaming . " 2Shy " also marked Steve Kiziak 's first appearance as Duchovny 's body double . The episode was viewed by almost 15 million people in its initial broadcast , and drew mixed reviews from critics . Although director Nutter based the gory scenes in " 2Shy " on the earlier episode " The Host " , the episode has drawn comparisons to " Squeeze " and " Irresistible " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Cleveland , a couple sit flirting in a car at night , having met over the internet . The man , the charismatic and handsome Virgil Incanto ( Timothy Carhart ) , suffocates his overweight date , Lauren , with a gelatinous substance he spits up . The next morning , a policeman finds Lauren 's body , covered in the substance . 
 Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) are called in to investigate , as the victim 's description seems similar to those of other victims of a lonely hearts killer still at large . Scully attempts to perform an autopsy on Lauren 's body , only to find that it has liquified with only a skeleton remaining . Scully later discerns that the substance coating the body was a concentrated digestive enzyme , and that the remains are lacking in body fat . 
 Incanto prowls an online chatroom , arranging to meet with a similarly overweight woman named Ellen Kaminsky ( Catherine <unk> ) . Incanto is interrupted by his landlord Monica Landis , who believes he is a writer and who is romantically interested in him . He ignores her and resumes chatting . Elsewhere , Mulder learns that Lauren met a man in a chatroom , and researches Incanto 's online accounts . They find that he had started one account using a credit card taken from a previous victim . 
 Kaminsky stands up Incanto while he waits at a restaurant . He leaves , murdering a slightly overweight prostitute who injures him in a struggle . Incanto is forced to flee before he can fully dissolve the body . At the autopsy , Scully finds that the body 's airways are choked with the same substance that dissolved Lauren . Scully also finds the skin under the victim 's nails contains no oils or fatty acids , convincing Mulder that the killer is sucking body fat from his victims . 
 Mulder finds passages of obscure medieval poetry in Incanto 's e @-@ mails , and compiles a list of people who would have access to the texts from which these were taken . The agents , along with local detective Alan Cross ( James Handy ) , agree to canvass everyone on the list . Meanwhile , Incanto , a translator of medieval Italian literature , receives a package while talking to Monica and her blind daughter , Jessie . He receives an e @-@ mail from Kaminsky , asking to arrange another date ; he is also questioned by Cross . 
 Returning home with Kaminsky , Incanto invites her inside , but quickly retracts his invitation when he sees the lights on in his apartment . After leaving Kaminsky , Incanto finds and kills Monica in his apartment after she discovers Cross ' body in his bathtub . When Jessie asks Incanto about her mother 's whereabouts , he denies seeing her and aggressively asks her to leave him alone . However , Jessie smells her mother 's perfume in Incanto 's apartment and calls the police . When they arrive , Incanto is gone , but his computer gives a list of women he has been in contact with . Only two are unreachable , one being Kaminsky . 
 After Incanto comes to Kaminsky 's apartment , she recognizes his facial composite distributed by the FBI . Scully arrives at Kaminsky 's apartment and is attacked by Incanto ; however , as they struggle , Kaminsky retrieves Scully 's gun and fires on her attacker . Later , during questioning , a visibly weakened and deformed Incanto admits to the killings . He claims to have given his victims what they had wanted in return for what he wanted ( the fatty acids to keep his skin condition under control ) . Incanto states " the dead are no longer lonely " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " 2Shy " was written by Jeff Vlaming , who had previously worked for the series Weird Science . Vlaming 's only other writing credit for the series was the later third season episode " Hell Money " . He had initially pitched the idea of a mutant who fed on body oils , which was eventually changed to body fats . The presentation of the character Virgil Incanto also went through several permutations , initially conceived as a creepy Phantom of the Opera @-@ like recluse , and as a butcher who would be able to cut the fat from his victims , before the final " fairly normal @-@ looking " version was decided upon . 
 Director David Nutter made sure that the episode contained several visceral moments , after the popularity of the " Flukeman " character in the earlier episode " The Host " . Frank Spotnitz , the series ' story editor , was initially wary of the concept as he felt it might be seen as offensive , but changed his mind when series creator Chris Carter convinced him the episode told " a good story " , and was a " fun , old @-@ fashioned sort of X @-@ File " . 
 The episode was primarily filmed in Vancouver 's Quebec Street , with two nearby apartment buildings used for interior shots . " 2Shy " marked the début of Steve Kiziak as Duchovny 's new body double . While filming a scene in which Mulder bursts through a door , Kiziak and the other body doubles mistakenly burst through the wrong apartment 's door , interrupting the tenant 's dinner party . Kerry <unk> , who portrays Ellen Kaminsky 's friend Joanne , had previously appeared in the first season episode " Roland " , while Incanto 's landlord was played by Glynis Davies , who had appeared in season one 's " Tooms " and the second season episode " Irresistible " . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " 2Shy " premiered on the Fox network on November 3 , 1995 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on February 27 , 1997 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 1 with a 17 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 17 percent of households watching TV , were tuned in to the episode . The episode was viewed by over 14 @.@ 83 million viewers . 
 Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , had mixed feelings about the episode , ultimately rating it a B- . He felt that the character of Virgil Incanto was " wonderfully gross " , although he " lacks the universal creepiness " of first season villain Eugene Tooms , from the episode " Squeeze " . Handlen also felt that the episode was let down by the fact that it " takes it as a given that single women are targets " , failing to give any real depth to its female characters . An overview of the third season in Entertainment Weekly also rated the episode a B- , and called Incanto a " fine example " of the series ' " unassuming " villains , comparing him to Tooms and to the second season villain Donnie Pfaster . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode three stars out of five , calling it " a retread of Squeeze " and " a little too formulaic to be truly satisfying " . However , Shearman and Pearson felt that the episode " has a heart to it " and " jogs along at a fair pace " , also praising its gory visuals . 
 TV Guide listed Incanto among the scariest X @-@ Files monsters , whilst UGO Networks listed the character as one of their best " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " in the series , saying Scully 's " pure revulsion at Incanto 's instinctual need makes for one of The X @-@ Files ' finest final scenes " . 
 = Benjamin Tillman = 
 Benjamin Ryan Tillman ( August 11 , 1847 – July 3 , 1918 ) was a politician of the Democratic Party who was Governor of South Carolina from 1890 to 1894 , and a United States Senator from 1895 until his death in 1918 . A white supremacist who often spoke out against blacks , Tillman led a paramilitary group of Red Shirts during South Carolina 's violent 1876 election . On the floor of the U.S. Senate , he frequently ridiculed blacks , and boasted of having helped to kill them during that campaign . 
 In the 1880s , Tillman , a wealthy landowner , became dissatisfied with the Democratic leadership and led a movement of white farmers calling for reform . He was initially unsuccessful , though he was instrumental in the founding of Clemson University as an agricultural school . In 1890 , Tillman took control of the state Democratic Party , and was elected governor . During his four years in office , 18 African Americans were lynched in South Carolina — the 1890s saw the most lynchings of any decade in South Carolina . Tillman tried to prevent lynchings , but spoke in support of the lynch mobs , stating his own willingness to lead one . In 1894 , at the end of his second two @-@ year term , he was elected to the U.S. Senate by vote of the state legislature . 
 Tillman was known as " Pitchfork Ben " because of his aggressive language , as when he threatened to use one to prod that " bag of beef " , President Grover Cleveland . Considered a possible candidate for the Democratic nomination for president in 1896 , Tillman lost any chance after giving a disastrous speech at the convention . He became known for his virulent oratory ( especially against African Americans ) but also as an effective legislator . The first federal campaign finance law , banning corporate contributions , is commonly called the Tillman Act . Tillman was repeatedly re @-@ elected , serving in the Senate for the rest of his life . One of his legacies was South Carolina 's 1895 constitution , which disenfranchised most of the black majority and ensured white rule for more than half a century . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Benjamin Ryan Tillman was born on August 11 , 1847 , on the family plantation " Chester " , near Trenton , in the Edgefield District , sometimes considered part of upcountry South Carolina . His parents , Benjamin Ryan Tillman , Sr. and the former Sophia Hancock , were of English descent . In addition to being planters with 86 slaves , the Tillmans operated an inn . Benjamin Jr. was the last born of seven sons and four daughters . 
 Edgefield was known as a violent place , even by the standards of antebellum South Carolina , where matters of personal honor might be addressed with a killing or duel . Before Tillman Sr. ' s death from typhoid fever in 1849 , he had killed a man and been convicted of rioting by an Edgefield jury . One of his sons died in a duel ; another was killed in a domestic dispute . A third died in the Mexican @-@ American War ; a fourth of disease aged 15 . Of Benjamin Jr . ' s two surviving brothers , one died of Civil War wounds after returning home , and the other , George , killed a man who accused him of cheating at gambling . Convicted of manslaughter , George continued to practice law from his jail cell during his two @-@ year sentence , and was elected to the state senate while still incarcerated . He later served several terms in Congress . 
 From an early age , Ben showed a developed vocabulary . In 1860 , he was sent to Bethany , a boarding school in Edgefield where he became a star student , and he remained there after the American Civil War began . In 1863 , he came home for a year to help his mother pay off debts . He returned to Bethany in 1864 , intending a final year of study prior to entering the South Carolina College ( today , the University of South Carolina ) . The South 's desperate need for soldiers ended this plan , and in June 1864 , still not yet 17 , he withdrew from the academy , making arrangements to join a coastal artillery unit . These plans were scuttled as well when he fell ill at home . A cranial tumor led to the removal of his left eye , and it was not until 1866 , months after Confederate forces had disbanded , that Ben Tillman was again healthy . 
 After the war , Ben Tillman , his mother , and his wounded brother James ( who died in 1866 ) worked to rebuild Chester plantation . They signed the plantation 's freedmen as workers . They were confronted with the circumstance of several men refusing to work for them and legally leaving the plantation . From 1866 to 1868 , Ben Tillman went with several workers from the plantation to Florida , where a new cotton @-@ planting belt had been established . The Tillmans purchased land there . Tillman was unsuccessful in Florida — after two marginal years , the 1868 crop was destroyed by caterpillars . 
 During his convalescence , Tillman had met Sallie Starke , a refugee from Fairfield District . They married in January 1868 and she joined him in Florida . The Tillmans returned to South Carolina , where the following year they settled on 430 acres ( 170 ha ) of Tillman family land , given to him by his mother . They would have seven children together : Adeline , Benjamin Ryan , Henry Cummings , Margaret <unk> , Sophia Oliver , Samuel Starke , and Sallie Mae . 
 Tillman proved an adept farmer , who experimented with crop diversification and took his crops to market each Saturday in nearby Augusta , Georgia . In 1878 , Tillman inherited 170 acres ( 69 ha ) from Sophia Tillman , and purchased 650 acres ( 260 ha ) at Ninety Six , some 30 miles ( 48 km ) from his Edgefield holdings . Having inherited a large library from his uncle John Tillman , he spent part of his days reading . Although his workers were no longer slaves , Tillman continued to apply the whip to them . By 1876 , Tillman was the largest landowner in Edgefield County . He rode through his fields on horseback like an antebellum overseer , and stated at the time that it was necessary that he do so to " drive the slovenly Negroes to work " . 
 = = Red Shirts and Reconstruction = = 
 = = = Resistance to Republican rule = = = 
 With the Confederacy defeated , South Carolina ratified a new constitution in 1865 that recognized the end of slavery , but basically left the pre @-@ war elites in charge . African @-@ American freedmen , who were the majority of South Carolina 's population , were given no vote , and their new freedom was soon restricted by Black Codes that limited their civil rights and required black farm laborers to bind themselves with annual labor contracts . Congress was dissatisfied with this minimal change and required a new constitutional convention and elections with universal male suffrage . As African Americans generally favored the Republican Party at the time , that party controlled the biracial state legislature beginning with the 1868 elections . That campaign was marked by violence — 19 Republican and Union League activists were killed in South Carolina 's 3rd congressional district alone . 
 In 1873 , two Edgefield lawyers and former Confederate generals , Martin Gary and Matthew C. Butler , began to advocate what became known as the " Edgefield Plan " or " <unk> Plan " . They believed that the previous five years had shown it was not possible to outvote African Americans . Gary and Butler deemed compromises with black leaders to be misguided ; they felt white men must be restored to their antebellum position of preeminent political power in the state . They proposed that white men form clandestine paramilitary organizations — known as " rifle clubs " — and use force and intimidation to drive the African American from power . Members of these groups became known as Red Shirts . Tillman was an early and enthusiastic recruit for his local organization , dubbed the Sweetwater Sabre Club . He became a devoted protégé of Gary . 
 From 1873 to 1876 , Tillman served as a member of the Sweetwater club , members of which assaulted and intimidated black would @-@ be voters , killed black political figures , and skirmished with the African @-@ American @-@ dominated state militia . Economic coercion was used as well as physical force : most Edgefield planters would not employ black militiamen or allow them to rent land , and ostracized whites who did . 
 = = = Hamburg massacre ; campaign of 1876 = = = 
 In 1874 , a moderate Republican , Daniel Henry Chamberlain , was elected South Carolina 's governor , attracting even some Democratic votes . When Chamberlain sought re @-@ election in 1876 , Gary recruited Wade Hampton III , a Confederate war hero who had moved out of state , to return and run for governor as a Democrat . That election campaign of 1876 was marked by violence , of which the most notorious occurrence was what became known as the Hamburg massacre . It occurred in Hamburg , South Carolina , a mostly black town across the river from Augusta , in Aiken County , bordering Edgefield County . The incident grew out of a confrontation on July 4 when a black militia marched in Hamburg and two white farmers in a buggy tried to ride through its ranks . Both sides filed criminal charges against the other , and dozens of armed out @-@ of @-@ uniform Red Shirts , led by Butler , traveled to Hamburg on the day of the hearing , July 8 . Tillman was present , and the subsequent events were among his proudest memories . 
 The hearing never occurred , as the black militiamen , outnumbered and outgunned , refused to attend court . This upset the white mob , which expected an apology . Butler demanded that the militiamen give one , and as part of the apology , surrender their arms . Those who attempted to mediate found that neither Butler nor the armed men who backed him were interested in compromise . If the militiamen surrendered their arms , they would be helpless before the mob ; if they did not , Butler and his men would use force . Butler brought additional men in from Georgia , and the augmented armed mob , including Tillman , went to confront the militiamen , who were barricaded in their drill room , above a local store . Shots were fired , and after one white man was killed , the rest stormed the room and captured about thirty of the militia . Five were murdered as having white enemies ; among the dead was a town constable who had arrested white men . The rest were allowed to flee , with shots fired after them . At least seven black militiamen were killed in the incident . On the way home to Edgefield , Tillman and others had a meal to celebrate the events at the home of the man who had pointed out which African Americans should be shot . 
 Tillman later recalled that " the leading white men of Edgefield " had decided " to seize the first opportunity that the Negroes might offer them to provoke a riot and teach the Negroes a lesson " by " having the whites demonstrate their superiority by killing as many of them as was justifiable " . Hamburg was their first such opportunity . Ninety @-@ four white men , including Tillman , were indicted by a coroner 's jury , but none was prosecuted for the killings . Butler blamed the deaths on intoxicated factory workers and Irish @-@ Americans who had come across the bridge from Augusta , and over whom he had no control . 
 Tillman raised his profile in state politics by attending the 1876 state Democratic convention , which nominated Hampton as the party 's candidate for governor . While Hampton presented a fatherly image , urging support from South Carolinians , black and white , Tillman led fifty men to Ellenton , intending to join over one thousand rifle club members who slaughtered thirty militiamen , with the survivors saved only by the arrival of federal authorities . Although Tillman and his men arrived too late to participate in those killings , two of his men murdered Simon Coker , a black state senator who had come to investigate reports of violence . They shot him as he knelt in final prayer . 
 On Election Day in November 1876 , Tillman served as an election official at a local poll , as did two black Republicans . One arrived late and was scared off by Tillman . As there was as yet no secret ballot in South Carolina , Tillman threatened to remember any votes cast for the Republicans . That precinct gave 211 votes for the Democrats and 2 for the Republicans . Although almost two @-@ thirds of those eligible to vote in Edgefield were African Americans , the Democrats were able to suppress the ( Republican ) African @-@ American vote , reporting a win for Hampton in Edgefield County with over 60 percent of the vote . Bolstered by this result , Hampton gained a narrow victory statewide , at least according to the official returns . The Red Shirts used violence and fraud to create Democratic majorities that did not exist , and give Hampton the election . 
 Tillman biographer Stephen Kantrowitz wrote that the violent summer of 1876 " marked a turning point in Ben Tillman 's life , establishing him as a member of the political and military leadership " . Historian Orville Vernon Burton stated that " his violence on behalf of the white Democrats in the Hamburg and Ellenton riots in the summer of 1876 secured his prominence among the state 's white political elite and proved to be the deathblow to South Carolina 's Republican Reconstruction government . " The takeover , by fraud and terror , of South Carolina 's government became known to whites as the state 's " Redemption " . 
 In 1909 , Tillman addressed a reunion of Red Shirts in Anderson , South Carolina , and recounted the events of 1876 : 
 The purpose of our visit to Hamburg was to strike terror , and the next morning ( Sunday ) when the negroes who had fled to the swamp returned to the town ( some of them never did return , but kept on going ) the ghastly sight which met their gaze of seven dead negroes lying stark and stiff , certainly had its effect ... It was now after midnight , and the moon high in the heavens looked down peacefully on the deserted town and dead negroes , whose lives had been offered up as a sacrifice to the fanatical teachings and fiendish hate of those who sought to substitute the rule of the African for that of the Caucasian in South Carolina . 
 = = " Agricultural Moses " = = 
 Starting with the election of Hampton as governor in 1876 , South Carolina was ruled primarily by the wealthy " Bourbon " or " Conservative " planter class that had controlled the state before the Civil War . In the 1880s , though , the Bourbon class was neither as strong nor as populous as before . The agenda of the Conservatives had little to offer the farmer , and in the hard economic times of the early 1880s , there was discontent in South Carolina which gave some electoral success to the short @-@ lived Greenback Party . 
 Having risen to the rank of captain in the rifle club before the end of the 1876 campaign , Tillman spent the next several years managing his plantations . He played a modest role in Edgefield 's political and social life , and in 1881 was elected second in command of the Edgefield Hussars , a rifle club that had been made part of the state militia . He supported Gary 's unsuccessful candidacy for the Democratic nomination for governor in 1880 , and after Gary 's death in 1881 , as a delegate to the 1882 Democratic state convention Tillman backed former Confederate general John Bratton for the nomination , again unsuccessfully . By then , Tillman was dissatisfied with the Conservative leaders he had helped gain power ; he believed they were ignoring the interests of farmers and of poor mill workers , and had been responsible for denying office to Gary — the former Red Shirt leader had twice sought to be senator , and once governor , and was each time denied . Tillman never forgot what he deemed the " betrayal " of Gary . 
 = = = Struggle for the farmer = = = 
 In an attempt to better conditions for the farmer ( by which Tillman always meant white males only ) , in 1884 he founded the Edgefield Agricultural Club . It died for lack of members . Undeterred , Tillman tried again in January 1885 , beginning the Edgefield County Agricultural Society . Its membership also dwindled , but Tillman was elected one of three delegates to the August joint meeting of the state Grange and the state Agricultural and Mechanical Society at Bennettsville , and was invited to be one of the speakers . 
 When Tillman spoke at Bennettsville , he was not widely known except as the brother of Congressman George Tillman . Ben Tillman called for the state government to do more for farmers , and blamed politicians and lawyers in the pay of financial interests for agricultural problems , including the crop lien system that left many farmers struggling to pay bills . He assailed his listeners for letting themselves be duped by hostile interests , and told of the farmer who was elected to the legislature , only to be dazzled and seduced by the elite . According to an account the next day in the Columbia Daily Register , Tillman 's speech " electrified the assembly and was the sensation of the meeting " . Lindsey Perkins , in his journal article on Tillman 's oratory , wrote that " Tillman 's losses in the agricultural depression of 1883 – 1898 forced him to begin thinking and planning economic reforms . The result was Bennettsville . " Tillman later stated that he began his advocacy after a few bad years in the early 1880s forced him to sell some of his land . The speech was printed in several newspapers , and Tillman began to receive more invitations to speak . According to Zach McGhee in his 1906 article on Tillman , " from that day to this he has been the most conspicuous figure in South Carolina " . 
 Within two months of the Bennettsville speech , Tillman was being talked of as a candidate for governor in 1886 . He continued to speak to audiences , and was dubbed the " Agricultural Moses " . He made political demands , such as primary elections to determine who would get the Democratic nomination ( then tantamount to election ) rather than the leaving the decision to the Bourbon @-@ dominated state nominating convention . He principally promoted the establishment of a state college for the education of farmers , where young men could learn the latest techniques . Kantrowitz pointed out that the term " farmer " is flexible in meaning , allowing Tillman to overlook distinctions of class and unite most white men in predominately rural South Carolina under a single banner . During these years , cartoonists began depicting Tillman with pitchfork in hand , symbolizing his agriculture @-@ based roots and tendency to take jabs at opponents . This was a source of his nickname , " Pitchfork Ben " . 
 Historian H. Wayne Morgan noted that " Ben Tillman 's venom was not typical , but his general feeling represented that of southern dirt farmers . " According to E. Culpepper Clark in his journal article on Tillman , 
 Tillman constantly baffled his enemies . Every move he made seemed sure to be counterproductive ; yet his popularity only grew ... he abused his followers , calling them ignorant , imbecilic , backward , apathetic , and foolish . He assailed his enemies with a tongue so outrageous that many believed only the demise of the code duello kept him alive ... Despite all this , his movement grew and multiplied , thriving best when the issues appeared contrived , contradictory or without foundation . 
 Tillman spoke widely in the state in 1885 and after , and soon attracted allies , including a number of Red Shirt comrades , such as Martin Gary 's nephews Eugene B. Gary and John Gary Evans . He sought to mold local farmers ' groups into a statewide organization to be a voice for agriculturalists . In April 1886 , a convention called by Tillman met in Columbia , the state capital . The goal of what became known as the Farmer 's Association or Farmer 's Movement was to control the state Democratic Party from within , and to gain reforms such as the agricultural college . He initially was unsuccessful , though he came within thirty votes of controlling the 1886 state Democratic convention . The lack of success caused Tillman , in late 1887 , to announce his retirement from politics , though there was widespread speculation he would soon be back . 
 Tillman had met , in 1886 , with Thomas G. Clemson , son @-@ in @-@ law of the late John C. Calhoun , to discuss a bequest to underwrite the cost of the new agricultural school . Clemson died in 1888 , and his will not only left money and land for the college , but made Tillman one of seven trustees for life , who had the power to appoint their successors . Tillman stated that this provision , which made the lifetime trustees a majority of the board , was intended to forestall any attempt by a future Republican government to admit African Americans . Clemson College ( later Clemson University ) was authorized by the legislature in December 1888 . 
 The Clemson bequest helped revitalize Tillman 's movement . The targets of Tillman 's oratory were again politicians in Columbia and the Conservative elements based in Charleston and elsewhere in the lowcountry of South Carolina . Through letters to newspapers and stump speeches , he decried the state government as a pit of corruption , stating that officials displayed " ignorance , extravagance and laziness " and that Charleston 's The Citadel was a " military dude factory " that might profitably be repurposed as a school for women . 
 Governor John P. Richardson had been elected in 1886 ; in 1888 he sought re @-@ nomination , to be met with opposition from Tillman 's farmers . As had been done to Republican rallies in 1876 , Tillman and his followers attended campaign events and demanded that he be allowed equal time to speak . Tillman was a highly talented stump speaker , and when given the opportunity to debate , accused Richardson of being irreligious , a gambler and a drunkard . Even so , Richardson was easily re @-@ nominated by the state Democratic convention , which turned down Tillman 's demand for a primary election . Tillman proposed the customary gracious motion that Richardson 's nomination be made unanimous . 
 = = = 1890 gubernatorial campaign = = = 
 One factor that helped Tillman and his movement in the 1890 campaign was the organization of many South Carolina farmers under the auspices of the Farmers ' Alliance . The Alliance , which had spread through much of the agricultural South and West since its origin in Texas , sought to get farmers to work together cooperatively and seek reform . From that organization would come the People 's Party ( better known as the Populists ) . Although the Populist Party played a significant role in the politics of the 1890s , it did not do so in South Carolina , where Tillman had already channeled agricultural discontent into an attempt to take over the Democratic Party . The Alliance in South Carolina generally backed Tillman , and its many local farmers ' organizations gave Tillman new venues for his speeches . 
 In January 1890 , Tillmanite leader George Washington Shell published what came to be known as the " Shell Manifesto " in a Charleston newspaper , setting forth the woes of farmers under the Conservative government , and calling for them to elect delegates to meet in March to recommend a candidate for governor . Both Tillman supporters and Conservatives realized the purpose was to pre @-@ empt the Democratic convention 's choice , and fresh , acrimonious debate over the merits of Tillman and his methods began . He and his supporters were often attacked in the newspapers by the Conservatives , but such invective by the hated elites only tended to endear Tillman the more to the farmers who saw him as their champion . Conservatives were certain that once Tillman 's voters understood how wealthy he was while speaking for debt @-@ ridden farmers , they would abandon him ; they did not . 
 At the " Shell Convention " , state Representative John L. M. Irby nominated Tillman , stating " shame on the [ Democratic ] party for stabbing Gary , a man who had saved in [ sic ] us in ' 76 ... we could now make the amends honorable and choose B. R. Tillman " . Although many delegates voted to make no endorsement , Tillman gained a narrow victory for the convention 's recommendation . Tillman spent the summer of 1890 making speeches and debating two rivals ( former general Bratton and state Attorney General Joseph H. Earle ) for the nomination , as the Democratic leadership watched with increasing consternation . Given Tillman 's strength at the grassroots level , he was likely to be the choice of the Democratic convention in September . Accordingly , the party 's Bourbon @-@ controlled state executive committee tried to use the brief August convention ( called to set the rules for the September one ) to change the nomination method to a primary , in which the anti @-@ Tillman forces would unite behind a single candidate . When the August convention was held , the Tillmanites had a large majority , which they used to oust the executive committee and install one loyal to Tillman . The convention also passed a new party constitution calling for a primary , beginning in 1892 . Tillman was duly nominated in September as the Democratic candidate for governor , with Eugene Gary as his running mate for lieutenant governor . 
 After the convention many Conservative Democrats , though not happy at Tillman 's victory , acknowledged him as head of the state party . Those who submitted to Tillman 's rule included Hampton and Butler , the state 's two U.S. senators . In his campaign , Tillman promoted support for Clemson , establishment of a state women 's college , reapportionment of the state legislature ( then dominated by the lowcountry counties ) , and ending the influence of corporation lawyers in that body . 
 Those Democrats who could not abide Tillman 's candidacy held an October meeting with 20 of South Carolina 's 35 counties represented , and nominated Alexander Haskell for governor . The announcement that Haskell would run caused a closing of Democratic ranks against him , lest white unity be sundered . The Charleston News and Courier , not always a friend to Tillman , urged , " stand by the ticket , not for the ticket 's sake , but for the party and the State " . Even most Conservatives would not support a bolt from the party , and Kantrowitz suggested that Haskell and his supporters hated Tillman so much that his nomination caused them to commit political suicide . The Haskell campaign reached out to black voters , pledging that he would not disturb the limited political role played by African Americans in the state , a promise Tillman was unlikely to make . 
 During Tillman 's five years of agricultural advocacy , he had rarely discussed the question of the African American . With blacks given control of one of South Carolina 's seven congressional districts , the question of black influence in state politics seemed settled and did not play a significant role in the campaign for the Democratic nomination for governor . Haskell 's appeals for support , added to speculation that Tillman was trying to form a biracial coalition through the Farmers ' Alliance ( which , though segregated , had a parallel organization for black farmers ) made race an issue . Tillman boasted of his deeds at Hamburg and Ellenton , but it was Gary who made race the focus of his campaign . Urging segregation of railroad cars , Gary asked , " what white man wants his wife or sister sandwiched between a big bully buck and a saucy wench " ? 
 Although Tillman fully expected to win , he warned that should he be defeated by ballot @-@ box stuffing , there would be war . On Election Day , November 4 , 1890 , Tillman was elected governor with 59 @,@ 159 votes to 14 @,@ 828 for Haskell . With no Republican to support ( none had run for governor since 1878 ) , black leaders had been divided as to whether to endorse Haskell ; in the end the only two counties won by him were in the lowcountry and heavily African @-@ American . The losing candidate and his white supporters were quickly consigned to political oblivion , with some mocking them as " white Negroes " . 
 = = Governor ( 1890 – 1894 ) = = 
 = = = Inauguration and legislative control = = = 
 Tillman was sworn in as governor in Columbia on December 4 , 1890 , before a crowd of jubilant supporters , the largest to see South Carolina 's governor inaugurated since Hampton 's swearing @-@ in . In his inaugural address , Tillman celebrated his victory , " the citizens of this great commonwealth have for the first time in its history demanded and obtained for themselves the right to choose her Governor ; and I , as the exponent and leader of the revolution which brought about the change , am here to take the solemn oath of office ... the triumph of democracy and white supremacy over <unk> and anarchy , of civilization over barbarism , has been most complete . " 
 Tillman made it clear he was not content that African Americans were allowed even a limited role in the political life of South Carolina : 
 The whites have absolute control of the State government , and we intend at any and all hazards to retain it . The intelligent exercise of the right of suffrage ... is as yet beyond the capacity of the vast majority of colored men . We deny , without regard to color , that " all men are created equal " ; it is not true now , and was not true when Jefferson wrote it . 
 The legislature , at Tillman 's recommendation , reapportioned itself , costing Charleston County four of its twelve seats , and other lowcountry counties one each , with the seats going to the upcountry . Although Tillman sought to reduce public expenditures , he was not successful in doing so as his reform program required spending , and the legislature could find few savings to make . Construction of Clemson College was slowed , and subsidies for fairs were cut . 
 Among the matters before the new , Tillman @-@ controlled legislature was who should fill the Senate seat held by Hampton , whose term expired in March 1891 — until 1913 , state legislatures elected senators . There was a call from many in the South Carolina Democratic Party to re @-@ elect Hampton , who had played a major role in the state for the past thirty years , in war and peace . Tillman was embittered against Hampton for a number of slights , including the senator 's neutrality in the race against Haskell . The legislature retired Hampton , who received only 43 of 157 votes , and sent Irby to Washington in his place . The ouster of Hampton was controversial , and remained so for decades afterwards ; according to Simkins ( writing in 1944 ) , " to future generations of South Carolinians , Tillman 's act was a ruthless violation of cherished traditions of which Hampton was a living symbol " . 
 = = = Policies and events as governor = = = 
 = = = = Lynching and race = = = = 
 Tillman as governor initially took a strong stand against lynching . The Shell Manifesto , in reciting the ills of Conservative government , had blamed the Bourbons for encouraging lynching through bad laws and poor administration . Although Governor Richardson , Tillman 's predecessor , had taken action to prevent such murders , they still occurred , with no one being prosecuted for them . In about half of the lynchings in South Carolina between 1881 and 1895 , there were claims that the black victim had raped or tried to rape a white woman , though studies have shown that lynchings were tied to economic and social issues . More lynchings took place in South Carolina in the 1890s than in any other decade , and in Edgefield and several other counties , such killings outnumbered lawful executions . 
 During Tillman 's first year in office there were no lynchings , compared with 12 in Richardson 's last year , which Simkins attributed to Tillman 's " vigorous attitude towards law enforcement " . Tillman called out the militia multiple times to prevent lynchings , and corresponded with sheriffs , passing along information and rumors of contemplated lynchings . The governor pressed for a law requiring the segregation of railroad cars : opposed by railroad companies and the few black legislators , the bill passed the state House of Representatives but failed in the Senate . Tillman 's calls to <unk> away the one congressional district dominated by African Americans , and for a constitutional convention to disenfranchise them also fell in the Senate , where the convention proposal failed to attract the necessary two @-@ thirds majority . The only enactment that struck at the African American in Tillman 's first term imposed a prohibitive tax on labor agents , who were recruiting local farm hands to move out of state . 
 In December 1891 , soon after the first anniversary of Tillman 's taking office , a black Edgefield man named Dick Lundy was charged with murdering the sheriff 's son , and was taken from the jail and lynched . Tillman sent the state solicitor to Edgefield to investigate the matter , and ridiculed the coroner 's jury verdict . As usual in cases of lynching , it stated the deceased had been killed by persons unknown . Tillman said , " the law received a wound for every bullet shot into Dick Lundy 's body . " The News and Courier opined that had he been present " with true Edgefield instinct , [ Tillman ] would probably have been hanging around on the edge of the mob " . 
 In April 1893 , Mamie Baxter , a fourteen @-@ year @-@ old girl in Denmark , Barnwell County , alleged that an African American unknown to her had attempted to attack her . About twenty black men were detained and paraded before her ; she stated that Henry Williams looked something like the man she had seen . Placed on what passed for a trial by the mob that took him from the jail , Williams produced several respected white men to support his alibi . A majority of the mob voted against killing him , and Williams was returned to jail . More searches were made for Baxter 's attacker . A suspect in the case , John Peterson , appealed to Tillman for protection , fearing he would be lynched if taken to Denmark , and stating he could prove his innocence . Tillman sent Peterson to Denmark with a single guard . He was taken by the mob , put on " trial " , and after the mob found him guilty , was murdered . There was widespread outrage among both races across the country , both at the actions of the <unk> and at what Tillman had done . The governor said , in response , that he had assumed that , as the mob had been convinced by Williams ' defense , it would allow Peterson to prove his innocence as well . He thereafter ignored the issue of the Denmark lynching . 
 There were five lynchings in South Carolina during Tillman 's first term , and thirteen during his second . Tillman had to walk a narrow line in the debates over lynching , since most of his supporters believed in the collective right of white men in a community to dispense mob justice , especially in cases of alleged rape . Yet as governor , he was sworn to uphold the rule of law . He attempted to finesse the matter by seeking to appeal to both sides , demanding that the law be followed , but that he would , as he stated in 1892 , " willingly lead a mob in lynching a Negro who had committed an assault on a white woman " . Under criticism , he amended this to a willingness to lead the lynching of " a man of any color who assaults a virtuous woman of any color " — the adjective " virtuous " limiting the commitment , in Tillman 's eyes , to assaults on white women . 
 During Tillman 's second term , he had the legislature pass a bill to abolish elected local government , in favor of gubernatorial appointment of municipal and county officials . Tillman used this law to oust black officials even where that race held a voting majority . In September 1893 , South Carolina was hit by storms . Tillman discouraged northerners from sending aid to African Americans , fearing it would result in " lazy , idle crowds [ wanting to ] draw rations , as in the days of the Freedmen 's Bureau ... They cannot be treated as we would white people . " 
 = = = = Alcohol and the dispensary = = = = 
 The question of prohibition of alcohol was a major issue in South Carolina during Tillman 's governorship . Tillman opposed banning alcohol , but was careful to speak well of temperance advocates , many of whom were women . The concern Tillman had with alcohol issues was that they divided the white community , leaving openings for black Republicans to exploit . 
 In the 1892 election , South Carolinians passed a non @-@ binding referendum calling for prohibition . Bills were introduced into both houses of the state legislature that December to accomplish this , and passed the House of Representatives . Before the House bill could be passed by the Senate , Tillman sent a proposal in the form of an amendment , with instructions to pass the amended bill , and enact nothing else on the subject . Based on a system that had been successful in Athens , Georgia , the bill banned the private sale of alcohol , setting up a system of dispensaries that would sell alcohol in sealed containers — sale by the drink , and consumption on the premises , would not be permitted . Both houses passed Tillman 's amendment , though there was opposition both within and outside the legislature . The dispensary system went into effect on July 1 , 1893 . 
 The new law was met with considerable resistance , especially in the towns and cities , where Tillman had less support . Dozens of clandestine saloons opened , fueled by barrels of illicit liquor , often transported by railroad . Tillman appointed dispensary constables , who tried to seize such shipments , to be frustrated by the fact that the South Carolina Railroad was in federal receivership , and state authorities could not confiscate goods entrusted to it . All of Tillman 's constables were white , placing him at a disadvantage in dealing with the alcohol trade among African Americans . Some of the constables tried going undercover by blacking their faces like minstrels ; later , Tillman hired an African @-@ American detective from Georgia . 
 The small city of Darlington became a center of the bootlegging trade , with many illegal saloons . Tillman repeatedly warned the local mayor to crack down ; when this did not occur , in April 1894 , Tillman sent a train full of constables and other enforcement personnel to Darlington . They were repelled by gunfire , with dead on both sides . Tillman called out the state militia , which put down the unrest , though some units refused to serve . After the incident , Tillman disbanded the units of the militia that had refused his orders , and organized new companies to serve in their place . The Darlington riot divided the state politically as Tillman prepared to seek Butler 's seat in the Senate , which would be filled by the legislature in December 1894 . 
 Only weeks after the Darlington affair , the South Carolina Supreme Court declared the act creating the dispensary system in violation of the state constitution on the grounds that the government had no right to run a profit @-@ making business . The vote was 2 – 1 , with Justice Samuel McGowan in the majority . McGowan was a lame duck in office ; Lieutenant Governor Gary had been elected to fill his seat effective August 1 , 1894 . Tillman closed the dispensaries temporarily , resulting in prohibition in South Carolina , and fired the constables . He had taken the precaution , once the court agreed to take the dispensary case , of having the 1893 legislature pass a revised dispensary law . When Gary took the bench , the Tillmanites would have a majority on the state Supreme Court , and Tillman instructed trial justices not to hear challenges to the 1893 law until after August 1 . Tillman kept the law suspended until then , afterwards reopening the dispensaries under that statute . The high court declared the 1893 act constitutional on October 8 , 1894 , 2 – 1 , with Gary voting in the majority . 
 = = = = Agriculture and higher education = = = = 
 Elected with support from the Farmers ' Alliance and as a result of agricultural protest , Tillman was thought likely to join the Populists in their challenge to the established parties . Tillman refused , and generally opposed Populist positions that went beyond his program of increasing access to higher education and reform of the Democratic Party ( white supremacy was not a Populist position ) . The Alliance ( and Populists ) demanded a system of <unk> under the federal government , that could accept farmers ' crops and advance them 80 percent of the value interest @-@ free . Tillman , not wanting more federal officeholders in the state ( that in Republican administrations might be filled by African Americans ) , initially opposed the proposal . Many farmers felt strongly about this issue , and in 1891 , Tillman was censured by the state Alliance for his opposition . <unk> to political necessities , Tillman gradually came to support the <unk> in time for his re @-@ election campaign in 1892 , though he was never an active proponent . 
 Tillman spoke at the opening of Clemson College on July 6 , 1893 . He fulfilled his campaign promise to start a women 's college . In 1891 , the legislature passed a bill creating the South Carolina Industrial and Winthrop Normal College ( today Winthrop College ) . He took a personal interest in the bidding by various towns around the state for the new school , and supported the successful candidate , the progressive town of Rock Hill , on the state 's northern border . Rock Hill officials had offered land , cash , and building materials . The school , then admitting only white women , opened in October 1895 , after Tillman had become a senator . 
 = = = = Re @-@ election in 1892 = = = = 
 Tillman sought election to a second two @-@ year term in 1892 , presenting himself as a reforming alternative to the Conservatives . In the campaign , Tillman was a strong supporter of free silver or bimetallism , making silver legal tender at the historic ratio to gold of 16 : 1 . Such a policy would inflate the currency , and Tillman felt that would make it easier for the farmer to repay debts . The rhetoric of free silver suited Tillman as well , as he could make himself appear the champion of the farmer against the powerful interests that had committed the " Crime of ' 73 " ( as silver supporters termed the act ending bimetallism in the United States ) . 
 Announcing that a primary for 1892 , as had been prescribed two years before , was anti @-@ reform , Tillman put off the first Democratic gubernatorial primary in the state until 1894 . Thus , the nominee would be chosen by a convention , and the summer of 1892 saw a lengthy series of debates between Tillman and his challenger , former governor John C. Sheppard . The bitter campaign was marked by violence , often set off by provocative language from the candidates . According to Kantrowitz , Tillman " sought to prolong the confrontation , to take the crowd up to the edge of violence , demonstrating his identification with his farmers without quite provoking them to murder " . When former senator Hampton attempted to speak on Sheppard 's behalf , he was shouted down by Tillman partisans ; opponents complained that Tillman 's supporters had formed a mob , and that the governor was a true son of violent Edgefield . 
 As the likely Democratic presidential candidate for 1892 , former president Grover Cleveland , was a staunch opponent of free silver , Tillman attacked Cleveland . Most of the South Carolina delegation , including Tillman , voted against Cleveland at the convention , but when the former president was nominated , the governor worked to deliver South Carolina for Cleveland by an overwhelming margin . Cleveland was elected , but the new president was offended by Tillman 's earlier attacks , and denied the governor any role in patronage in South Carolina , entrusting it to Senator Matthew Butler and other remaining Conservatives . Tillman 's inability to provide federal jobs for supporters made it more difficult for him to hold his coalition together . Tillman continued his verbal assaults , stating that Cleveland " is an old bag of beef and I am going to Washington with a pitchfork and prod him in his old fat ribs " — thus popularizing Tillman as " Pitchfork Ben " . 
 During the 1892 campaign , Tillman called for the defeat in the Democratic primary of most of the men elected as his supporters in the legislature , urging the election of more loyal men . Tillman urged the voters , " turn out this cattle , these driftwood legislators , and send me a legislature that will do what I say , and I 'll show you reform . " South Carolinians dutifully voted out their representatives as Tillman requested . Although no primary for governor was permitted , the delegates to the nominating convention were elected by the Democratic voters , and Tillman won an overwhelming victory over Sheppard , who took only four of thirty @-@ five counties . The convention was mostly Tillmanite , and gave the governor an easy triumph . The Conservatives had agreed not to bolt the party , and Tillman won uncontested re @-@ election . 
 = = = Senate election of 1894 = = = 
 Tillman had long seen a Senate seat as a logical next step once he concluded his time as governor . Senator Butler , whose term expired in March 1895 , had soon after the 1890 election begun to shift his positions towards Tillman 's , hoping to retain Conservative backing while appealing to the governor 's supporters . The senator signed on to most demands of the Farmers ' Alliance , and did not support the forces trying to prevent Tillman 's re @-@ nomination in 1892 . Butler 's seeming apostasy disheartened Conservatives , who did not bother to run candidates for the legislature in many counties in 1894 , abandoning the field ( and Butler 's Senate seat ) to the Tillmanites . The governor took nothing for granted , seeing to it that popular candidates , loyal to him , ran for the legislature . In addition to electing Tillman to the Senate , these legislators could help preserve his gubernatorial legacy , including the dispensary . 
 Butler was aware of the uphill struggle he faced , and called for a primary for senator , with all Democratic legislators committed to vote to elect the winner . Tillman , who had already finalized his plans to win in the legislature , refused . The series of debates that marked a campaign summer in South Carolina began on June 18 , 1894 . Butler believed he could still win by appealing to the electorate in the same manner as Tillman ; the senator thought he understood the lessons of 1876 as well as anyone . In the debates , Butler and Tillman matched slander for slander , with Butler claiming that at Hamburg , when the shooting started , Tillman was " nowhere to be found " . Tillman shot back that when Butler had testified before Congress about Hamburg , he had downplayed his role in the events . According to Kantrowitz , " their struggle over the legacy of 1876 was in part over who could more legitimately claim to have murdered " African Americans . Tillman 's partisans shouted down Butler when he tried to speak at some debates . Although this tactic had been used by Butler and other Democrats against the Republicans in 1876 , Butler now decried it as " not Christian civilization to howl anyone down " . 
 <unk> again , Butler attempted to turn the campaign personal , calling Tillman a liar and trying to strike him . Tillman warned that Butler 's tactics risked sundering white unity , stating to a questioner who asked why he did not meet Butler 's insults with violence , " Yes , I tell you , you cowardly hound , why I took them [ the insults ] , and I 'll meet you wherever you want to . I took them because I , as governor of the State , could not afford to create a row at a public meeting and have our people murder each other like dogs . " 
 By early July , Butler had realized the futility of his race , and took to ignoring Tillman in his speeches , which the governor reciprocated , taking much of the drama from the debates . The two men even rode in the same carriage on July 4 . Nevertheless , Butler refused to surrender , even after the primary for the legislature was overwhelmingly won by the Tillmanites , threatening action in the courts and an election contest before the Senate . On December 11 , 1894 , Benjamin Tillman was elected to the Senate by the new legislature with 131 votes . Butler received 21 and three votes were scattered . 
 = = Senator ( 1895 – 1918 ) = = 
 = = = <unk> the African American : 1895 state constitutional convention = = = 
 Throughout his time as governor , Tillman had sought a convention to rewrite South Carolina 's Reconstruction @-@ era constitution . His main purpose in doing so was to disenfranchise African Americans . They opposed Tillman 's proposal , as did others , who had seen previous efforts to restrict the franchise rebound against white voters . Tillman was successful in getting the legislature to place a referendum for a constitutional convention on the November 1894 general election ballot . It passed by 2 @,@ 000 votes statewide , the narrow margin gained , according to Kantrowitz , most likely through fraud . John Gary Evans was elected Tillman 's successor as governor . 
 Opponents sued in the courts to overturn the referendum result ; they were unsuccessful . The convention , which Tillman hailed as " a fitting capstone to the triumphal arch which the common people have erected to liberty , progress , and Anglo @-@ Saxon civilization since 1890 " . To assure white unity , Tillman allowed the election of Conservatives as about a third of delegates . The convention assembled in Columbia in September 1895 , consisting of 112 Tillmanites , 42 Conservatives , and six African Americans . Tillman called black disenfranchisement " the sole cause of our being here " . 
 Tillman was the dominant figure of the convention , chairing the Committee on the Rights of Suffrage , which was to craft language to accomplish the disenfranchisement . Constrained by the requirement of the federal Fifteenth Amendment that men of all races be allowed to vote , the committee sought language that though superficially nondiscriminatory would operate or could be used to take the vote from most African Americans . 
 Tillman spoke to the convention on October 31 . In addition to supporting the provisions of the draft document , he recalled 1876 : 
 How did we recover our liberty ? By fraud and violence . We tried to overcome the thirty thousand majority by honest methods , which was a mathematical impossibility . After we had borne these indignities for eight years life became worthless under such conditions . Under the leadership and inspiration of Mart [ in ] Gary ... we won the fight . 
 The adopted provisions , which came into force after the new constitution was ratified by the convention in December 1895 , set a maze of obstacles before prospective voters . Voters had to be a resident of the state two years , the county one year , and the precinct for four months . Many African Americans were itinerant laborers , and this provision disproportionately affected them . A poll tax had to be paid six months in advance of the election , in May when laborers had the least cash . Each registrant had to prove to the satisfaction of the county board of elections that he could read or write a section of the state constitution ( in a literacy or comprehension test ) , or that he paid taxes on property valued at $ 300 or more . This allowed white registrars ample discretion to disenfranchise African Americans . Illiterate whites were shielded by the " understanding " clause , that allowed , until 1898 , permanent registration to citizens who could " understand " the constitution when read to them . This also allowed officials great leeway to discriminate . Even if an African American maneuvered past all of these blocks , he still faced the manager of the polling place , who could demand proof he had paid all taxes owed — something difficult to show conclusively . Conviction of one of a long list of crimes that whites believed prevalent among African Americans was made the cause of permanent disenfranchisement , including bigamy , adultery , burglary , and arson . Convicted murderers not in prison had their franchise undisturbed . 
 = = = 1896 presidential bid = = = 
 By early 1896 , many in the Democratic Party were bitterly opposed to President Cleveland and his policies . The United States was by then in the third year of a deep recession , the Panic of 1893 . Cleveland was a firm supporter of the gold standard , and soon after the recession began forced through repeal of the Sherman Silver Purchase Act , which he believed had helped cause it . Sherman 's act , although not restoring bimetallism , had required the government to purchase and coin large quantities of silver bullion , and its repeal outraged supporters of free silver . Other Cleveland policies , such as his forcible suppression of the Pullman strike , led to the Democrats losing control of both houses of Congress in the 1894 midterm elections , and to a revolt against him by silver supporters within his party . 
 From the time of his swearing @-@ in in December 1895 ( when Congress began its annual session ) , Tillman was seen as the voice of the dissatisfied in the nation ; the New York Press stated Tillman would voice the concerns of " the masses of the people of South Carolina far more faithfully than did the Bourbon politician Butler " . He shocked the Senate with dramatic attacks on Cleveland , calling the president " the most gigantic failure of any man who ever occupied the White House , all because of his vanity and obstinacy " . The New York Times deemed Tillman " a filthy baboon , accidentally seated in the Senate chamber " . 
 Tillman believed that the nation was on the verge of major political change , and that he could be elected president in 1896 , uniting the silver supporters of the South and West . He was willing to consider a third party bid if Cleveland kept control of the Democratic Party , but felt the Populists , by allowing African Americans to seek office , had destroyed their credibility among southern whites . The stinging oratory of the South Carolina senator brought him national prominence , and with the 1896 Democratic National Convention in Chicago likely to be controlled by silver supporters , Tillman was spoken of as a possible presidential candidate along with others , such as former Missouri representative Richard Bland , Texas Governor James Hogg , and former Nebraska congressman William Jennings Bryan . 
 Tillman was his state 's favorite son candidate , and its representative on the Committee on Resolutions ( often called " the Platform Committee " ) . The platform had the support of the pro @-@ silver majority of the committee , but the gold minority , led by New York Senator David B. Hill , opposed its support of free silver , and wanted to take the disagreement to the convention floor . With one hour and fifteen minutes allocated to each side , Tillman and Bryan were selected as the speakers in favor of the draft platform . Bryan asked Tillman if he wanted to open or close the debate ; the senator wanted to close , but sought fifty minutes to do so . The Nebraskan replied that Hill would oppose such a long closing address , and Tillman agreed to open the debate , with Bryan to close it . 
 When the platform debate began in the Chicago Coliseum on the morning of July 9 , 1896 , Tillman was the opening speaker . Although met with applause and shouts of his name , he " spoke in the same manner that had won him success in South Carolina , cursing , haranguing his enemies , and raising the specter of sectionalism . He , however , thoroughly alienated the national audience " . According to Richard Bensel in his study of the 1896 convention , Tillman gave " by far , the most divisive speech of the convention , an address that embarrassed the silver wing of the party as much as it enraged the hard @-@ money faction " . He deemed silver a sectional issue , pitting the wealthy East against the oppressed South and West . This upset delegates , who wished to view silver as a patriotic , national issue , and some voiced their dissent , disagreeing with Tillman . The senator alternately offended , confused , and bored the delegates , who shouted for Tillman to stop even though less than half of his time had expired . Beset by shouting delegates and one of the convention bands , which unexpectedly appeared and began to play , Tillman nevertheless pressed on , " the audience might just as well understand that I am going to have my say if I stand here until sundown . " By the time he had his say , he had " effectively destroyed his chances to become a national candidate " . With Tillman 's candidacy stillborn ( only his home state voted for him ) , Bryan seized the opportunity to deliver an address in support of silver that did not rely on sectionalism . His Cross of Gold speech won him the presidential nomination . 
 After Tillman returned from Chicago to South Carolina , he suggested he had delivered an intentionally radical speech so as to allow Bryan to look statesmanlike by comparison . This interpretation was mocked by his enemies . Tillman is not known to have otherwise discussed his feelings at the failure of his presidential bid , and the political grief was likely overwhelmed by personal sadness a week after the convention when his beloved daughter Addie died , struck by lightning on a North Carolina mountain . Tillman campaigned for Bryan , but was a favorite target of cartoonists denigrating the Democratic candidate and supporting the Republican , former Ohio governor William McKinley . Bryan had also been nominated by the Populists , who selected their own vice presidential candidate , Georgia 's Thomas E. Watson . Tillman was active in efforts to get Watson to withdraw , having a 12 @-@ hour meeting with the candidate , apparently without result . Tillman traveled widely to speak on Bryan 's behalf , and drew large crowds , but his speeches were of little significance . Despite undertaking an arduous campaign , Bryan lost the election . Simkins suggested that Tillman , by helping forge an image of the Democratic Party as anarchic , contributed to Bryan 's defeat . 
 = = = Wild man of the Senate = = = 
 Kantrowitz deemed Tillman " the Senate 's wild man " , who applied the same techniques of accusation and insinuation that had served him well in South Carolina . In 1897 , Tillman accused the Republicans , " I certainly do not want to attack any member of the committee who does not deserve to be attacked [ but ] nobody denies that there have been rooms occupied for two months by the Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee at the Arlington Hotel ... in easy reach of the sugar trust " . Simkins , though , opined that Tillman 's speeches in the Senate were only inflammatory because of his injection of personalities , and if that is disregarded , his speeches , when read , come across as well @-@ reasoned and even conservative . 
 In 1902 , Tillman accused his junior colleague from South Carolina , John L. McLaurin , of corruption in a speech to the Senate . McLaurin , who had been a Tillmanite before breaking from him after being elected to the Senate , called him a liar , whereupon Tillman rushed across the Senate floor and punched McLaurin in the face . McLaurin reciprocated , giving Tillman a bloody nose before the Sergeant at Arms and senators intervened . The body immediately went into closed session , and held both men in contempt . The Senate considered suspending them , but Tillman argued that it was unfair to deprive South Carolina of her representation , though the body could certainly expel the two men — knowing he had enough Democratic votes to prevent it . In the end , both men were censured , and later that year , Tillman arranged for McLaurin , whose term ended in 1903 , to not be re @-@ elected . 
 The fracas with McLaurin caused President Theodore Roosevelt , who had succeeded the assassinated McKinley in 1901 , to withdraw an invitation to dinner at the White House . Tillman never forgave this slight , and became a bitter enemy of Roosevelt , Tillman was inclined to oppose Roosevelt anyway , who soon after becoming president had dined at the White House with Booker T. Washington , an African American , provoking Tillman to say , " the action of President Roosevelt in entertaining that nigger will necessitate our killing a thousand niggers in the South before they learn their place again . " 
 = = = Race relations = = = 
 Tillman believed , and often stated as senator , that blacks must submit to either white domination or extermination . He was reluctant to undertake the latter , fearing hundreds of whites would die accomplishing it . He campaigned in the violent 1898 North Carolina elections , in which white Democrats were determined to take back control from a biracial Populist @-@ Republican coalition elected in 1894 and 1896 on a fusion ticket . He spoke widely in North Carolina in the fall of 1898 , often to crowds wearing red shirts , disheartening his Populist supporters . Terror and intimidation again won the day for the Democrats , who were elected statewide . They failed to win in the coastal city of Wilmington , but white supremacists took over by force . South Carolina saw violence as well : an effort to register black voters in Phoenix led whites to provoke a confrontation , after which a number of African Americans were murdered . Tillman warned African Americans and those who might combine with them that black political activism would provoke a murderous response from whites . 
 Beginning in 1901 , Tillman joined the Chautauqua circuit , giving well @-@ paid speeches throughout the nation . Tillman 's reputation , both for his views and his oratory , attracted large crowds . Tillman informed them that African Americans were inferior to the white man , but were not baboons , though some were " so near akin to the monkey that scientists are yet looking for the missing link " . Given that in Africa , they were an " ignorant and debased and debauched race " with a record of " barbarism , savagery , cannibalism and everything that is low and degrading " , it was the " quintessence of folly " to believe that the black man should be placed on an equal footing with his white counterpart . 
 Tillman told the Senate , " as governor of South Carolina , I proclaimed that , although I had taken the oath of office to support the law and enforce it , I would lead a mob to lynch any man , black or white , who ravished a woman , black or white . " He told his colleagues , " I have three daughters , but , so help me God , I had rather find either one of them killed by a tiger or a bear [ and die a virgin ] than to have her crawl to me and tell me the horrid story that she had been robbed of the jewel of her womanhood by a black fiend . " In 1907 , he told the senators about the Ellenton riot of 1876 , " it was then that we shot them ; it was then that we killed them ; it was then that we stuffed the ballot @-@ boxes . " 
 As South Carolina 's economy changed in the early 20th century , with textile mills being built , Tillman complained that some African Americans were evading the supervision they would have on the farm , fearing the threat to white women . He admitted that it would be unjust to kill all of these workers , " because we might kill some innocent men , but we can keep them on the chain gang " . 
 = = = Legislative activities , re @-@ elections , and death = = = 
 Tillman was an early and fervent backer of war with Spain in 1898 . However , he opposed taking the Spanish colonies such as Puerto Rico and the Philippines , both because he considered it wrong to annex people to the United States without their consent , and out of opposition to adding territories with large numbers of non @-@ whites . Tillman mocked the Republicans , most of whom supported annexation rather than self @-@ determination , stating that it was that party that since 1860 had claimed " that all men , including the Negro , are free and equal , " and was annoyed when they refused to admit their positions were inconsistent . 
 In 1906 , Roosevelt backed the Hepburn Bill , imposing railroad regulation . Many Republicans initially wanted nothing to do with the bill , and Senate Republican leader Nelson Aldrich entrusted management of the bill to Tillman . Aldrich hoped the outspoken South Carolinian would cause the defeat of the bill . To Aldrich 's surprise , Tillman soberly and competently conducted the bill through much of the legislative process . Tillman withdrew from the bill ( though he voted for it ) after Roosevelt got a provision for federal court review of agency decisions included , which Tillman opposed . The president and the southern senator ended on worse terms than before , but there was great public attention on the Hepburn Bill , and Tillman gained considerable respect for his role . 
 This activity caused a public reassessment of Tillman , who was best known for giving speeches that shocked the North and made even southerners cringe . Writers suggested he was merely presenting an image as " Pitchfork Ben " , that he could turn on and off as needed . He came to be regarded in the North as acceptable and even respectable , with some suggesting he had matured during his time in the Senate . The Saturday Evening Post compared Tillman with a coconut , hard , rough , and shaggy on the outside , but within , " the milk of human kindness " . 
 Tillman was the primary sponsor of the Tillman Act , the first federal campaign finance reform law , which was passed in 1907 and which banned corporate contributions in federal political campaigns . Justice Clarence Thomas has suggested that Tillman 's motivation in introducing this legislation was to reduce the power of corporations which tended to favor Republicans and African Americans . 
 When Tillman entered the Senate in 1895 , he was opposed to expansion of the United States Navy , fearing the expenditure would cause the issuance of bonds by the president , which he felt would only enrich the wealthy . Tillman sat on the Senate Committee on Naval Affairs , and soon came to understand that South Carolina could benefit from naval appropriations steered towards her . A flow of federal funds to his home state resulted , beginning in 1900 , followed by the establishment , in 1909 , of the Charleston Naval Shipyard . Once Democrats took control of the Senate for the first time in Tillman 's tenure , in 1913 , he became chairman of the committee and allied with others from the southeast ( such as Navy Secretary Josephus Daniels , a North Carolinian ) to see that the bulk of naval appropriations would be spent there . He also served as chairman of the Committee on Revolutionary Claims ( 57th through 59th Congresses ) and on the Committee on Five Civilized Tribes of Indians ( 61st and 62nd Congresses ) . Strokes in 1908 and 1910 decreased his influence and ability in the Senate ; his seniority entitled him to become Senate Appropriations Committee chairman in 1913 , but his health did not permit it . 
 President Woodrow Wilson was inaugurated in 1913 , the first Democrat to hold the office since Cleveland . Tillman supported Wilson 's legislation in the Senate , except on women 's suffrage , where he was a strong opponent . He was uneasy when Wilson 's Secretary of State , Bryan , tried to prevent war through treaty @-@ making , describing the former presidential candidate as the " <unk> of peace at any price " . When the United States entered World War I , Tillman was a strong supporter , seeing the conflict as democratic nations against German " slaves ... and not free men at all " . Although he urged vigilance against spies , once he was satisfied that the accusations against German @-@ born Friedrich Johannes Hugo von Engelken , president of the Federal Land Bank at Columbia , were unfounded , he spoke in support of the man . 
 Tillman had been re @-@ elected in 1901 and 1907 . By 1912 , the Democratic nominee , who would be elected by the overwhelming Democratic majority in the legislature , was determined by a primary . A primary was also used for governor , and Tillman ran at the same time as Governor Cole Blease , who also sought re @-@ election . Blease , also an outspoken white supremacist , had entered politics as a Tillmanite legislator in 1890 , and breaking from him , adopted similar techniques to Tillman 's to appeal to poor farm workers and mill hands . Tillman faced two opponents in his re @-@ nomination bid — his control over South Carolina politics had deteriorated over the years , and he had moved towards the Conservatives . He had not endorsed Blease in 1910 . The two men reached an agreement that Tillman would remain neutral in the governor 's race in 1912 , but Tillman became convinced Blease could not win against former state chief justice Ira B. Jones . Both sides claimed to have letters from Tillman endorsing their candidate , but three days before the primary , Tillman condemned Blease and endorsed Jones . Blease , outraged , alleged betrayal , accused Tillman of " insane jealousy " , and said of the senator , " possibly his mind has become more diseased of late than it was when I had my last talk with his confidential physician " . Both men were re @-@ elected . 
 The Seventeenth Amendment , ratified in 1913 , gave the people the right to elect senators , but this made little difference in South Carolina , where the Democratic primary remained decisive . Tillman in 1914 announced plans to retire when his term expired in 1919 , but the war and the threat that Blease would win the open seat caused him to announce his candidacy for a fifth term in March 1918 . Tillman remained for the most part in Washington , and did not campaign , but came to Columbia for the state Democratic convention in May to discredit rumors about his health , which was indeed poor . He got Wilson to persuade one of his rivals , Congressman Asbury F. Lever , to abandon the race , and considered how to do the same to Blease . These plans had not yet come to fruition when Tillman was stricken by a cerebral hemorrhage at the end of June , and died July 3 , 1918 in Washington , D.C. He is buried in Ebenezer Cemetery , Trenton , South Carolina . 
 Tillman 's death generated a large number of tributes to him in the Senate , which were afterwards collected in book form . One copy came into the hands of Blease , who was angry that Tillman was being lauded , and stated that the late senator was not what he had seemed . He wrote in front of the volume , " Don 't believe me , but look up his life & see . " 
 = = Legacy and historical view = = 
 According to Orville Burton , " Tillman 's legacy for South Carolina and the nation is controversial and disturbing . White and black South Carolinians interpret Tillman 's accomplishments in contradictory ways . " A national hero to white supremacists , according to an article on Tillman for The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education , " for African Americans , he was the ' devil incarnate ' " . No African American was elected to Congress under the 1895 constitution until the civil rights era , nor were any elected to statewide or county office after 1900 . 
 Simkins , a son of Edgefield , while recognizing faults in Tillman 's racial policies , stated that " no South Carolinian , with the single exception of Calhoun , has ever made a <unk> impression on his generation than Tillman . " The late senator 's supporters and protégés remained long in South Carolina , encouraging a view of Tillman as a great man in state and national history . James F. Byrnes , for example , repeated Tillman 's themes of race war on the floor of the House of Representatives in 1919 . In 1940 , Byrnes , by then a senator and soon to sit on the U.S. Supreme Court , dedicated a statue of Tillman outside the South Carolina State House and called him the state 's " first New Dealer " . Others who knew and at one time admired Tillman included Strom Thurmond , son of Tillman 's Edgefield attorney , who saw and was inspired by Tillman 's campaigning style as a boy . Other southerners were highly negative : Lyndon B. Johnson said of Tillman , " He might have been president . I 'd like to sit down with him and ask how it was to throw it away for the sake of hating . " 
 Simkins noted that Tillman " rose above the handicap of his radical views , his <unk> , and the insularity of his issues to become a considerable force in national politics " . Historian I. M. Newby deemed <unk> the closest thing to a mass movement in the history of white South Carolinians , and one that dominated the state for a generation . " To students of black history and racial equality its most striking features are the extent to which it expressed the desire of white Carolinians to dominate blacks and the fact that much of its unity and force derived from its <unk> racial policies . " Tillman 's movement took power from the Bourbon Democrats in South Carolina , but a greater price was paid , electorally and in lives , by the African American . 
 In 1962 , Main Building on the campus of Winthrop College was renamed Tillman Hall in his honor . Clemson University also has a Tillman Hall , though efforts have been made to change the name . Kantrowitz argued that Tillman deserves little credit for what have become important southern schools , integrated and coeducational : 
 For through the doors of Tillman Hall now pass men and women whose paths stretch back to many continents , men and women who understand the right to wage political struggles without fear of violent retaliation . In this , Clemson repudiates rather than represents Tillman 's legacy . He would have torn down his beloved ' farmers ' college ' brick by brick before he would have allowed it to foster a world where neither sex nor race defined the limits of a person 's attainment . 
 = Crusaders ( rugby union ) = 
 The Crusaders ( formerly the Canterbury Crusaders and officially called the <unk> Crusaders for sponsorship reasons ) are a New Zealand professional rugby union team based in Christchurch that competes in the Super Rugby competition . They are the most successful team in Super Rugby history with seven titles ( 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2002 , 2005 , 2006 and 2008 ) . The franchise represents the Buller , Canterbury , Mid @-@ Canterbury , South Canterbury , Tasman and West Coast provincial Rugby Unions . Their main home ground is AMI Stadium , formerly known as Jade Stadium and before that , Lancaster Park . 
 Formed in 1996 to represent the upper South Island of New Zealand in the Super 12 , the Crusaders struggled in their first season and finished last . Their performance improved in 1997 and the team finished sixth ( out of twelve teams ) . The team went on to win all three titles from 1998 to 2000 despite each final being played away from home . They again won the competition in 2002 after going through the season unbeaten . In the following two seasons , they again reached the final , although they were beaten on both occasions . 2005 was the last season of the Super 12 before its expansion . After finishing top of the table in that season , the Crusaders went on to host the final in which they defeated the Waratahs . As a result of winning their fifth Super 12 title , the Crusaders were given the trophy to keep . In 2006 , the Crusaders hosted the Hurricanes in the inaugural Super 14 final and won 19 – 12 . In 2008 the Crusaders hosted the final at AMI Stadium against the Waratahs , and won the match 20 – 12 to claim their seventh title . 
 In addition to winning more Super Rugby titles than any other team , the franchise also holds several competition records , including most points in a game and most tries in a game , both achieved in their 96 – 19 victory over the Waratahs in 2002 . Ironically the Crusaders also hold the record for the least points scored in a game when they were defeated by the Highlanders 6 – 0 in 2009 . They have also scored the most points ( 541 ) and most tries ( 71 ) in one season , both achieved in 2005 . Individual players also hold records : Andrew Mehrtens for most points in a Super 12 season ( 206 in 1998 ) , and Rico Gear for most tries in a season ( 15 in 2005 ) . Twelve players have played over 100 games for the franchise : Justin Marshall , Reuben Thorne , Caleb Ralph , Greg Somerville , Leon MacDonald , Richie McCaw , Chris Jack , Dan Carter , Andrew Ellis , Kieran Read , Wyatt Crockett and Sam Whitelock . They also have three International Rugby Board Players of the Year : Dan Carter ( 2005 ) , ( 2012 ) , ( 2015 ) , Richie McCaw ( 2006 ) , ( 2009 ) and ( 2010 ) and Kieran Read ( 2013 ) 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Beginnings : 1996 and 1997 = = = 
 The Crusaders franchise was created as one of five New Zealand teams in the Super 12 . Originally named the Canterbury Crusaders , the Crusaders ' franchise area encompassed the upper South Island of New Zealand ( see Super Rugby franchise areas ) , and was formed from the Buller , Canterbury , Marlborough , Mid @-@ Canterbury , Nelson Bays , South Canterbury , and West Coast rugby unions . The original Crusaders team of 1996 was captained by All Blacks prop Richard Loe and coached by Vance Stewart . The Crusaders struggled in the inaugural season and finished bottom of the table with only two wins . Their eight losses included a 49 – 18 loss to the Blues and a 52 – 16 loss to the Queensland Reds . And the First ever tour was a pre @-@ visit to South Africa prior start of Super 12 . 
 The following season saw a change in captain and coach , with Todd Blackadder succeeding Loe as captain and Wayne Smith taking over as coach . With five wins , the team finished the round @-@ robin stage in sixth place . The improvement was particularly illustrated by the Crusaders ' 29 – 28 loss to the defending champions , the Blues , which contrasted with their 49 – 18 loss the previous season . ( The Blues also went on to win the 1997 title ) . During this loss , Leon MacDonald was taken out with a shoulder charge by Robin Brooke . While the Crusaders attempted to get MacDonald back on the field , the Blues scored two tries , including one by Brooke , who was later suspended for two weeks for the shoulder charge . In their last game of 1997 , the Crusaders beat the Queensland Reds 48 – 3 at Lancaster Park , now known as AMI Stadium . 
 = = = Hat trick : 1998 to 2000 = = = 
 The Crusaders won their first title in 1998 , despite starting the season with three losses in their first four games . They finished the round @-@ robin by winning their last seven games , culminating in a last @-@ round win over the Coastal Sharks ( now the Sharks ) that gave them second place in the round @-@ robin phase of the competition . Their second @-@ placing allowed them to host their semi @-@ final at Lancaster Park , where they won the match 36 – 32 against the Coastal Sharks . 
 In the final at Eden Park , the Crusaders faced the Blues , who were heavy favourites . According to Crusaders ' hooker Mark Hammett , " If we 'd been polled in that week , and had to give an honest answer , most of the boys , deep down , would probably have thought that the Blues would beat us . " The Crusaders were ahead 3 – 0 at half time , but the Blues scored first after half time to take a 10 – 3 lead after 53 minutes . After Crusader Norm Maxwell scored a try , the game was tied 10 all . Then , after a penalty each , the two teams were tied 13 all with one minute of regulation time remaining . At that moment , Andrew Mehrtens chipped the ball for James Kerr to run onto and score , giving the Crusaders a 20 – 13 win after the try was converted . The ten points scored by Andrew Mehrtens in the final contributed to his total of 206 points for the season − a record for the Super 12 . Upon the Crusaders ' return to Christchurch , they were given a parade through the city that drew 100 @,@ 000 people . 
 The 1999 season was equally successful for the Crusaders despite struggling to make the play @-@ offs in fourth place after winning their last four round @-@ robin matches . They defeated the favoured Queensland Reds ( who had finished top in the round @-@ robin ) in their semi @-@ final to advance to the final against the Otago Highlanders ( since renamed the Highlanders ) . The all @-@ South Island final in Dunedin was promoted as " the party at Tony Brown 's house " after Highlanders first five @-@ eighths Tony Brown . Again playing away from home , the Crusaders won 24 – 19 . The decisive try of the match was scored by Crusaders winger Afato So 'oalo when he chipped the ball , then out @-@ sprinted All Blacks winger Jeff Wilson to collect the ball and score . 
 Following the All Blacks ' semi @-@ final loss in the 1999 Rugby World Cup , Wayne Smith succeeded John Hart as All Blacks coach . Crusaders manager Robbie Deans replaced Smith as Crusaders coach . In Deans ' first year in charge , the Crusaders won their third title in a row − a feat that has not since been repeated . The Crusaders finished second in the round @-@ robin , earning them the right to host a semi @-@ final in which they faced the Highlanders at Jade Stadium . Two tries in the final 20 minutes by Marika Vunibaka helped the Crusaders to a 37 – 15 win . The 2000 Super 12 Final was played against the Brumbies in Canberra , Australia , where the weather for the final was icy , with sleet and snow . The game was low @-@ scoring , with only one try each . Four penalties by Mehrtens gave the Crusaders a 12 – 6 half time lead . Following a Brumbies penalty four minutes from time , the Brumbies led 19 – 17 . However , the Crusaders were awarded a penalty from the resulting kick @-@ off , and after Mehrtens converted the penalty , the Crusaders went on to win the game 20 – 19 . 
 = = = Development of a legacy : 2001 to 2005 = = = 
 After winning three consecutive Super 12 titles , the Crusaders finished tenth in 2001 – their worst finish since 1996 . The season was the last for captain Todd Blackadder before he left to play for Edinburgh in Scotland . 
 The Crusaders bounced back dramatically in 2002 when they went through the Super 12 season unbeaten , achieving their fourth title . Although the Crusaders won all eleven of their round @-@ robin matches , six of them were won by a margin of seven points or less . Their eleven round @-@ robin games also included a record 96 – 19 win over the Waratahs in the final match of the round @-@ robin stage , which was especially noteworthy given that both teams finished at the top of the table . 
 The Crusaders met the Highlanders in their 2002 semi @-@ final , which they eventually won 34 – 23 after being ahead 18 – 6 at half time . The following week , they faced the Brumbies in the first final to be hosted at Jade Stadium . The Brumbies trailed 11 – 3 after the first half , having had only 30 per cent possession . Although the Brumbies closed the gap to 14 – 13 with eight minutes to go , the Crusaders held on and steadied to win 31 – 13 with a last @-@ minute try to Caleb Ralph . The season was their first under the captaincy of Reuben Thorne , who went on to captain the All Blacks until the end of the 2003 Rugby World Cup . 
 The Crusaders ' winning run finally came to an end when they were beaten 39 – 5 by the Blues in the third round of the 2003 Super 12 season . Although their 15 @-@ match unbeaten streak had ended , Richie McCaw said of the loss , " ... in some ways it was almost a relief . We 'd finally been beaten , the run was over , so people could stop talking about it and we could get on with playing it week by week . " The Crusaders recovered to finish second on the table with eight wins . They hosted a semi @-@ final against the Hurricanes , who were coached by Colin Cooper , a former assistant coach for the Crusaders . Despite this inside knowledge of the team by the Wellington coach , the Crusaders won the match 39 – 16 . In the final , the Crusaders met the Blues , another team coached by a former Crusaders assistant coach , Peter Sloane . Hooker Mark Hammett scored two tries to give the Crusaders a 10 – 6 lead at half @-@ time . The Blues hit back to lead 21 – 10 with ten minutes to go . The Crusaders managed another converted try , but it was not enough , and the Blues won 21 – 17 . 
 The Crusaders ' 2004 season began with two losses : first to the Waratahs , then to the Blues . They recovered to again finish second on the table with seven wins . They played the Stormers at Jade Stadium in their semi @-@ final , and won 27 – 16 . They met the Brumbies at Canberra Stadium in a replay of the 2000 final . The Brumbies dominated in the final , scoring 33 unanswered points in the first 19 minutes . The Crusaders managed to salvage some pride by narrowing the loss to a 47 – 38 finish . 
 The 2005 season started with a repeat of the previous year 's final : a Brumbies victory over the Crusaders in Canberra . There was a win the following week at home over the Chiefs , followed by a win over the Reds at Trafalgar Park . Although there was a 35 – 20 loss to the Bulls after Crusaders captain Richie McCaw was knocked unconscious , they eventually finished the regular season top of the table . McCaw returned from his five weeks on the sideline to lead the Crusaders in their semi @-@ final victory over the Hurricanes . They faced the Waratahs in the final at Jade Stadium . Leading 14 – 6 at halftime , the Crusaders then moved out to a 29 @-@ point lead . Despite three late tries by the Waratahs , the Crusaders won their fifth title with a 35 – 20 win . 
 As a reward for their seventh finals appearance and fifth title , the Crusaders were allowed to keep the Super 12 trophy . After the 2005 season , the franchise saw the departure of stalwarts Andrew Mehrtens and Justin Marshall , both of whom had played for the team since its formation in 1996 . 
 = = = Super 14 : 2006 to 2010 = = = 
 In 2006 , the Super 12 expanded to form the Super 14 when the Western Force from Perth , Australia , and the Central Cheetahs from the Free State and Northern Cape Provinces , South Africa joined the competition . An unbeaten run of sixteen matches was nearly halted when the Crusaders drew with the Western Force in Perth in round eleven . The following week , the unbeaten run was ended when the Crusaders lost to the Stormers in Cape Town . That loss was their only one of the year , as they finished top of the table with eleven wins . After beating the Bulls in their semi @-@ final , the Crusaders faced the Hurricanes in the final at Jade Stadium that was played in a thick fog , causing poor visibility . Sections of the crowd could not see the field , and many spectators left during the match . The scorers were tied 9 – 9 going into the game 's last 20 minutes . The Crusaders ' Casey <unk> then scored the game 's only try before the match finished 19 – 12 . 
 In the 2007 Super 14 season , seven Crusaders players missed the first seven rounds of the competition to participate in an All Black " conditioning programme " . The conditioning programme was part of the All Blacks ' 2007 Rugby World Cup preparations ; 22 players were selected for the programme . The Crusaders ' seven players in the programme was more than any other New Zealand Super 14 franchise . The Crusaders players were Chris Jack , Richie McCaw , Greg Somerville , Reuben Thorne , Dan Carter , Leon MacDonald , and Aaron Mauger . All but one of the seven returned to play for the Crusaders in their eighth round match against the Stormers ( Greg Somerville did not return due to injury ) . The Crusaders climbed to second on the table before defeating the Western Force 53 – 0 at Jade Stadium in the tenth round . The victory over the Force was the one hundredth Super rugby win for the Crusaders – the first franchise to reach the milestone . 
 The Crusaders were top of the table going into the last round of the Super 14 before the play @-@ offs . To guarantee a home semi @-@ final they needed to defeat the Chiefs at Jade Stadium . The Chiefs won 30 – 24 – and ended the Crusaders 26 game winning streak at home . As the Bulls defeated the Reds 92 – 3 in the same round , they overtook the Crusaders to finish second in the round robin . The Crusaders then travelled to Pretoria to face the Bulls in their semi @-@ final where they lost 27 – 12 . 
 The 2008 season was another highly successful one for the Crusaders . After finishing top of the table at the end of the last round , they comfortably defeated the Hurricanes 33 – 22 in the semi @-@ final , and went on to beat the Waratahs in the final 20 – 12 . It was a fitting way to send off long @-@ serving coach Robbie Deans before he departed to coach Australia . It was also the last game for Crusaders stalwarts Caleb Ralph and former captain Reuben Thorne . In July that year former captain Todd Blackadder was appointed Crusaders coach , and his former teammates Mark Hammett and Daryl Gibson were appointed as assistants . 
 The 2009 season started with a sole win and a draw from the Crusaders ' first five matches ; this included a 6 — 0 loss to the Highlanders . The side found its feet later in the season , and won key away games which ultimately saw them finish in fourth place on the table – just ahead of the Waratahs . Both the Crusaders and Waratahs finished the season with 41 competition points , but the Crusaders advanced through to the semi @-@ finals due to a greater ' points for and against ' difference . 
 The Crusaders lost their semi @-@ final to the Bulls 36 – 23 at Loftus Versfeld , Pretoria in front of a capacity 52 @,@ 000 crowd . The Bulls went on to win the 2009 Super 14 title beating the Chiefs 61 – 17 . Statistically , the Crusaders had the best defensive record of the 2009 competition – conceding just 198 points . However , points for , and total tries scored was the second lowest in the competition with just 231 points and 27 tries . 
 In 2010 the Crusaders had a very good start to the season before a poor finish with three losses in four games caused them to have to travel to Orlando Stadium , Soweto to face the Bulls . They lost the semi @-@ final 39 – 24 . 
 = = = New era : 2011 to present = = = 
 The 2011 season had a minor hiccup at the very beginning with a two @-@ point loss to the Blues . Their second round match against the Hurricanes was cancelled , and match declared a draw after the Christchurch earthquake on 22 February which caused 182 deaths . In their first match after the earthquake they played the Waratahs , a team that had only conceded six points in their previous two games . The Crusaders triumphed 33 – 18 in a convincing display in front of a sold @-@ out stadium . They next played the Brumbies and brushed them aside in a 52 – 10 demolition . They next played the Highlanders who had previously only lost one match in the season , to the undefeated and table @-@ topping Stormers . The Crusaders won comfortably 44 – 13 in Dunedin . The next team they played , the Sharks , had like the Highlanders previously only lost one match in the season before the Crusaders won 44 – 28 at Twickenham for a one off match due to earthquake damage at their own ground . They played the second match in Timaru Alpine Stadium against the Bulls in a sell out crowd winning 27 – 0 . Round 9 they played the Chiefs in Mt Maunganui and gained four tries winning 34 – 16 with Richie McCaw returning after eight weeks off with injury . The Crusaders lost the final at the Suncorp Stadium to the Queensland Reds . Will Genia scored a crucial try for the Reds to help them to an 18 – 13 win . The 2012 season , the first in the new home ground of Christchurch Stadium , saw the Crusaders again reach the playoffs . However , they were defeated by the ( eventual champion ) Chiefs in the semi @-@ final . 
 = = Name and colours = = 
 The Crusaders ' name was chosen to reflect the crusading nature of Canterbury rugby . A potential name was also the <unk> ; however , this was not chosen , as " Crusaders " recalled the English heritage of the city of Christchurch . Christchurch was established by English emigrants in the 19th century and is often described as the most English city outside England . The club adopted Canterbury 's traditional sporting colours of red and black , as worn by Canterbury . 
 = = Franchise area = = 
 The Crusaders ' franchise area consists of the regions controlled by the Buller , Canterbury , Mid @-@ Canterbury , South Canterbury , Tasman and West Coast rugby unions . Before 2006 , when the NPC was reorganised , Canterbury was the only union playing division one ( now ITM Cup ) within the Crusaders ' catchment . As a result , the majority of Crusaders players were also listed with Canterbury . Today , the Crusaders ' catchment contains two ITM Cup sides – Canterbury and Tasman . 
 = = Grounds = = 
 The Crusaders ' main home ground was the 36 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity AMI Stadium in Christchurch . However , they stopped playing there during the 2011 Super Rugby season due to damage inflicted by the February Christchurch earthquake . The Crusaders usually took one game each year to another part of the franchise area , most often when the New Zealand cricket team was playing at AMI Stadium . Previous venues included Trafalgar Park in Nelson , and Alpine Energy Stadium in Timaru . 
 With AMI Stadium still out of commission , the Crusaders adopted Rugby League Park ( which has been renamed Christchurch Stadium temporarily ) in Addington as their home ground for that and future seasons to <unk> their games in one location as opposed to the road show that was the 2011 season . The ground had a limited makeover , taking it to an 18 @,@ 600 capacity stadium and bringing its facilities to the minimum standards required by the Super Rugby competition . 
 The Crusaders ' management proposed playing a 2005 regular season match in Melbourne when Jade Stadium was unavailable . Although five of the seven unions within the Crusaders region supported having the regular season game in Melbourne , the New Zealand Rugby Union ( NZRU ) vetoed the proposal . In 2006 , the Crusaders did play a pre @-@ season match in Melbourne against the Western Force at Olympic Park Stadium . They did the same in the 2008 preseason as well , also against the Force . 
 Due to the 2011 earthquake , the Crusaders played four games at Trafalgar Park , and two in Timaru during their 2011 season . They also played a " home " game in Wellington in Round 18 against Hurricanes , and a special home match against the Sharks at Twickenham in London . The London match was a fundraiser for earthquake relief , and was the first Super Rugby match ever contested outside of the three participating countries . In the first 30 hours of ticket sales , over 30 @,@ 000 were purchased ; a spokesman for United Ticketmaster indicated that the response was the strongest he had experienced for a rugby match outside of internationals . 
 = = Development team = = 
 The Crusaders have fielded a development team in competitions such as the Pacific Rugby Cup and in matches against other representative teams for several seasons . Known as the Crusaders Development XV or Crusaders Knights , the squad is selected from the best emerging rugby talent in the Crusaders catchment area and is composed of Crusaders contracted players , wider training group members , under 20s , and selected club players . 
 = = Records and achievements = = 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 Champions ( 7 ) 
 1998 , 1999 , 2000 , 2002 , 2005 , 2006 , 2008 @,@ 
 Runners @-@ up ( 4 ) 
 2003 , 2004 , 2011 , 2014 
 Playoff Appearances ( 5 ) 
 2007 , 2009 , 2010 , 2012 , 2013 
 New Zealand Conference Champions ( 2 ) 
 2011 , 2014 
 = = = Season standings = = = 
 = = = Competition records = = = 
 The Crusaders team and members of its squad hold various competition records in both the Super 12 and Super 14 . The Crusaders hold the record for most points in a game , with their 96 – 19 victory over the Waratahs in the 12th round of the 2002 season . This game set the record for the most tries scored ( 14 ) , and the most conversions in a match ( 13 ) . In 2005 the team set the record for most points scored in a season with 541 and most tries in a season with 71 . The Crusaders also feature in the record for the lowest combined score in a game when they were defeated by the Highlanders 6 – 0 in the 4th round of the 2009 season . 
 Several individuals have achieved competition records whilst playing for the team . Most notable are records for individual points scored in a season : Andrew Mehrtens holds the Super 12 record of 206 points , achieved in 1998 ; while Dan Carter holds the Super 14 record of 221 points . Andrew Mehrtens also holds the record for Super points overall , with 990 accumulated during his Crusaders career . Rico Gear holds the joint record for tries in a Super 12 or Super 14 season , with 15 tries in 2005 . In round ten of the 2007 season , the Crusaders defeated the Western Force 53 – 0 and in the process became the first team in Super rugby to win 100 matches . 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 The squad for the 2016 Super Rugby season : 
 = = = Notable players = = = 
 Nine players have played over 100 games for the franchise : Justin Marshall , Reuben Thorne , Caleb Ralph , Greg Somerville , Leon MacDonald , Richie McCaw , Chris Jack , Dan Carter and Andrew Ellis . Half @-@ back Justin Marshall was the first player to achieve the feat , playing for the Crusaders between 1996 and 2005 . Both Thorne and Ralph achieved the 100 @-@ game mark at the same time . However , Ralph had played nine of his matches for other franchises : three for the Chiefs and six for the Blues . Ralph achieved the " 100 Crusaders games " feat later that season ; remarkably , they were played consecutively . Greg Somerville became the next player to contribute 100 games for the franchise , achieving this in the 2006 semi @-@ final against the Bulls . The first match of the 2008 season was Leon MacDonald 's 100th game , and on 11 March 2011 Chris Jack started against the Brumbies to play his 100th match for the Crusaders . The Crusaders also boast three winners of the IRB International Player of the Year Award : Dan Carter ( 2005 , 2012 and 2015 ) , Kieran Read ( 2013 ) and Richie McCaw ( 2006 , 2009 and 2010 ) . 
 = = = 1996 – 2005 Team of the decade = = = 
 On the eve of the last Super 12 final in 2005 , a panel of experts picked the Crusaders team of the decade , which was published by the Christchurch Press . The experts chosen to select the team were : <unk> Norton ( former All Blacks captain ) , Vance Stewart ( first Crusaders coach ) , Dick Tayler ( president of supporters club ) , Bob Schumacher ( former Christchurch Press rugby writer ) and Tony Smith ( Christchurch Press rugby writer ) . 
 The most notable omissions from the team were Dan Carter , Richard Loe , and Reuben Thorne . Daniel Carter was omitted due to the strength of Andrew Mehrtens and Aaron Mauger who occupied the first and second five @-@ eighth positions respectively , and because he was regarded as " the star of the next decade " . Despite being considered one of Canterbury 's best ever props , Richard Loe missed out as he was only in the team for the unsuccessful 1996 season . The former All Black captain Reuben Thorne was omitted due the quality of players in the lock and blindside flanker positions . The most unlikely inclusion was for Norm Berryman at right wing . Berryman was picked over Marika Vunibaka and Afato So 'oalo due to his crucial tries late in the 1998 and 1999 seasons that helped the Crusaders qualify for the semi @-@ finals . The team : 
 = = Coaches = = 
 The Crusaders were coached in their first season by Vance Stewart , who was assisted by Aussie Mclean " . Stewart was replaced by Wayne Smith in 1997 ; McLean too was replaced , by Peter Sloane . Smith continued as coach until he was appointed All Blacks coach after the 1999 season . Robbie Deans took over the reins for the 2000 season . Deans has had several assistants : in 2000 and 2001 his assistant was Steve Hansen ; in 2002 , Colin Cooper ; in 2003 and 2004 , Don Hayes ; and in 2005 and 2006 , Vern Cotter . Deans ' assistant for the 2007 season was former Crusader Mark Hammett . Deans was appointed coach of Australia in December 2007 , but was allowed to continue coaching the Crusaders in the 2008 season . Former captain , Todd Blackadder was appointed his successor in July 2008 , with Hammett continuing as assistant coach . Hammett was appointed Hurricanes coach from the beginning of the 2011 season , and consequently former prop Dave Hewett was appointed assistant forwards coach . In June 2016 , Scott Robertson , former Crusaders player and current head coach of the Canterbury national provincial team and the New Zealand Under 20 rugby team , was announced as the Crusaders head coach from 2017 through to 2019 . 
 Head coach 
 Todd Blackadder 
 Assistant coaches 
 Dave Hewett 
 Aaron Mauger 
 <unk> Matson 
 = = Print sources = = 
 Gifford , Phil ( 2004 ) . The Passion – The Stories Behind 125 years of Canterbury Rugby . Wilson Scott Publishing . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ X. 
 Howitt , Bob ( 2005 ) . SANZAR Saga – Ten Years of Super 12 and Tri @-@ Nations Rugby . Harper Collins Publishers . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 566 @-@ 2 . 
 <unk> , Matt ( 2005 ) . Ten Years of Super 12 . Hodder Moa . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 025 @-@ 8 . 
 <unk> , Ron ( 2003 ) . Century in Black – 100 Years of All Black Test Rugby . Hodder Moa Beckett Publishers Limited . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 937 @-@ 8 . 
 = Fluffernutter = 
 A fluffernutter is a sandwich made with peanut butter and marshmallow fluff usually served on white bread . Variations of the sandwich include the substitution of wheat bread and the addition of various sweet , salty and savory ingredients . The term fluffernutter can also be used to describe other food items , primarily desserts , that incorporate peanut butter and marshmallow fluff . 
 The sandwich was first created in the early twentieth century after marshmallow creme , a sweet marshmallow @-@ like spread , was invented in Massachusetts . During World War I , a recipe for a peanut butter and marshmallow creme sandwich , the earliest known example of the sandwich , was published . The term “ fluffernutter ” was created by an advertising agency in 1960 as a more effective way to market the sandwich . 
 The sandwich is particularly popular in New England and has been proposed as the official state sandwich of Massachusetts . 
 = = Recipe and variations = = 
 A fluffernutter is made by spreading peanut butter on a slice of bread , then spreading an equal amount of marshmallow fluff on another slice and finally combining them to form a sandwich . Variations of the recipe include wheat bread instead of white , Nutella hazelnut spread instead of or in addition to peanut butter , and the addition of sweet ingredients like bananas or savory and salty ingredients like bacon . The Fluffernutter itself is often seen as a variation on the peanut butter and jelly sandwich . Though often seen as a food for children , the Fluffernutter recipe has been adapted to appeal to adult tastes . For example , a New York caterer serves a Fluffernutter hors d 'oeuvre in a toasted ice cream cone with a spoon of peanut butter and torched marshmallow fluff on top . 
 The term fluffernutter has also been used to describe other foods that feature peanut butter and marshmallow fluff , including Fluffernutter cookies , bars and cupcakes . Durkee @-@ Mower , the company that produces Marshmallow Fluff , a brand of marshmallow fluff , produces a cookbook that features recipes for Fluffernutter bars , frosting , pie and a shake . In 2006 , Brigham 's Ice Cream and Durkee @-@ Mower introduced a Fluffernutter flavor , which featured peanut butter and Marshmallow Fluff in vanilla ice cream . Fluffernutter was also the name of a candy briefly produced by the Boyer Brothers candy company beginning in 1969 . 
 = = History = = 
 Marshmallow fluff , one of the two main ingredients of a Fluffernutter , was invented in the early 20th century . Archibald Query invented a creation he called Marshmallow Creme in Somerville , Massachusetts , in 1917 , while Amory and Emma Curtis of Melrose , Massachusetts , invented Snowflake Marshmallow Creme in 1913 . During World War I , Emma Curtis published a recipe for the Liberty Sandwich , which consisted of peanut butter and Snowflake Marshmallow Creme on oat or barley bread . The recipe was published in a promotional booklet sent to Curtis ' customers in 1918 and may be the origin of the Fluffernutter sandwich . Earlier labels and booklets published by the <unk> suggested combining Snow Flake Marshmallow Creme with peanut butter or eating it on sandwiches with chopped nuts or olives . 
 Meanwhile , sugar shortages during World War I hurt sales of Archibald Query 's Marshmallow Creme , so Query sold his recipe in 1920 to two men from Swampscott , Massachusetts , H. Allen Durkee and Fred L. Mower , who began distributing the product through their company , Durkee @-@ Mower Inc . The pair renamed the product Toot Sweet Marshmallow Fluff , and Durkee @-@ Mower continues to sell the product under the name Marshmallow Fluff . The sandwich made with peanut butter and marshmallow fluff continued to be eaten , but was not called a Fluffernutter until 1960 , when an advertising firm Durkee @-@ Mower hired created the term as a more effective way to market the sandwich . Fluffernutter is a registered trademark of Durkee @-@ Mower , although the company 's U.S. trademark registrations for the term cover only ice cream and printed recipes . In 2006 , Durkee @-@ Mower sued Williams @-@ Sonoma Inc. in the United States District Court for the District of Massachusetts , alleging that Williams @-@ Sonoma infringed on its trademark by selling a marshmallow and peanut butter chocolate @-@ covered candy under the Fluffernutter name . 
 In June 2006 , Massachusetts State Senator Jarrett Barrios gained national attention when he proposed legislation restricting the serving of Fluffernutter sandwiches in public schools . After Barrios learned that his son was served Fluffernutters on a daily basis at his Cambridge , Massachusetts , public elementary school , he created an amendment to a junk food bill that aimed to limit the serving of Fluffernutters in Massachusetts public schools to once a week . The proposal was criticized as an example of trivial and overly intrusive legislation , while Barrios ' supporters pointed to concerns over the problem of childhood obesity . Among the people who defended the Fluffernutter at the time was Massachusetts State Representative Kathi @-@ Anne Reinstein , whose district in Revere was close to Lynn , where Marshmallow Fluff is made . She claimed she planned to " fight to the death for Fluff " and supported legislation that would make the Fluffernutter the official state sandwich . The measure failed , and Reinstein tried again unsuccessfully in 2009 . Supporters of the bill cited the sandwich 's close association with childhood and Massachusetts . 
 = = In culture = = 
 The term fluffernutter has sometimes been used disparagingly to describe something that lacks substance and has minimal to no cultural value . On the other hand , some writers look on Fluffernutters and marshmallow fluff as a source of childhood nostalgia and regional pride . 
 The sandwich has close ties to New England , particularly to Somerville , Massachusetts , where Archibald Query invented Marshmallow Fluff , and to Lynn , Massachusetts , where Durkee @-@ Mower has produced it for decades . Somerville holds an annual festival called What the Fluff ? based around celebrating Marshmallow Fluff and Fluffernutter sandwiches . The festival incorporates music , visual art , games and a cooking contest based around Fluff and Fluffernutters . In 2011 , NASA astronaut Richard Michael <unk> , who was born in Lowell , Massachusetts , and ate a Fluffernutter while aboard the International Space Station , acted as one of the contest judges . 
 In the fifteenth episode of the eighth season of the animated television series The Simpsons entitled " Homer 's Phobia " guest star John Waters ( of Pink Flamingos fame ) comes to town and is taken with the " camp / kitsch " aesthetic in which the Simpsons are blissfully unaware they live . The following occurs when he ( John ) arrives at the Simpsons residence for a <unk> snack : 
 Also mentioned in the lyrics of the 1970 sunshine pop anthem " Love You " by The Free Design : 
 October 8 is National Fluffernutter Day . 
 = Heather Higgins = 
 Heather Richardson Higgins ( born September 21 , 1959 ) is an American businesswoman , political commentator , and non @-@ profit sector executive . She is the president and CEO of Independent Women 's Voice , the 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) sister organization of the Independent Women 's Forum . 
 Described as a political " diva " by some sources , Higgins has been associated with a number of different political and policy organizations . These range from non @-@ profit , non @-@ partisan organizations like the Hoover Institution and the Council on Foreign Relations to media organizations with more pronounced political affinities , such as the National Empowerment Television network and Irving Kristol 's The Public Interest . 
 = = Personal background = = 
 Born in Atlanta , Georgia and raised in Manhattan , Higgins began her undergraduate studies in 1977 at Wellesley College . She graduated cum laude from Wellesley in 1981 , earning a B.A. She then moved back to New York City and enrolled in the M.B.A. finance program at New York University 's graduate school of business . After leaving NYU for several years to work as a research analyst , marketer , and portfolio manager at a small firm , she resumed her studies there in 1986 and was awarded her graduate degree in 1987 . She currently lives in Manhattan with her husband James and their three children . 
 = = Journalist and commentator = = 
 In the 1980s , Higgins began writing editorial columns for the Wall Street Journal . During this time , she also became an assistant editor at Irving Kristol 's now @-@ defunct quarterly , The Public Interest . Higgins ' editorial writing and policy work have led to appearances on a variety of news / commentary programs , including Hardball with Chris Matthews , Politically Incorrect , Real Time with Bill Maher , Crossfire , Equal Time and Good Morning America . With Newt Gingrich , she co @-@ hosted The Progress Report on the now @-@ defunct National Empowerment Television . When asked about Higgins ' television appearances , Bill Maher said , " Oh God , she could talk about anything . " 
 Higgins was co @-@ editor of The Quotable Paul Johnson ( 1994 ) , a book of collected quotations from the popular historian . 
 = = Investment career = = 
 Before Higgins ' 1991 entry into the non @-@ profit sector , she worked as a Wall Street portfolio manager for seven years , eventually attaining the position of vice president of U.S. Trust before it became a subsidiary of the Charles Schwab Corporation . On February 3 , 2006 , she was elected to be a Director and Trustee of sixteen of UBS 's registered investment companies , which consisted of thirty @-@ six mutual funds as of January 2007 . 
 = = Non @-@ profit roles and policy work = = 
 Higgins has been heavily involved with non @-@ profit organizations . She is chairman and CEO of Independent Women 's Voice , a 501 ( c ) ( 4 ) social welfare organization , chairman of the Independent Women 's Forum , co @-@ founder of the Alliance For Charitable Reform , and has been president and director of New York 's Randolph Foundation since 1991 . She was also the executive director of the Council on Culture & Community . 
 In addition to helming the above organizations , Higgins ' non @-@ profit experience includes her position on the executive committee of the board of overseers for the Hoover Institution and her membership in the Council on Foreign Relations . She is also a trustee of the Committee for Economic Development , vice @-@ chairman of the Washington , D.C.-based Philanthropy Roundtable and a former member of the W.H. Brady Foundation 's board of directors . 
 In November 2013 , Campaigns & Elections named Higgins to their list of top fifty political influencers to watch in 2014 . 
 = = = Responses to 2010 special elections = = = 
 After Republican Scott Brown defeated Democrat Martha Coakley in the special election to select Ted Kennedy 's successor , Independent Women 's Voice commissioned a survey which Higgins cited as demonstrating that voters were motivated by the potential impact that the election was perceived as playing in healthcare reform and other national policy debates . Higgins also reported that the survey showed that , " while women overall voted 53 % – 45 % for Coakley , Independent women voted 67 % – 33 % for Brown . Given an option between reducing taxes and regulations on small business or increasing government spending , 51 % preferred tax cuts while 30 % chose infrastructure . " 
 In the May 2010 special House election in Hawaiʻi 's 2nd congressional district , Independent Women 's Voice ran advertisements critical of former Democratic Congressman Ed Case . The advertisements asserted that Case " had voted to raise taxes 72 times and had received failing grades from anti @-@ pork barrel spending groups such as the National Taxpayers Union . " According to Politico , the group spent " more than $ 200 @,@ 000 " on the anti @-@ Case advertising campaign . Federal Election Commission filings indicate that the organization spent $ 237 @,@ 500 on the effort as of early May 2010 . 
 = = = ACR advocacy for private foundations = = = 
 In a letter published in The Hill , Higgins and fellow Alliance for Charitable Reform co @-@ founder Dan Peters responded to discussion of legislative regulatory proposals , saying that , " ACR believes that every dollar of tax increases on foundations is to the federal government rather than a dollar to charities , and the ACR is troubled by that notion .... We cannot adopt a one @-@ size @-@ fits @-@ all solution that disadvantages smaller organizations . We must do everything possible to encourage philanthropy and not create barriers to charitable giving . " 
 = = Political views = = 
 Columnist Suzanne Fields , in an article discussing Higgins and IWF co @-@ founder Lisa <unk> , states that they " are mothers and relate to women who are not ideologically doctrinaire , but who are instinctively conservative on war and taxes . " 
 In an interview with the Acton Institute , Higgins expressed her fundamental opposition to government social programs insofar as they compete with or replace private charities , stating , 
 Government programs pose serious problems for community institutions when they directly compete with those organizations which attempt to provide charity , while seeking to assist the individual beyond materialistic ends . Properly performed charity not only feeds you , but keeps your self @-@ respect <unk> 
 In her review of Thomas DiLorenzo and James T. Bennett 's book Unhealthy Charities : Hazardous to Your Health and Wealth , which examines the operation of health charities , Higgins argues that , 
 The problem is not that there are bad people running these organizations ; almost anyone sitting on the board of such an organization would do the same thing in this environment . The problem is having centralized government funding in the first place . <unk> the dollars , disperse the authority , create competing funding sources , and all these problems and false incentives will be instantly mitigated . 
 George magazine published an article in its 1995 first issue , entitled " The Heather Report , " in which Higgins ' views were summarized as " essentially libertarian , " and in agreement with the idea that " Centralized government will matter less and less .... We are in the midst of a ' great shift ' from ' elitist to populist , ' from a machine ' which is controlled and planned ' to an organic system that , ' following this new paradigm , has faith in people , faith in their capacities , faith in their choices . ' " Higgins was characterized as a link between the " wide @-@ eyed " academic community and " flinty " political practitioners . 
 In a 1995 Wall Street Journal column , Paul Gigot described Higgins as an " idea broker , " explaining that she prefers not to be associated with political parties . Gigot included a quotation from her , in which she stated , " I am not really interested in a party .... If the Democrats had really been New Democrats , that would have been great . If these Republicans become Old Republicans , they 'll lose me too . " William Galston , a senior domestic policy adviser in the Clinton administration , said , " I see Heather as an intellectual and policy entrepreneur with some real moral commitments .... I don 't see her as a sharply partisan figure , certainly not in the way she deals with people . " 
 = Trivia ( The Office ) = 
 " Trivia " is the eleventh episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's 163rd episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 12 , 2012 . It was written by Steve Hely and was directed by executive producer B. J. Novak . 
 In this episode , Oscar Martinez ( Oscar Nunez ) reveals that he is partaking in a trivia contest in Philadelphia and Andy Bernard ( Ed Helms ) tries to get the entire office involved . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) journeys to Florida and meets with his boss , Robert California ( James Spader ) , in order to explore other job opportunities . 
 After airing , the episode sparked a debate among fans , as well as critics , as to whether former leading actor Steve Carell had made an uncredited cameo as a member of an opposing trivia team . NBC later denied that Carell had made an appearance and stated that the situation was just a coincidence . " Trivia " received mostly positive reviews from critics , with many noting that the episode marked an improvement from the first part of the season . Despite this , several reviews were critical of the Dwight sub @-@ plot . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Trivia " drew 5 @.@ 87 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , staying relatively even with the previous three episodes , " Christmas Wishes " , " Gettysburg " and " Mrs. California " . It ranked third in its timeslot and was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Andy , who is worried that he will not be able to meet the 8 % quarterly sales growth figures that Robert California ( James Spader ) asked for by about $ 800 , starts to think of creative ways to sell more paper . During a conference room meeting , he proposes that everyone in the office buy paper to alleviate some of the burden , but no one is willing . He then decides to ask Oscar to make a rounding mistake in the books , but Oscar tells Andy that he does not have time to make the mistake because he is leaving for a trivia contest in a bar in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . He tells Andy that the prize is $ 1 @,@ 000 and his team is determined to win it . Andy , encouraged by Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) and Jim ( John Krasinski ) , decides to take the entire office to Philadelphia in an attempt to win the money and make up the sales growth difference . At the bar , which turns out to be a gay bar called the Liberty Well , Andy divides the office into three teams : Dunder Mifflin A @-@ Team ( Jim , Darryl , Andy , and Ryan ) , Dunder @-@ Mifflin B @-@ Team ( Stanley Hudson , Phyllis , Creed , and Cathy ) , and the " Just For Fun " team ( Kevin , Kelly , Erin , and Meredith ) . Oscar refuses to join Andy and stays on his original team . Initially , the Dunder Mifflin A @-@ Team does well until they soon falter . However , much to Andy 's surprise , the " Just For Fun " team ( calling themselves The Einsteins ) ends up doing much better than expected because of the group 's trivial knowledge on a variety of issues . <unk> , the team misses the answers to a handful of common questions , including one about their namesake . They make it to the final round against Oscar 's team and eventually win thanks to Kevin 's correct answers . However , the Just for Fun team 's luck runs out when they later get demolished while trying to win another bar 's even more lucrative trivia contest . 
 Meanwhile , Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) heads down to Florida to meet with Robert California at the Sabre headquarters to discuss a possible manager position . While sitting in the waiting room , Dwight talks to Gabe , who describes himself as the " toilet of the company " who flushes all the unwanted items away . Robert then tells Dwight that he cannot meet with him but will have him meet with Bill , another executive , much to Dwight 's frustration . However , Robert manipulates the situation by secretly calling Gabe and instructing him to not let Dwight speak with Bill either , but to have Gabe listen to Dwight 's pitch and then reject him . Dwight , after being told by Gabe that he is not wanted as a manager , grabs and twists Gabe 's arm and forces him to be taken to Robert 's Florida condo . Initially , Robert tries to spare Dwight 's feelings , but eventually turns him down by telling him he 's a better salesman and his drive and energy would be wasted in a manager 's position . Dwight then returns to Scranton . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by supervising producer Steve Hely , at the time , his second writing credit for the series . It was directed by executive producer and cast member B. J. Novak , who portrays Ryan Howard on the show . The episode also marks the fifth appearance of Lindsey Broad , who plays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season and she initially appeared in " Pam 's Replacement . " Due to Jenna Fischer 's actual pregnancy , Pam did not appear in the episode . After airing , the episode sparked a debate among fans , as well as critics , as to whether former leading actor Steve Carell had made an uncredited cameo as a member of an opposing trivia team , The <unk> Bears . NBC later denied that Carell had made an appearance and stated that the situation was just a coincidence . The Season Eight DVD contains a number of deleted scenes from this episode . Notable cut scenes include Andy attempting to get the office to sell $ 800 worth of paper in a day , and Andy trying to switch team members in order to boost Dunder Mifflin A @-@ Team 's chance of winning . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Due to the episode largely taking place at a trivia contest , " Trivia " featured a plethora of cultural references . After Ryan uses his smart phone , the trivia reader chides him for checking his Grindr account , a <unk> networking application for gay men . Dwight compares himself to a Spanish conquistador , coming to Florida to " claim what is rightfully [ his ] . " Several of the trivia teams featured names with culturally related puns . The teams included : The <unk> Bears , Joey <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Two Broke Dorks , Jason So @-@ Gay @-@ Kiss , Ladies Gaga , Aesop 's <unk> , and Lawrence O @-@ <unk> . 
 Many of the references were either the answers to trivia questions , or incorrect guesses . The " Einsteins " erroneously guess " See @-@ <unk> " when asked what city was on Ray Charles ' mind when he wrote one of his most famous songs . After being asked a question about Albert Einstein , the " Einsteins " answer with Thomas Edison , much to the delight of the sarcastic trivia reader . Kelly is able to correctly guess a basketball question because she cross @-@ referenced her knowledge of Khloe and Lamar and Dancing with the Stars . Kevin knows that the answer to the final trivia question is the 2001 French film Les <unk> <unk> , starring Marion Cotillard , because Cotillard " exposes herself a number of times . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Trivia " originally aired on NBC in the United States on January 12 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 5 @.@ 87 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 9 rating / 7 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 9 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode remained relatively equal in ratings compared with the previous episode , " Christmas Wishes . " The episode finished third in its time slot , being beaten by Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 8 rating / 9 % share and the CBS drama Person of Interest which received a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode , however , did manage to beat the Fox drama series The Finder and The CW drama series The Secret Circle . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Trivia " received relatively positive reviews , although many critics did not enjoy the Florida sub @-@ plot . Many television critics agreed that " Trivia " was a marked improvement over many of the episodes in the first part of the season . Craig McQuinn from The Faster Times wrote , " Aside from a few weak moments , ' Trivia ' was a solid episode of The Office and a vast improvement over most of the episodes this season . " Myles McNutt from The A.V. Club awarded the episode a B + rating and wrote positively of the trivia plot , saying , " When The Office reaches its next hiatus , and then its subsequent return , I ’ ll find myself hoping for more like the trivia side of ' Trivia ' , storylines that even after contrived introductions can simply sit back and let the character @-@ driven jokes take over the narrative . " Chris Plante from New York magazine explained that " If you plan to continue watching The Office , here ’ s my advice . [ ... ] You need to forget the negative energy this show attracts . Start thinking of Season Eight like a reboot . " He concluded that " The Office is not irreparable . It ’ s not great either , but there is some marked improvement here over the worst episodes from the first half of the season . " Lizzie Fuhr from <unk> wrote positively on both the trivia A @-@ plot and the Dwight and Robert B @-@ plot . TV Fanatic reviewer Dan Forcella called the trivia conceit " quite fun " and awarded the episode 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . The Huffington Post wrote that " The Office continues to find fun and unique ways to spotlight how mundane office life can be by showing ways the gang finds to fill their day . " Alan Sepinwall from HitFix , who was notably critical of the new season , called the episode " charming . " IGN reviewer Cindy White noted that the episode bore stylistic similarities to the third episode of the British version of the show , entitled " The Quiz " , writing that " while ' Trivia ' does loosely allude to that pub quiz with a bar trivia night , that turns out to be the only thing the two have in common . " She did , however , positively write about the humor of the episode , noting that , " the writers squeezed some good laughs out of the idea , and it feels good to be laughing again at The Office . " 
 While a large majority of critics praised the main trivia storyline , many reviews criticized the Dwight and Robert plot . McNutt wrote that , " As the trivia storyline was building momentum , the Florida storyline was killing that same momentum , a push @-@ and @-@ pull that the trivia ended up winning . " Forcella explained that " the titular storyline of the gang playing " Trivia " in Philadelphia worked really well , but the forced trio in Florida definitely did not . " Jill Mader from <unk> wrote , " All in all , I thought it was an inconsistent episode – I liked the trivia storyline , but the Dwight stuff really fell flat for me . " 
 = 24 : The Game = 
 24 : The Game is a third @-@ person shooter video game , based on the FOX television series , 24 . The game was developed by Sony Computer Entertainment 's Cambridge Studios and was published by 2K Games for PlayStation 2 . It was announced on March 30 , 2005 and was released in North America exclusively on February 27 , 2006 . The player controls many characters from the television series at different points in the game . The missions in the game involve elements of third @-@ person shooter , driving and puzzle games . The musical score was composed by Sean Callery , while the script was written by <unk> Demetrius and the series production team . 
 24 : The Game makes extensive use of actors ' voices and likenesses from the TV series , as well as using a script and music score from the same production team . Casting and voice production for 24 : The Game were organized and handled by <unk> . The events contained in the game are set in Los Angeles between the second and third seasons of the show . The story features three plotlines that overlap around a character from Jack Bauer 's past named Peter Madsen . Although the game received a mixed reception from critics , it received a BAFTA award nomination for its screenplay elements . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Like the series , the game takes place over 24 hours and has the same start and end clocks for each hour , marking the start and end of each part of the game . The hours are broken down into 58 separate missions , of which there are three broad types , each described in further detail below . Some missions are objective based , while others have a time @-@ restricted element . Each mission is graded out of 100 points , based on the quality of performance , number of objectives completed , shooting accuracy and so on . A grade of 90 points or higher rewards the player by unlocking some form of bonus feature , including three movies ( interviews with cast about the game , TV promos ) , 98 images ( wallpaper @-@ like images of main characters ) and 23 characters ( 3D models that the player can view ) . 
 Most of the game 's missions take place in third @-@ person shooting format , combined with the use of a cover system . When a character is behind a low object like a crate , or at the edge of a corner or <unk> , they can press a button to use the object or edge as cover . Another button will allow the character to peer around and enter a targeting mode , while releasing the button will quickly return them to cover . There is also a stealth mode which has the character stoop , walk silently ( unless running ) , duck behind any low obstacles they can hide behind and be less detectable by sound . A character can sneak up behind an enemy using stealth mode and perform a silent " stealth takedown " by breaking his neck . 
 A variety of weapons are available including handguns , automatic weapons and shotguns , with various ammunition types also in existence . Ammunition is limited in the game and weapons must be reloaded , although additional ammunition can be collected . Players can also call out to enemies who will sometimes surrender and can then be captured ( put in handcuffs ) with their ammunition also collected . There are also civilians in the game who can also be called out to and then rescued by the player . Health bars for enemies , vehicles or friendly subjects that must be protected are also sometimes shown . There are health packs which can be picked up , as well as health stations mounted on walls which can be used . Body armor is also sometimes provided or found in levels . A small heads @-@ up @-@ display features a radar / map with an arrow showing the character 's direction , red dots for enemies , green dots for civilians , and yellow stars for objectives . The direction and field of vision of enemies is shown on the radar . 
 In third @-@ person missions and occasionally some other types , a PDA is available . In the PDA the player can view their list of objectives ( which can change over the course of a mission ) , maps of the area if available , a help screen and a list of weapons held with information on each . Characters also typically have cell phones which they sometimes receive calls on during missions . Some missions involve sniping using first @-@ person shooter gameplay . These missions resemble the use of a sniper rifle during normal missions but the player cannot switch to a third @-@ person view . 
 There are several missions in which the player controls a motor vehicle . Though the game engine is the same as the third @-@ person mode , these missions are based on being in a vehicle . They usually involve getting to a certain location in a certain time period , often while avoiding pursuers while heading to the end point . Weapons can not be used while in a vehicle . While the PDA is not available in these mission types , a map of the city is . Cell phone calls are also sometimes received in these missions . 
 = = = Minigames = = = 
 24 's minigames serve as interludes from the main mission , and are primarily interrogation sequences or computer puzzles . They are presented both as single puzzles in third @-@ person missions , and as timed stand @-@ alone missions . The computer puzzles include maze puzzles , where a player must select a coloured path from a starting box to an ending box and sometimes a second and third box , are used to represent bypassing locks and other computer functions . Letter sequence puzzles , where a player swaps adjacent pairs of a series of random letters until they are in the correct sequence , are used to represent code @-@ breaking such as for encrypted files or a locked door . Colour / symbol matching puzzles , where a cursor randomly moves across a field of coloured squares and the player must press the controller button that corresponds to that coloured square , are used to represent unscrambling files from hard drives and other similar functions . A number of other puzzles are used only once , including puzzles to simulate transferring files over a damaged network , infrared scanning of buildings , radar @-@ like scanning of areas , and creating a network link across the entire planet . 
 The interrogation minigame involves the players character interrogating a suspect . A graph shows the suspect 's " stress level " which oscillates in a sort of pseudo @-@ sine wave . The player must choose to act either aggressively , <unk> or neutrally towards the suspect . These actions will raise , lower or maintain the stress level . A horizontal target range is highlighted on the chart , which the player must aim for the stress level to be within in order to advance the interrogation . A marker next to the graph indicates how advance the interrogation . The player must complete interrogation within a set time limit to succeed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 24 : The Game takes place between the events of the second and third seasons . In a similar way to the TV series , it can be split up into three sections or chapters . Section one revolves around an attack on Vice President Jim Prescott , while section two covers an attack on the Counter Terrorist Unit ( CTU ) . Section three covers a major terrorist attack and attempt to gain access to nuclear weapons . A large number of characters from seasons two and three feature in 24 : The Game , with each using the original actor 's likeness and voice acting . Main characters returning include Jack Bauer , Kimberly " Kim " Bauer , Tony Almeida , Michelle <unk> , Chase Edmunds , David Palmer , Max , Kate Warner , Chloe O 'Brian , and Ryan Chappelle , with Peter Madsen being voiced by Christian Kane . 
 The game begins with Jack Bauer waiting outside a ship in Los Angeles harbor where terrorists are going to release a ricin bomb in the water supply . A CTU team member triggers an alarm causing Jack and his team to storm the ship , discovering the whole ship 's crew dead in a cargo hold . He later learns of an assassination attempt on Vice President Prescott through undercover agent Chase Edmunds . <unk> the attack , Jack discovers that the mastermind behind the attempt is an enemy from his past known as Peter Madsen . 
 A Sarin gas attack on an L.A. Metro station lures CTU agents away from their headquarters . While distracted , terrorists activate an EMP , attacking and taking over the CTU LA main building , holding the staff members hostage . The terrorists execute these hostages , including data analyst Sean Walker and eventually escape with a stolen hard drive . Jack runs into Peter Madsen , who has kidnapped Jack 's daughter , Kim Bauer , forcing Jack to do " errands " for the terrorist cell . One of these errands is to sneak into a NSA building and retrieve confidential data for the terrorists . Jack manages to find and rescue Kim and recover the stolen hard drive with the help of undercover agent Chase Edmunds . 
 A major earthquake occurs in Los Angeles , caused by terrorists detonating explosives at focal points ( places where fault lines intersect ) . Kate Warner is also kidnapped by the terrorist cell , along with Governor James Radford who is kidnapped for assassination but is then rescued by the CTU . A conspiracy involving Radford in the day 's attacks is uncovered by the CTU and Radford is killed by the terrorist cell because he attempts to back out . Fort <unk> , U.S. Military base and the epicenter of the earthquakes , is attacked and taken over by terrorists , who then begin stealing weapons @-@ grade plutonium before attempting to smuggle the weapons out of the U.S. to the Middle East . Kate Warner 's father is forced to aid the terrorists by helping them smuggle the weapons with his customs passes . Jack finally kills Madsen when he tries to escape by shooting his speedboat with an M @-@ 80 assault rifle , causing it to explode . He also shoots and kills Max , the man behind the events of Season 2 and The Game , who was holding Kate Warner hostage , saving her life but in doing so Max manages to shoot Jack once in the stomach before dying . As a result , Chase Edmunds takes Jack to the hospital via helicopter . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = Development = = 
 24 : The Game was announced on March 30 , 2005 by Sony Computer Entertainment Europe through a licensing deal with Twentieth Century Fox to bring 24 to the PlayStation 2 , and Sony Computer Entertainment 's Cambridge Studio was confirmed to be the developer of the game . The announcement described how the game would sit between seasons two and three of the TV series , answering many questions left unanswered by the TV show storyline . Also included was the news that the game would feature the voices and likenesses of many of the cast of the TV show . By the time of the announcement the music score had been prepared by Sean Callery , while a script had been created by <unk> Demetrius in collaboration with the 24 production team . The announcement also stated that sound effects and noises from the TV series would be used in the game . The press release was accompanied by a press @-@ only video featuring Kiefer Sutherland describing some of the story and gameplay elements . 
 The game made an appearance later that May at the E3 show in 2005 , where four sections were demonstrated : a third @-@ person shootout , an interrogation scene , a computer tech minigame and a driving sequence . Some of the intermediate cut @-@ scenes were also shown at this point . The interrogation scene received praise , while the driving segment was let down by poor mechanics and physics . Originally 100 missions were proposed , with only 58 making it into the final game . In an interview , Mark Green stated that the game style was influenced by the way Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers and Enter the Matrix , while gameplay influences were described as James Bond 007 : Everything or Nothing and Alias . 
 It was originally planned to be released worldwide in the northern fall of 2005 but was delayed . The game was released in North America on February 27 , 2006 in Europe on March 17 , 2006 ( March 16 , 2006 in Ireland , due to St. Patrick 's Day ) , and in Australia on April 22 , 2006 . The musical score to the game , performed by the Nimrod Studio Orchestra and recorded at Abbey Road Studios in London , was made available for digital download after the game was released . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " mixed " reviews according to video game review aggregator Metacritic . 
 Eduardo Vasconcellos of GameSpy praised the game 's storyline and high @-@ quality voice work , but criticized the " jagged " visuals that caused character renderings to look " off " . He also complained of the lack of responsiveness in the controls , the " disjointed and awkward " camera angles , and the slowness with which some enemies react to the player . 
 Items from the TV series such as multi @-@ perspective screens ( as shown on the box cover ) were popular for illustrating multiple viewpoints of an objective . The use of episode start and end graphics to mark the start and end of missions was also liked . The script was generally described as being a redeeming feature of the game , although fans of the series may find that the viewpoints , motives and reasoning of the villains isn 't covered well . Cutscenes were singled out for particular praise by IGN , highlighting good use of camera angles and tight focus . Voice acting was generally popular , although some lines suffered from poor direction or emphasis . In contrast , device and ambiance sounds were well received with gunfire getting a particular mention . 
 Gameplay mechanics were singled out as being particularly poor . The third @-@ person shooter sections suffered from poor camera @-@ angle management , making targeting enemies feel " awkward and disjointed " . Enemy artificial intelligence for these sections was described as predictable and basic , adopting repeated firing stances or ignoring the character despite being shot repeatedly . Sniper variants of this fared better . The vehicle sections were also disappointing , with physics and vehicle handling being rated poorly . Vehicles were described as feeling " slow and clapped out " , with pursuits described as being " boring " . The use of AI in these sections were heavily criticized for being predictable and simplistic , with enemy vehicles having no regard for their own safety . The puzzle games were also received badly , being described as " 15 shades of easy and 20 shades of terrible " . Interrogation scenes were , in contrast , well liked , with reviewers finding the dialogue during these scenes entertaining . 
 The Times gave the game four stars out of five and said it was " more for 24 fans , who will instantly love it — so long as they don ’ t mind another TV addiction to feed . " The Sydney Morning Herald gave it three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , stating , " Newcomers to the trials and tribulations of Jack Bauer are unlikely to be impressed by this game 's generic shooting and driving action . But fans of 24 will be quaking , thanks to the authentic atmosphere and gripping story , set between season two and three of the TV series . " However , The A.V. Club gave it a C and stated that " For once , you 'll wish you could skip the action to get to the cutscenes . " Detroit Free Press gave it a similar score of two stars out of four and said : " The controls are just too unpolished to make it worthwhile , though . Movements are flaky , and aiming is far too loose . Sometimes , I got into a tight firefight where I couldn 't hit a terrorist a few feet in front of me . And the driving missions are worse . " 
 = Homer the Vigilante = 
 " Homer the Vigilante " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' fifth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 6 , 1994 . In the episode , a crime wave caused by an elusive cat burglar plagues Springfield . Lisa is distraught to find her saxophone has been stolen , and Homer promises to get it back . The police are ineffective , so Homer takes charge of a neighborhood watch . However , under his leadership it becomes more like a vigilante group , and fails to catch the burglar . With the help of Grampa , Homer discovers that the burglar is a charming senior named Molloy . Molloy is arrested , but he outwits the citizens of Springfield and escapes . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jim Reardon . Sam Neill guest starred in the episode as Molloy . " Homer the Vigilante " was selected for release in a 1997 video collection of selected episodes titled : The Simpsons : Crime and Punishment . It features cultural references to films such as It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad World and Dr. Strangelove . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 2 , and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A number of burglaries by a cat burglar take place in Springfield , even striking the Simpsons ' house . Among the stolen items include Lisa 's saxophone , Marge 's pearl necklace , Bart 's stamp collection , and the handheld television . In response , the residents of Springfield arm themselves and install security devices . A neighborhood watch group is formed , and the members elect Homer as their leader . The group patrols the streets , but its members only end up violating laws further than catching criminals , turning into vigilantes . When Homer is interviewed on news anchor Kent Brockman 's Smartline , the cat burglar calls the show and informs Homer that he will steal the world 's largest cubic zirconia from the Springfield museum . 
 Homer and his group begin guarding the museum . Grampa and his friends from the retirement home volunteer to help , but Homer tells them to leave because they are too old . A few minutes later , Homer sees a group of teenagers drinking beer . He leaves his post to intervene and catch them , but immediately ends up getting drunk with them instead . While Homer 's guard is down , the cat burglar sneaks past and steals the zirconia . Homer is blamed and pelted with vegetables by the unforgiving townspeople . Later that day , Grampa stops by the Simpsons ' house and tells everybody that he knows who the cat burglar is : a resident in the local retirement home named Molloy . 
 Homer captures Molloy at the retirement home , and the surprisingly amiable cat burglar returns the objects he stole . Chief Wiggum arrests him and he is imprisoned . While in his cell at the police station , Molloy casually mentions that he assumes Homer and the cops probably want to know where he hid all of his loot . This piques their interest , and Molloy tells them the stash is hidden under a giant " T " somewhere in Springfield . They all rush out of the station hoping to get the treasure for themselves . In a matter of minutes the entire town hears of the existence of Molloy 's stash and almost everybody in Springfield is racing to get there first . After the residents get to the site and dig , they finally discover a box with a note inside . The note tells them that there is no treasure and that while they have been searching , Molloy has escaped from his cell . However , several citizens continue to dig , convinced that a real treasure must be buried deeper . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jim Reardon . New Zealand actor Sam Neill guest starred in the episode as Molloy , the cat burglar . Executive producer David Mirkin thought Neill , a big The Simpsons fan , was " lovely " to direct . Mirkin also said Neill was " really game " and did " a terrific job " on the episode . Neill considers recording this episode to be a " high @-@ point " of his career . One scene of the episode features Kent Brockman reporting on the burglaries . Mirkin said this was a joke the staff enjoyed doing because it pointed out how negative and mean @-@ spirited news broadcasts can be , and how they are seemingly " always trying to scare everybody " by creating panic and depression . 
 " Homer the Vigilante " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on January 6 , 1994 . The episode was selected for release in a 1997 video collection of selected episodes titled : The Simpsons : Crime and Punishment . Other episodes included in the collection set were " Marge in Chains " , " Bart the Fink " , and " You Only Move Twice " . It was included in The Simpsons season five DVD set , The Simpsons - The Complete Fifth Season , which was released on December 21 , 2004 . Creator Matt Groening , supervising director David Silverman , and Mirkin appeared in the episode 's audio commentary on the season five DVD . The episode was again included in the 2005 DVD release of the Crime and Punishment set . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The Molloy character is based on actor David Niven 's performance as the character A. J. Raffles , a gentleman thief , in the 1939 film Raffles . The music heard at the beginning of the episode during the burglaries is taken from the film The Pink Panther , in which Niven played The Phantom , a similar character . Flanders tells Homer that his Shroud of Turin beach towels were stolen during one of the burglaries . Homer 's dream of riding a nuclear bomb into oblivion is a reference to the famous scene from the film Dr. Strangelove or : How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb . Homer 's line " So I said , Look buddy , your car was upside @-@ down when I got here . And as for your grandmother , she shouldn 't have mouthed off like that ! " is a reference to Flannery O 'Connor 's short story A Good Man Is Hard to Find . The scene of Homer and Principal Skinner talking in front of the museum is a reference to a scene from the television series Dragnet . In a reference to the plot of the 1963 film It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad World , Molloy sends the residents of Springfield on a hunt for a treasure that is buried under a big letter . The ending sequence of the episode also references the film by using the same music and camera angles . In another scene that references It 's a Mad , Mad , Mad , Mad World , Bart tricks American actor Phil Silvers into driving his car into a river , just like Silvers 's character did in the film . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Homer the Vigilante " finished 41st in the ratings for the week of January 3 – 9 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 12 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought it was " a bit lacking in focus " , but it contained " a number of satisfying set @-@ pieces — we like Professor Frink 's walking house security system — and displays Wiggum at his all @-@ time most useless . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson wrote : " After the many plots of the prior show , ' Vigilante ' maintains a much tighter focus . It ’ s not quite as wonderful an episode as its immediate predecessor , but it ’ s strong nonetheless . Much of the humor comes from Homer ’ s newfound power and abuse of it . If nothing else , it ’ s a great program due to Homer ’ s reaction to Lisa ’ s jug playing . " Les <unk> of Box Office Prophets named " Homer the Vigilante " , " Cape Feare " , " Homer Goes to College " , " $ pringfield " , and " Deep Space Homer " his favorite episodes of season five . It was also the Liverpool Daily Post 's Mike Chapple 's favorite episode of the season together with " Bart Gets an Elephant " and " Burns ' Heir " . Patrick Bromley of DVD Verdict gave the episode a grade of B , and Bill Gibron of DVD Talk gave it a score of 4 out of 5 . 
 = Salvage ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Salvage " is the ninth episode of the eighth season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on January 14 , 2001 . The episode was written by Jeffrey Bell and directed by Rod Hardy . " Salvage " is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . The episode received a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 11 @.@ 7 million viewers . Overall , the episode received largely negative reviews from critics . 
 The series centers on FBI special agents Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) and her new partner John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) — following the alien abduction of her former partner , Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) — who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Doggett and Scully encounter a dead man who is still living — only somewhat changed . What they discover is a man made of metal , enacting vengeance on those he believes created him . 
 " Salvage " was loosely based on Tetsuo : The Iron Man , a 1989 Japanese cyberpunk film by cult @-@ film director Shinya Tsukamoto . Written by Jeffrey Bell before Robert Patrick was cast as agent Doggett , the film coincidentally echoes the plot of the 1991 film Terminator 2 : Judgment Day , which Patrick starred in . Indeed , the episode contains an explicit reference to Patrick 's role , written in homage . The episode contained several elaborate special effects sequences , most notably in the teaser , wherein a man stops a car with his body . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Muncie , Indiana , Nora Pearce and Curtis Delario argue about the death of her husband , Ray . Nora believes Ray died from Gulf War syndrome . After attempting to comfort her , Delario starts to drive home and crashes into a man in the middle of the road . His car is totaled , but the man is unharmed as the car breaks around his body . Curtis , grievously injured , looks up at the man and says , “ Ray ? ” The man ’ s arm slams through the windshield as Curtis screams . 
 Agents Scully and Doggett investigate the crash . Scully suggests a man stopped the car but Doggett points out how it would have required a dense block of steel to stop the car . Nora Pearce appears and asks what happened to Curtis Delario . Soon afterwards , Scully finds Delario ’ s body left in a garbage can nearby ; his face has gaping holes in it . <unk> the remains , Scully concludes that the five holes in the man ’ s face were made by human fingers , as someone reached into Delario ’ s head and pulled him out of the wrecked vehicle . Doggett finds a fresh fingerprint with the blood of Ray . Agent Doggett goes to see Nora Pearce and finds Harry Odell , who employed Ray Pearce at his salvage yard . Doggett asks about Ray , but Nora insists she saw Ray die ; both do not believe Ray could be involved in Curtis ’ s death . 
 Later , Ray Pearce eats at a halfway house as volunteer Larina Jackson bothers him . She tries to reach out to help him but he is completely uninterested in talking with her . Meanwhile , at the salvage yard , Odell is shredding documents when Ray appears . Harry feigns friendliness while he gets the shotgun out of his desk drawer . He blasts Ray through a sliding glass door . Ray ’ s detached arm begins to rebuild itself with metal . Harry is transfixed by this sight as Ray kills him . The next morning , Doggett checks out the new murder scene and finds an interesting shredded document . Doggett goes to Chamber Technologies and learns about " smart metals " — metals that rebuild their original forms but are still a metallurgist ’ s pipe dream at the moment . On the phone , Doggett mentions the " smart metals " and Scully tells Doggett about how Ray Pearce ’ s medical records show his whole cellular structure was changing due to exposure to an unknown substance . Meanwhile , Larina sees Ray ’ s obituary in the paper and is watching the television news story about the murder at the salvage yard . She decides to call Ray ’ s widow . 
 Scully discusses Ray Pearce with Doggett . Scully wonders : if Pearce has become a ' metal man ' " how can he be stopped ? " Pearce arrives at Chamber Technologies . Dr. Pugovel , one of the scientists working there , lures him into a containment chamber and then Doggett , Scully , and SWAT team members surround it . He eventually tears his way out of the back of the chamber . Nora waits for Ray in the halfway house . Ray explains that he didn ’ t come home because he isn ’ t himself anymore . Ray turns angrily to her and says , " They 've got to pay for this . They 've all got to pay . " 
 Doggett , searching in the salvage yard , finds a Chamber Technologies drum , inside of which is a metal corpse . When Scully and Doggett confront Pugovel about it , he admits it was Dr. Clifton , a doctor who mysteriously disappeared . He requests that he be put in the barrel in order to not ruin the company or slow the research . Doggett and Scully realize that Ray was exposed to the barrel , and thus was transformed into a metal human . At the same time , Doggett notices Nora Pearce at the lab , looking through files for the person responsible . Later , the halfway house is raided by the FBI to find Pearce . Larina finds Ray and he puts one hand over her mouth to muffle , but he kills her by accident . 
 When Nora arrives home , Ray shows up demanding the name of the person responsible . She tells him that the man responsible is Owen Harris . Ray finds Harris , along with his family , and nearly kills him . However , he realizes that Harris was an accountant who accidentally sent the barrel to the salvage yard . Seeing that he was ultimately innocent , Ray spares him and goes off to die . Scully believes that this act represented the last of Ray ’ s humanity . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Salvage " was written by X @-@ Files staff writer Jeffrey Bell and was loosely based on Tetsuo : The Iron Man , a 1989 Japanese cyberpunk film by cult @-@ film director Shinya Tsukamoto . The idea to write an episode about a man whose body is made completely out of " dense metal alloys " was developed by Bell before actor Robert Patrick was cast in the show . Robert Patrick had previously played the role of a liquid @-@ metal T @-@ 1000 android assassin in the 1991 film Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . In fact , Patrick had been cast as Agent Doggett by the executives in a hope that his role in the movie would appeal to the 18 – 34 male demographic , upon which advertising prices are based . Fox had anticipated a 10 percent increase in viewership with the addition of Patrick . Indeed , the episode contains an explicit reference to Patrick 's role , written in homage : after hearing Scully 's theory , Doggett replies , " What ’ re you saying ? Ray Pearce has become some kind of metal man ? ‘ Cause that only happens in the movies , Agent Scully . " 
 With the filming and airing of " Salvage " , Robert Patrick began to feel " comfortable in his new role " . He later recalled that " we started seeing our [ ratings ] numbers . Our numbers were good , and everyone was happy . " Several of the characters and locations were named or based after real individuals and places . The three scientists : Chamber , Clifton , and Pugovel , were named after friends of Bell 's , who were engineers . Much of the action was based in Muncie , Indiana . Bell picked this location because it was the hometown of his grandparents . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 In the episode , Ray Pearce , the metal man , was required to stop a car by himself . In order to create this effect , Wade Williams , the actor who played the metal man , was filmed against a green screen . To create the illusion of being hit by a car , the lighting was dropped and a gust of wind from fans occurred at the moment of the supposed impact . The scene was shot at different speeds , a matte was cut , and various effects , like shattering glass and smoke , were overlaid onto the cut footage . A separate scene , featuring a car hitting a green post was then filmed . The two separate images were then composited together . Producer Paul Rabwin later described the scene as " effective " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Salvage " first aired on Fox on January 14 , 2001 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by 7 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's estimated households . The episode was viewed by 7 @.@ 26 million households , and 11 @.@ 7 million viewers . It ranked as the 54th most @-@ watched episode for the week ending January 14 . Subsequently , it debuted in the United Kingdom on the BBC Two on May 5 , 2002 . 
 Critical reception to the episode was largely negative . Television Without Pity writer Jessica Morgan rated the episode a F and criticized the episode 's plot and , most notably , its ending . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode one star out of five . The two noted that the episode diluted the characters of Doggett and Scully in a " mechanical plot " , writing " ' Salvage ' would never have made a great episode , but if it had only bothered to give a little more depth to Doggett and Scully , it might still have been an entertaining one . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . Vitaris referred to the episode as an " assembly line monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week episode " and criticized it for failing to make the audience truly empathetic to Ray Pearce 's plight . However , Vitaris did praise the make @-@ up in the episode , noting that " that makeup is [ Wade Andrew ] William 's performance [ … ] he is an astonishing sight . " Not all reviews were so negative . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . He applauded the way the guest star was allowed to " take over " the episode , but felt that the de @-@ emphasis on Scully and Doggett rendered their scenes " boring " . Ultimately , VanDerWerff noted that the problem with it was that the two halves of the story — <unk> and Scully investigation , and Ray 's plight — were largely unconnected . 
 = Royal antelope = 
 The royal antelope ( Neotragus pygmaeus ) is a West African antelope , recognised as the world 's smallest antelope . It was first described by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 . It stands up to merely 25 centimetres ( 10 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 2 @.@ 5 – 3 kilograms ( 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . A characteristic feature is the long and slender legs , with the hindlegs twice as long as the forelegs . Horns are possessed only by males ; the horns @-@ short , smooth and spiky @-@ measure 2 @.@ 5 – 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) and bend backward . The soft coat is reddish to golden brown , in sharp contrast with the white ventral parts . In comparison to Bates 's pygmy antelope , the royal antelope has a longer muzzle , broader lips , a smaller mouth and smaller cheek muscles . 
 Typically nocturnal ( active at night ) , the royal antelope exhibits remarkable alertness . Territories are marked with dung . A herbivore , the royal antelope prefers small quantities of fresh foliage and shoots ; fruits and fungi may be taken occasionally . Like other neotragines , the royal antelope is monogamous . Both sexes can become sexually mature by as early as six months . Births have been reported in November and December . A single , delicate young is born after an unknown gestational period . 
 The royal antelope prefers areas with fresh and dense growth of shrubs and other plants . It inhabits the warm , moist lowland forests prevalent in western African countries such as Côte d 'Ivoire , Ghana , Guinea , Liberia and Sierra Leone . The royal antelope has been categorised as Least Concern by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . The populations are feared to be declining due to habitat deterioration and expanding human settlement . A significant threat to the survival of this antelope is hunting for bushmeat . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The scientific name of the royal antelope is Neotragus pygmaeus . It is placed in the genus Neotragus and the family Bovidae . It was first described by Swedish zoologist Carl Linnaeus in the 10th edition of Systema Naturae ( 1758 ) . German zoologist Peter Simon Pallas recognised two species – <unk> pygmaeus and Antilope pygmaea . However , both of them were found to have the same type , the royal antelope . Hence these were treated as synonyms for N. pygmaeus . 
 The generic name Neotragus is constituted by two Greek words : neo ( " new " ) and tragus ( " he @-@ goat " ) , while the specific name pygmaeus comes from the Greek <unk> ( " as small as a fist " , in reference to the diminutive size of the antelope ) . The vernacular name " royal antelope " is based on a statement made by Willem Bosman , a merchant associated with the Dutch West India Company , that the antelope was called " the king of the harts " ( " hart " means " deer " in Old English ) by locals . 
 The tribe Neotragini comprises a variety of dwarf antelopes apart from Neotragus – these include Dorcatragus ( <unk> ) , Ourebia ( oribi ) , Madoqua ( dik dik ) , Oreotragus ( klipspringer ) and Raphicerus . The tribe has been shown to be paraphyletic . A 2014 phylogenetic analysis based on cytochrome b sequences and linear skull measurements showed polyphyly in Neotragus . The royal antelope is not closely related to the other two species in its genus – suni ( N. moschatus ) and Bates 's pygmy antelope ( N. batesi ) . The latter two are closely related , while the royal antelope is likely to have had an ancestor in common with the klipspringer and duikers ( subfamily Cephalophinae ) . 
 = = Description = = 
 The royal antelope is the smallest antelope in the world ; it is the smallest ungulate and ruminant as well . Bates 's pygmy antelope is only slightly larger . The royal antelope reaches merely 25 centimetres ( 10 in ) at the shoulder and weighs 2 @.@ 5 – 3 kilograms ( 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 6 lb ) . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically 40 centimetres ( 16 in ) . A characteristic feature is the long and slender legs , with the hindlegs twice as long as the forelegs – a remarkable similarity to the hare . The thin tail , 5 – 8 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) long , is white on the inside and ends in a white tuft . The species is sexually dimorphic , with females being larger than males . Only males possess horns , these being short , smooth and spiky , measuring 2 @.@ 5 – 3 centimetres ( 1 @.@ 0 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) long and bending backward . 
 The soft coat is reddish to golden brown , in sharp contrast with the white ventral parts . A brown band runs across the chest , and a distinct rufous collar can be observed on the neck . The chin and the insides of the legs are also white . The face is characterised by large , round dark brown eyes , small translucent ears , the slim muzzle , and the large grayish pink rhinarium . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The royal antelope exhibits remarkable alertness , and consequently little is known about its behaviour . The animal will immediately seek cover if alarmed and flees as soon as the danger is very close . It can move swiftly , either by sprinting fast with the body low to the ground , or through strong leaps powered by the large , well @-@ muscled hindlegs . It can cover 2 @.@ 8 metres ( 9 @.@ 2 ft ) in a single leap , and rise as high as 55 centimetres ( 22 in ) above the ground . It is typically nocturnal ( active at night ) , though activity may also be observed during the day . It generally rests or ruminate during the day . Territories are marked with dung . The reduced size of the preorbital glands , which are used for scent @-@ marking , could indicate that marking behaviour is not very prominent in this antelope . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 A herbivore , the royal antelope prefers small quantities of fresh foliage and shoots ; fruits and fungi may be taken occasionally . Though the antelope is considered to be nocturnal , zoologist Jonathan Kingdon holds that feeding occurs throughout the day , though some foraging may also be observed at night . In comparison to Bates 's pygmy antelope , the royal antelope has a longer muzzle , broader lips , a smaller mouth and smaller cheek muscles . These features do not allow complete digestion of lignified growth . Individuals may often move into new locations foraging for fresh growth . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Like other neotragines , the royal antelope is monogamous , though polygamy has been occasionally observed . Both sexes can become sexually mature by as early as six months . Births have been reported in November and December . Typically a single , delicate young is born after an unknown gestational period , weighing 0 @.@ 8 – 1 kilogram ( 1 @.@ 8 – 2 @.@ 2 lb ) – nearly a third of an adult 's weight . Young appear the same as adults in terms of colouration . The maximum lifespan of a captive royal antelope was estimated at six years and eight months by a 1993 study . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The royal antelope prefers areas with fresh and dense growth of shrubs and other plants . It inhabits the warm , moist lowland forests prevalent in western African countries such as Côte d 'Ivoire , Ghana , Guinea , Liberia and Sierra Leone . The habitat also includes forest fringes and secondary forests . The range extends eastward from the <unk> Massif in southwestern Guinea through Sierra Leone , Liberia and Côte d ’ Ivoire to the Volta River in Ghana . The royal antelope may also be found in the region north to the forested areas of western Africa , which is marked by the interface of forest and savannah habitats . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The royal antelope has been categorised as Least Concern by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . In 1999 , Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope Specialist Group estimated the total population to be about 62 @,@ 000 , however this is likely to be an underestimate . The populations are feared to be declining due to habitat deterioration and expanding human settlement . A significant threat to the survival of this antelope is hunting for bushmeat ; it is seldom hunted in Sierra Leone and Liberia , whereas it is a major source of bushmeat in Côte d 'Ivoire . Protected areas where the royal antelope occurs include the Tai National Park , Haut <unk> Fauna and Flora Reserve and Mabi @-@ Yaya Classified Forest ( Côte d ’ Ivoire ) ; <unk> National Park and <unk> @-@ <unk> Game Production Reserve ( Ghana ) ; <unk> and <unk> Forest Reserves ( Guinea ) ; <unk> Island and Gola Rainforest National Park ( Sierra Leone ) . 
 = Empire of Brazil = 
 The Empire of Brazil was a 19th @-@ century state that broadly comprised the territories which form modern Brazil and Uruguay . Its government was a representative parliamentary constitutional monarchy under the rule of Emperors Dom Pedro I and his son Dom Pedro II . A colony of the Kingdom of Portugal , Brazil became the seat of the Portuguese colonial Empire in 1808 , when the Portuguese Prince regent , later King Dom João VI , fled from Napoleon 's invasion of Portugal and established himself and his government in the Brazilian city of Rio de Janeiro . João VI later returned to Portugal , leaving his eldest son and heir , Pedro , to rule the Kingdom of Brazil as regent . On 7 September 1822 , Pedro declared the independence of Brazil and , after waging a successful war against his father 's kingdom , was acclaimed on 12 October as Pedro I , the first Emperor of Brazil . The new country was huge but sparsely populated and ethnically diverse . 
 Unlike most of the neighboring Hispanic American republics , Brazil had political stability , vibrant economic growth , constitutionally guaranteed freedom of speech , and respect for civil rights of its subjects , albeit with legal restrictions on women and slaves , the latter regarded as property and not citizens . The empire 's bicameral parliament was elected under comparatively democratic methods for the era , as were the provincial and local legislatures . This led to a long ideological conflict between Pedro I and a sizable parliamentary faction over the role of the monarch in the government . He faced other obstacles . The unsuccessful Cisplatine War against the neighboring United Provinces of the Río de la Plata in 1828 led to the secession of the province of Cisplatina ( later to become Uruguay ) . In 1826 , despite his role in Brazilian independence , he became the king of Portugal ; he immediately abdicated the Portuguese throne in favor of his eldest daughter . Two years later , she was usurped by Pedro I 's younger brother Miguel . Unable to deal with both Brazilian and Portuguese affairs , Pedro I abdicated his Brazilian throne on 7 April 1831 and immediately departed for Europe to restore his daughter to the Portuguese throne . 
 Pedro I 's successor in Brazil was his five @-@ year @-@ old son , Pedro II . As the latter was still a minor , a weak regency was created . The power vacuum resulting from the absence of a ruling monarch as the ultimate arbiter in political disputes led to regional civil wars between local factions . Having inherited an empire on the verge of disintegration , Pedro II , once he was declared of age , managed to bring peace and stability to the country , which eventually became an emerging international power . Brazil was victorious in three international conflicts ( the Platine War , the Uruguayan War and the Paraguayan War ) under Pedro II 's rule , and the Empire prevailed in several other international disputes and outbreaks of domestic strife . With prosperity and economic development came an influx of European immigration , including Protestants and Jews , although Brazil remained mostly Catholic . Slavery , which had initially been widespread , was restricted by successive legislation until its final abolition in 1888 . Brazilian visual arts , literature and theater developed during this time of progress . Although heavily influenced by European styles that ranged from Neoclassicism to Romanticism , each concept was adapted to create a culture that was uniquely Brazilian . 
 Even though the last four decades of Pedro II 's reign were marked by continuous internal peace and economic prosperity , he had no desire to see the monarchy survive beyond his lifetime and made no effort to maintain support for the institution . The next in line to the throne was his daughter Isabel , but neither Pedro II nor the ruling classes considered a female monarch acceptable . Lacking any viable heir , the Empire 's political leaders saw no reason to defend the monarchy . After a 58 @-@ year reign , on 15 November 1889 the Emperor was overthrown in a sudden coup d 'état led by a clique of military leaders whose goal was the formation of a republic headed by a dictator , forming the First Brazilian Republic . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Independence and early years = = = 
 The territory which would come to be known as Brazil was claimed by Portugal on 22 April 1500 , when the navigator Pedro Álvares Cabral landed on its coast . Permanent settlement followed in 1532 , and for the next 300 years the Portuguese slowly expanded westwards until they had reached nearly all of the borders of modern Brazil . In 1808 , the army of French Emperor Napoleon I invaded Portugal , forcing the Portuguese royal family — the House of Braganza , a branch of the thousand @-@ year @-@ old Capetian dynasty — into exile . They re @-@ established themselves in the Brazilian city of Rio de Janeiro , which became the unofficial seat of the Portuguese Empire . 
 In 1815 , the Portuguese crown prince Dom João ( later Dom João VI ) , acting as regent , created the United Kingdom of Portugal , Brazil and the Algarves , which raised the status of Brazil from colony to kingdom . He ascended the Portuguese throne the following year , after the death of his mother , Maria I of Portugal . He returned to Portugal in April 1821 , leaving behind his son and heir , Prince Dom Pedro , to rule Brazil as his regent . The Portuguese government immediately moved to revoke the political autonomy that Brazil had been granted since 1808 . The threat of losing their limited control over local affairs ignited widespread opposition among Brazilians . José Bonifácio de Andrada , along with other Brazilian leaders , convinced Pedro to declare Brazil 's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822 . On 12 October , the prince was acclaimed Pedro I , first Emperor of the newly created Empire of Brazil , a constitutional monarchy . The declaration of independence was opposed throughout Brazil by armed military units loyal to Portugal . The ensuing war of independence was fought across the country , with battles in the northern , northeastern , and southern regions . The last Portuguese soldiers to surrender did so in March 1824 , and independence was recognized by Portugal in August 1825 . 
 Pedro I encountered a number of crises during his reign . A secessionist rebellion in the Cisplatine Province in early 1825 and the subsequent attempt by the United Provinces of the Río de la Plata ( later Argentina ) to annex Cisplatina led the Empire into the Cisplatine War : " a long , inglorious , and ultimately futile war in the south " . In March 1826 , João VI died and Pedro I inherited the Portuguese crown , briefly becoming King Pedro IV of Portugal before abdicating in favor of his eldest daughter , Maria II . The situation worsened in 1828 when the war in the south ended with Brazil 's loss of Cisplatina , which would become the independent republic of Uruguay . During the same year in Lisbon , Maria II 's throne was usurped by Prince Miguel , Pedro I 's younger brother . 
 Other difficulties arose when the Empire 's parliament , the General Assembly , opened in 1826 . Pedro I , along with a significant percentage of the legislature , argued for an independent judiciary , a popularly elected legislature and a government which would be led by the emperor who held broad executive powers and prerogatives . Others in parliament argued for a similar structure , only with a less influential role for the monarch and the legislative branch being dominant in policy and governance . The struggle over whether the government would be dominated by the emperor or by the parliament was carried over into debates from 1826 to 1831 on the establishment of the governmental and political structure . Unable to deal with the problems in both Brazil and Portugal simultaneously , the Emperor abdicated on behalf of his son , Pedro II , on 7 April 1831 and immediately sailed for Europe to restore his daughter to her throne . 
 = = = Anarchy = = = 
 Following the hasty departure of Pedro I , Brazil was left with a five @-@ year @-@ old boy as head of state . With no precedent to follow , the Empire was faced with the prospect of a period of more than twelve years without a strong executive , as , under the constitution , Pedro II would not attain his majority and begin exercising authority as Emperor until 2 December 1843 . A regency was elected to rule the country in the interim . Because the Regency held few of the powers exercised by an emperor and was completely subordinated to the General Assembly , it could not fill the vacuum at the apex of Brazil 's government . 
 The hamstrung Regency proved unable to resolve disputes and rivalries between national and local political factions . Believing that granting provincial and local governments greater autonomy would quell the growing dissent , the General Assembly passed a constitutional amendment in 1834 , called the Ato <unk> ( Additional Act ) . Instead of ending the chaos , these new powers only fed local ambitions and rivalries . Violence erupted throughout the country . Local parties competed with renewed ferocity to dominate provincial and municipal governments , as whichever party dominated the provinces would also gain control over the electoral and political system . Those parties which lost elections rebelled and tried to assume power by force , resulting in several rebellions . 
 The politicians who had risen to power during the 1830s had by then become familiar with the difficulties and pitfalls of power . According to historian Roderick J. Barman , by 1840 " they had lost all faith in their ability to rule the country on their own . They accepted Pedro II as an authority figure whose presence was indispensable for the country 's survival . " Some of these politicians ( who would form the Conservative Party in the 1840s ) believed that a neutral figure was required — one who could stand above political factions and petty interests to address discontent and moderate disputes . They envisioned an emperor who was more dependent on the legislature than the constitutional monarch envisioned by Pedro I , yet with greater powers than had been advocated at the beginning of the Regency by their rivals ( who later formed the Liberal Party ) . The liberals , however , contrived to pass an initiative to lower Pedro II 's age of majority from eighteen to fourteen . The Emperor was declared fit to rule in July 1840 . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 To achieve their goals , the liberals had allied themselves with a group of high @-@ ranking palace servants and notable politicians : the " Courtier Faction " . The courtiers were part of the Emperor 's inner circle and had established influence over him , which enabled the appointment of successive liberal @-@ courtier cabinets . Their dominance was short @-@ lived , though . By 1846 , Pedro II had matured physically and mentally . No longer an insecure 14 @-@ year @-@ old swayed by gossip , suggestions of secret plots , and other manipulative tactics , the young emperor 's weaknesses faded and his strength of character came to the fore . He successfully engineered the end of the courtiers ' influence by removing them from his inner circle without causing any public disruption . He also dismissed the liberals , who had proved ineffective while in office , and called on the conservatives to form a government in 1848 . 
 The abilities of the Emperor and the newly appointed conservative cabinet were tested by three crises between 1848 and 1852 . The first crisis was a confrontation over the illegal importation of slaves . Importing slaves had been banned in 1826 as part of a treaty with Britain . Trafficking continued unabated , however , and the British government 's passage of the Aberdeen Act of 1845 authorized British warships to board Brazilian ships and seize anyone who was found to be involved in the slave trade . While Brazil grappled with this problem , the Praieira revolt , a conflict between local political factions within Pernambuco province ( and one in which liberal and courtier supporters were involved ) , erupted on 6 November 1848 , but was suppressed by March 1849 . It was the last rebellion to occur during the monarchy , and its end marked the beginning of forty years of internal peace in Brazil . The Eusébio de Queirós Law was promulgated on 4 September 1850 giving the government broad authority to combat the illegal slave trade . With this new tool Brazil moved to eliminate the importation of slaves , and by 1852 this first crisis was over , with Britain accepting that the trade had been suppressed . 
 The third crisis was a conflict with the Argentine Confederation over ascendancy in territories adjacent to the Río de la Plata and free navigation of that waterway . Since the 1830s , Argentine dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas had supported rebellions within Uruguay and Brazil . The Empire was unable to address the threat posed by Rosas until 1850 , when an alliance was forged between Brazil , Uruguay and disaffected Argentines , leading to the Platine War and the subsequent overthrow of the Argentine ruler in February 1852 . The Empire 's successful navigation of these crises considerably enhanced the nation 's stability and prestige , and Brazil emerged as a hemispheric power . Internationally , Europeans came to see the country as embodying familiar liberal ideals , such as freedom of the press and constitutional respect for civil liberties . Its representative parliamentary monarchy also stood in stark contrast to the mix of dictatorships and instability endemic in the other nations of South America during this period . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1850s , Brazil was enjoying internal stability and economic prosperity . The nation 's infrastructure was being developed , with progress in the construction of railroads , the electric telegraph and steamship lines uniting Brazil into a cohesive national entity . After five years in office , the successful conservative cabinet was dismissed and in September 1853 , Honório Hermeto Carneiro Leão , Marquis of Paraná , chieftain of the Conservative Party , was charged with forming a new cabinet . Emperor Pedro II wanted to advance an ambitious plan , which became known as " the Conciliation " , aimed at strengthening parliament 's role in settling the country 's political disputes . 
 Paraná invited several liberals to join the conservative ranks and went so far as to name some as ministers . The new cabinet , although highly successful , was plagued from the start by strong opposition from ultraconservative members of the Conservative Party who repudiated the new liberal recruits . They believed that the cabinet had become a political machine infested with converted liberals who did not genuinely share the party 's ideals and were primarily interested in gaining public offices . Despite this mistrust , Paraná showed resilience in fending off threats and overcoming obstacles and setbacks . However , in September 1856 , at the height of his career , he died unexpectedly , although the cabinet survived him until May 1857 . 
 The Conservative Party had split down the middle : on one side were the ultraconservatives , and on the other , the moderate conservatives who supported the Conciliation . The ultraconservatives were led by the Joaquim Rodrigues Torres , Viscount of Itaboraí , Eusébio de Queirós and Paulino Soares de Sousa , 1st Viscount of Uruguai — all former ministers in the 1848 – 1853 cabinet . These elder statesmen had taken control of the Conservative Party after Paraná 's death . In the years following 1857 , none of the cabinets survived long . They quickly collapsed due to the lack of a majority in the Chamber of Deputies . 
 The remaining members of the Liberal Party , which had languished since its fall in 1848 and the disastrous Praieira rebellion in 1849 , took advantage of what seemed to be the Conservative Party 's impending implosion to return to national politics with renewed strength . They delivered a powerful blow to the government when they managed to win several seats in the Chamber of Deputies in 1860 . When many moderate conservatives defected to unite with liberals to form a new political party , the " Progressive League " , the conservatives ' hold on power became unsustainable due to the lack of a workable governing majority in the parliament . They resigned , and in May 1862 Pedro II named a progressive cabinet . The period since 1853 had been one of peace and prosperity for Brazil : " The political system functioned smoothly . Civil liberties were maintained . A start had been made on the introduction into Brazil of railroad , telegraph and steamship lines . The country was no longer troubled by the disputes and conflicts that had racked it during its first thirty years . " 
 = = = Paraguayan War = = = 
 This period of calm came to an end when the British consul in Rio de Janeiro nearly sparked a war between Great Britain and Brazil . He sent an ultimatum containing abusive demands arising out of two minor incidents at the end of 1861 and beginning of 1862 . The Brazilian government refused to yield , and the consul issued orders for British warships to capture Brazilian merchant vessels as indemnity . Brazil prepared itself for the imminent conflict , and coastal defenses were given permission to fire upon any British warship that tried to capture Brazilian merchant ships . The Brazilian government then severed diplomatic ties with Britain in June 1863 . 
 As war with the British Empire loomed , Brazil had to turn its attention to its southern frontiers . Another civil war had begun in Uruguay which pitted its political parties against one another . The internal conflict led to the murder of Brazilians and the looting of their Uruguayan properties . Brazil 's progressive cabinet decided to intervene and dispatched an army , which invaded Uruguay in December 1864 , beginning the brief Uruguayan War . The dictator of nearby Paraguay , Francisco Solano López , took advantage of the Uruguayan situation in late 1864 by attempting to establish his nation as a regional power . In November of that year , he ordered a Brazilian civilian steamship seized , triggering the Paraguayan War , and then invaded Brazil . 
 What had appeared at the outset to be a brief and straightforward military intervention led to a full @-@ scale war in South America 's southeast . However , the possibility of a two @-@ front conflict ( with Britain and Paraguay ) faded when , in September 1865 , the British government sent an envoy who publicly apologized for the crisis between the empires . The Paraguayan invasion in 1864 led to a conflict far longer than expected , and faith in the progressive cabinet 's ability to prosecute the war vanished . Also , from its inception , the Progressive League was plagued by internal conflict between factions formed by former moderate conservatives and by former liberals . 
 The cabinet resigned and the Emperor named the aging Viscount of Itaboraí to head a new cabinet in July 1868 , marking the return of the conservatives to power . This impelled both progressive wings to set aside their differences , leading them to rechristen their party as the Liberal Party . A third , smaller and radical progressive wing would declare itself republican in 1870 — an ominous signal for the monarchy . Nonetheless , the " ministry formed by the viscount of Itaboraí was a far abler body than the cabinet it replaced " and the conflict with Paraguay ended in March 1870 with total victory for Brazil and its allies . More than 50 @,@ 000 Brazilian soldiers had died , and war costs were eleven times the government 's annual budget . However , the country was so prosperous that the government was able to retire the war debt in only ten years . The conflict was also a stimulus to national production and economic growth . 
 = = = Apogee = = = 
 The diplomatic victory over the British Empire and the military victory over Uruguay in 1865 , followed by the successful conclusion of the war with Paraguay in 1870 , marked the beginning of the " golden age " of the Brazilian Empire . The Brazilian economy grew rapidly ; railroad , shipping and other modernization projects were started ; immigration flourished . The Empire became known internationally as a modern and progressive nation , second only to the United States in the Americas ; it was a politically stable economy with a good investment potential . 
 In March 1871 , Pedro II named the conservative José Paranhos , Viscount of Rio Branco as the head of a cabinet whose main goal was to pass a law to immediately free all children born to female slaves . The controversial bill was introduced in the Chamber of Deputies in May and faced " a determined opposition , which commanded support from about one third of the deputies and which sought to organize public opinion against the measure . " The bill was finally promulgated in September and became known as the " Law of Free Birth " . Rio Branco 's success , however , seriously damaged the long @-@ term political stability of the Empire . The law " split the conservatives down the middle , one party faction backed the reforms of the Rio Branco cabinet , while the second — known as the <unk> ( English : <unk> ) — were unrelenting in their opposition " , forming a new generation of ultraconservatives . 
 The " Law of Free Birth " , and Pedro II 's support for it , resulted in the loss of the ultraconservatives ' unconditional loyalty to the monarchy . The Conservative Party had experienced serious divisions before , during the 1850s , when the Emperor 's total support for the conciliation policy had given rise to the Progressives . The ultraconservatives led by Eusébio , Uruguai and Itaboraí who opposed conciliation in the 1850s had nonetheless believed that the Emperor was indispensable to the functioning of the political system : the Emperor was an ultimate and impartial arbiter when political deadlock threatened . By contrast , this new generation of ultraconservatives had not experienced the Regency and early years of Pedro II 's reign , when external and internal dangers had threatened the Empire 's very existence ; they had only known prosperity , peace and a stable administration . To them — and to the ruling classes in general — the presence of a neutral monarch who could settle political disputes was no longer important . Furthermore , since Pedro II had clearly taken a political side on the slavery question , he had compromised his position as a neutral arbiter . The young ultraconservative politicians saw no reason to uphold or defend the Imperial office . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 The weaknesses in the monarchy took many years to become apparent . Brazil continued to prosper during the 1880s , with the economy and society both developing rapidly , including the first organized push for women 's rights ( which would progress slowly over the next decades ) . By contrast , letters written by Pedro II reveal a man grown world @-@ weary with age , increasingly alienated from current events and pessimistic in outlook . He remained meticulous in performing his formal duties as Emperor , albeit often without enthusiasm , but he no longer actively intervened to maintain stability in the country . His increasing " indifference towards the fate of the regime " and his inaction to protect the imperial system once it came under threat have led historians to attribute the " prime , perhaps sole , responsibility " for the dissolution of the monarchy to the emperor himself . 
 The lack of an heir who could feasibly provide a new direction for the nation also threatened the long @-@ term prospects for the Brazilian monarchy . The Emperor 's heir was his eldest daughter , Isabel , who had no interest in , nor expectation of , becoming the monarch . Even though the Constitution allowed female succession to the throne , Brazil was still a very traditional , male @-@ dominated society , and the prevailing view was that only a male monarch would be capable as head of state . Pedro II , the ruling circles and the wider political establishment all considered a female successor to be inappropriate , and Pedro II himself believed that the death of his two sons and the lack of a male heir were a sign that the Empire was destined to be supplanted . 
 A weary Emperor who no longer cared for the throne , an heir who had no desire to assume the crown , an increasingly discontented ruling class who were dismissive of the Imperial role in national affairs : all these factors presaged the monarchy 's impending doom . The means to achieve the overthrow of the Imperial system would soon appear within the Army ranks . Republicanism had never flourished in Brazil outside of certain elitist circles , and had little support in the provinces . A growing combination of republican and Positivist ideals among the army 's junior and mid @-@ level officer ranks , however , began to form a serious threat to the monarchy . These officers favored a republican dictatorship , which they believed would be superior to the liberal democratic monarchy . Beginning with small acts of insubordination at the beginning of the 1880s , discontent in the army grew in scope and audacity during the decade , as the Emperor was uninterested and the politicians proved incapable of re @-@ establishing the government 's authority over the military . 
 = = = Fall = = = 
 The nation enjoyed considerable international prestige during the final years of the Empire and had become an emerging power in the international arena . While Pedro II was receiving medical treatment in Europe , the parliament passed , and Princess Isabel signed on 13 May 1888 , the Golden Law , which completely abolished slavery in Brazil . Predictions of economic and labor disruption caused by the abolition of slavery proved to be unfounded . Nonetheless , the end of slavery was the final blow to any remaining belief in the crown 's neutrality , and this resulted in an explicit shift of support to Republicanism by the ultraconservatives — themselves backed by rich and powerful coffee farmers who held great political , economic and social power in the country . 
 To avert a republican backlash , the government exploited the credit readily available to Brazil as a result of its prosperity to fuel further development . The government extended massive loans at favorable interest rates to plantation owners and lavishly granted titles and lesser honors to curry favor with influential political figures who had become disaffected . The government also indirectly began to address the problem of the recalcitrant military by revitalizing the moribund National Guard , by then an entity which existed mostly only on paper . 
 The measures taken by the government alarmed civilian republicans and the positivists in the military . The republicans saw that it would undercut support for their own aims , and were emboldened to further action . The reorganization of the National Guard was begun by the cabinet in August 1889 , and the creation of a rival force caused the dissidents among the officer corps to consider desperate measures . For both groups , republicans and military , it had become a case of " now or never " . Although there was no desire among the majority of Brazilians to change the country 's form of government , republicans began pressuring army officers to overthrow the monarchy . 
 They launched a coup and instituted the republic on 15 November 1889 . The few people who witnessed what occurred did not realize that it was a rebellion . Historian <unk> Besouchet noted that , " [ r ] arely has a revolution been so minor . " Throughout the coup Pedro II showed no emotion , as if unconcerned about the outcome . He dismissed all suggestions put forward by politicians and military leaders for quelling the rebellion . The Emperor and his family were sent into exile on 17 November . Although there was significant monarchist reaction after the fall of the Empire , this was thoroughly suppressed , and neither Pedro II nor his daughter supported a restoration . Despite being unaware of the plans for a coup , once it occurred and in light of the Emperor 's passive acceptance of the situation , the political establishment supported the end of the monarchy in favor of a republic . They were unaware that the goal of the coup leaders was the creation of a dictatorial republic rather than a presidential or parliamentary republic . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Parliament = = = 
 Article 2 of Brazil 's Constitution defined the roles of both the Emperor and the Assembleia Geral ( General Assembly or Parliament ) , which in 1824 was composed of 50 senators and 102 general deputies , as the nation 's representatives . The Constitution endowed the Assembly with both status and authority , and created legislative , moderating , executive and judicial branches as " delegations of the nation " with the separation of those powers envisaged as providing balances in support of the Constitution and the rights it enshrined . 
 The prerogatives and authority granted to the legislature within the Constitution meant that it could and would play a major and indispensable role in the functioning of the government — it was not just a rubber stamp . The General Assembly alone could enact , revoke , interpret and suspend laws under Article 13 of the Constitution . The legislature also held the power of the purse and was required to annually authorize expenditures and taxes . It alone approved and exercised oversight of government loans and debts . Other responsibilities entrusted to the Assembly included setting the size of the military 's forces , the creation of offices within the government , monitoring the national welfare and ensuring that the government was being run in conformity to the Constitution . This last provision allowed the legislature wide authority to examine and debate government policy and conduct . 
 Regarding matters of foreign policy , the Constitution ( under Article 102 ) required that the General Assembly be consulted about declarations of war , treaties and the conduct of international relations . A determined legislator could exploit these Constitutional provisions to block or limit government decisions , influence appointments and force reconsideration of policies . 
 During its annual four @-@ month sessions the Assembly conducted public debates . These were widely reported and formed a national forum for the expression of public concerns from all parts of the country . It was frequently a venue for expressing opposition to policies and airing grievances . Legislators enjoyed immunity from prosecution for speeches made from the floor and in the discharge of their offices . Only their own chambers within the Assembly could order the arrest of a member during his tenure . " With no actual responsibility for the actual conduct of affairs , the legislators were free to propose sweeping reforms , advocate ideal solutions , and denounce compromising and opportunistic conduct by the government . " 
 = = = Emperor and council of ministers = = = 
 The Emperor was the head of both the moderating and executive branches ( being aided by the Council of State and the Council of Ministers , respectively ) ; he had the final say and held ultimate control over the national government . He was tasked with ensuring national independence and stability . The Constitution ( Article 101 ) gave him very few avenues for imposing his will upon the General Assembly . His main recourse was the right to dissolve or extend legislative sessions . In the Senate , an emperor 's authority to appoint senators did not necessarily give him added influence since senators held their offices for life and were thus freed from government pressure once confirmed . On those occasions when the Chamber of Deputies was dissolved , new elections were required to be held immediately and the new Chamber seated . " This power was effective when held in reserve as a threat . It could not be employed repeatedly , nor would its use work to the emperor 's advantage . " 
 During the reign of Pedro I the Chamber of Deputies was never dissolved and legislative sessions were never extended or postponed . Under Pedro II , the Chamber of Deputies was only ever dissolved at the request of the President of the Council of Ministers ( Prime minister ) . There were eleven dissolutions during Pedro II 's reign and , of these , ten occurred after consultation with the Council of State , which was beyond what was required by the Constitution . A Constitutional balance of power existed between the General Assembly and the executive branch under the Emperor . The legislature could not operate alone and the monarch could not force his will upon the Assembly . The system functioned smoothly only when both Assembly and Emperor acted in a spirit of cooperation for the national good . 
 A new element was added when the office of " President of the Council of Ministers " was officially created in 1847 — although it had existed in practice since 1843 . The president of the Council owed his position to both his party and to the Emperor and these could sometimes come into conflict . 19th @-@ century abolitionist leader and historian Joaquim Nabuco said that the " President of the Council in Brazil was no Russian Chancellor , Sovereign 's creature , nor a British Prime Minister , made only by the trust of the [ House of ] Commons : the delegation of the Crown was to him as necessary and important as the delegation of the Chamber , and , to exert with safety his functions , he had to dominate the caprice , the oscillations and ambitions of the Parliament , as well as to preserve always unalterable the favor , the good will of the emperor . " 
 = = = Provincial and local government = = = 
 When enacted in 1824 , the Imperial Constitution created the Conselho Geral de Província ( Provincial General Council ) , the legislature of the provinces . This council was composed of either 21 or 13 elected members , depending on the size of a province 's population . All " resolutions " ( laws ) created by the councils required approval by the General Assembly , with no right of appeal . Provincial Councils also had no authority to raise revenues , and their budgets had to be debated and ratified by the General Assembly . Provinces had no autonomy and were entirely subordinate to the national government . 
 With the 1834 constitutional amendment known as the Additional Act , Provincial General Councils were supplanted by the <unk> <unk> <unk> ( Provincial Legislative Assemblies ) . The new Assemblies enjoyed much greater autonomy from the national government . A Provincial Assembly was composed of 36 , 28 or 20 elected deputies , the number depending on the size of the province 's population . The election of provincial deputies followed the same procedure as used to elect general deputies to the national Chamber of Deputies . 
 The responsibilities of the Provincial Assembly included defining provincial and municipal budgets and levying the taxes necessary to support them ; providing primary and secondary schools ( higher education was the responsibility of the national government ) ; oversight and control of provincial and municipal expenditures ; and providing for law enforcement and maintenance of police forces . The Assemblies also controlled the creation and abolishment of , and salaries for , positions within provincial and municipal civil services . The nomination , suspension and dismissal of civil servants was reserved for the president ( governor ) of the province , but how and under what circumstances he could exercise these prerogatives was delineated by the Assembly . The expropriation of private property ( with due monetary compensation ) for provincial or municipal interests was also a right of the Assembly . In effect , the Provincial Assembly could enact any kind of law — with no ratification by Parliament — so long as such local laws did not violate or encroach upon the Constitution . However , provinces were not permitted to legislate in the areas of criminal law , criminal procedure laws , civil rights and obligations , the armed forces , the national budget or matters concerning national interests , such as foreign relations . 
 The provincial presidents were appointed by the national government and were , in theory , charged with governing the province . In practice , however , their power was intangible , varying from province to province based upon each president 's relative degree of personal influence and personal character . Since the national government wanted to ensure their loyalty , presidents were , in most cases , sent to a province in which they had no political , familial or other ties . In order to prevent them from developing any strong local interests or support , presidents would be limited to terms of only a few months in office . As the president usually spent a great deal of time away from the province , often traveling to their native province or the imperial capital , the de facto governor was the vice @-@ president , who was chosen by the Provincial Assembly and was usually a local politician . With little power to undermine provincial autonomy , the president was an agent of the central government with little function beyond conveying its interests to the provincial political bosses . Presidents could be used by the national government to influence , or even rig , elections , although to be effective the president had to rely on provincial and local politicians who belonged to his own political party . This interdependency created a complex relationship which was based upon exchanges of favors , private interests , party goals , negotiations , and other political maneuvering . 
 The <unk> municipal ( town council ) was the governing body in towns and cities and had existed in Brazil since the beginning of the colonial period in the 16th century . The Chamber was composed of <unk> ( councilmen ) , the number of which depended on the size of the town . Unlike the Provincial General Council , the Constitution gave town councils great autonomy . However , when the Provincial Assembly replaced the Provincial General Council in 1834 , many of the powers of town councils ( including the setting of municipal budgets , oversight of expenditures , creation of jobs , and the nomination of civil servants ) were transferred to the provincial government . Additionally , any laws enacted by the town council had to be ratified by the Provincial Assembly — but not by Parliament . While the 1834 Additional Act granted greater autonomy to the provinces from the central government , it transferred the towns ' remaining autonomy to the provincial governments . There was no office of mayor , and towns were governed by a town council and its president ( who was the councilman who won the most votes during elections ) . 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 Until 1881 , voting was mandatory and elections occurred in two stages . In the first phase voters chose electors who then selected a slate of senatorial candidates . The Emperor would choose a new senator ( member of the Senate , the upper house in the General Assembly ) from a list of the three candidates who had received the highest number of votes . The Electors also chose the General Deputies ( members of the Chamber of Deputies , the lower house ) , provincial deputies ( members of the Provincial Assemblies ) and councilmen ( members of the town councils ) without the involvement of the Emperor in making a final selection . All men over the age of 25 with an annual income of at least Rs 100 $ 000 ( or 100 @,@ 000 réis ; the equivalent in 1824 to $ 98 U.S. ) were eligible to vote in the first phase . The voting age was lowered to 21 for married men . To become an elector it was necessary to have an annual income of at least Rs 200 $ 000 . 
 The Brazilian system was relatively democratic for a period during which indirect elections were common in democracies . The income requirement was much higher in the United Kingdom , even after the reforms of 1832 . At the time the only nations not requiring a minimum level of income as a qualification for voting were France and Switzerland where universal suffrage was introduced only in 1848 . It is probable that no European country at the time had such liberal legislation as Brazil . The income requirement was low enough that any employed male citizen could qualify to vote . As an illustration , the lowest paid civil employee in 1876 was a janitor who earned Rs 600 $ 000 annually . 
 Most voters in Brazil had a low income . For example , in the Minas Gerais town of <unk> in 1876 , the poor constituted 70 % of the electorate . In <unk> in the province of Rio de Janeiro , the poor were 87 % of the electorate . Former slaves could not vote , but their children and grandchildren could , as could the illiterate ( which few countries allowed ) . In 1872 , 10 @.@ 8 % of the Brazilian population voted ( 13 % of the non @-@ slave population ) . By comparison , electoral participation in the UK in 1870 was 7 % of the total population ; in Italy it was 2 % ; in Portugal 9 % ; and in the Netherlands 2 @.@ 5 % . In 1832 , the year of the British electoral reform , 3 % of the British voted . Further reforms in 1867 and 1884 expanded electoral participation in the UK to 15 % . 
 Although electoral fraud was common , it was not ignored by the Emperor , politicians or observers of the time . The problem was considered a major issue and attempts were made to correct abuses , with legislation ( including the electoral reforms of 1855 , 1875 and 1881 ) repeatedly being enacted to combat fraud . The 1881 reforms brought significant changes : they eliminated the two @-@ stage electoral system , introduced direct and facultative voting , and allowed the votes of former slaves and enfranchised non @-@ Catholics . Conversely , illiterate citizens were no longer allowed to vote . Participation in elections dropped from 13 % to only 0 @.@ 8 % in 1886 . In 1889 , about 15 % of the Brazilian population could read and write , so disenfranchising the illiterate does not solely explain the sudden fall in voting percentages . The discontinuation of mandatory voting and voter apathy may have been significant factors contributing to the reduction in the number of voters . 
 = = = Armed Forces = = = 
 Under Articles 102 and 148 of the Constitution , the Brazilian Armed Forces were subordinate to the Emperor as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief . He was aided by the Ministers of War and Navy in matters concerning the Army and the Armada ( Navy ) — although the President of the Council of Ministers usually exercised oversight of both branches in practice . The ministers of War and Navy were , with few exceptions , civilians . 
 The military was organized along similar lines to the British and American armed forces of the time , in which a small standing army could quickly augment its strength during emergencies from a reserve militia force ( in Brazil , the National Guard ) . Brazil 's first line of defense relied upon a large and powerful navy to protect against foreign attack . As a matter of policy , the military was to be completely obedient to civilian governmental control and to remain at arm 's length from involvement in political decisions . 
 Military personnel were allowed to run for and serve in political office while remaining on active duty . However they did not represent the Army or the Armada , but were instead expected to serve the interests of the city or province which had elected them . Pedro I chose nine military officers as Senators and appointed five ( out of fourteen ) to the Council of State . During the Regency , two were named to the Senate and none to the Council of State ( this body was dormant during the Regency ) . Pedro II chose four officers as Senators during the 1840s , two in the 1850s and three others during the remaining years of his reign . He also appointed seven officers to be State Councilors during the 1840s and 1850s , and three others after that . 
 The Brazilian Armed Forces were created in the aftermath of Independence . They were originally composed of <unk> and Portuguese @-@ born officers and troops who had remained loyal to the government in Rio de Janeiro during the war of secession from Portugal . The Armed Forces were crucial to the successful outcomes of international conflicts faced by the Empire , starting with Independence ( 1822 – 1824 ) , followed by the Cisplatine War ( 1825 – 1828 ) , then the Platine War ( 1851 – 1852 ) , the Uruguayan War ( 1864 – 1865 ) and , finally , the Paraguayan War ( 1864 – 1870 ) . They also played a part in quelling rebellions , beginning with the Confederation of the Equator ( 1824 ) under Pedro I , followed by the uprisings during Pedro II 's early reign , such as the Ragamuffin War ( 1835 – 1845 ) , <unk> ( 1835 – 1840 ) , Balaiada ( 1838 – 1841 ) , among others . 
 The Armada was constantly being modernized with the latest developments in naval warfare . It adopted steam navigation in the 1830s , ironclad plate armor in the 1860s , and torpedoes in the 1880s . By 1889 , Brazil had the fifth or sixth most powerful navy in the world and the most powerful battleships in the western hemisphere . The Army , despite its highly experienced and battle @-@ hardened officer corps , was plagued during peacetime by units which were badly paid , inadequately equipped , poorly trained and thinly spread across the vast Empire . 
 Dissension resulting from inadequate government attention to Army needs was restrained under the generation of officers who had begun their careers during the 1820s . These officers were loyal to the monarchy , believed the military should be under civilian control , and abhorred the <unk> ( Hispanic @-@ American dictatorships ) against which they had fought . But by the early 1880s , this generation ( including commanders such as the Duke of Caxias , the Count of Porto Alegre , and the Marquis of Erval ) had died , were retired , or no longer exercised direct command . 
 Dissatisfaction became more evident during the 1880s , and some officers began to display open insubordination . The Emperor and the politicians did nothing to improve the military nor meet their demands . The dissemination of Positivist ideology among young officers brought further complications , as Positivism opposed the monarchy under the belief that a dictatorial republic would bring improvements . A coalition between a mutinous Army faction and the Positivist camp was formed and directly led to the republican coup on 15 November 1889 . Battalions and even full regiments of soldiers loyal to the Empire , who shared the ideals of the older generation of leaders , attempted to restore the monarchy . Attempts at a restoration proved futile and supporters of the Empire were executed , arrested or forcibly retired . 
 = = = Foreign relations = = = 
 Upon independence from Portugal , the immediate focus of Brazil 's foreign policy was to gain widespread international recognition . The first nation to recognize Brazilian sovereignty was the United States , in May 1825 . Other nations followed in establishing diplomatic relations over the next few years . Portugal recognized the separation in August 1825 . The Brazilian government subsequently made it a priority to establish its international borders through treaties with its neighbors . The task of securing recognized frontiers was complicated by the fact that , between 1777 and 1801 , Portugal and Spain had annulled their previous treaties setting out the borders between their American colonial empires . However , the Empire was able to sign several bilateral treaties with neighbors , including Uruguay ( in 1851 ) , Peru ( in 1851 and 1874 ) , the Republic of New Granada ( later Colombia , in 1853 ) , Venezuela ( in 1859 ) , Bolivia ( in 1867 ) and Paraguay ( in 1872 ) . By 1889 , most of its borders were firmly established . The remaining issues — including the purchase of the region of Acre from Bolivia which would give Brazil its present @-@ day configuration — were only finally resolved after the country became a republic . 
 A number of conflicts occurred between the Empire and its neighbors . Brazil experienced no serious conflicts with its neighbors to the north and west , due to the buffer of the nearly impenetrable and sparsely populated Amazonian rainforest . In the south , however , the colonial disputes inherited from Portugal and Spain over the control of the navigable rivers and plains which formed the frontiers continued after independence . The lack of mutually agreed borders in this area led to several international conflicts , from the Cisplatine War to the Paraguayan War . 
 " Brazil is , next to ourselves , the great power on the American continent " , affirmed James Watson Webb , the U.S. minister to Brazil , in 1867 . The Empire 's rise was noticed as early as 1844 by John C. Calhoun , the U.S. Secretary of State : " Next to the United States , Brazil is the most wealthy , the greatest and the most firmly established of all the American powers . " By the early 1870s , the international reputation of the Empire of Brazil had improved considerably , and it remained well @-@ regarded internationally until its end in 1889 . Christopher Columbus Andrews , an American diplomat in the Brazilian capital in the 1880s , later recalled Brazil as an " important Empire " in his memoirs . In 1871 , Brazil was invited to arbitrate the dispute between the United States and Britain which became known as the Alabama Claims . In 1880 , the Empire acted as arbiter between the United States and France over the damage caused to U.S. nationals during the French intervention in Mexico . In 1884 , Brazil was called upon to arbitrate between Chile and several other nations ( France , Italy , Britain , Germany , Belgium , Austria @-@ Hungary and Switzerland ) over damages arising from the War of the Pacific . 
 The Brazilian government eventually felt confident enough to negotiate a trade deal with the United States in 1889 , the first to be undertaken with any nation since the disastrous and exploitative trade treaty with Britain in 1826 ( canceled in 1844 ) . American historian Steven C. <unk> said that Pedro II 's " quest for a trade treaty with the United States was part of a grander strategy to increase national sovereignty and autonomy . " Unlike the circumstances of the previous pact , the Empire was in a strong position to insist on favorable trade terms , as negotiations occurred during a time of Brazilian domestic prosperity and international prestige . 
 = = Economy = = 
 = = = Currency = = = 
 The unit of currency from the Empire 's founding , and until 1942 , was the real ( " royal " in English , its plural form was réis and is reais in modern Portuguese ) , and was derived from the Portuguese real . It was usually called <unk> ( English : thousand royals ) and written as 1 $ 000 . A thousand <unk> ( 1 : 000 $ 000 ) — or one million réis — was known as <unk> de réis . One <unk> de réis was represented by the symbol Rs written before the value and by a dollar sign was written before any amounts lower than 1 @,@ 000 réis . Thus , 350 réis was written as " Rs 350 " ; 1 @,@ 712 réis as " Rs 1 $ 712 " ; and 1 @,@ 020 @,@ 800 réis was written as " Rs 1 : 020 $ 800 " . For millions , a period was used as a separator between millions , billions , trillions , etc . ( e.g. , 1 billion réis was written as " Rs 1 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 " ) . A colon functioned to separate millions from thousands , and the $ sign was inserted between thousands and hundreds ( 999 or fewer ) . 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Brazil 's international trade reached a total value of Rs 79 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 between 1834 and 1839 . This continued to increase every year until it reached Rs 472 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 between 1886 and 1887 : an annual growth rate of 3 @.@ 88 % since 1839 . The absolute value of exports from the Empire in 1850 was the highest in Latin America and triple that of Argentina which was in fourth place . Brazil would keep its high standing in exports and general economic growth until the end of the monarchy . Brazilian economic expansion , especially after 1850 , compared well with that of the United States and European nations . The national tax revenue amounted to Rs 11 @.@ 795 : 000 $ 000 in 1831 and rose to Rs 160 @.@ 840 : 000 $ 000 in 1889 . By 1858 , national tax revenues ranked as the eighth @-@ largest in the world . Imperial Brazil was , despite its progress , a country where wealth was very unequally distributed . However , for purposes of comparison , according to historian Steven C. <unk> , in the United States , " by 1890 , 80 percent of the population lived on the margin of subsistence , while 20 percent controlled almost all wealth . " 
 As new technologies appeared , and with increases in internal productivity , exports increased considerably . This made it possible to reach equilibrium in the balance of trade . During the 1820s sugar constituted about 30 % of total exports while cotton constituted 21 % , coffee 18 % and leather and skins 14 % . Twenty years later coffee would reach 42 % , sugar 27 % , leather and skins 9 % , and cotton 8 % of the total exports . This did not mean a reduction in the production of any of these items and , in fact , the opposite occurred . Growth occurred in all sectors , some more than others . In the period between 1820 and 1840 , Fausto says " Brazilian exports had doubled in volume and had tripled in nominal value " while the valuation denominated in Pounds sterling increased by over 40 % . Brazil was not the only country where agriculture played an important role on exports . Around 1890 , in the United States , by then the richest nation in the Americas , agricultural goods represented 80 % of all its exports . 
 In the 1820s , Brazil exported 11 @,@ 000 tons of cacao and by 1880 this had increased to 73 @,@ 500 tons . Between 1821 and 1825 , 41 @,@ 174 tons of sugar were exported , rising to 238 @,@ 074 tons between 1881 and 1885 . Until 1850 , rubber production was insignificant , but between 1881 and 1890 , it had reached third place among Brazilian exports . This was about 81 tons between 1827 and 1830 reaching 1 @,@ 632 tons in 1852 . By 1900 the country was exporting 24 @,@ 301 @,@ 452 tons of rubber . Brazil also exported around 3 @,@ 377 @,@ 000 tons of coffee between 1821 and 1860 while between 1861 and 1889 this reached 6 @,@ 804 @,@ 000 tons . Technological innovations also contributed to the growth of exports , in particular the adoption of steam navigation and railroads allowed for faster and more convenient cargo transportation . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Development on an immense scale occurred during this period , anticipating similar advancements in European countries . In 1850 , there were fifty factories with a total capital of Rs 7 @.@ 000 : 000 $ 000 . At the end of the Imperial period in 1889 , Brazil had 636 factories representing an annual rate of increase of 6 @.@ 74 % over the number in 1850 , and with a total capital of approximately Rs 401 @.@ 630 : 600 $ 000 ( which represents an annual growth rate in value of 10 @.@ 94 % from 1850 to 1889 ) . The " countryside echoed with the clang of iron track being laid as railroads were constructed at the most furious pace of the 19th century ; indeed , building in 1880s was the second greatest in absolute terms in Brazil 's entire history . Only eight countries in the entire world laid more track in the decade than Brazil . " The first railroad line , with only 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) of track , was opened on 30 April 1854 at a time when many European countries had no rail service . By 1868 , there were 718 kilometres ( 446 mi ) of railroad lines , and by the end of the Empire in 1889 this had grown to 9 @,@ 200 kilometres ( 5 @,@ 700 mi ) with another 9 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 5 @,@ 600 mi ) under construction making it the country with " the largest rail network in Latin America " . 
 Factories were constructed throughout the Empire in the 1880s , allowing Brazil 's cities to be modernized and " receive the benefits of gas , electrical , sanitation , telegraph and tram companies . Brazil was entering the modern world . " It was the fifth country in the world to install modern city sewers , the third to have sewage treatment and one of the pioneers in the installation of a telephone service . In addition to the foregoing improvements to infrastructure , it was also the first South American nation to adopt public electric lighting ( in 1883 ) and the second in the Americas ( behind the United States ) to establish a transatlantic telegraphic line connecting it directly to Europe in 1874 . The first domestic telegraph line appeared during 1852 in Rio de Janeiro . By 1889 , there were 18 @,@ 925 kilometres ( 11 @,@ 759 mi ) of telegraph lines connecting the country 's capital to distant Brazilian provinces such as Pará and even linking to other South American countries such as Argentina and Uruguay . 
 = = Society = = 
 = = = Demographics = = = 
 Since the second half of the 18th century , when Brazil was still a colony , the government had attempted to gather data regarding the population . However , few captaincies ( later called provinces ) collected the requested information . After independence the government instituted a commission for statistics in an 1829 decree with a mandate to hold a national census . The commission was a failure and was disbanded in 1834 . In the ensuing years , provincial governments were tasked with collecting census information , but their census reports were often incomplete or not submitted at all . In 1851 , another attempt at a nationwide census failed when rioting broke out . This was the result of the erroneous belief among Brazilians of mixed @-@ race descent that the survey was a subterfuge designed to enslave anyone having African blood . 
 The first true national census with exhaustive and broad coverage was carried out in 1872 . The small number of people and small number of towns reported by the census reveal Brazil 's enormous territory to have been sparsely populated . It showed Brazil as having a total population of 9 @,@ 930 @,@ 478 inhabitants . Estimates made by the government in prior decades showed 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 1823 and gave a figure of 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 700 in 1854 . The population was distributed across 20 provinces and the Neutral Municipality ( the Empire 's capital ) with 641 municipalities . 
