 The information regarding lists including Vespertine is adapted from Acclaimed Music , except where otherwise noted . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 " Unison " samples " Aero Deck " by Oval , from the 1994 album <unk> . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Vespertine 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Slow Dance ( song ) = 
 " Slow Dance " is a song by American recording artist Keri Hilson . Written with American singer Justin Timberlake , the song was penned while she was a guest on the British leg of Timberlake 's FutureSex / LoveShow tour . The writing team also included Johnkenum D. Spivery , as well as Timbaland protégés The Royal Court and Jim Beanz , who produced the track . The song serves as the sixth single from her debut studio album , In a Perfect World .... Giving off a psychedelic vibe and compared to 1980 's Prince ballads and Ciara slow burners , the song received generally positive reviews , complimenting its musical backdrop and vulnerable lyrical appeal . 
 Hilson originally premiered the song at her producer / mentor Polow da Don 's launch party for his record label , Zone 4 , in Atlanta in July 2007 , and later performed it several times as promoting it as In A Perfect World 's sixth single . The song was not adequately receptive in the United States , reaching forty @-@ nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . Two music videos for the song were shot , the Chris Robinson @-@ directed second version being used as the official video . The video features Hilson at getting ready and enjoying herself at a party , featuring appearances by Monica , Chris Brown , former Pussycat Dolls member Melody Thornton and Omarion , among others . She performed the song as a part of a medley at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Slow Dance " was written with Hilson alongside American recording artist Justin Timberlake , as well as Johnkenum D. Spivery and Timbaland protégés The Royal Court and Jim Beanz . According to Hilson , the songs were first in the works with fellow Timbaland collaborator Justin Timberlake in 2006 , during FutureSex / LoveSounds era , but she commented , " it was still unofficial then . The budgets hadn 't been opened up for me at that stage . " Hilson premiered the song at her producer and mentor Jamal " Polow da Don " Jones 's launch party his newly created , Interscope @-@ distributed record label , Zone 4 , in Atlanta in July 2007 . On choosing singles for In A Perfect World ... , in an interview with Digital Spy , Hilson stated , " [ Timbaland ] liked it a lot at first and said it should be a single , but just as that was about to happen he called it ' bubble bath music ' . But now he loves it again and thinks it should be a single ! He 'll really change it up on you . " The song went for adds on urban airplay formats on July 21 , 2009 . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 The down @-@ tempo R & B piece features a guitar @-@ laden background with synthesizers , and features lyrics about the physical attraction of a relationship . " Slow Dance " has been said to sound like a Ciara 's " Promise " and 1980 's Prince ballad , and described as " sparkly " and " psychedelic . " A writer for Spike called the song a " digital lullaby . " Calling the lyrical content " the ecstasy of desire with all the warmth of an alien observing life on Planet Earth " , Mikael Wood of The Los Angeles Times said the song was impeccably arranged . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters stated , that on In A Perfect World ... , songs like " Slow Dance " , " tend to provide better matches between the vocals and the music , since the backdrop keeps things simple and the lyrics don ’ t always fall into slang and unintentional irony . " Jon Caramanica of The New York Times called the song " excellent " , commenting that the song was the album 's high point . Sophie Bruce of BBC Music said the song " is laden with potential in its first Prince @-@ channelling two minutes , but loses its way completely when it breaks down into beatboxing . " Calling the album 's slow numbers a problem , and the song itself " smooth " , Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine said " Slow Dance " was " nothing more than a copy of Ciara 's " Promise . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The original music video was directed by Paul Hunter , known for his work on previous Michael Jackson and TLC clips . However , for unknown reasons , the video was scrapped , and Hilson re @-@ shot a clip for the video with " Knock You Down " and " Number One " director Chris Robinson . Robinson told Rap @-@ Up , " Keri Hilson has a great personality and is a real girl . That ’ s what we want to get across . " He also talked about the premise and plot of the video , stating that the video portrays Hilson as a woman who doesn 't take herself seriously , commenting , 
 " It ’ s a really sexy song , but we don ’ t want to fall into the typical love , love , love R & B vibe with that ... it starts where you think , ‘ Oh , it ’ s about her and being sexy . ' She ’ s in her house and by herself , and you kind of think it could be serious , but the song drops out in the middle and her friends catch her being all sexy , basically like , ‘ What the f * * k [ sic ] are you doing ? You are not singing by yourself . ’ " 
 In an interview with That Grape Juice , when asked about the video and on the sensuality of the live performances compared to video , Hilson responded , 
 " Yeah . It is a bit of that , but it ’ s a bit toned down for the video , because you got so much censoring , I can ’ t do everything I do on stage ( laughs ) . So when people come out they ’ re probably still gonna be a bit surprised to see it live , after seeing the video . But I ’ m very pleased with the video . I love the colours and it ’ s reminiscent of the whole late 70s early 80s era in music . " 
 Chris Brown , Omarion , Monica , Melody Thornton , and Polow Da Don all appear in the video . The video begins with Hilson , dressed lavishly , arriving late to a Jeep full of the previous stated people . The clip flips back to what happened earlier that night , showing Hilson getting ready in a seductive fashion , as she chooses perfume and picks out clothes . Scenes of Hilson performing in front of a leather @-@ like wall are interspersed in between her and her friends riding down a boulevard to the club . Once she arrives to the club , she is attracted to a particular man , and subsequently performs elaborate , sensual choreography with him and other dancers , before slow dancing . VIBE said , " Keri Hilson is fine as wine . You know it . We know it . And she knows it . But for the doubters , she proves it once again with this seductive new video from In A Perfect World . " A writer for Rap @-@ Up said that Hilson , " takes it nice and slow in the video for ' Slow Dance . ' " The video ranked at number 80 on BET : Notarized Top 100 Videos of 2009 countdown . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Aside from performing it at the 2007 Zone 4 launch , Hilson performed the song on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon on September 17 , 2009 , alongside The Roots . She also performed it as a part of a medley at the 2009 Soul Train Music Awards . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Songwriting - Keri Hilson , Justin Timberlake , James Washington Johnkenum D. Spivery , Jerome Harmon , Solomon Logan 
 Production - The Royal Court 
 Recording and mixing - Marcella Araica 
 Vocal arrangement and production - Keri Hilson , Jim Beanz 
 Source 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Talbot Baines Reed = 
 Talbot Baines Reed ( 3 April 1852 – 28 November 1893 ) was an English writer of boys ' fiction who established a genre of school stories that endured into the mid @-@ 20th century . Among his best @-@ known work is The Fifth Form at St. Dominic 's . He was a regular and prolific contributor to The Boy 's Own Paper ( B.O.P. ) , in which most of his fiction first appeared . Through his family 's business , Reed became a prominent typefounder , and wrote a standard work on the subject : History of the Old English Letter Foundries . 
 Reed 's father , Charles Reed , was a successful London printer who later became a Member of Parliament ( MP ) . Talbot attended the City of London School before leaving at 17 to join the family business in Fann Street . His literary career began in 1879 , when the B.O.P. was launched . The family were staunchly Christian , pillars of the Congregational Church , and were heavily involved in charitable works . However , Reed did not use his writing as a vehicle for moralising , and was dismissive of those early school story writers who did , such as Dean Farrar . Reed 's affinity with boys , his instinctive understanding of their standpoint in life and his gift for creating believable characters , ensured that his popularity survived through several generations . He was widely imitated by other writers in the school story genre . 
 In 1881 , following the death of his father , Reed became head of the company . By then he had begun his monumental history which was published in 1887 . Along with his B.O.P. contributions Reed wrote regular articles and book reviews for his cousin Edward Baines 's newspaper , the Leeds Mercury . He was a co @-@ founder and first honorary secretary of the Bibliographical Society , and a trustee for his family 's charities . All this activity may have undermined his health ; after struggling with illness for most of 1893 , Reed died in November that year , at the age of 41 . Tributes honoured him both for his contribution to children 's fiction and for his work as the definitive historian of English typefounding . 
 = = Family background = = 
 The Reeds were descended from John Reed , a colonel in Oliver Cromwell 's army during the English Civil War . The family was based in Maiden Newton in the county of Dorset before moving to London at the end of the 18th century . Talbot Reed 's grandfather , Andrew Reed ( 1787 – 1862 ) , was a minister of the Congregational Church and the founder of several charitable institutions , including the London Orphan Asylum and a hospital for the incurably sick . He was also a hymn @-@ writer of repute ; his " Spirit Divine , attend our prayers " is still found in several 20th and 21st century hymnals . 
 Andrew Reed had five sons , the third of whom , Charles Reed ( 1819 – 81 ) , was apprenticed in 1836 to a wool manufacturer in Leeds , Yorkshire , where he also became secretary of the local Sunday School union . Through this work he met Edward Baines , proprietor of the Leeds Mercury one of the town 's two MPs . The Baines family had a strong tradition of public and political service ; both of Edward Baines 's sons followed him into Parliament , the elder , Matthew Talbot Baines , eventually reaching Cabinet rank . Charles Reed was attracted to the youngest Baines offspring , a daughter , Margaret , whom he married in 1844 . By this time Charles had left the wool industry and returned to London , where he founded his first business , a printing firm . 
 The family settled in the London district of Hackney where Charles was active in public and religious affairs , with a particular interest in education . He became a member , and later chairman , of the London School Board , and helped to establish the Congregational Church Board of Education . From 1868 to 1881 he was one of Hackney 's MPs . He also raised a family of five sons , the third of whom , named Talbot Baines after his distinguished uncle , was born at the family home , " <unk> " , on 3 April 1852 . Over the years , Charles expanded his business interests , and by 1861 had prospered sufficiently to acquire the <unk> type foundry in Fann Street , City of London . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Talbot Baines Reed grew up in a happy household , dominated by Charles Reed 's religious zeal and his belief that hardy outdoor sports were the best means for bringing up boys . This atmosphere of " simple , cheerful Puritanism " was , according to a friend , " eminently suited to [ Talbot 's ] character and disposition " . Talbot began his education at Priory House School , Clapton , and in 1864 became a day pupil at the City of London School , a relatively new foundation that had been established in Milk Street , Cheapside , in 1837 . Talbot 's eldest brother , Charles junior , had been notably successful there , as captain of the school and a leading figure in its cricket and football teams . Talbot soon made his own mark , particularly on the sporting field ; a contemporary describes him as " full of life and vigour ... his strength of muscle , length of limb , boldness of attack , absolute fearlessness and perfection of nerve always made him conspicuous " . Reed later showed some reticence about his academic achievements , asserting that one of his few successes was winning " the comfortable corner desk near the fire " , reserved for the bottom place in Mathematics . In fact , in keeping with the school 's record of producing men of letters and language scholars , Reed had excellent results in French , Greek and Latin , and had competed for the Sixth Form Latin prize . One of his school contemporaries was Herbert Henry Asquith , the future British prime minister . 
 Despite evidence of considerable academic ability , Reed did not follow his brother Charles , who went on from the school to Trinity College , Cambridge . Instead , in 1869 , Reed left the school to join the family firm at the Fann Street foundry , beginning a lifelong association with the printing trade . He found time , however , to pursue many other interests , physical , artistic and intellectual . Twice he walked the 53 miles ( 85 km ) from London to Cambridge , each time leaving on Friday afternoon and arriving at St John 's College for breakfast on Saturday . Reed was a competent swimmer , and won a Royal Humane Society medal for saving a cousin from drowning in rough seas . He was an accomplished pianist , a skilful pen @-@ and @-@ ink illustrator , and had an engaging style of writing . These artistic talents were put to service in the production of a family magazine , The <unk> Chronicle , which Reed edited ( and largely wrote ) from the mid @-@ 1870s . The magazine circulated only among the extended Reed family , and included serious articles ( " Is total abstinence a moral duty ? " ) alongside comic verses and cartoons . 
 = = Printer and typefounder = = 
 Although Reed would later jokingly describe his work for the family firm as " drudgery " , in reality he was enthusiastic about the trade and worked hard to master it . Early in his career he met the leading printer and bibliographer of the day , William Blades , from whom he acquired a lasting fascination with the printing and typefounding crafts . While still relatively inexperienced , Reed was asked by Blades to help organise a major exhibition to mark the 400th anniversary of William Caxton 's printing of The Game and <unk> of the <unk> . This was thought to be the first book printed in England , in 1474 , and the exhibition was originally planned for 1874 . However , Blades 's research indicated that Caxton 's first printing in England had been in 1477 , of a different book : The <unk> and Notable Wise Sayings of the Philosophers , so the quatercentenary celebrations were rescheduled accordingly . The exhibition was held during the summer of 1877 , at South Kensington , and was opened by William Gladstone , the former and future prime minister . It included displays of Caxton 's printed works , together with many examples of printing through the intervening years . Reed contributed an essay to the exhibition 's catalogue , entitled " The Rise and Progress of Type @-@ Founding in England " . The exhibition was supported by leading London printers , publishers , booksellers , antiquarians and scholars , and attracted wide public interest . 
 Sir Charles Reed , who had been knighted on Gladstone 's recommendation in 1874 , died in 1881 . A few months later , Talbot 's elder brother Andrew retired from the business because of ill health . As a result , at the age of 29 , Talbot became the sole managing director of the Fann Street business , a position he held until his death . In 1878 , in response to a suggestion from Blades , Reed began work on a general history of typefounding in England , a task which occupied him intermittently for nearly ten years . Published by Elliot Stock in 1887 under the title of History of the Old English Letter Foundries , the book became a standard text on the subject . Its 21 chapters are illustrated throughout with examples of typefaces and symbols used for four centuries . The text is presented in modern style , but with the initial letter of each chapter ornately drawn from a 1544 pattern . Also in 1887 Reed produced a revised and enlarged specimen book for the Fann Street foundry , with many new typeface designs and artistic ornamentations . 
 As an acknowledged expert in his field , Reed was in demand as a lecturer to learned societies . Among the papers he delivered were " Old and New Fashions in Typography " , to the Royal Society of Arts in 1890 , and " On the Use and Classification of a Typographical Library " , to the Library Association in 1892 . After Blades 's death in 1890 , Reed prepared his former mentor 's unfinished Pentateuch of Printing for publication , adding a long memorial tribute to Blades . 
 = = The Boy 's Own Paper = = 
 The Reed family had longstanding connections with The Religious Tract Society ( RTS ) , which had been founded in 1799 to publish and disseminate material of a Christian nature . Talbot 's grandfather Andrew Reed , at the age of 12 , had attended the Society 's inaugural meeting ; Charles Reed and his eldest son , Charles junior , were both active members . On 23 July 1878 an RTS subcommittee ( including both Charles Reeds ) recommended the publication of " a magazine for Boys to be issued weekly at a price of one penny " . Although the Society had frequently expressed a desire to counter the " cheap and sensational " magazines that were read by young people , its main committee was initially hesitant about this proposal , fearing its financial implications . Finally , however , it felt obliged " to attempt an enterprise from which others shrank " . Thereafter the committee moved swiftly , and the first issue of the new publication , The Boy 's Own Paper , was on sale on 18 January 1879 . 
 Although at that time his writing experience was limited , Reed was asked by his father and brother to contribute to the new venture , a challenge he accepted enthusiastically . Apart from his stories for The <unk> Chronicle , his sole prior experience of magazine writing had been an article entitled " Camping Out " , for the Edinburgh @-@ based young peoples ' magazine Morning of Life . This account of a boating excursion on the Thames had appeared in 1875 . For the first issue of the B.O.P. , Reed wrote a school story , " My First Football Match " which , accompanied by a half @-@ page illustration , appeared on the front page " by An Old Boy " . The story was very well received , and prompted demands for more about " Parkhurst " , the school where the football match was played . Reed responded with several more tales , among which were " The Parkhurst Paper Chase " and " The Parkhurst Boat Race " . 
 In the new magazine 's first year Reed was a regular contributor of articles and stories on a range of subjects , joining distinguished writers such as G. A. Henty , R.M. Ballantyne and Jules Verne . A prominent illustrator for the magazine was the artist and mountaineer Edward Whymper . Reed 's association with the B.O.P. lasted for the remainder of his life ; the magazine would be the initial publisher for almost all his subsequent output of fiction . This commitment to the B.O.P. delayed progress on his History of the Old English Letter Foundries , especially as Reed began writing regular columns and book reviews for the Leeds Mercury , now edited by his cousin , the younger Edward Baines . 
 The 1880s was a decade of growing national prosperity , and increasing numbers of families from the expanding middle classes were sending their sons to boarding schools . The B.O.P. editor , George Hutchison , felt that such schools would provide the ideal setting for stories in which a boy hero ( or heroes ) could display Christian principles and strength of character in the face of temptations , and planned to run a long serial story . Reed , who had not himself attended a boarding school , was not the obvious choice as the writer . However , the skill and imagination he had displayed in his short school stories convinced Hutchison that Reed should be given the assignment . 
 = = School stories = = 
 Reed 's first response to the request for school stories for The Boy 's Own Paper was The Adventures of a Three @-@ Guinea Watch , which ran for 19 instalments from October 1880 to April 1881 . The travels of a schoolboy 's pocket watch are charted through school , university and , finally , India at the time of the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . The school , " <unk> " , is believed to be based , like " Parkhurst " , on information Reed received from friends who had boarded at Radley . The success of the story encouraged the B.O.P. ' s editors to ask Reed to attempt a longer and more ambitious work . The result was The Fifth Form at St. Dominic 's , which became the favourite and most influential of all Reed 's stories . Extended over 38 episodes , each a self @-@ contained unit within an overall plot , this was the first of a sequence of school stories , all serialised in the B.O.P. The boarding school milieu was repeated , with a few variations , in The Willoughby Captains ( serialised 1883 – 84 ) , The Master of the Shell ( 1887 – 88 ) , The Cock @-@ House at <unk> ( 1891 ) and Tom , Dick and Harry ( 1892 – 93 ) . Reed followed the suggestion of his editors by setting My Friend Smith ( 1882 – 83 ) in a different kind of school , a " modest establishment for the backward and troublesome " . It was , however , the boarding school stories that endured and which became the standard model for school stories for many decades . All the serials were quickly issued in book form , and most were reprinted for the benefit of successive generations of boys , up to the 1950s . The model was imitated or copied by other writers for the next half century ; according to historian Isabel Quigly , " Reed was a better writer than his followers , and has been diminished by their imitations . " 
 In a biographical sketch written in 2004 , the historian Jeffrey Richards characterises Reed 's work as a mixing of the earlier school story traditions established by Dean Farrar and Thomas Hughes , crafted with a vivid readability . Reed dismissed Farrar 's Eric , or , Little by Little as a religious tract thinly disguised as a school story , and sought to produce something more " manly " . Many of the incidents and characterisations introduced by Reed in St. Dominic 's became standard elements in his subsequent stories , and in those of his imitators . Quigly lists among other recurrent features the stolen exam paper , the innocent who is wrongly accused and ultimately justified after much proud suffering , the boating accident , the group rivalries , the noble friendships . Adult characters are largely stereotypes : a headmaster known as " the Doctor " and modelled on Thomas Arnold of Rugby , " the jabbering French master ( pointed beard and two @-@ tone shoes ) " , the popular games master , the dry pedant , the generally comic domestic staff . Reed established a tradition in which the fictional boarding school was peopled by such characters and was almost invariably represented in terms of " dark passages , iron bedsteads , scratched desks , chill dormitories and cosy , shabby studies " . Quigly suggests that one reason for the success of Reed 's stories and their long @-@ lasting appeal is that they are not so much books about school as books about people . John Sime of the RTS , in a memorial tribute to Reed after his death , notes that the boys in the stories are recognisably of flesh and blood , with " just that spice of wickedness ... without which a boy is not a boy " . 
 = = Personal life and other activities = = 
 In 1876 Reed married Elizabeth Greer , the daughter of Samuel Greer , a County Court judge and former MP for the County of Londonderry in the north of Ireland . Their first child , a daughter , died in infancy , but three healthy children followed : Charles in 1879 , Margaret in 1882 and Talbot in 1886 . The connection with Ireland was of great value to Reed , and the family regularly spent annual holidays on the shores of Lough Swilly in County Donegal . 
 Reed was constantly busy ; he held the " loafer " — defined by him as " anyone who worked from nine to five and did nothing with the rest of the day " — in contempt . Alongside his heavy schedule of duties at the foundry and his prolific writing , he took his share in the supervision of the various charities founded by his grandfather Andrew Reed , and was a deacon at his local Congregational Church . In 1892 he was a co @-@ founder of the Bibliographical Society and its first honorary secretary , an office he modestly agreed to hold " pro tem in the hopes of your finding a better man " . 
 Physically active and energetic , Reed keenly followed his old school 's fortunes on the sports field , on one occasion writing anxiously to the school about its apparent loss of enthusiasm for football and cricket . As part of a busy social life he regularly attended City of London Old Boys ' reunion dinners , and was a member of two London clubs , the Savile and the Reform . In politics Reed was a Liberal , although he disagreed with Gladstone 's Irish Home Rule policy . His busy and fulfilling life was punctuated from time to time by private tragedies . The loss of his baby daughter was followed , soon after , by the death of his younger brother Kenneth , drowned with a companion in Lough Allen in County Leitrim , while exploring the River Shannon . In 1883 his elder brother , The Rev. Charles Reed , " my ' father confessor ' in times of all trouble " , died after a fall during a walking holiday in Switzerland . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Reed generally enjoyed vigorous good health . However , early in 1893 there were signs that his workload was taking its toll . In January of that year he left London for an extended stay in Ireland , hoping to recover his energies . He returned to his various duties in May , but later in the summer became seriously ill with what was identified at the time as " consumption " , and was probably pulmonary tuberculosis . He relinquished the secretaryship of the Bibliographical Society and returned to Ireland where , though largely confined indoors , he continued writing his regular weekly column for the Leeds Mercury and finished his final novel , <unk> . Letters to friends at home indicated that he remained in good spirits and was hopeful of recovery . However , his condition worsened , and he was advised to return home for urgent medical treatment . Back in London he wrote his last piece for the Mercury , a review of Seventy Years of Irish Life by W.R. Le Fanu . He died at his home in Highgate on 28 November 1893 , aged 41 , and was buried in <unk> Park Cemetery , by the side of his father and grandfather . 
 Among the many tributes paid to Reed , Joseph Sime spoke for " the boys of the English @-@ speaking world " who had " lost one of their best friends " . Sime wrote of Reed 's particular empathy with the young : " He possessed in himself the healthy freshness of heart of boyhood ... and could place himself sympathetically at the boy 's standpoint in life . " Reed 's grave was visited by boys and their families for many years . He died a wealthy man , although long before his death he had transferred the copyright of his books to the Religious Tract Society for a nominal sum . 
 Reed 's regular readers included the young P.G. Wodehouse , who particularly loved the school stories . Wodehouse 's literary biographer Benny Green , while excoriating Reed as a " hereditary prig " and a " religious huckster " , accepts that he influenced Wodehouse , and cites in particular The Willoughby Captains . Green also echoes Quigly in asserting that none of Reed 's successors could match his abilities as a storyteller . Quigly summarises Reed 's legacy to future school story writers : he established a genre by " alter [ ing ] the shapeless , long @-@ winded , garrulous and moralistic school story " into something popular and readable , a convention followed by all his successors . Reed himself expressed the guiding principles of his life in a letter addressed to a new Boys ' Club in Manchester : " The strong fellows should look after the weak , the active must look after the lazy , the merry must cheer up the dull , the sharp must lend a helping hand to the <unk> . Pull together in all your learning , playing and praying . " 
 The grave in <unk> Park was eventually surmounted by a memorial stone in the style of a Celtic cross . Reed 's biographer , the printing executive and historian Stanley Morison , suggests that Reed 's legacy is his History of the Old English Letter Foundries , while Jack Cox , historian of the <unk> , asserts that the school stories first serialised in the magazine are the writer 's true memorial . 
 After Reed 's death , Elizabeth Reed agreed that his considerable personal library should be given to the St Bride Foundation Institute , whose collection of typographic literature included the library of Reed 's early mentor , William Blades . This collection now forms part of the St Bride Library , The books and collection of Reed 's company , the Fann Street Foundry , went to first its later purchaser Stephenson Blake and then to the Type Museum collection . 
 = = = Fiction = = = 
 The Adventures of a Three Guinea Watch Serialised in B.O.P. 1880 – 81 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1883 . 
 The Fifth Form at St. Dominic 's Serialised in B.O.P. 1881 – 82 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1887 . 
 My Friend Smith Serialised in B.O.P. 1882 – 83 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1889 . 
 The Willoughby Captains Serialised in B.O.P. 1883 – 84 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1887 . 
 Reginald Cruden ; A Tale of City Life Serialised in B.O.P. 1885 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1903 . 
 Follow My Leader , or , The Boys of Templeton First published in book form by Cassell & Co . , London , 1885 . 
 A Dog With a Bad Name Serialised in B.O.P. 1886 – 87 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1894 . 
 The Master of the Shell Serialised in B.O.P. 1887 – 88 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1901 . 
 Sir <unk> Serialised in B.O.P. 1889 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1889 . 
 Roger <unk> , Minor First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1891 . 
 The Cock @-@ House at <unk> Serialised in B.O.P. 1891 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1893 . 
 Tom , Dick and Harry Serialised in B.O.P. 1892 – 93 . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1894 . 
 <unk> First published in book form by T. Nelson and Sons Ltd , London , 1895 . 
 Parkhurst Boys and Other Stories of School Life First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1914 . 
 <unk> and other stories 15 assorted short stories . First published in book form by The Religious Tract Society , London , 1917 . 
 = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = 
 A History of the Old English Letter Foundries First published by Elliot Stock , London , 1887 ; reprinted in 1952 with editing by A.F. Johnson and Stanley Morison . 
 The Pentateuch of Printing Main text by William Blades . Edited for publication by Talbot Baines Reed , with a memoir of Blades . First published by Elliot Stock , London . 1891 . 
 = <unk> argument = 
 The teleological or physico @-@ theological argument , also known as the argument from design , or intelligent design argument is an argument for the existence of God or , more generally , for an intelligent creator " based on perceived evidence of deliberate design in the natural or physical world " . It is historically closely associated with the concept of Natural Theology . 
 The earliest recorded versions of this argument are associated with Socrates in ancient Greece , although it has been argued that he was taking up an older argument . Plato , his student , and Aristotle , Plato 's student , developed complex approaches to the proposal that the cosmos has an intelligent cause , but it was the Stoics who , under their influence , " developed the battery of creationist arguments broadly known under the label ' The Argument from Design ' " . 
 Socratic philosophy influenced the development of the Abrahamic religions in many ways , and the teleological argument has a long association with them . In the Middle Ages , Islamic theologians such as Al Ghazali used the argument , although it was rejected as unnecessary by Quranic literalists , and as unconvincing by many Islamic philosophers . Later , the teleological argument was accepted by Saint Thomas Aquinas and included as the fifth of his " Five Ways " of proving the existence of God . In early modern England clergymen such as William Turner and John Ray were well @-@ known proponents . In the early 18th century , William Derham published his Physico @-@ Theology , which gave his " demonstration of the being and attributes of God from his works of creation " . Later , William Paley , in his 1802 work on natural theology , published a prominent presentation of the design argument with his version of the watchmaker analogy and the first use of the phrase " argument from design " . 
 From the beginning , there have been numerous criticisms of the different versions of the teleological argument , and responses to its challenge to the claims against non @-@ teleological natural science . Especially important were the general logical arguments made by David Hume in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion , published 1779 , and the explanation of biological complexity given in Charles Darwin 's Origin of Species , published in 1859 . Since the 1960s , Paley 's arguments , including the words " intelligent design " , have been influential in the development of a creation science movement , especially the form known as the intelligent design movement , which not only uses the teleological argument to argue against the modern Darwinian understanding of evolution , but also makes the philosophical claim that it can provide a basis for scientific proof of the divine origin of biological species . 
 Also starting already in classical Greece , two approaches to the teleological argument developed , distinguished by their understanding of whether the natural order was literally created or not . The non @-@ creationist approach starts most clearly with Aristotle , although many thinkers , such as the Neoplatonists , believed it was already intended by Plato . This approach is not creationist in a simple sense , because while it agrees that a cosmic intelligence is responsible for the natural order , it rejects the proposal that this requires a " creator " to physically make and maintain this order . The Neoplatonists did not find the teleological argument convincing , and in this they were followed by medieval philosophers such as Al @-@ Farabi and Avicenna . Later , Averroes and Thomas Aquinas considered the argument acceptable , but not necessarily the best argument . 
 In contrast to the approach of such philosophers and theologians , the intelligent design movement makes a creationist claim for an intelligence that intervenes in the natural order to make certain changes occur in nature . 
 = = History = = 
 While the concept of an intelligence behind the natural order is ancient , a rational argument that concludes that we can know that the natural world has a designer , or a creating intelligence which has human @-@ like purposes , appears to have begun with classical philosophy . Religious thinkers in Judaism , Hinduism , Confucianism , Islam and Christianity also developed versions of the teleological argument . Later , variants on the argument from design were produced in Western philosophy and by Christian fundamentalism . 
 = = = Classical philosophy = = = 
 = = = = Socrates and the pre @-@ Socratics = = = = 
 The argument from intelligent design appears to have begun with Socrates , although the concept of a cosmic intelligence is older and David Sedley has argued that Socrates was developing an older idea , citing Anaxagoras of Clazomenae , born about 500 BC , as a possible earlier proponent . The proposal that the order of nature showed evidence of having its own human @-@ like " intelligence " goes back to the origins of Greek natural philosophy and science , and its attention to the orderliness of nature , often with special reference to the revolving of the heavens . Anaxagoras is the first person who is definitely known to have explained such a concept using the word " nous " ( which is the original Greek term that leads to modern English " intelligence " via its Latin and French translations ) . Aristotle reports an earlier philosopher from Clazomenae named <unk> who had taken a similar position . Amongst Pre @-@ Socratic philosophers before Anaxagoras , other philosophers had proposed a similar intelligent ordering principle causing life and the rotation of the heavens . For example Empedocles , like Hesiod much earlier , described cosmic order and living things as caused by a cosmic version of love , and Pythagoras and Heraclitus attributed the cosmos with " reason " ( logos ) . In his <unk> <unk> Plato has Socrates speak of this as a tradition , saying that " all philosophers agree — whereby they really exalt themselves — that mind ( nous ) is king of heaven and earth . Perhaps they are right . " and later states that the ensuing discussion " confirms the utterances of those who declared of old that mind ( nous ) always rules the universe " . 
 Xenophon 's report in his Memorabilia might be the earliest clear account of an argument that there is evidence in nature of intelligent design . The word traditionally translated and discussed as " design " is <unk> and Socrates is reported by Xenophon to have pressed doubting young men to look at things in the market , and consider whether they could tell which things showed evidence of <unk> , and which seemed more to be by blind chance , and then to compare this to nature and consider whether it could be by blind chance . In Plato 's Phaedo , Socrates is made to say just before dying that his discovery of Anaxagoras ' concept of a cosmic nous as the cause of the order of things , was an important turning point for him . But he also expressed disagreement with Anaxagoras ' understanding of the implications of his own doctrine , because of Anaxagoras ' materialist understanding of causation . Socrates complained that Anaxagoras restricted the work of the cosmic nous to the beginning , as if it were uninterested and all events since then just happened because of causes like air and water . Socrates , on the other hand , apparently insisted that the demiurge must be " loving " , particularly concerning humanity . ( In this desire to go beyond Anaxagoras and make the cosmic nous a more active manager , Socrates was apparently preceded by Diogenes of Apollonia . ) 
 = = = = Plato and Aristotle = = = = 
 Plato 's Timaeus is presented as a description of someone who is explaining a " likely story " in the form of a myth , and so throughout history commentators have disagreed about which elements of the myth can be seen as the position of Plato . Sedley nevertheless calls it " the creationist manifesto " and points out that although some of Plato 's followers denied that he intended it , in classical times writers such as Aristotle , Epicurus , the Stoics and Galen all understood Plato as proposing the world originated in an " intelligent creative act " . Plato has a character explain the concept of a " demiurge " with supreme wisdom and intelligence as the creator of the cosmos in his work . 
 Plato 's teleological perspective is also built upon the analysis of a priori order and structure in the world that he had already presented in The Republic . The story does not propose creation ex nihilo ; rather , the demiurge made order from the chaos of the cosmos , imitating the eternal Forms . 
 Plato 's world of eternal and unchanging Forms , imperfectly represented in matter by a divine Artisan , contrasts sharply with the various mechanistic <unk> , of which atomism was , by the 4th century at least , the most prominent ... This debate was to persist throughout the ancient world . <unk> mechanism got a shot in the arm from Epicurus ... while the Stoics adopted a divine teleology ... The choice seems simple : either show how a structured , regular world could arise out of undirected processes , or inject intelligence into the system . 
 Plato 's student and friend Aristotle ( c . 384 – 322 BC ) , continued the Socratic tradition of criticising natural scientists such as Democritus who sought ( as in modern science ) to explain everything in terms of matter and chance motion . He was very influential in the future development of classical creationism , but was not a straightforward " creationist " because he required no creation interventions in nature , meaning he " insulated god from any requirement to intervene in nature , either as creator or as administrator " . Instead of direct intervention by a creator it is " scarcely an exaggeration to say that for Aristotle the entire functioning of the natural world , as also the heavens , is ultimately to be understood as a shared striving towards godlike actuality " . And whereas the myth in the Timaeus suggests that all living things are based on one single paradigm , not one for each species , and even tells a story of " devolution " whereby other living things devolved from humans , it was Aristotle who presented the influential idea that each type of normal living thing must be based on a fixed paradigm or form for that species . 
 Aristotle felt that biology was a particularly important example of a field where materialist natural science ignored information which was needed in order to understand living things well . For example birds use wings for the purpose of flight . Therefore the most complete explanation in regard to the natural , as well as the artificial , is for the most part teleological . In fact , proposals that species had changed by chance survival of the fittest , similar to what is now called " natural selection " , were already known to Aristotle , and he rejected these with the same logic . He conceded that monstrosities ( new forms of life ) could come about by chance , but he disagreed with those who ascribed all nature purely to chance because he believed science can only provide a general account of that which is normal , " always , or for the most part " . The distinction between what is normal , or by nature , and what is " accidental " , or not by nature , is important in Aristotle 's understanding of nature . As pointed out by Sedley , " Aristotle is happy to say ( Physics II 8 , <unk> @-@ b4 ) without the slightest fear of blasphemy , crafts make occasional mistakes ; therefore , by analogy , so can nature " . According to Aristotle the changes which happen by nature are caused by their " formal causes " , and for example in the case of a bird 's wings there is also a final cause which is the purpose of flying . He explicitly compared this to human technology : 
 If then what comes from art is for the sake of something , it is clear that what come from nature is too [ ... ] This is clear most of all in the other animals , which do nothing by art , inquiry , or deliberation ; for which reason some people are completely at a loss whether it is by intelligence or in some other way that spiders , ants , and such things work . [ ... ] It is absurd to think that a thing does not happen for the sake of something if we do not see what sets it in motion deliberating . [ ... ] This is most clear when someone practices medicine himself on himself ; for nature is like that . 
 The question of how to understand Aristotle 's conception of nature having a purpose and direction something like human activity is controversial in the details . Martha Nussbaum for example has argued that in his biology this approach was practical and meant to show nature only being analogous to human art , explanations of an organ being greatly informed by knowledge of its essential function . Nevertheless , Nussbaum 's position is not universally accepted . In any case , Aristotle was not understood this way by his followers in the Middle Ages , who saw him as consistent with monotheistic religion and a teleological understanding of all nature . Consistent with the medieval interpretation , in his Metaphysics and other works Aristotle clearly argued a case for their being one highest god or " prime mover " which was the ultimate cause , though specifically not the material cause , of the eternal forms or natures which cause the natural order , including all living things . And he clearly refers to this entity having an intellect that humans somehow share in , which helps humans see the true natures or forms of things without relying purely on sense perception of physical things , including living species . This understanding of nature , and Aristotle 's arguments against materialist understandings of nature , were very influential in the Middle Ages in Europe . The idea of fixed species remained dominant in biology until Darwin , and a focus upon biology is still common today in teleological criticisms of modern science . 
 = = = = Roman era = = = = 
 It was the Stoics who " developed the battery of creationist arguments broadly known under the label " The Argument from Design " " . Cicero ( c . 106 – c . 43 BC ) reported the teleological argument of the Stoics in De Natura Deorum ( On the Nature of the Gods ) Book II , which includes an early version of the watchmaker analogy , which was later developed by William Paley . 
 When you see a sundial or a water @-@ clock , you see that it tells the time by design and not by chance . How then can you imagine that the universe as a whole is devoid of purpose and intelligence , when it embraces everything , including these artifacts themselves and their artificers ? 
 Another very important classical supporter of the teleological argument was Galen , whose compendious works were one of the major sources of medical knowledge until modern times , both in Europe and in Moslem lands . He was not a Stoic , but like them he looked back to the Socratics and was constantly engaged in arguing against atomists such as the Epicureans . Unlike Aristotle ( who was however a major influence upon him ) , and unlike the Neoplatonists , he believed there was really evidence for something literally like the " demiurge " found in Plato 's Timaeus , which worked physical upon nature . In works such as especially his On the <unk> of Parts he explained evidence for it in the complexity of animal construction . His work shows " early signs of contact and contrast between the pagan and the Judaeo @-@ Christian tradition of creation " , criticizing the account found in the Bible . " Moses , he suggests , would have contented himself with saying that God ordered the eyelashes not to grow and that they obeyed . In contrast to this , the Platonic tradition 's <unk> is above all else a technician . " Surprisingly , neither Aristotle nor Plato are however considered by Galen as the best writer on this subject , but Xenophon . Galen shared with Xenophon a scepticism of the value of books about most speculative philosophy , except for inquiries such as whether there is " something in the world superior in power and wisdom to man " . This he saw as having an everyday importance , a usefulness for living well . He also asserted that Xenophon was the author who reported the real position of Socrates , including his aloofness from many types of speculative science and philosophy . 
 Galen 's connection of the teleological argument to discussions about the complexity of living things , and his insistence that this is possible for a practical scientist , foreshadows some aspects of modern uses of the teleological argument . 
 = = = Medieval philosophy and theology = = = 
 = = = = Late classical Christian writers = = = = 
 As an appeal to general revelation , Paul the Apostle ( AD 5 @-@ 67 ) , argues in Romans 1 : 18 @-@ 20 [ 1 : 18 @-@ 20 ] , that because it has been made plain to all from what has been created in the world , it is obvious that there is a God . 
 Marcus Minucius Felix ( c. late 2nd to 3rd century ) , an Early Christian writer , argued for the existence of God based on the analogy of an ordered house in his The Orders of Minucius Felix : " Supposing you went into a house and found everything neat , orderly and well @-@ kept , surely you would assume it had a master , and one much better than the good things , his belongings ; so in this house of the universe , when throughout heaven and earth you see the marks of foresight , order and law , may you not assume that the lord and author of the universe is fairer than the stars themselves or than any portions of the entire world ? " 
 Augustine of Hippo ( AD 354 – 430 ) in The City of God mentioned the idea that the world 's " well @-@ ordered changes and movements " , and " the fair appearance of all visible things " was evidence for the world being created , and " that it could not have been created save by God " . 
 = = = = Islamic philosophy = = = = 
 Early Islamic philosophy played an important role in developing the philosophical understandings of God among Jewish and Christian thinkers in the Middle Ages , but concerning the teleological argument one of the lasting effects of this tradition came from its discussions of the difficulties which this type of proof has . Various forms of the argument from design have been used by Islamic theologians and philosophers from the time of the early <unk> theologians in the 9th century , although it is rejected by fundamentalist or literalist schools , for whom the mention of God in the Qu 'ran should be sufficient evidence . The argument from design was also seen as an unconvincing <unk> by the early Islamic philosopher Al @-@ Farabi , who instead took the " <unk> " approach of the Neoplatonists such as Plotinus , whereby nature is rationally ordered , but God is not like a craftsman who literally manages the world . Later , Avicenna was also convinced of this , and proposed instead a cosmological argument for the existence of God . 
 The argument was however later accepted by both the Aristotelian philosopher Averroes ( Ibn <unk> ) and his great anti @-@ philosophy opponent Al @-@ Ghazali . Averroes ' term for the argument was <unk> al @-@ <unk> , which can be translated as " argument from providence " . Both of them however accepted the argument because they believed it is explicitly mentioned in the Quran . Despite this , like Aristotle , the Neoplatonists , and Al @-@ Farabi , Averroes proposed that order and continual motion in the world is caused by God 's intellect . Whether Averroes was an " <unk> " like his predecessors has been a subject of disagreement and uncertainty . But it is generally agreed that what he adapted from those traditions , agreed with them about the fact that God does not create in the same way as a craftsman . 
 In fact then , Averroes treated the teleological argument as one of two " religious " arguments for the existence of God . The principal demonstrative proof is , according to Averroes , Aristotle 's proof from motion in the universe that there must be a first mover which causes everything else to move . Averroes ' position that the most logically valid proof should be physical rather than metaphysical ( because then metaphysics would be proving itself ) was in conscious opposition to the position of Avicenna . Later Jewish and Christian philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas were aware of this debate , and generally took a position closer to Avicenna . 
 = = = = Jewish philosophy = = = = 
 An example of the teleological argument in Jewish philosophy appears when the medieval Aristotelian philosopher Maimonides cites the passage in Isaiah 40 : 26 , where the " Holy One " says : " Lift up your eyes on high , and behold who hath created these things , that <unk> out their host by number : " However , Barry Holtz calls this " a crude form of the argument from design , " and that this " is only one possible way of reading the text . " He asserts that " Generally , in the biblical texts the existence of God is taken for granted . " 
 Maimonides also recalled that Abraham ( in the midrash , or explanatory text , of Genesis Rabbah 39 : 1 ) recognized the existence of " one transcendent deity from the fact that the world around him exhibits an order and design . " The midrash makes an analogy between the obviousness that a building has an owner , and that the world is looked after by God . Abraham says " Is it conceivable that the world is without a guide ? " Because of these examples , the 19th century philosopher Nachman <unk> called the argument from design " a cardinal principle of the Jewish faith . " 
 The American orthodox rabbi , Aryeh Kaplan , retells a legend about the 2nd century AD Rabbi Meir . When told by a philosopher that he did not believe that the world was created by God , the rabbi produced a beautiful poem that he claimed had come into being when a cat accidentally knocked over a pot of ink , " spilling ink all over the document . This poem was the result . " The philosopher exclaims that would be impossible : " There must be an author . There must be a scribe . " The rabbi concludes , " How could the universe ... come into being by itself ? There must be an Author . There must be a Creator . " 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Thomas Aquinas ( 1225 @-@ 1274 ) , whose writings became widely accepted within Catholic western Europe , was heavily influenced by Aristotle , Averroes , and other Islamic and Jewish philosophers . He presented a teleological argument in his Summa Theologica . In the work , Aquinas presented five ways in which he attempted to prove the existence of God : the <unk> <unk> . These arguments feature only a posteriori arguments , rather than literal reading of holy texts . He sums up his teleological argument as follows : 
 The fifth way is taken from the governance of the world . We see that things which lack knowledge , such as natural bodies , act for an end , and this is evident from their acting always , or nearly always , in the same way , so as to obtain the best result . Hence it is plain that they achieve their end , not fortuitously , but designedly . Now whatever lacks knowledge cannot move towards an end , unless it be directed by some being endowed with knowledge and intelligence ; as the arrow is directed by the archer . Therefore , some intelligent being exists by whom all natural things are directed to their end ; and this being we call God . 
 Aquinas notes that the existence of final causes , by which a cause is directed toward an effect , can only be explained by an appeal to intelligence . However , as natural bodies aside from humans do not possess intelligence , there must , he reasons , exist a being that directs final causes at every moment . That being is what we call God . 
 = = = Modernity = = = 
 = = = = Newton and Leibniz = = = = 
 Isaac Newton affirmed his belief in the truth of the argument when , in 1713 , he wrote these words in an appendix to the second edition of his Principia : 
 This most elegant system of the sun , planets , and comets could not have arisen without the design and dominion of an intelligent and powerful being . 
 This view , that " God is known from his works " , was supported and popularized by Newton 's friends Richard Bentley , Samuel Clarke and William Whiston in the Boyle lectures , which Newton supervised . Newton wrote to Bentley , just before Bentley delivered the first lecture , that : 
 when I wrote my treatise about our Systeme I had an eye upon such Principles as might work with considering men for the <unk> [ sic ] of a Deity , and nothing can rejoice me more than to find it useful for that purpose . 
 The German philosopher Gottfried Leibniz disagreed with Newton 's view of design in the teleological argument . In the Leibniz – Clarke correspondence , Samuel Clarke argued Newton 's case that God constantly intervenes in the world to keep His design adjusted , while Leibniz thought that the universe was created in such a way that God would not need to intervene at all . As quoted by <unk> <unk> , Leibniz wrote : 
 According to [ Newton 's ] doctrine , God Almighty wants [ i.e. needs ] to wind up his watch from time to time ; otherwise it would cease to move . He had not it seems , sufficient foresight to make it a perpetual motion 
 Leibniz considered the argument from design to have " only moral certainty " unless it was supported by his own idea of pre @-@ established harmony expounded in his <unk> . Bertrand Russell wrote that " The proof from the pre @-@ established harmony is a particular form of the so @-@ called physico @-@ theological proof , otherwise known as the argument from design . " According to Leibniz , the universe is completely made from individual substances known as monads , programmed to act in a predetermined way . Russell wrote : 
 In Leibniz ’ s form , the argument states that the harmony of all the monads can only have arisen from a common cause . That they should all exactly synchronize , can only be explained by a Creator who pre @-@ determined their synchronism . 
 = = = = British empiricists = = = = 
 The 17th @-@ century Dutch writers <unk> and Grotius argued that the intricate structure of the world , like that of a house , was unlikely to have arisen by chance . The empiricist John Locke , writing in the late 17th century , developed the Aristotelian idea that , excluding geometry , all science must attain its knowledge a posteriori - through sensual experience . In response to Locke , Anglican Irish Bishop George Berkeley advanced a form of idealism in which things only continue to exist when they are perceived . When humans do not perceive objects , they continue to exist because God is perceiving them . Therefore , in order for objects to remain in existence , God must exist <unk> . 
 David Hume , in the mid @-@ 18th century , referred to the teleological argument in his A Treatise of Human Nature . Here , he appears to give his support to the argument from design . John Wright notes that " Indeed , he claims that the whole thrust of his analysis of causality in the Treatise supports the Design argument " , and that , according to Hume , " we are obliged ' to infer an infinitely perfect Architect . ' ” 
 However , later he was more critical of the argument in his An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding . This was presented as a dialogue between Hume and " a friend who loves sceptical paradoxes " , where the friend gives a version of the argument by saying of its proponents , they " paint in the most magnificent colours the order , beauty , and wise arrangement of the universe ; and then ask if such a glorious display of intelligence could come from a random coming together of atoms , or if chance could produce something that the greatest genius can never sufficiently admire . " 
 Hume also presented arguments both for and against the teleological argument in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion . The character Cleanthes , summarizing the teleological argument , likens the universe to a man @-@ made machine , and concludes by the principle of similar effects and similar causes that it must have a designing intelligence . 
 Look round the world : contemplate the whole and every part of it : You will find it to be nothing but one great @-@ machine , subdivided into an infinite number of lesser machines , which again admit of subdivisions to a degree beyond what human senses and faculties can trace and explain . All these various machines , and even their most minute parts , are adjusted to each other with an accuracy , which <unk> into admiration all men who have ever contemplated them . The curious adapting of means to ends , throughout all nature , resembles exactly , though it much exceeds , the productions of human contrivance ; of human design , thought , wisdom , and intelligence . Since therefore the effects resemble each other , we are led to infer , by all the rules of analogy , that the causes also resemble ; and that the Author of Nature is somewhat similar to the mind of man ; though possessed of much larger faculties , proportioned to the grandeur of the work which he has executed . By this argument a posteriori , and by this argument alone , do we prove at once the existence of a Deity , and his similarity to human mind and intelligence . 
 On the other hand , Hume 's sceptic , Philo , is not satisfied with the argument from design . He attempts a number of refutations , including one that arguably foreshadows Darwin 's theory , and makes the point that if God resembles a human designer , then assuming divine characteristics such as omnipotence and omniscience is not justified . He goes on to joke that far from being the perfect creation of a perfect designer , this universe may be " only the first rude essay of some infant deity ... the object of derision to his superiors " . 
 = = = = Derham 's natural theology = = = = 
 Starting in 1696 with his Artificial <unk> , William Derham published a stream of teleological books . The best known of these are Physico @-@ Theology , 1713 ; Astro @-@ Theology , 1714 ; and Christo @-@ Theology , 1730 . Physico @-@ Theology , for example , was explicitly subtitled " A demonstration of the being and attributes of God from his works of creation " . A natural theologian , Derham listed scientific observations of the many variations in nature , and proposed that these proved " the unreasonableness of infidelity " . At the end of the section on Gravity for instance , he writes : " What else can be concluded , but that all was made with manifest Design , and that all the whole Structure is the Work of some intelligent Being ; some Artist , of Power and Skill equivalent to such a Work ? " Also , of the " sense of sound " he writes : 
 For who but an intelligent Being , what less than an omnipotent and infinitely wise God could contrive , and make such a fine Body , such a Medium , so susceptible of every Impression , that the Sense of Hearing hath occasion for , to empower all Animals to express their Sense and Meaning to others . 
 Derham concludes : " For it is a Sign a Man is a wilful , perverse Atheist , that will impute so glorious a Work , as the Creation is , to any Thing , yea , a mere Nothing ( as Chance is ) rather than to God . A.S. Weber writes that Derham 's Physico @-@ Theology " directly influenced " William Paley 's later work . 
 The power , and yet the limitations , of this kind of reasoning is illustrated in microcosm by the history of La Fontaine 's fable of The Acorn and the Pumpkin , which first appeared in France in 1679 . The light @-@ hearted anecdote of how a doubting peasant is finally convinced of the wisdom behind creation arguably undermines this approach . However , beginning with Anne Finch 's conversion of the story into a polemic against atheism , it has been taken up by a succession of moral writers as presenting a valid argument for the proposition that " The wisdom of God is displayed in creation " . 
 = = = = Watchmaker analogy = = = = 
 The watchmaker analogy , framing the teleological argument with reference to a timepiece , dates at least back to the Stoics , who were reported by Cicero in his De Natura Deorum ( <unk> ) , using such an argument against Epicureans , whom , they taunt , would " think more highly of the achievement of Archimedes in making a model of the revolutions of the firmament than of that of nature in creating them , although the perfection of the original shows a craftsmanship many times as great as does the counterfeit " . It was also used by Robert Hooke and Voltaire , the latter of whom remarked : 
 The Universe troubles me , and much less can I think 
 That this clock exists and should have no clockmaker . 
 William Paley presented his version of the watchmaker analogy at the start of his Natural Theology ( 1802 ) . 
 [ S ] <unk> I found a watch upon the ground , and it should be inquired how the watch happened to be in that place , I should hardly think … that , for anything I knew , the watch might have always been there . Yet why should not this answer serve for the watch as well as for [ a ] stone [ that happened to be lying on the ground ] ? … For this reason , and for no other ; namely , that , if the different parts had been differently shaped from what they are , if a different size from what they are , or placed after any other manner , or in any order than that in which they are placed , either no motion at all would have been carried on in the machine , or none which would have answered the use that is now served by it . 
 According to Alister McGrath , Paley argued that " The same complexity and utility evident in the design and functioning of a watch can also be discerned in the natural world . Each feature of a biological organism , like that of a watch , showed evidence of being designed in such a way as to adapt the organism to survival within its environment . Complexity and utility are observed ; the conclusion that they were designed and constructed by God , Paley holds , is as natural as it is correct . " 
 Natural theology strongly influenced British science , with the expectation as expressed by Adam Sedgwick in 1831 that truths revealed by science could not conflict with the moral truths of religion . These natural philosophers saw God as the first cause , and sought secondary causes to explain design in nature : the leading figure Sir John Herschel wrote in 1836 that by analogy with other intermediate causes " the origination of fresh species , could it ever come under our cognizance , would be found to be a natural in contradistinction to a miraculous process " . 
 As a theology student , Charles Darwin found Paley 's arguments compelling . However , he later developed his theory of evolution in his 1859 book On the Origin of Species , which offers an alternate explanation of biological order . In his autobiography , Darwin wrote that " The old argument of design in nature , as given by Paley , which formerly seemed to me so conclusive , fails , now that the law of natural selection has been discovered " . Darwin struggled with the problem of evil of suffering in nature , but remained inclined to believe that nature depended upon " designed laws " and commended Asa Gray 's statement about " Darwin 's great service to Natural Science in bringing back to it Teleology : so that , instead of Morphology versus Teleology , we shall have Morphology wedded to Teleology . " 
 Darwin owned he was " bewildered " on the subject , but was " inclined to look at everything as resulting from designed laws , with the details , whether good or bad , left to the working out of what we may call chance " : 
 But I own that I cannot see , as plainly as others do , & as I <unk> wish to do , evidence of design & beneficence on all sides of us . There seems to me too much misery in the world . I cannot persuade myself that a beneficent & omnipotent God would have designedly created the Ichneumonidae with the express intention of their feeding within the living bodies of caterpillars , or that a cat should play with mice . Not believing this , I see no necessity in the belief that the eye was expressly designed . 
 = = = Recent proponents = = = 
 = = = = Probabilistic arguments = = = = 
 In 1928 and 1930 , FR . Tennant published his Philosophical Theology , which was a " bold endeavour to combine scientific and theological thinking " . He proposed a version of the teleological argument based on the accumulation of the probabilities of each individual biological adaptation . " Tennant concedes that naturalistic accounts such as evolutionary theory may explain each of the individual adaptations he cites , but he insists that in this case the whole exceeds the sum of its parts : naturalism can explain each adaptation but not their totality . " The Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy notes that " Critics have insisted on focusing on the cogency of each piece of theistic evidence - reminding us that , in the end , ten leaky buckets hold no more water than one . " Also , " Some critics , such as John Hick and D.H. Mellor , have objected to Tennant ’ s particular use of probability theory and have challenged the relevance of any kind of probabilistic reasoning to theistic belief . " 
 Richard Swinburne 's " contributions to philosophical theology have sought to apply more sophisticated versions of probability theory to the question of God ’ s existence , a methodological improvement on Tennant ’ s work but squarely in the same spirit . " He uses Bayesian probability " taking account not only of the order and functioning of nature but also of the ' fit ' between human intelligence and the universe , whereby one can understand its workings , as well as human aesthetic , moral , and religious experience . Swinburne writes : " the existence of order in the world confirms the existence of God if and only if the existence of this order in the world is more probable if there is a God than if there is not . ... the probability of order of the right kind is very much greater if there is a God , and so that the existence of such order adds greatly to the probability that there is a God . " Swinburne acknowledges that his argument by itself may not give a reason to believe in the existence of God , but in combination with other arguments such as cosmological arguments and evidence from mystical experience , he thinks it can . 
 While discussing Hume 's arguments , Alvin Plantinga offered a probability version of the teleological argument in his book God and Other Minds : 
 Every contingent object such that we know whether or not it was the product of intelligent design , was the product of intelligent design . 
 The universe is a contingent object . 
 So probably the universe is designed . 
 Following Plantinga , Georges Dicker produced a slightly different version in his book about Bishop Berkeley : 
 A. The world ... shows amazing teleological order . 
 B. All Objects exhibiting such order ... are products of intelligent design . 
 C. Probably the world is a result of intelligent design . 
 D. Probably , God exists and created the world . 
 The Encyclopædia Britannica has the following criticism of such arguments : 
 It can of course be said that any form in which the universe might be is statistically enormously improbable as it is only one of a virtual infinity of possible forms . But its actual form is no more improbable , in this sense , than innumerable others . It is only the fact that humans are part of it that makes it seem so special , requiring a transcendent explanation . 
 = = = = Fine @-@ tuned Universe = = = = 
 A modern variation of the teleological argument is built upon the concept of the fine @-@ tuned Universe : According to the website <unk> : " Fine @-@ tuning refers to the surprising precision of nature ’ s physical constants , and the beginning state of the Universe . To explain the present state of the universe , even the best scientific theories require that the physical constants of nature and the beginning state of the Universe have extremely precise values . " Also , the fine @-@ tuning of the Universe is the apparent delicate balance of conditions necessary for human life . In this view , speculation about a vast range of possible conditions in which life cannot exist is used to explore the probability of conditions in which life can and does exist . For example , it can be argued that if the force of the Big Bang explosion had been different by 1 / 1060 or the strong interaction force was only 5 % different , life would be impossible . In terms of a teleological argument , the intuition in relation to a fine @-@ tuned universe would be that God must have been responsible , if achieving such perfect conditions is so improbable . However , in regard to fine @-@ tuning , Kenneth Himma writes : " The mere fact that it is enormously improbable that an event occurred ... by itself , gives us no reason to think that it occurred by design … As intuitively tempting as it may be ... ” Himma attributes the “ Argument from Suspicious <unk> ” , a formalization of “ the fine @-@ tuning intuition ” to George N. Schlesinger : 
 To understand Schlesinger ’ s argument , consider your reaction to two different events . If John wins a 1 @-@ in @-@ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lottery game , you would not immediately be tempted to think that John ( or someone acting on his behalf ) cheated . If , however , John won three consecutive 1 @-@ in @-@ 1 @,@ 000 lotteries , you would immediately be tempted to think that John ( or someone acting on his behalf ) cheated . Schlesinger believes that the intuitive reaction to these two scenarios is <unk> justified . The structure of the latter event is such that it … justifies a belief that intelligent design is the cause … Despite the fact that the probability of winning three consecutive 1 @-@ in @-@ 1 @,@ 000 games is exactly the same as the probability of winning one 1 @-@ in @-@ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 game , the former event … warrants an inference of intelligent design . 
 Himma considers Schlesinger ’ s argument to be subject to the same vulnerabilities he noted in other versions of the design argument : 
 While Schlesinger is undoubtedly correct in thinking that we are justified in suspecting design in the case [ of winning ] three consecutive lotteries , it is because — and only because — we know two related empirical facts about such events . First , we already know that there exist intelligent agents who have the right motivations and causal abilities to deliberately bring about such events . Second , we know from past experience with such events that they are usually explained by the deliberate agency of one or more of these agents . Without at least one of these two pieces of information , we are not obviously justified in seeing design in such cases … [ T ] he problem for the fine @-@ tuning argument is that we lack both of the pieces that are needed to justify an inference of design . First , the very point of the argument is to establish the fact that there exists an intelligent agency that has the right causal abilities and motivations to bring the existence of a universe capable of sustaining life . Second , and more obviously , we do not have any past experience with the genesis of worlds and are hence not in a position to know whether the existence of fine @-@ tuned universes are usually explained by the deliberate agency of some intelligent agency . Because we lack this essential background information , we are not justified in inferring that there exists an intelligent Deity who deliberately created a universe capable of sustaining life . 
 Antony Flew , who spent most of his life as an atheist , converted to deism late in life , and postulated " an intelligent being as involved in some way in the design of conditions that would allow life to arise and evolve . " He concluded that the fine @-@ tuning of the universe was too precise to be the result of chance , so accepted the existence of God . He said that his commitment to " go where the evidence leads " meant that he ended up accepting the existence of God . Flew proposed the view , held earlier by Fred Hoyle , that the universe is too young for life to have developed purely by chance and that , therefore , an intelligent being must exist which was involved in designing the conditions required for life to evolve . 
 Would you not say to yourself , “ Some super @-@ calculating intellect must have designed the properties of the carbon atom , otherwise the chance of my finding such an atom through the blind forces of nature would be utterly minuscule . ” Of course you would … A common sense interpretation of the facts suggests that a <unk> has <unk> with physics , as well as with chemistry and biology , and that there are no blind forces worth speaking about in nature . The numbers one calculates from the facts seem to me so overwhelming as to put this conclusion almost beyond question . 
 = = = = Creation Science and intelligent design = = = = 
 A version of the argument from design is central to both creation science and Intelligent design , but unlike Paley 's openness to deistic design through God @-@ given laws , proponents seek scientific confirmation of repeated miraculous interventions in the history of life , and argue that their theistic science should be taught in science classrooms . 
 The teaching of evolution was effectively barred from United States public school curricula by the outcome of the 1925 Scopes Trial , but in the 1960s the National Defense Education Act led to the Biological Sciences Curriculum Study reintroducing the teaching of evolution . In response , there was a resurgence of creationism , now presented as " creation science " , based on biblical literalism but with Bible quotes optional . ( " Explicit references to the Bible were optional : Morris 's 1974 book Scientific Creationism came in two versions , one with Bible quotes , and one without . " ) 
 A 1989 survey found that virtually all literature promoting creation science presented the design argument , with John D. Morris saying " any living thing gives such strong evidence for design by an intelligent designer that only a willful ignorance of the data ( II Peter 3 : 5 ) could lead one to assign such intricacy to chance . " Such publications introduced concepts central to intelligent design , including irreducible complexity ( a variant of the watchmaker analogy ) and specified complexity ( closely resembling a fine @-@ tuning argument ) . The United States Supreme Court ruling on Edwards v. Aguillard barred the teaching of " Creation Science " in public schools because it breached the separation of church and state , and a group of creationists rebranded Creation Science as " intelligent design " which was presented as a scientific theory rather than as a religious argument . 
 Scientists disagreed with the assertion that intelligent design is scientific , and its introduction into the science curriculum of a Pennsylvania school district led to the 2005 Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial , which ruled that the " intelligent design " arguments are essentially religious in nature and not science . The court took evidence from theologian John F. Haught , and ruled that " ID is not a new scientific argument , but is rather an old religious argument for the existence of God . He traced this argument back to at least Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century , who framed the argument as a syllogism : Wherever complex design exists , there must have been a designer ; nature is complex ; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer . " " This argument for the existence of God was advanced early in the 19th century by Reverend Paley " : " The only apparent difference between the argument made by Paley and the argument for ID , as expressed by defense expert witnesses Behe and Minnich , is that ID 's ' official position ' does not acknowledge that the designer is God . " 
 Proponents of the intelligent design movement such as Cornelius G. Hunter , have asserted that the methodological naturalism upon which science is based is religious in nature . They commonly refer to it as ' scientific materialism ' or as ' methodological materialism ' and conflate it with ' metaphysical naturalism ' . They use this assertion to support their claim that modern science is atheistic , and contrast it with their preferred approach of a revived natural philosophy which welcomes supernatural explanations for natural phenomena and supports theistic science . This ignores the distinction between science and religion , established in Ancient Greece , in which science can not use supernatural explanations . 
 Intelligent design advocate Michael Behe proposed a development of Paley 's watch analogy in which he argued in favour of intelligent design . Unlike Paley , Behe only attempts to prove the existence of an intelligent designer , rather than the God of classical theism . Behe uses the analogy of a mousetrap to propose irreducible complexity : he argues that if a mousetrap loses just one of its parts , it can no longer function as a mousetrap . He argues that irreducible complexity in an object guarantees the presence of intelligent design . Behe claims that there are instances of irreducible complexity in the natural world and that parts of the world must have been designed . This negative argument against step by step evolution ignores longstanding evidence that evolution proceeds through changes of function from preceding systems . The specific examples Behe proposes have been shown to have simpler homologues which could act as precursors with different functions . His arguments have been rebutted , both in general and in specific cases by numerous scientific papers . In response , Behe and others , " ironically , given the absence of any detail in their own explanation , complain that the proffered explanations lack sufficient detail to be empirically tested . " 
 = = = = " Third way " proposal = = = = 
 University of Chicago geneticist James A. Shapiro , writing in the Boston Review , states that advancements in genetics and molecular biology , and " the growing realization that cells have molecular computing networks which process information about internal operations and about the external environment to make decisions controlling growth , movement , and differentiation " , have implications for the teleological argument . Shapiro states that these " natural genetic engineering " systems , can produce radical reorganizations of the " genetic apparatus within a single cell generation " . Shapiro suggests what he calls a ' Third Way ' ; a non @-@ creationist , non @-@ Darwinian type of evolution : 
 What significance does an emerging interface between biology and information science hold for thinking about evolution ? It opens up the possibility of addressing scientifically rather than ideologically the central issue so hotly contested by fundamentalists on both sides of the Creationist @-@ Darwinist debate : Is there any guiding intelligence at work in the origin of species displaying exquisite adaptations ... " 
 In his book , Evolution : A View from the 21st Century , Shapiro refers to this concept of " natural genetic engineering " , which he says , has proved troublesome , because many scientists feel that it supports the intelligent design argument . He suggests that " function @-@ oriented capacities [ can ] be attributed to cells " , even though this is " the kind of teleological thinking that scientists have been taught to avoid at all costs . " 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = Classical = = = 
 The original development of the argument from design was in reaction to atomistic , explicitly non @-@ teleological , understandings of nature . Socrates , as reported by Plato and Xenophon , was reacting to such natural philosophers . While less has survived from the debates of the Hellenistic and Roman eras , it is clear from sources such as Cicero and Lucretius , that debate continued for generations , and several of the striking metaphors used to still today such as the unseen watchmaker , and the infinite monkey theorem , have their roots in this period . While the Stoics became the most well @-@ known proponents of the argument from design , the atomistic counter arguments were refined most famously by the Epicureans . On the one hand they criticized the evidence for there being evidence of an intelligent design to nature , and the logic of the Stoics . On the defensive side , they were faced with the challenge of explaining how un @-@ directed chance can cause something which appears to be a rational order . Much this defence revolved around arguments such as the infinite monkey metaphor . Democritus , had already apparently used such arguments in the time of Socrates , saying that there will be infinite planets , and only some having an order like the planet we know . But the Epicureans refined this argument , by proposing that the actual number of types of atoms in nature is small , not infinite , making it less coincidental that after a long period of time , certain orderly outcomes will result . 
 These were not the only positions held in classical times . A more complex position also continued to be held by some schools , such as the Neoplatonists , who , like Plato and Aristotle , insisted that Nature did indeed have a rational order , but were concerned about how to describe the way in which this rational order is caused . According to Plotinus for example , Plato 's metaphor of a craftsman should be seen only as a metaphor , and Plato should be understood as agreeing with Aristotle that the rational order in nature works through a form of causation unlike everyday causation . In fact , according to this proposal each thing already has its own nature , fitting into a rational order , whereby the thing itself is " in need of , and directed towards , what is higher or better " . 
 = = = David Hume = = = 
 Louis Loeb writes that David Hume , in his Enquiry , " insists that inductive inference cannot justify belief in extended objects . " Loeb also quotes Hume as writing : 
 It is only when two species of objects are found to be constantly conjoined , that we can infer the one from the other . . . If experience and observation and analogy be , indeed , the only guides which we can reasonably follow in inference of this nature ; both the effect and cause must bear a similarity and resemblance to other effects and causes . . . which we have found , in many instances , to be conjoined with another . . . [ The proponents of the argument ] always suppose the universe , an effect quite singular and unparalleled , to be the proof of a Deity , a cause no less singular and unparalleled . 
 Loeb notes that " we observe neither God nor other universes , and hence no conjunction involving them . There is no observed conjunction to ground an inference either to extended objects or to God , as unobserved causes . " 
 Hume also presented a criticism of the argument in his Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion . The character Philo , a religious sceptic , voices Hume 's criticisms of the argument . He argues that the design argument is built upon a faulty analogy as , unlike with man @-@ made objects , we have not witnessed the design of a universe , so do not know whether the universe was the result of design . Moreover , the size of the universe makes the analogy problematic : although our experience of the universe is of order , there may be chaos in other parts of the universe . Philo argues : 
 A very small part of this great system , during a very short time , is very imperfectly discovered to us ; and do we thence pronounce decisively concerning the origin of the whole ? 
 Philo also proposes that the order in nature may be due to nature alone . If nature contains a principle of order within it , the need for a designer is removed . Philo argues that even if the universe is indeed designed , it is unreasonable to justify the conclusion that the designer must be an omnipotent , omniscient , benevolent God - the God of classical theism . It is impossible , he argues , to infer the perfect nature of a creator from the nature of its creation . Philo argues that the designer may have been defective or otherwise imperfect , suggesting that the universe may have been a poor first attempt at design . Hume also pointed out that the argument does not necessarily lead to the existence of one God : “ why may not several deities combine in contriving and framing the world ? ” ( p . 108 ) . 
 Wesley C. Salmon developed Hume 's insights , arguing that all things in the universe which exhibit order are , to our knowledge , created by material , imperfect , finite beings or forces . He also argued that there are no known instances of an immaterial , perfect , infinite being creating anything . Using the probability calculus of Bayes Theorem , Salmon concludes that it is very improbable that the universe was created by the type of intelligent being theists argue for . 
 Nancy Cartwright accuses Salmon of begging the question . One piece of evidence he uses in his probabilistic argument - that atoms and molecules are not caused by design - is equivalent to the conclusion he draws , that the universe is probably not caused by design . The atoms and molecules are what the universe is made up of and whose origins are at issue . Therefore , they cannot be used as evidence against the theistic conclusion . 
 = = = Immanuel Kant = = = 
 Referring to it as the physico @-@ theological proof , Immanuel Kant discussed the teleological argument in his Critique of Pure Reason . Even though he referred to it as " the oldest , clearest and most appropriate to human reason " , he nevertheless rejected it , heading section VI with the words , " On the impossibility of a physico @-@ theological proof " . In accepting some of Hume 's criticisms , Kant wrote that the argument " proves at most intelligence only in the arrangement of the ' matter ' of the universe , and hence the existence not of a ' Supreme Being ' , but of an ' Architect ' . " Using the argument to try to prove the existence of God required " a concealed appeal to the Ontological argument . " 
 = = = Does not prove the existence of God = = = 
 In his Traité de <unk> Voltaire observed that , even if the argument from design could prove the existence of a powerful intelligent designer , it would not prove that this designer is God . 
 ... from this sole argument I cannot conclude anything further than that it is probable that an intelligent and superior being has skillfully prepared and fashioned the matter . I cannot conclude from that alone that this being has made matter out of nothing and that he is infinite in every sense . 
 Søren Kierkegaard questioned the existence of God , rejecting all rational arguments for God 's existence ( including the teleological argument ) on the grounds that reason is inevitably accompanied by doubt . He proposed that the argument from design does not take into consideration future events which may serve to undermine the proof of God 's existence : the argument would never finish proving God 's existence . In the Philosophical Fragments , Kierkegaard writes : 
 The works of God are such that only God can perform them . Just so , but where then are the works of the God ? The works from which I would deduce his existence are not directly and immediately given . The wisdom in nature , the goodness , the wisdom in the governance of the world -- are all these manifest , perhaps , upon the very face of things ? Are we not here confronted with the most terrible temptations to doubt , and is it not impossible finally to dispose of all these doubts ? But from such an order of things I will surely not attempt to prove God 's existence ; and even if I began I would never finish , and would in addition have to live constantly in suspense , lest something so terrible should suddenly happen that my bit of proof would be demolished . 
 = = = Argument from improbability = = = 
 Richard Dawkins is harshly critical of theology , creationism and intelligent design in his book The God Delusion . In this book , he contends that an appeal to intelligent design can provide no explanation for biology because it not only begs the question of the designer 's own origin but raises additional questions : an intelligent designer must itself be far more complex and difficult to explain than anything it is capable of designing . He believes the chances of life arising on a planet like the Earth are many orders of magnitude less probable than most people would think , but the anthropic principle effectively counters skepticism with regard to improbability . For example , Fred Hoyle suggested that potential for life on Earth was no more probable than a Boeing 747 being assembled by a hurricane from the scrapyard . Dawkins argues that a one @-@ time event is indeed subject to improbability but once under way , natural selection itself is nothing like random chance . Furthermore , he refers to his counter argument to the argument from improbability by that same name : 
 The argument from improbability is the big one . In the traditional guise of the argument from design , it is easily today 's most popular argument offered in favour of the existence of God and it is seen , by an amazingly large number of theists , as completely and utterly convincing . It is indeed a very strong and , I suspect , unanswerable argument — but in precisely the opposite direction from the theist 's intention . The argument from improbability , properly deployed , comes close to proving that God does not exist . My name for the statistical demonstration that God almost certainly does not exist is the Ultimate Boeing 747 gambit . 
 The creationist misappropriation of the argument from improbability always takes the same general form , and it doesn 't make any difference … [ if called ] ' intelligent design ' ( ID ) . Some observed phenomenon — often a living creature or one of its more complex organs , but it could be anything from a molecule up to the universe itself — is correctly extolled as statistically improbable . Sometimes the language of information theory is used : the Darwinian is challenged to explain the source all the information in living matter , in the technical sense of information content as a measure of improbability or ' surprise value ' … However statistically improbable the entity you seek to explain by invoking a designer , the designer himself has got to be at least as improbable . God is the Ultimate Boeing 747 . 
 … The whole argument turns on the familiar question ' Who made God ? ' … A designer God cannot be used to explain organized complexity because any God capable of designing anything would have to be complex enough to demand the same kind of explanation in his own right . God presents an infinite regress from which he cannot help us to escape . This argument … demonstrates that God , though not technically disprovable , is very very improbable indeed . 
 Dawkins considered the argument from improbability to be " much more powerful " than the teleological argument , or argument from design , although he sometimes implies the terms are used interchangeably . He paraphrases <unk> ' teleological argument as follows : “ Things in the world , especially living things , look as though they have been designed . Nothing that we know looks designed unless it is designed . Therefore there must have been a designer , and we call him God . ” 
 Philosopher Edward <unk> has accused Dawkins of misunderstanding the teleological argument , particularly Aquinas ' version . 
 = = = A flawed argument = = = 
 George H. Smith , in his book Atheism : The Case Against God , points out what he considers to be a flaw in the argument from design : 
 Now consider the idea that nature itself is the product of design . How could this be demonstrated ? Nature … provides the basis of comparison by which we distinguish between designed objects and natural objects . We are able to infer the presence of design only to the extent that the characteristics of an object differ from natural characteristics . Therefore , to claim that nature as a whole was designed is to destroy the basis by which we differentiate between artifacts and natural objects . 
 = = = Perception of purpose in biology = = = 
 The philosopher of biology Michael Ruse has argued that Darwin treated the structure of organisms as if they had a purpose : " the organism @-@ as @-@ if @-@ it @-@ were @-@ designed @-@ by God picture was absolutely central to Darwin ’ s thinking in 1862 , as it always had been . " He refers to this as " the metaphor of design ... Organisms give the appearance of being designed , and thanks to Charles Darwin ’ s discovery of natural selection we know why this is true . " In his review of Ruse 's book , R.J. Richards writes , " Biologists quite routinely refer to the design of organisms and their traits , but properly speaking it ’ s apparent design to which they refer – an “ as if ” design . " Robert Foley refers to this as " the illusion of purpose , design , and progress . " He adds , " there is no purpose in a fundamentally causative manner in evolution but that the processes of selection and adaptation give the illusion of purpose through the utter functionality and designed nature of the biological world . 
 Richard Dawkins suggests that while biology can at first seem to be purposeful and ordered , upon closer inspection its true function becomes questionable . Dawkins rejects the claim that biology serves any designed function , claiming rather that biology only mimics such purpose . In his book The Blind Watchmaker , Dawkins states that animals are the most complex things in the known universe : “ Biology is the study of complicated things that give the appearance of having been designed for a purpose . ” He argues that natural selection should suffice as an explanation of biological complexity without recourse to divine provenance . 
 However , theologian Alister McGrath has pointed out that the fine @-@ tuning of carbon is even responsible for nature ’ s ability to tune itself to any degree . 
 [ The entire biological ] evolutionary process depends upon the unusual chemistry of carbon , which allows it to bond to itself , as well as other elements , creating highly complex molecules that are stable over prevailing terrestrial temperatures , and are capable of conveying genetic information ( especially DNA ) . [ … ] Whereas it might be argued that nature creates its own fine @-@ tuning , this can only be done if the primordial constituents of the universe are such that an evolutionary process can be initiated . The unique chemistry of carbon is the ultimate foundation of the capacity of nature to tune itself . 
 Proponents of intelligent design creationism , such as William A. Dembski question the philosophical assumptions made by critics with regard to what a designer would or would not do . Dembski claims that such arguments are not merely beyond the purview of science : often they are tacitly or overtly theological while failing to provide a serious analysis of the hypothetical objective 's relative merit . Some critics , such as Stephen Jay Gould suggest that any purported ' cosmic ' designer would only produce optimal designs , while there are numerous biological criticisms to demonstrate that such an ideal is manifestly untenable . Against these ideas , Dembski characterizes both Dawkins ' and Gould 's argument as a rhetorical straw man . He suggests a principle of constrained optimization more realistically describes the best any designer could hope to achieve : 
 Not knowing the objectives of the designer , Gould was in no position to say whether the designer proposed a faulty compromise among those objectives … In criticizing design , biologists tend to place a premium on functionalities of individual organisms and see design as optimal to the degree that those individual functionalities are maximized . But higher @-@ order designs of entire ecosystems might require lower @-@ order designs of individual organisms to fall short of maximal function . 
 = = = Other criticisms = = = 
 The teleological argument assumes that one can infer the existence of intelligent design merely by examination , and because life is reminiscent of something a human might design , it too must have been designed . However , considering " snowflakes and crystals of certain salts " , " [ i ] n no case do we find intelligence " . " There are other ways that order and design can come about " such as by " purely physical forces " . 
 The design claim can be challenged as an argument from analogy . Supporters of design suggest that natural objects and man @-@ made objects have many similar properties , and man @-@ made objects have a designer . Therefore , it is probable that natural objects must be designed as well . However , proponents must demonstrate that all the available evidence has been taken into account . Eric Rust argues that , when speaking of familiar objects such as watches , " we have a basis to make an inference from such an object to its designer " . However , the " universe is a unique and isolated case " and we have nothing to compare it with , so " we have no basis for making an inference such as we can with individual objects . ... We have no basis for applying to the whole universe what may hold of constituent elements in the universe . " 
 Most professional biologists support the modern evolutionary synthesis , not merely as an alternative explanation for the complexity of life but a better explanation with more supporting evidence . Living organisms obey the same physical laws as inanimate objects . Over very long periods of time self @-@ replicating structures arose and later formed DNA . 
 = = Similar discussions in other civilizations = = 
 = = = Hinduism = = = 
 Nyaya , the Hindu school of logic , had a version of the argument from design . P.G. Patil writes that , in this view , it is not the complexity of the world from which one can infer the existence of a creator , but the fact that " the world is made up of parts . " In this context , it is the Supreme Soul , Ishvara , who created all the world . 
 The argument is in five parts : 
 The ... world ... has been constructed by an intelligent agent . 
 On account of being an effect . 
 Each and every effect has been constructed by an intelligent agent , just like a pot . 
 And the world is an effect . 
 Therefore , it has been constructed by an intelligent agent . 
 However , other Hindu schools , such as Samkhya , deny that the existence of God can ever be proved , because such a creator can never be perceived . Krishna Mohan Banerjee , in his Dialogues on the Hindu Philosophy , has the Samkhya speaker saying , " the existence of God cannot be established because there is no proof . ... nor can it be proved by Inference , because you cannot exhibit an analogous instance . " 
 = = = Buddhist criticism of Hindu Nyaya logic = = = 
 Buddhism denies the existence of a creator god , and rejects the Nyaya syllogism for the teleological argument as being " logically flawed " . Buddhists argue that " the ' creation ' of the world cannot be shown to be analogous to the creation of a human artifact , such as a pot . 
 = = = Confucianism = = = 
 The 18th century German philosopher Christian Wolff once thought that Confucius was a godless man , and that " the ancient Chinese had no natural religion , since they did not know the creator of the world " . However , later , Wolff changed his mind to some extent . " On Wolff 's reading , Confucius 's religious perspective is thus more or less the weak deistic one of Hume 's Cleanthes " . 
 = = = Taoism = = = 
 The Taoist writings of the 6th century BC philosopher Laozi , also known as Lao Tzu , have similarities with modern naturalist science . B. Schwartz notes that , in Taoism , " The processes of nature are not guided by a teleological consciousness ... the tao [ dao ] is not consciously providential . 
 = Durga Shakti Nagpal = 
 Durga Shakti Nagpal ( born 25 June 1985 ) is an Indian bureaucrat , civil servant and officer in the Uttar Pradesh cadre of the Indian Administrative Service . She is posted as Joint Magistrate of Kanpur ( Rural ) . She came into public view after launching a massive drive against corruption and illegal sand mining within her jurisdiction of Gautam Budh Nagar . She was later suspended by the Uttar Pradesh government for allegedly demolishing an illegal mosque wall in a village in Greater Noida , which resulted in severe opposition as it was perceived to be based on flimsy grounds . There was a growing demand from various political parties , associations of Indian bureaucrats , and by the general public on online social media for her suspension to be revoked . Her suspension was revoked by the Uttar Pradesh government on 22 September 2013 . 
 Nagpal was appointed OSD ( Officer on Special Duty ) in the Agriculture Ministry in January 2015 , a post that she currently holds . 
 = = Background = = 
 Durga Nagpal was born in Agra , Uttar Pradesh on 25 June 1984 . Her father is a former government employee in Rajasthan who was awarded the President 's Medal for distinguished service at the Delhi Cantonment Board . Her grandfather was a police officer who was murdered in 1954 while on duty in Sadar Bazaar , Delhi . Nagpal 's family belongs to the state of Chhattisgarh . She graduated from the Indira Gandhi Delhi Technological University in 2007 with an undergraduate degree in computer engineering . She obtained an All India Rank of 20 in the UPSC Civil Services Examination in 2009 , after which she joined the Indian Administrative Service ( IAS ) . In her first attempt to pass the civil service exam , she was accepted into the Indian Revenue Service , but chose to take the UPSC exam another time . She is married to Abhishek Singh , who is also an IAS officer , and serving as a Block Development Officer in Noida . She met Singh while preparing for the UPSC examinations in 2009 , and they live in Greater Noida . 
 = = Career = = 
 Nagpal began in the Punjab cadre of the IAS . She joined the Mohali district administration in June 2011 , and served there for fourteen months . As a trainee IAS officer in Punjab , she exposed a land scam in Mohali . 
 In August 2012 , she moved to the Uttar Pradesh ( UP ) cadre as the Sub @-@ Divisional Magistrate ( SDM ) of Sadar , Noida , after marrying Abhishek Singh . She was later appointed as the SDM in Gautam Budh Nagar . She came into public notice after acting against the " sand mafia " in Greater Noida , Uttar Pradesh by forming special investigation teams to stop the illegal sand @-@ mining in the Yamuna and Hindon river banks . Under her leadership , the administration confiscated 24 <unk> trucks and 300 trolleys used in illegal operations , and arrested 15 people who were fined ₹ 20 million ( US $ 297 @,@ 200 ) . 
 = = = Crackdown on illegal mining = = = 
 Most of the sand @-@ mining activity in the NCR region , comprising Noida ( Uttar Pradesh ) , Faridabad ( Haryana ) and Delhi , is illegal as no environment impact assessment ( EIA ) has been carried out , and it is estimated that about 250 to 350 truckloads of sand is illegally dredged every day . The cost of this sand varies from ₹ 1 billion ( US $ 15 million ) per month to ₹ 5 billion ( US $ 74 million ) per annum . According to environmentalists and engineers , the massive amount of mining is responsible for soil @-@ erosion and changing the natural flow of the Hindon and Yamuna , which shifted its course by about 500 metres toward east and posed a threat to flood embankments in six sectors of Noida . A " Special Mining Squad " was established by the Noida district administration to curb sand mining and was expected to succeed , but high demand of sand for increased construction activity , police inaction and the political nexus with the " sand mafia " has ensured that various rules to safeguard the environment are regularly flouted . 
 After receiving many complaints of dredging in the Yamuna and Hindon rivers banks , the UP Chief Minister 's office in Lucknow asked the GB Nagar district administration to prevent further illegal activity . Nagpal , as the SDM , oversaw a large operation to stop illegal sand mining in the district , and used surprise and secrecy to arrest illegal miners and to confiscate their machinery . On 23 July 2013 , Nagpal had said that she would take strict action against dredgers engaged in illegal mining , adding that such activity could affect the environmental adversely . Since April 2013 , the Uttar Pradesh Police had filed 17 FIRs and the Chief Judicial magistrates had ordered the arrest of illegal sand miners in 22 cases . From April to June 2013 , the police had impounded 297 vehicles and machinery used for illegal mining and collected Rs 8 @,@ 234 @,@ 000 in fines . Under Nagpal , a joint operation involving the revenue , police and transport departments was launched and villages of <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> were monitored . On 25 July , the government transferred the mining officer of the GB Nagar district Ashish Kumar , who was assisting Nagpal , to <unk> . Before being transferred , Kumar survived three attempts on his life , the last one was on 9 February 2013 . Nagpal was also targeted on 26 April 2013 , during a visit to the <unk> police station . These attacks were attributed to the " sand mafia " operating in the district . 
 On the night of 29 July 2013 , the Gautam Buddha Nagar police arrested 15 persons and confiscated 26 vehicles in the district and registered seven cases , some of which were in <unk> and Greater Noida areas . 
 = = = Suspension = = = 
 Nagpal was suspended on 28 July 2013 , a day after she allegedly demolished a wall of an under @-@ construction mosque in Kadalpur village , in the <unk> area of Greater Noida . The construction of the mosque had not been cleared by the state government . Whether Nagpal was actually involved in the demolition of the wall , and whether she was justified in her actions even if she was , are disputed . Her supporters and most of the media sources claim that Nagpal did not order the demolition of the wall and was not even present at the site when the incident happened . According to them , she was targeted due to her campaign against illegal sand @-@ mining , and allegations of Nagpal 's involvement in the demolition are false . However , there are other sources which quote residents of Kadalpur village claiming that Nagpal personally supervised the demolition of the wall . 
 On 16 August , Nagpal submitted her reply to the chargesheet filed by the UP government , in which she declared herself innocent and said that her action was within the rules of service and as per the directions of the Supreme Court . On 28 August , Noida district magistrate <unk> Singh , who backed Nagpal 's actions , was transferred from his post and was put on a wait list . 
 = = = Suspension revoked = = = 
 Nagpal , accompanied by her husband Abhishek Singh , met Chief Minister Akhilesh Yadav on 21 September 2013 for the first time since her suspension . Her suspension was revoked by the UP government on 22 September 2013 , and she joined as Joint Magistrate of Kanpur ( Rural ) on 5 October 2013 . 
 = = = <unk> of Family = = = 
 On 11 October 2014 , Nagpal 's husband , Abhishek Singh , also a bureaucrat was suspended . Abhishek Singh was the SDM ( Sub Divisional Magistrate ) in <unk> , Mathura , was suspended by the chief minister Akhilesh Yadav , for allegedly treating a teacher , <unk> Singh , in an inhuman manner . Abhishek Singh denies the charges , while the government refuses to elaborate further on what inhuman actions he was guilty of . 
 = = Reactions to her suspension = = 
 = = = Public = = = 
 The administrative actions and subsequent suspension of Nagpal received widespread attention in India . She was widely praised for making efforts to clean up the corruption in the Indian political system . References were made with the Hindu goddess Durga for taking action against the politically well @-@ connected sand @-@ mining mafia and real estate barons . According to Surinder S. <unk> , professor and chair at the Centre for the Study of Social Systems in Jawaharlal Nehru University , the protest after Nagpal 's suspension are due to the growing discontent within India 's growing middle @-@ class with criminalisation in politics . Due to the public protests , the UP government had to engage in damage control , highlighting its welfare schemes and announcing that it is considering to set up a task force to check illegal mining . 
 Kiran Bedi and large number of people on social media like Facebook and Twitter protested against the IAS officer 's suspension . Several serving and retired IAS officers like former Central Vigilance Commissioner ( CVC ) N. Vittal , former cabinet secretaries T. S. R. Subramanian and Naresh Chandra , and former Comptroller and Auditor General Vinod Rai came out in support of Nagpal , calling her actions bold and courageous , and asked the Chief Secretary to revoke her suspension . The All India IAS Association , a national body of IAS officers , termed the government 's actions " wrong " and believes that Nagpal was suspended due to her stringent actions which hurt the sand @-@ mafia . It has demanded immediate revocation of her suspension , and called the incident " demoralising " for young IAS officers . The collective voicing of these concerns by the state 's IAS officers was deemed unusual and surprised the ruling Samajwadi Party . Senior officers have attributed this backlash to the general feeling of discontentment in the officer cadre , which they say is due to increasing political interference in public administration . On 1 August , in a rare act , thousands of IAS officers filed a petition to the Department of personnel and training , demanding intervention by the Central government to direct the UP government to revoke Durga 's suspension . 
 On 5 August 2013 , reacting to the suspension of Nagpal , the National Green <unk> ordered a pan @-@ India suspension of all sand mining activity carried without a license from the Ministry of Environment and Forests . 
 = = = Political parties = = = 
 Since Nagpal 's suspension came to public view , it has been alleged that Samajwadi Party leader Narendra Bhati , who has cabinet @-@ minister rank as the chairperson of the UP State Agro Industrial Corporation Limited , was responsible for getting her abruptly suspended because he was frustrated by Nagpal 's drive against illegal mining . Bhati was later recorded on video boasting about getting the officer suspended within 40 minutes . Other leaders of the Samajwadi party such as Azam Khan and Naresh Agarwal have issued statements supporting the suspension order . 
 Aam Aadmi Party ( AAP ) leader Arvind Kejriwal supported Nagpal on 29 July 2013 , saying that the decision of the government indicated " that politics and politicians are turning dirty " and that " whatever took place with <unk> is extremely wrong . " He criticised the government for not letting whistle blowers and honest officers work freely and praised Ms. Nagpal for carrying out her duties fearlessly . The opposition parties in the state of Uttar Pradesh , Bharatiya Janata Party ( BJP ) and the Bahujan Samaj Party accused the state government of ignoring the rule of law and protecting criminals . The former president of the BJP Nitin <unk> criticised the action as " ... fanning communal and caste @-@ based sentiments " and " harassing a good officer for vote bank politics ... " The BJP in Uttar Pradesh asked the state 's Governor BL Joshi to intervene and revoke the suspension . 
 On 2 August 2013 , the Indian National Congress condemned the suspension order and said that public reactions of Samajwadi Party leaders supporting the suspension order , indicated that those orders were dictated by the sand mining mafia . However , it also criticised the " arbitrary demolition " of the mosque 's wall . UPA chairperson Sonia Gandhi wrote a letter to the Prime Minister Manmohan Singh , demanding fair treatment of the officer . 
 = = = State government = = = 
 The Samajwadi Party government said in a statement that Nagpal was suspended for demolishing a mosque 's wall and the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh Akhilesh Yadav justified the order saying that Nagpal 's actions " lacked foresight and disturbed communal harmony " and she was suspended due to " administrative compulsion to ease communal tension " . This was later refuted by reports that the area had not reported any communal tension . The Station Officer of <unk> police station said that since the demolition took place in night , most residents were not even aware of the incident . The demolition was reportedly executed in compliance to Supreme Court orders forbidding construction of illegal religious structures on public land . The court , in a judgement passed in 2009 had ruled that " no new temples , mosques , churches and gurdwaras can be constructed on public parks , public streets and public spaces " and " the ban must be enforced even if it gave rise to a law and order problem . " 
 According to the report on the demolition incident submitted by <unk> Singh , District Magistrate ( DM ) of Greater Noida to the UP government , Nagpal did not demolish a wall of any religious structure , in fact there was no religious structure in place . The construction of the wall had just begun , and on being warned by Ms. Nagpal of the structure being constructed on government land , the local residents decided to dismantle the constructed wall themselves . The report called Nagpal 's actions " blemish @-@ free " . The report also says that there was no communal tension or the possibility of any clashes between religious communities . The UP government appointed a committee to verify the DM 's report . 
 After the IAS officers ' association protested on 29 July , Uttar Pradesh Chief Secretary said that the suspension order would be reviewed , but despite the assurances , no decision has been taken . After the suspension , Nagpal was attached to the Board of Revenue in Lucknow , the state capital . 
 = = = Kadalpur = = = 
 The residents of Kadalpur village however challenged the anti @-@ corruption narrative in the media , and say that the suspension order was justified . They even threatened to protest if she is reinstated . They said that the mosque was being built on gram sabha land and they had got the panchayat 's approval , adding that they were unaware about seeking permission for it . The construction of the mosque was started in 2011 , hence they questioned the delayed response of the authorities . Stressing on Nagpal 's " high @-@ handedness " and getting the police to demolish it , they said they requested more time to obtain the construction permission , which she rejected . On the District Magistrate 's report to the UP government , they claimed that he did not contact them or any of the panchayat officials . They said that donations for the construction of temples and mosques were given by everyone , and they aim to re @-@ build the mosque . <unk> Singh , spokesperson for the Uttar Pradesh Congress party , said that the villagers were not aware of the Supreme Court rulings and it was the duty of the administration to direct them into getting permission and at least stop the construction temporarily . The majority of the villagers are Muslims and the rest are Hindus , and there is a minimal threat for communal violence there . 
 A month later the villagers said they felt cheated by the UP government since permission to build it was still not given ; they blamed the Samajwadi Party leaders for unnecessarily punishing her . They said that the party leaders should have got them permission to build the mosque at that time , preventing this incident from happening . 
 = = = Public @-@ interest litigations = = = 
 The suspension order of Nagpal was challenged in the Allahabad High Court on 30 July 2013 through a Public interest litigation ( PIL ) . The petition was filed by social activist Nutan Thakur at the Lucknow bench of the court . It also requested the court to direct the central government to ask the state governments to prevent harassment of those officers who have ordered action against illegal construction of religious places , and illegal mining . On 1 August , the court ruled that the suspension is not a matter of a PIL , and the officer should directly approach the court . It however praised her work in preventing illegal sand mining and ordered both the central and the state government to report how they are tackling illegal mining and what security is being provided to the officers engaged in stopping it . 
 On 8 August , the Supreme Court of India accepted a PIL filed by an advocate M. L. Sharma . The PIL sought to dismiss all charges against Nagpal and argued that Nagpal was suffering hardship for following the court 's rulings in 2009 and 2010 regarding demolition of illegal religious structures . On 16 August , the court refused to accept the PIL , questioning the standing of the lawyer , but saying that " it may entertain the petition if she ( Nagpal ) herself approaches the court . " The court also sought an explanation from the UP government for arresting <unk> Bharti , a scholar who allegedly wrote a post on Facebook in support of Nagpal . The central government had passed an advisory notification based on an earlier order of the court which said that a person cannot be arrested for posting objectionable comments on social networking sites without taking permission from a high @-@ ranking police official . 
 = = = Intervention by central government = = = 
 On 31 July , the central government said that they are awaiting a detailed report on her suspension from the state within 15 days . The Minister of State for Personnel V. <unk> , during a meeting with a delegation from All India IAS Officers ' Association assured that justice will be done to Ms. Nagpal . He later assured that both version of the incident will be taken into account before reaching a decision . As per the All India Services ( Discipline And Appeal ) Rules , 1969 , the UP government cannot keep her under suspension for more than 90 days , pending disciplinary proceedings , without the consent of Central Government . 
 On 5 August 2013 , Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said that the central government had asked the UP government to provide details of the case . On 19 August , associations of the Indian Administrative Service ( IAS ) , Indian Police Service ( IPS ) and Indian Forest Service ( <unk> ) met with the Secretary of Department of Personnel and Training ( <unk> ) S K Sarkar and demanded that the central government should modify the rules related to suspension of bureaucrats by state governments , as those rules were widely abused . The three associations want the central government instead of various state governments to have the authority to suspend any All India Services officer . 
 On 20 August , the central government decided not to intervene in the suspension of Nagpal , as she did not appeal or challenge the suspension order given by the Uttar Pradesh government . Since Nagpal 's suspension on 27 July , the Centre had issued three reminders to the UP government , seeking a detailed report . On 4 August , the UP government had sent a report on Nagpal 's suspension to the <unk> and had served a chargesheet to Nagpal , which deemed her actions as unwarranted and in violation of rules . 
 = New Jersey Route 53 = 
 Route 53 is a state highway in Morris County in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 4 @.@ 66 mi ( 7 @.@ 50 km ) from U.S. Route 202 in Morris Plains north to Bloomfield Avenue in Denville Township . The route , which is a two @-@ lane undivided highway most of its length , intersects with Route 10 , Interstate 80 , and U.S. Route 46 . For most of its length , the route runs a short distance to the east of New Jersey Transit 's Morristown Line . It passes through industrial areas and wooded residential neighborhoods along its route . 
 From 1916 to 1927 , the route was a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 , which ran from Delaware in Warren County east to Newark . In 1927 , the portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 that is today Route 53 was not made a part of a different route and became Route 5N to distinguish it from a newly created Route 5 . In 1953 , the route became Route 53 . A freeway was planned for the route in 1966 , running from a planned Route 24 freeway in Morris Plains north to a planned Route 208 freeway in Greenwood Lake in Passaic County . This planned freeway was scaled back in 1967 to end at Interstate 80 . It was later designated Route 178 before being canceled in 1975 . There are plans to improve the interchange with Route 10 with construction starting in 2009 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 53 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 202 ( Littleton Road ) in Morris Plains . It proceeds north as Tabor Road , a two @-@ lane undivided road with a 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) speed limit , closely paralleling New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line , which runs along the west side of the route . Route 53 bends farther east from the tracks and runs through an industrial area . After passing through the industrial area , the road heads through wooded residential areas , passing under a set of power lines with the speed limit decreasing to 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) at the Old Tabor Road intersection . Route 53 intersected Route 10 at an interchange . 
 Past the Route 10 interchange , the road enters Parsippany @-@ Troy Hills Township and continues north through wooded residential neighborhoods , running parallel to Interstate 80 while passing to the east of a couple small lakes . It begins to turn northwest before passing by the Mt . Tabor Country Club . Route 53 continues north through Mount Tabor before crossing into Denville Township , where the route becomes East Main Street . In Denville , the route passes under New Jersey Transit ’ s Montclair @-@ Boonton Line near Denville Station . The speed limit drops to 30 mph ( 48 km / h ) and Route 53 comes to an interchange with Interstate 80 , where the route becomes a four @-@ lane , divided highway . Immediately after Interstate 80 , the route interchanges with U.S. Route 46 and ends at the intersection with Bloomfield Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1916 , present @-@ day Route 53 was designated as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 , which ran from Delaware in Warren County east to Newark . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , this route became Route 6 ( now U.S. Route 46 ) between Delaware and Denville , Route 32 ( now U.S. Route 202 ) between Morris Plains and Morristown , and Route 24 ( now Route 124 ) between Morristown and Newark . The portion of pre @-@ 1927 Route 5 between Morris Plains and Denville , however , was not replaced by a different route and became Route 5N to distinguish it from a newly created Route 5 . The northern terminus of Route 5N was at U.S. Route 46 / Route 6 ( Bloomfield Avenue ) in Denville ; when those routes were moved to a bypass , Route 5N ’ s northern terminus remained at Bloomfield Avenue . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 5N was renumbered to Route 53 . 
 In 1966 , a freeway was planned for the Route 53 corridor , intended to reduce traffic congestion . The freeway was intended to run from a planned Route 24 freeway in Morris Plains and continue north , crossing Interstate 80 and Route 23 before ending at a planned Route 208 freeway near Greenwood Lake in Passaic County that would connect to the New York State Route 208 freeway that was to continue north into Orange County , New York . In 1967 , the northern terminus of the Route 53 freeway was cut back to Interstate 80 . This freeway was designated Route 178 in 1969 . Right @-@ of @-@ way acquisition began for the freeway but was stopped in 1971 due to lack of funds . The freeway was officially cancelled in 1975 when NJDOT did not include it in the five @-@ year highway program . Despite the cancellation of the proposed freeway , several large corporations in Morris County pushed for the freeway to be built as it would reduce commuter traffic on Route 53 and US 202 in the area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Morris County . 
 = New York State Route 17A = 
 New York State Route 17A ( NY 17A ) is a state highway in southern New York in the United States , entirely within Orange County . Its western terminus is located in the village of Goshen at a junction with NY 17 , and its eastern terminus is at another intersection with NY 17 located in Southfields . It runs concurrently with NY 94 from Warwick to Florida . It serves mainly to connect Warwick with the rest of the county . While it is an east – west route , many sections run in a more north – south orientation . Its circuitous route allows it to offer much scenery to drivers . 
 The Greenwood Lake – Goshen portion of NY 17A was originally designated as part of New York State Route 55 in the 1920s . South of Greenwood Lake , NY 55 used modern NY 210 . NY 55 was split into NY 17A and NY 210 as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . Initially , only NY 210 continued east from Greenwood Lake to Southfields ; however , NY 17A was extended to Southfields by 1933 , overlapping NY 210 . The overlap was eliminated in 1982 when NY 210 was truncated to Greenwood Lake . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 17A begins just south of NY 17 exit 124 in the village of Goshen . At the traffic light with the southern on @-@ ramp from NY 17 eastbound , NY 207 becomes NY 17A . The route quickly climbs to some of the hillier areas south of Goshen , offering views of not only Orange County 's Black Dirt Region but <unk> Mountain and High Point to the south in New Jersey . It then slowly descends past rolling meadows and farmland until it reaches the small village of Florida , where NY 94 comes in from the west shortly after the village border . The concurrent roads then become Florida 's main street . 
 Once out of the village , NY 17A and NY 94 begin to climb again , this time offering some panoramic views to the north , all the way to the Shawangunk Ridge and even the Catskill Mountains beyond them in clear enough weather . The road is surprisingly little developed in this area , with only one gas station between Florida and Warwick , its next stop , which likewise presents itself after a descent . Again , NY 17A and NY 94 serve as the bustling village 's main street , longer this time and with many upscale boutiques in evidence . Many historic buildings line the road through Warwick . Near the southern end of the village , the two roads split , with NY 94 continuing toward New Jersey while NY 17A goes eastward . 
 The road begins to climb again over the next few miles , passing a county park and finally the small Mount Peter ski area before crossing the Appalachian Trail along the <unk> of <unk> Mountain . From here it once again drops down and bends in a north – south direction to reach Greenwood Lake , where NY 210 leaves to go along the side of the lake to the state line . 
 Leaving Greenwood Lake , NY 17A climbs once again to cross another ridge before descending and expanding to a four @-@ lane with median strip to pass through Sterling Forest and reach its eastern terminus at NY 17 in Southfields . The highway continues as County Route 106 ( CR 106 ) in Orange and Rockland counties east to that route 's eastern terminus at U.S. Route 9W ( US 9W ) and US 202 in Stony Point . CR 106 was once part of NY 210 before it was truncated to NY 17A in Greenwood Lake . 
 = = History = = 
 In the late 1920s , what is now NY 17A from Greenwood Lake to Goshen was designated as part of NY 55 , a connector between NY 17 in Goshen and the New Jersey state line . In the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , NY 55 was incorporated into two longer routes : NY 210 from New Jersey to Greenwood Lake and NY 17A from Greenwood Lake to Goshen . The modern routing of NY 17A between Greenfield Lake and Southfields was originally only part of NY 210 , which continued past NY 17 and into Rockland County . NY 17A was extended east to Southfields by 1933 , completing the alternate loop of NY 17 and creating an overlap with NY 210 . 
 In 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 210 between NY 210 and the Rockland County line was transferred from the state of New York to Orange County . Two years later , all of NY 210 in Rockland County was given to the county . NY 210 was truncated to its current northern terminus in Greenwood Lake following the latter swap , eliminating the overlap with NY 17A . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Orange County . 
 = Third Battle of Seoul = 
 The Third Battle of Seoul , also known as the Chinese New Year 's Offensive , the January – Fourth Retreat ( Korean : 1 • 4 <unk> ) or the Third Phase Campaign Western Sector ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Dì <unk> Cì Zhàn Yì Xī Xiàn ) , was a battle of the Korean War , which took place from December 31 , 1950 to January 7 , 1951 around the South Korean capital of Seoul . In the aftermath of the major Chinese victory at the Battle of the Ch 'ongch 'on River , the United Nations Command started to contemplate the possibility of evacuation from the Korean Peninsula . Upon learning of this development , China 's Chairman Mao Zedong ordered the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army to cross the 38th parallel in an effort to pressure the United Nations forces to withdraw from South Korea . 
 On 31 December 1950 , the Chinese 13th Army attacked the South Korean army 's 1st , 2nd , 5th and 6th Infantry Divisions along the 38th parallel , breaching United Nations Forces ' defenses at the Imjin River , Hantan River , Gapyeong and Chuncheon in the process . To prevent the Chinese forces from overwhelming the defenders , the U.S. Eighth Army under the command of Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway evacuated Seoul on January 3 , 1951 . 
 Although Chinese forces captured Seoul by the end of the battle , the Chinese invasion of South Korea galvanized the United Nations ' support for South Korea , while the idea of evacuation was soon abandoned by the United Nations Command . At the same time , the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army were exhausted after months of nonstop fighting since the start of the Chinese intervention , thereby allowing the United Nations forces to regain the initiative in Korea . 
 = = Background = = 
 With the People 's Republic of China entering the Korean War in late 1950 , the conflict had entered a new phase . To prevent North Korea from falling under United Nations ( UN ) control after the UN landing at Incheon , the Chinese People 's Volunteer Army ( PVA ) entered Korea and launched a series of surprise attacks against the UN forces near the Sino @-@ Korean border at the end of 1950 . The resulting battles at the Ch 'ongch 'on River Valley and the Chosin Reservoir forced the UN forces to retreat back to the 38th parallel by December 1950 , with Chinese and North Korean forces recapturing much of North Korea . On the Korean western front , after the United States Eighth Army suffered a disastrous defeat at the Ch 'ongch 'on River , the Eighth Army retreated back to the Imjin River while setting up defensive positions around the South Korean capital of Seoul . Although the US Eighth Army was ordered to hold Seoul for as long as possible , General Douglas MacArthur planned a series of withdrawals to the Pusan Perimeter under the assumption that UN forces were about to be overwhelmed in Korea . General Walton Walker , commander of the US Eighth Army , was killed in a traffic accident on December 23 , and Lieutenant General Matthew B. Ridgway assumed command of the Eighth Army on December 26 , 1950 . At the UN , a ceasefire along the 38th parallel was proposed to China on December 11 , 1950 in order to avoid any further escalation of hostility between China and the US . 
 Although the PVA had been weakened from their earlier battles , with nearly 40 percent of its forces rendered combat ineffective , its unexpected victories over the UN forces had convinced the Chinese leadership of the invincibility of the PVA . Immediately after the PVA 13th Army 's victory over the US Eighth Army at the Ch 'ongch 'on River , China 's Chairman Mao Zedong started to contemplate another offensive against the UN forces on the urging of North Korean Premier Kim Il @-@ sung . After learning of MacArthur 's plans and the UN ceasefire , Mao also believed that the UN evacuation of the Korean Peninsula was imminent . Although the over @-@ stretched Chinese logistics prevented the PVA from launching a full @-@ scale invasion against South Korea , Mao still ordered the PVA 13th Army to launch an intrusion , dubbed the " Third Phase Campaign " , to hasten the UN withdrawal and to demonstrate China 's desire for a total victory in Korea . On December 23 , 1950 , China 's Foreign Minister Zhou Enlai formally rejected the UN ceasefire while demanding all UN forces to be withdrawn from the Korean Peninsula . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 = = = Locations , terrain and weather = = = 
 Seoul is the capital city of South Korea , which is roughly bisected into northern and southern halves by the Han River . Seoul is also located at 35 mi ( 56 km ) south of the 38th parallel . The battle was fought over the UN defenses at the 38th parallel , which stretches horizontally from the Imjin River mouth on the Korean west coast to the town of Chuncheon in central Korea . A road dubbed " Route 33 " runs south across the 38th parallel at the Hantan River , passes through Uijeongbu and eventually arrives at Seoul , and it is an ancient invasion route towards Seoul . Another road ran across the Imjin River , and it connects Seoul and Kaesong through the town of Munsan and Koyang . Finally , a road runs through Chuncheon and it connects to Seoul from the northeast . The harsh Korean winter , with temperatures as low as − 20 ° C ( − 4 ° F ) , had frozen the Imjin and the Hantan River over most of the river crossings , and it eliminated a major obstacle for the attacking Chinese forces . 
 = = = Forces and strategies = = = 
 By December 22 , 1950 , the US Eighth Army 's front had stabilized along the 38th parallel . Just days before his death , Walker placed the US I Corps , the US IX Corps , and the ROK III Corps of the Eighth Army along the 38th parallel to defend Seoul . The US I and IX Corps were to defend the Imjin and Hantan River respectively , while the ROK III Corps were to guard the areas around Chuncheon . The boundary between US I and IX Corps was marked by Route 33 , and was defended by the ROK 1st Infantry Division on the west side and the ROK 6th Infantry Division on the east side . 
 Because the South Korean forces had suffered nearly 45 @,@ 000 casualties at the end of 1950 , most of the South Korean units were composed of raw recruits with little combat training . After inspecting the front just days before the battle , General J. Lawton Collins , the US Army Chief of Staff , concluded that most of the ROK formations were only fit for outpost duties . At the same time , the US Eighth Army was also suffering from low morale due to its earlier defeats , and most of its soldiers were anticipating an evacuation from Korea . The Eighth Army 's lack of will to fight and to maintain contact with Chinese forces resulted in a lack of information on Chinese troop movements and intentions . After inspecting the front on December 27 , Ridgway ordered the US I and IX Corps to organize a new defensive line around Koyang to Uijeongbu , called the Seoul Bridgehead line , to cover the Han River crossings in case the UN forces were forced to evacuate Seoul . 
 The Chinese forces , however , were also suffering from logistics problems and exhaustion after their earlier victories . Arguing against the Third Phase Campaign on December 7 , PVA Commander Peng Dehuai telegraphed to Mao that the PVA would need at least three months to replace its casualties , while most of its troops were in critical need of resupply , rest and reorganization . The Chinese logistics system , which was based on the concept of People 's War with the native population supplying the army , also ran into difficulties due to the indifferent , and sometimes hostile , Korean population near the 38th parallel . The Chinese were now suffering from hunger and the lack of winter clothing . 
 Responding to Peng 's concern over the troops ' conditions , Mao limited the scope of the Third Phase Campaign to pin down the South Korean forces along the 38th parallel while inflicting as much damage as possible . Upon noticing that the US units were not interspersed between the South Korean formations , therefore unable to support the South Koreans , Mao ordered the PVA 13th Army to destroy the ROK 1st Infantry Division , the ROK 6th Infantry Division and the ROK III Corps . Following Mao 's instruction , Peng placed the PVA 38th , 39th , 40th and 50th Corps of the 13th Army in front of the ROK 1st and 6th Infantry Division , while the 42nd and the 66th Corps of the 13th Army were moved into ROK III Corps ' sector . The start date of the offensive was set to 31 December in order to take advantage of the night assault under a full moon and the anticipated low alertness of the UN soldiers during the holiday . For the same reasons Ridgway had predicted that 31 December would be the likely time for the new Chinese offensive . Believing that the destruction of the South Korean forces at the 38th parallel would render the UN forces incapable of counterattacks in the future , Mao promised to pull all Chinese troops off the front line for rest and refit by the end of the campaign . 
 = = Battle = = 
 On the evening of December 31 , 1950 , the PVA 13th Army launched a massive attack against South Korean forces along the 38th parallel . Along the Imjin River and the Hantan River , the PVA 38th , 39th , 40th and 50th Corps managed to decimate the ROK 1st Division while routing the ROK 6th Division . At the Chuncheon sector , the PVA 42nd and the 66th Corps forced the ROK III Corps into full retreat . With the defenses at the 38th parallel completely collapsed by January 1 , 1951 , Ridgway ordered the evacuation of Seoul on January 3 . 
 = = = Actions at the Imjin River and the Hantan River = = = 
 By December 15 , 1950 , the ROK 1st Infantry Division had retreated back to the town of <unk> on the southern bank of the Imjin River — its original defensive position at the start of the Korean War . On the right flank of the ROK 1st Infantry Division , the ROK 6th Infantry Division was located at the north of <unk> along the southern bank of the Hantan River . The ROK 1st Infantry Division planned to defend the Imjin River by placing its 11th and 12th Regiments at the west and the east side of <unk> respectively , while the ROK 6th Infantry Division defended the Route 33 at the Hantan River by placing its 7th and 19th Regiments on each side of the road . Both the ROK 15th Regiment of the 1st Infantry Division and the ROK 2nd Regiment of the 6th Infantry Division were placed in the rear as reserves . The South Koreans had also constructed numerous bunkers , barbed wire obstacles and minefields on both banks of the river in order to strengthen defenses and to maintain troop morale . 
 Faced with the South Korean defense , the Chinese had prepared for well over a month for the offensive . In the weeks before the operational orders for the Third Phase Campaign were issued by PVA High Command , the advance elements of the PVA 39th Corps had been conducting detailed reconnaissance on South Korean defenses . The South Korean positions were then thoroughly analyzed by Chinese commanders , engineers and artillery officers . Chinese " thrust " companies , which were composed of specially trained assault and engineer teams , were also organized to lead the attack across the Imjin and Hantan River . During the preparation , the Chinese artillery units had suffered heavy losses under UN air attacks , but PVA Deputy Commander Han Xianchu still managed to bring up 100 artillery pieces against the South Korean fortifications . On December 22 , the PVA High Command issued the operational orders that signaled the start of the Third Phase Campaign . The PVA 39th and 50th Corps were tasked with the destruction of the ROK 1st Infantry Division , while the 38th and the 40th Corps were tasked with the destruction of the ROK 6th Infantry Division . 
 Acting on Ridgway 's prediction , the ROK Army Headquarters ordered all units to full alert at dusk on December 31 , but many of its soldiers were either drunk from the New Year celebration or had abandoned their posts in order to escape the cold . The Chinese artillery units began to shell the South Korean defenses at 16 : 30 on December 31 . The first blow fell on the ROK 12th Regiment of the 1st Infantry Division , due to the unit 's positioning as both the boundary between the ROK 1st and 6th Infantry Divisions and the boundary between US I and IX Corps . Because the river banks on ROK 12th Regiment 's flanks were composed of high cliffs difficult for the attackers to scale , most of the regiment 's strength were used to defend its center . Upon noticing this development , the PVA 39th Corps decided to use ROK 12th Regiment 's flanks as the main points of attack in order to achieve maximum surprise . Following a feint attack on the ROK 12th Regiment 's center , the PVA 116th and the 117th Divisions of the 38th Corps struck both flanks of the ROK 12th Regiment . The ROK 12th Regiment was caught off guard and offered little resistance , and within hours the regiment was cut to pieces with a battery of the US 9th Field Artillery Battalion seized by the Chinese . Under the cover of the fleeing Korean soldiers , the attacking Chinese forces then penetrated the ROK 15th Regiment 's defense without firing a shot . Desperate to contain the Chinese breakthrough , Brigadier General Paik Sun Yup of the ROK 1st Infantry Division used the division 's rear service personnel to form an assault battalion , but the battalion was unable to stop the Chinese advance . With only the ROK 11th Regiment remaining intact by the morning of January 1 , the ROK 1st Infantry Division was forced to withdraw on January 2 . 
 The Chinese attacks against the ROK 6th Infantry Division , however , did not go as commanders had planned . The original plan called for the PVA 38th and the 40th Corps to attack the ROK 19th Regiment on the 6th Infantry Division 's right flank , but the bulk of the Chinese forces mistakenly attacked the US 19th Infantry Regiment of the US 24th Infantry Division , which was stationed to the east of the ROK 19th Regiment . The poor intelligence had also made the Chinese charge through several minefields , resulting in heavy casualties to the attackers . In spite of the losses , the Chinese pushed the US 19th Infantry Regiment back , exposing the right flank of the ROK 6th Infantry Division in the process . With the ROK 1st Infantry Division out of action and the US 24th Infantry Division 's defenses penetrated , the Chinese forces on both flanks of the ROK 6th Infantry Division then advanced southward in an attempt to encircle the division . By midnight of the New Year 's Eve , the ROK 6th Infantry Division was forced into full retreat . Although the Chinese managed to intercept some elements of the ROK 6th Infantry Division , most of the South Koreans escaped the trap by infiltrating the Chinese lines using the mountain trails . As Ridgway tried to inspect the front on the morning of January 1 , he was greeted by the fleeing and weaponless remnants of the ROK 6th Infantry Division a few miles north of Seoul . Despite Ridgway 's efforts to stop the retreat , the division continued to flee south . It was not until the personal intervention of South Korean President Syngman Rhee that the division finally stopped its retreat . By the night of January 1 , the UN defenses at the Imjin River and the Hantan River had completely collapsed with the Chinese advancing 9 mi ( 14 km ) into UN territory . The Chinese stopped their advance on January 2 . 
 = = = Actions at Gapyeong and Chuncheon = = = 
 At the beginning of the battle the ROK III Corps was located to the east of the US 24th Infantry Division of the US IX Corps , defending the 38th parallel to the north of Gapyeong ( Kapyong ) and Chuncheon . Composed of four divisions , the ROK III Corps placed its ROK 2nd Infantry Division on the corps ' left flank at the hills north of Gapyeong , while the ROK 5th Infantry Division defended the corps ' center at Chuncheon . The cold winter created great difficulties for the South Korean defenders , with the heavy snow hindering construction and icy roads limiting food and ammunition supplies . North Korean guerrillas were also active in the region , and had caused serious disruption in the rear of the ROK III Corps . 
 The Chinese operational order for the Third Phase Campaign called for the 42nd and the 66th Corps to protect the Chinese left flank by eliminating the ROK 2nd and 5th Infantry Divisions , while cutting the road between Chuncheon and Seoul . Following instructions , the two Chinese corps quickly struck after midnight on New Year 's Eve . The PVA 124th Division first penetrated the flanks of the ROK 2nd Infantry Division , then blocked the division 's retreat route . The trapped ROK 17th and 32nd Regiments of the ROK 2nd Infantry Division were forced to retreat in disarray . With the PVA 66th Corps pressuring the ROK 5th Infantry Division 's front , the PVA 124th Division then advanced eastward in the Korean rear and blocked the ROK 5th Infantry Division 's retreat route as well . The maneuver soon left the ROK 36th Regiment of the ROK 5th Infantry Division surrounded by Chinese , and the ROK 36th Regiment had to escape by infiltrating the Chinese lines using mountain trails . By January 1 , the ROK III Corps had lost contact with the 2nd and 5th Infantry Divisions , while the rest of the III Corps were retreating to the town of Wonju . On January 5 , the PVA 42nd and 66th Corps were relieved by the North Korean People 's Army ( KPA ) II and V Corps , and the North Koreans launched a separate offensive towards Wonju . 
 = = = Evacuation of Seoul = = = 
 In the aftermath of the Chinese attacks on along the 38th parallel , Ridgway worried that the Chinese would exploit the breakthrough at <unk> to circle the entire Eighth Army . He also lacked confidence in the UN troops ' ability to hold against the Chinese offensive . On the morning of January 3 , after conferring with Major General Frank W. Milburn and Major General John B. Coulter , commanders of the US I and IX Corps , respectively , Ridgway ordered the evacuation of Seoul . With the collapse of the UN defenses at the 38th parallel , the retreat had already started on January 1 . At 09 : 00 on January 1 , Milburn ordered US I Corps to retreat to the Seoul Bridgehead line . Following his orders , the US 25th Infantry Division of I Corps took up position to the west of Koyang , while the British 29th Independent Infantry Brigade of I Corps had dug in to the east . To the east of I Corps , Coulter also ordered the withdrawal of the US IX Corps at 14 : 00 with the Anglo @-@ Australian 27th British Commonwealth Brigade covering the rear . Some Chinese forces managed to trap the 3rd Battalion , Royal Australian Regiment ( <unk> ) of the 27th British Commonwealth Brigade at Uijeongbu during their attacks against the ROK 6th Infantry Division , but the battalion escaped the trap with four wounded . By midnight on January 1 , the US 24th Infantry Division of the IX Corps reached the Seoul Bridgehead line at the south of Uijeongbu , and the 27th Commonwealth Brigade was moved into the IX Corps rear as reserves . 
 The Chinese forces lacked the ability to lay siege to the city , so the evacuation order caught Peng by surprise . On the morning of January 3 , Peng ordered the PVA 13th Army to pursue the retreating UN forces by attacking towards Seoul . The US 24th , 25th Infantry Division and the British 29th Infantry Brigade soon bore the brunt of the Chinese attacks . In US IX Corps ' sector , PVA 38th Corps immediately attacked the US 24th Infantry Division as the American were trying to withdraw . In the fierce fighting that followed , the US 19th Infantry Regiment on the division 's left flank was involved in numerous hand @-@ to @-@ hand struggles with the Chinese around Uijeongbu . The Chinese overran the E and G company of US 19th Infantry Regiment during their attacks , but American artillery and air strikes soon inflicted 700 casualties in return . Faced with the heavy Chinese pressure , the 27th Commonwealth Brigade was again called in to cover the retreat of US IX Corps . After the US 24th Division evacuated Seoul on the night of January 3 , the 27th Commonwealth Brigade started to cross the Han River on the morning of January 4 , and by 07 : 40 the entire US IX Corps had left Seoul . 
 On the left flank of the U.S. 24th Infantry Division , the British 29th Infantry Brigade of the US I Corps was involved in the hardest fighting of the entire battle . In the 29th Infantry Brigade 's first action of the Korean War , the brigade was ordered to defend the areas east of Koyang on the Seoul Bridgehead line . The 1st Battalion , Royal Ulster Rifles ( 1RUR ) covered the brigade 's left flank , while the 1st Battalion , Royal Northumberland Fusiliers ( 1RNF ) was stationed on the brigade 's right flank . The 1st Battalion , Gloucestershire Regiment and the 1st Battalion , 21st Royal Thai Regiment covered the brigade 's rear with artillery support . At 04 : 00 on January 3 , 1RUR first made contact with the 149th Division of the PVA 50th Corps . The Chinese surprised and overran the B and D company of 1RUR , but a counterattack by Major C. A. H. B. Blake of 1RUR restored the battalion 's position by the morning . While 1RUR was under attack , the Chinese forces also infiltrated 1RNF 's positions by exploiting the unguarded valleys between hilltops occupied by the British . The entire 1RNF soon came under sniper fire and the Chinese made repeated attempts to capture the Y Company of 1RNF . To restore 1RNF 's position , Brigadier Thomas Brodie of the 29th Infantry Brigade sent the W Company of 1RNF with four Churchill tanks as reinforcement . The reinforcement was met with machine gun and mortar fire , but the Chinese resistance immediately crumbled under the Churchill tanks ' devastating assaults . The surviving Chinese troops fled under the bombardment from 4 @.@ 2 inch mortars and 25 pounder field guns . In the aftermath of fighting , the 29th Infantry Brigade suffered at least 16 dead , 45 wounded and 3 missing , while 200 Chinese dead were found within 1RNF 's position . 
 While the British 29th Infantry Brigade and the PVA 149th Division fought at the east of Koyang , the US 25th Infantry Division of the US I Corps started to withdraw on the left flank of 29th Infantry Brigade . The evacuation plan called for a coordinated withdrawal between the US 25th Infantry Division and the British 29th Infantry Brigade in order to prevent the Chinese from infiltrating the UN rear areas , but the heavy fighting soon made the coordination between American and British units impossible . After the US 27th Infantry Regiment of the 25th Infantry Division formed the rear guard of the US I Corps , the 25th Infantry Division and the 29th Infantry Brigade were ordered to evacuate at 15 : 00 on January 3 . The 25th Infantry Division retreated with little difficulties , but the withdrawal of the 29th Infantry Brigade did not start until after dark at 21 : 30 . With the road completely open between the American rear guards and the British units , the <unk> Regiment of the PVA 149th Division infiltrated UN rear areas and set up an ambush against 1RUR and the Cooper Force of the 8th King 's Royal Irish Hussars . 1RUR and the Cooper Force were then quickly overran by Chinese soldiers , most of whom were completely unarmed . The Chinese had also attacked the Cromwell tanks of the Cooper Force with bundle grenades and Bangalore torpedoes , setting several on fire . In the desperate hand on hand fighting that followed , although 100 soldiers from 1RUR managed to escape the trap under the command of Major <unk> Shaw , Major Blake of 1RUR and Captain D. Astley @-@ Cooper of the Cooper Force were killed in action , while another 208 British soldiers were missing in action , most of whom were captured by the Chinese . The US 27th Infantry Regiment tried to rescue the trapped British troops , but Brodie stopped the rescue in order to prevent more unnecessary losses . 
 When the British 29th Infantry Brigade left Seoul at 08 : 00 on January 4 , the US 27th Infantry Regiment became the last UN tactical unit that remained in the city . After fighting several more holding engagements at the outskirt of Seoul , the 27th Infantry Regiment crossed the Han River at 14 : 00 on January 4 . On January 5 Ridgway ordered the Eighth Army to withdraw from the Han River and to form a new defensive line , dubbed " Line D " , at the 37th parallel between <unk> and <unk> . The Incheon port and the Kimpo Airfield were then demolished to deny their use to the Chinese and North Korean forces . 
 On the afternoon of January 4 , the KPA I Corps , the PVA 38th Corps and the PVA 50th Corps entered Seoul , but they were only greeted by an empty city in flames . Most of the civilians had either fled south through the frozen Han River or evacuated to the nearby countryside . The South Korean government in Seoul , which was reduced to essential personnel before the battle , also left the city with little difficulties . A Chinese platoon reached the Seoul City Hall at about 13 : 00 and raised the North Korean flag . On January 5 , Peng ordered the PVA 50th Corps and the KPA I Corps to seize Gimpo and Incheon while instructing all other units to rest on the northern bank of the Han River . By January 7 , Peng halted the Third Phase Campaign due to troop exhaustion and to prevent a repeat of the Incheon landing . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Although the UN casualties were moderate during the battle , the Third Battle of Seoul was a significant success for the Chinese military in Korea , and the UN forces ' morale had sunk to its lowest point during the war . Ridgway was also extremely displeased with the performance of Eighth Army , which he had no control over due to the sudden death of Walker . Ridgway then took immediate steps to restore the morale and fighting spirit of the UN forces in Korea . With Ridgway leading the Eighth Army , MacArthur started to regain confidence in UN forces ' ability to hold Korea , and the UN evacuation plan was abandoned on January 17 . 
 Meanwhile , at the UN , although the UN members and US were initially divided on how to respond to Chinese intervention in Korea , the Chinese rejection of UN ceasefire soon rallied the UN members towards US . Immediately afterward , a UN resolution that condemned China as an aggressor was passed on February 1 . In the opinion of historian Bevin Alexander , the Chinese rejection of UN ceasefire had damaged the international prestige it had built from its earlier military successes , and this later made it difficult for China to either join the UN or to deny US support for Taiwan . The Korean War , which ultimately ended at the 38th parallel , would drag on for another two bloody years due to the Chinese demand for all UN forces to be withdrawn from the Korean Peninsula . 
 Despite its victory , the PVA had become completely exhausted after fighting nonstop since the start of the Chinese intervention . PVA Deputy Commander Han Xianchu later reported to Peng that although combat casualties had been light with only 8 @,@ 500 battle casualties , the poor logistics and the exhaustion had cost the " backbone " of the Chinese forces during the Third Phase Campaign . US Far East Air Forces ' " Interdiction Campaign No.4 " , which was launched on December 15 , 1950 against Chinese and North Korean supply lines , also made the Chinese unable to sustain any further offensives southward . Believing that the UN forces in Korea were thoroughly demoralized and unable to counterattack , Mao finally permitted the PVA to rest for at least two to three months , while Peng and other Chinese commanders were planning for one last decisive battle in the spring of 1951 . But to the surprise of Chinese commanders , Ridgway and the Eighth Army soon counterattacked the PVA with Operation Thunderbolt on January 25 , 1951 . 
 = M @-@ 28 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 28 is an east – west state trunkline highway that almost completely traverses the Upper Peninsula in the U.S. state of Michigan , from Wakefield to near Sault Ste . Marie in Bruce Township . Along with US Highway 2 ( US 2 ) , M @-@ 28 forms a pair of primary highways linking the Upper Peninsula from end to end , providing a major access route for traffic from Michigan and Canada along the southern shore of Lake Superior . M @-@ 28 is the longest state trunkline in Michigan numbered with the " M- " prefix at 290 @.@ 373 miles ( 467 @.@ 310 km ) . The entire highway is listed on the National Highway System , while three sections of M @-@ 28 are part of the Lake Superior Circle Tour . M @-@ 28 also carries two memorial highway designations along its route . 
 Throughout its course across the Upper Peninsula , M @-@ 28 passes through forested woodlands , bog swamps , urbanized areas , and along the Lake Superior shoreline . Sections of roadway cross the Ottawa National Forest and both units of the Hiawatha National Forest . Some of the other landmarks accessible from M @-@ 28 include the Seney Stretch , Seney National Wildlife Refuge and several historic bridges . 
 M @-@ 28 is an original trunkline designation , dating to the 1919 formation of the state 's trunkline system . The original highway was much shorter than the current version . M @-@ 28 was expanded eastward to the Sault Ste . Marie area in the late 1920s . The western end has been expanded twice to different locations on the Wisconsin state line . Other changes along the routing have led to the creation of three different business loops at various times , with one still extant . Future changes , proposed by Marquette County but not accepted by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) , could see M @-@ 28 rerouted over County Road 480 ( CR 480 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 28 is a major highway for Michigan and Canadian traffic along the south shore of Lake Superior . It forms the northern half of a pair of primary trunklines linking the Upper Peninsula from end to end ; US 2 is the southern partner . The 290 @.@ 373 @-@ mile ( 467 @.@ 310 km ) highway comprises mostly two lanes , undivided except for sections that are concurrent with US 41 near Marquette . The " Marquette Bypass " portion of US 41 / M @-@ 28 is a four @-@ lane expressway , and segments of the highway in Marquette County have four lanes . The entire route is part of the National Highway System , and three sections of the trunkline are part of the Lake Superior Circle Tour . 
 = = = Western terminus to Shingleton = = = 
 In the west , M @-@ 28 begins at a signalized intersection with US 2 in Wakefield . Heading north , the highway passes Sunday Lake heading out of town . After crossing into southwestern Ontonagon County and the Eastern Time Zone , the trunkline highway skirts the northern shore of Lake Gogebic , running concurrently with M @-@ 64 . The first section of M @-@ 28 designated as a part of the Lake Superior Circle Tour is from the western terminus to the eastern junction with M @-@ 64 in Bergland , where the Circle Tour turns north along M @-@ 64 , leaving M @-@ 28 . Here , M @-@ 28 has its lowest traffic counts ; within the 2013 MDOT survey , the road is listed with only an average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) of 1 @,@ 425 vehicles on a section of highway between Bergland and the US 45 intersection in Bruce Crossing . The trunkline runs through heavily forested areas of southern Houghton and Baraga counties . At the eastern junction with US 41 near Covington , M @-@ 28 receives the Circle Tour designation again and exits the Ottawa National Forest . 
 In Baraga and Marquette counties , US 41 / M @-@ 28 passes through hilly terrain before entering the urban areas of Ishpeming , Negaunee and Marquette . Approximately 13 @,@ 000 – 17 @,@ 000 vehicles use this section from Ishpeming eastward through Negaunee . West of the city of Marquette , US 41 / M @-@ 28 had a peak 2013 AADT of 32 @,@ 805 vehicles in Marquette Township along a retail and business corridor . This peak level is sustained until the start of the Marquette Bypass , where the traffic returns to the 16 @,@ 500 @-@ vehicle and higher levels seen in Ishpeming and Negaunee . South of the city of Marquette , traffic counts once again climb to 19 @,@ 620 vehicles . In Chocolay Township the AADT drops to 8 @,@ 840 vehicles before tapering off to 3 @,@ 065 vehicles by the county line . 
 At the Ishpeming – Negaunee city line , M @-@ 28 changes memorial highway designations . From the western terminus to this point , M @-@ 28 is called the " Veterans Memorial Highway " , but it becomes the " D. J. Jacobetti Memorial Highway " to honor the longest @-@ serving member of the Michigan Legislature . The Jacobetti Highway designation ends at the eastern M @-@ 123 junction in Chippewa County . 
 Between Marquette and Munising , M @-@ 28 closely parallels the Lake Superior shoreline , providing scenic views of the lake and its " lonesome sandy beaches " . The <unk> Sculpture Park is located in Chocolay Township near Shot Point in eastern Marquette County . This roadside attraction is owned by Tom <unk> and features fanciful works of art made of scrap iron . Near the community of Au Train , M @-@ 28 crosses into the western unit of the Hiawatha National Forest . West of Munising is a ferry dock offering transport to the Grand Island National Recreation Area , and at Munising there is easy access to Pictured Rocks National Lakeshore . The roadway also features variable message signs to warn motorists of winter weather @-@ related traffic closures along the lakeshore . Installed at the US 41 and M @-@ 94 junctions , the signs advise motorists which sections of roadway are closed . Per MDOT policy , only snowplows are allowed on these sections during a closure . The highway exits the Hiawatha National Forest at the Alger County – Schoolcraft County line along the Seney Stretch . 
 = = = Seney Stretch = = = 
 The portion of M @-@ 28 between Seney and Shingleton , called the Seney Stretch , is 25 miles ( 40 km ) of " straight @-@ as @-@ an @-@ arrow highway " across the Great Manistique Swamp , " though others claim it 's 50 miles [ 80 km ] , only because it seems longer . " The Seney Stretch is the longest such section of highway in the state , and " one of the longest stretches of <unk> highway east of the Mississippi . " The highway is often cited as the " state 's most boring route " according to the Michigan Economic Development Corporation ( <unk> ) and Hunts ' Guide . The straightness and flatness over a great distance are given as reasons for the reputation of this stretch as boring . 
 The road across the swamp was constructed parallel to the line of the Duluth , South Shore and Atlantic Railway ( later the Soo Line Railroad ) . It was first numbered as a part of M @-@ 25 when that designation was used along today 's M @-@ 28 east of US 41 . The most significant changes made to the stretch since its original construction were the addition of passing relief lanes and a full @-@ scale , year @-@ round rest area in 1999 . 
 Part of the Seney Stretch forms the northern border of the Seney National Wildlife Refuge . Established in 1935 , this refuge is a managed wetland in Schoolcraft County . It has an area of 95 @,@ 212 acres ( 385 km2 ) , and contains the <unk> Bog National Natural Landmark within its boundaries . 
 = = = Seney to eastern terminus = = = 
 Past Seney , M @-@ 28 once again enters woodlands on the eastern end of the Upper Peninsula . In Luce County , the roadway passes through the community of McMillan en route to Newberry . The Circle Tour departs M @-@ 28 to follow M @-@ 123 at Newberry , looping north to the Tahquamenon Falls State Park . East of town , the road passes Luce County Airport off of Luce CR 399 . From there , M @-@ 28 crosses the east and west branches of the Sage River and passes south of Soo Junction , before the Chippewa County border . 
 In Chippewa County , M @-@ 28 begins bending slightly east @-@ northeastward . Hulbert Lake is located south of Hulbert ; north of the lake , the highway enters the eastern unit of the Hiawatha National Forest . At the eastern junction of M @-@ 28 and M @-@ 123 near Eckerman and Strongs , the Circle Tour returns to M @-@ 28 and the D.J. Jacobetti Memorial Highway designation ends . The highway leaves the eastern unit of the Hiawatha National Forest between the communities of <unk> and Brimley . M @-@ 221 leads north from the main highway on an old routing of M @-@ 28 to connect to the community of Brimley and the Bay Mills Indian Community . Brimley State Park is just east of Brimley on the old 6 Mile Road alignment of M @-@ 28 . The highway meets I @-@ 75 at exit 386 , and the Lake Superior Circle Tour departs M @-@ 28 to follow I @-@ 75 . This interchange is just west of H @-@ 63 / Mackinac Trail , a former segment of US 2 . M @-@ 28 continues 3 miles ( 5 km ) farther to its eastern terminus with M @-@ 129 . 
 = = = Services = = = 
 Along the routing of M @-@ 28 , MDOT has established several roadside parks and rest areas . Two of these are in Ontonagon County near Ewen and Trout Creek . A park with a picnic area , and a footbridge lies near Tioga Creek in Baraga County east of the US 41 junction . In Three Lakes a scenic turnout and a roadside park overlook Lake Michigamme , and along Lake Superior south of Marquette is a tourist information center built as a log cabin . East of the H @-@ 01 junction in Au Train is a roadside park that includes Scott Falls . Further east , a year @-@ round rest area is located on the west end of the Seney Stretch . Three other roadside parks lie east of Harvey in Shelter Bay , on the shores of Deer Lake and west of Newberry . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Mainline history = = = 
 Formed by July 1 , 1919 , M @-@ 28 began in Wakefield at a junction with then M @-@ 12 and ran roughly along the current alignment to end at M @-@ 15 , 6 @.@ 5 miles ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) east of Covington . These two termini roughly correspond to the modern US 2 and western US 41 junctions respectively . M @-@ 28 was extended in 1927 along US 41 into Marquette County and east over M @-@ 25 through Chatham , Munising , and Newberry , before ending in downtown Sault Ste . Marie . At Negaunee , M @-@ 28 took the former routing of M @-@ 15 between Negaunee and Marquette for 10 miles ( 16 km ) while US 41 ran along a portion of M @-@ 35 . This southern loop routing of M @-@ 28 lasted until approximately 1936 , when M @-@ 28 was moved to US 41 , and the former route became CR 492 . A new routing of M @-@ 28 in the Newberry area opened later that year , and a new M @-@ 28A ( later Bus . M @-@ 28 ) existed until 1953 . Another realignment in 1937 marked the transfer of M @-@ 28 out of downtown Ishpeming and Negaunee . This former routing later became Bus . M @-@ 28 . 
 In the late 1930s , a highway numbered M @-@ 178 was designated between M @-@ 28 south of Munising to M @-@ 94 in town . In 1941 , the routings of M @-@ 28 and M @-@ 94 were reversed between Harvey and Munising , and M @-@ 28 supplanted the M @-@ 178 designation completely . Since then , M @-@ 28 has run along the lakeshore through Au Train . M @-@ 28 was extended along US 2 to the state line at Ironwood , and the eastern end of M @-@ 28 through Brimley was moved to a new alignment ending at US 2 , in Dafter in 1942 . The eastern end was moved along US 2 back to Sault Ste . Marie in 1948 , though the terminus was returned to Dafter in 1950 . 
 From 1952 to 1962 , M @-@ 28 crossed US 2 at Wakefield going south and stopped at the Wisconsin border , connecting with a county road . This segment of the highway ( now Gogebic CR 519 ) was transferred back to the county in 1962 . M @-@ 94 previously looped along Munising @-@ Van Meer @-@ Shingleton Road ( now H @-@ 58 and H @-@ 15 ) north of M @-@ 28 between Munising and Shingleton . This routing was abandoned on November 7 , 1963 in favor of the current concurrency . The last significant change to the M @-@ 28 routing occurred on March 3 , 1989 , when the eastern terminus was moved east to M @-@ 129 . 
 = = = Marquette roundabout = = = 
 MDOT unveiled plans on March 31 , 2009 , to rebuild the intersection between Front Street and the eastern end of the Marquette Bypass during 2010 . The rebuilt intersection would take the form of a roundabout , replacing several intersecting roadways that connect the north and south sections of Front Street with US 41 / M @-@ 28 through the existing intersection . The previous intersection configuration dated back to the 1960s . It had been labeled as " dangerous and [ causing ] significant traffic delays " by the designers of the replacement . A traffic study concluded in 2007 that the intersection would need either the roundabout or a traffic signal with several turning lanes to accommodate the traffic needs in the area . MDOT decided in favor of a two @-@ lane , 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) roundabout retaining the right @-@ turn lanes from the previous intersection layout . These lanes will be used by right @-@ turning traffic to bypass the circle at the center of the intersection . 
 The upgraded intersection had been a part of the City of Marquette 's master plan since 2003 . MDOT engineers touted the constant @-@ flowing nature of the design as a benefit to the new intersection , and city planners promoted the enhanced safety aspects of the project . Both parties stated the planned intersection was less expensive than a conventional stop light . 
 Residents have expressed concerns about snow plowing and truck traffic in the intersection . The designers consulted officials of Avon , Colorado , where several roundabouts are situated in a location that averages over 300 inches ( 760 cm ) of annual snowfall . Designers planned the size of the new intersection to accommodate truck traffic . MDOT has stated that many of the concerns expressed are due to misconceptions and unfounded assumptions about the design . The department held an informational meeting with the residents on April 15 , 2010 before construction began . Topics ranges from emergency vehicles , plowing , trucks , accidents and detour plans . 
 Construction started on the project in May . One lane of traffic in each direction was maintained for US 41 / M @-@ 28 . Motorist seeking access to downtown were detoured via Grove Street or Lakeshore Boulevard . The Downtown Development Authority had plans to purchase billboards helping to direct customers to the downtown shopping district . A section of the intersection was opened in July to traffic from the south that turns west . The lanes northbound into downtown were opened in the beginning of August , and the city held a ribbon cutting ceremony on August 19 , 2010 . The remaining lanes were opened the next day . To address residents ' concerns about truck traffic through the intersection , the mayor note that truck used the roundabout after the ribbon was cut . " It just cruised right around and through . All of these people who are wondering is it big enough , can you get a firetruck on it ? Yes , you can , " stated Mayor John Kivela . 
 = = = Historic bridges = = = 
 MDOT has highlighted five historic bridges along the route of M @-@ 28 on the MDOT website . In Interior Township , Ontonagon County , the highway crosses the Ontonagon River over a bridge built in 1929 . Designed by the State Highway Department and built by the firm of Meads and Anderson , the Ontonagon River Bridge is one of only three steel arch bridges in Michigan . The main span arch is 150 feet ( 46 m ) long . A former routing of M @-@ 28 in Covington Township crosses the Rock River . Although this section was bypassed by a new alignment of the trunkline in 1924 , the bridge remains complete " with corbeled bulkheads and six panels recessed in the concrete spandrel walls . " The corbels and spandrels are decorative features found in the concrete sides of the bridge . 
 Today , drivers cannot use the Peshekee River Bridge south of US 41 / M @-@ 28 in western Marquette County 's Michigamme Township . The bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1999 as " Trunk Line Bridge No. 1 " for its engineering and architectural significance . MDOT has listed it as " one of Michigan 's most important vehicular bridges . " It was the first bridge designed by the Michigan State Highway Department , the forerunner to MDOT , in 1914 . It was bypassed by a newer bridge built over the Peshekee River on US 41 / M @-@ 28 subsequently abandoned as a roadway . The replacement bridge was bypassed and demolished in 1995 . 
 The next historic bridge listed by MDOT along M @-@ 28 is over the Sand River in <unk> Township in Alger County . While not visible to motorists , the bridge , constructed in 1939 , is the longest rural rigid @-@ frame span in Michigan . Most bridges of this type were built in urban locations , and soil conditions in the state limit locations for this style of bridge . The bridge over the East Branch of the Tahquamenon River in Chippewa County was built in 1926 as a " formative exercise in what would evolve into a state standard design . " The 55 @-@ foot ( 17 m ) bridge was built with nine lines of I @-@ beams encased in concrete . Only one other bridge in Michigan was built with such concrete encasement . 
 = = Future = = 
 In the August 24 , 2005 edition , the Marquette Mining Journal reported that the Marquette County Board and the County Road Commission were negotiating with MDOT to transfer the jurisdiction of Marquette County Road 480 to the state . Several routing options have been discussed , though all would make CR 480 a part of M @-@ 28 . Cost was the primary reason given behind rerouting M @-@ 28 along CR 480 . " The road commission receives about $ 50 @,@ 000 a year in state gas tax money but spends about $ 100 @,@ 000 to maintain CR 480 because of the type and volume of traffic it receives . " Handing CR 480 over to the state would shift the maintenance costs to the state , as well . 
 MDOT has indicated that it has not requested jurisdiction , but rather if it assumed control of the route , the community would need to support a through @-@ route . Several proposals have arisen , including creating a " spur " from US 41 / M @-@ 28 through the east end of Ishpeming to meet CR 480 west of Negaunee . This spur would pass through recently reopened former mining " caving grounds " , and to the south of the Mather A & B Mine complex . According to Gerry Corkin , Marquette County Board Chairman , " the land that was purchased by Ishpeming and Negaunee , the mining company land , this has the potential to help in the development of that if this is compatible . I think both cities will be interested in taking a look at what the land uses are and where this [ spur ] would push through . " 
 The spur proposal would open land to development between the downtown areas of the two cities . If jurisdiction is transferred , and M @-@ 28 is routed over CR 480 as proposed , M @-@ 28 would leave the concurrency with US 41 near Teal Lake in Negaunee , and cross the caving grounds west of downtown to connect to Rail Street . Rail Street would serve as the connector to CR 480 , which ends at the intersection of Rail and Ann streets and Healey Avenue . Proposals indicate two routing options for the east end of CR 480 . One would route M @-@ 28 back along US 41 from Beaver Grove north of the CR 480 eastern terminus to the existing M @-@ 28 in Harvey . A second would route it along CR 551 / Cherry Creek Road from CR 480 to M @-@ 28 in Harvey . 
 = = Business loops = = 
 There have been three business loops for M @-@ 28 : Ishpeming – Negaunee , Marquette and Newberry . Only the business loop serving Ishpeming and Negaunee is still a state @-@ maintained trunkline . US 41 / M @-@ 28 was relocated to bypass the two cities ' downtowns in 1937 . The highway through downtown Ishpeming and Negaunee later carried the ALT US 41 / ALT M @-@ 28 designation before being designated BUS M @-@ 28 in 1958 . The western end of the business loop was transferred to local government control when BUS M @-@ 28 was moved along Lakeshore Drive in 1999 . 
 BUS US 41 in Marquette was first shown on a map in 1964 after the construction of the Marquette Bypass . It was later designated BUS US 41 / BUS M @-@ 28 on a map in 1975 ; this second designation was removed from maps by 1982 . The entire business loop was turned back to local control in a " route swap " between the City of Marquette and MDOT announced in early 2005 . The proposal transferred jurisdiction on the unsigned M @-@ 554 and the business route from the state to the city . The state would take jurisdiction over a segment of McClellan Avenue to be used to extend M @-@ 553 to US 41 / M @-@ 28 . In addition , MDOT would pay $ 2 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 3 @.@ 15 million in 2015 ) for reconstruction work planned for 2007 . The transfer would increase Marquette 's operational and maintenance liability expenses by $ 26 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to $ 33 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) and place the financial burden of the future replacement of a stop light on the city . On October 10 , 2005 , MDOT and Marquette transferred jurisdiction over the three roadways . As a result , BUS US 41 was decommissioned when the local government took control over Washington and Front streets . As a result of the decommissioning , the 2006 maps did not show the now former business loop . 
 The Newberry Bus . M @-@ 28 was designated from 1936 until 1952 as M @-@ 28A . The MSHD maps of the time showed it signed as BUS M @-@ 28 in 1952 before it was turned back to local control in 1953 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich I @-@ 211 = 
 The Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich I @-@ 211 was a prototype high @-@ altitude Soviet fighter aircraft built during World War II . It was a version of the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich I @-@ 210 , itself a variant of the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich MiG @-@ 3 , fitted with a Shvetsov ASh @-@ 82F radial engine . Its development was quite prolonged , although successful , but by the time it finished its manufacturer 's trials in early 1944 there was no need for a high @-@ altitude fighter and it was not worth reducing the production of existing fighters to convert a factory over to the I @-@ 211 . 
 = = Development = = 
 The I @-@ 211 was a direct descendent of the Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich I @-@ 210 high @-@ altitude fighter prototype , also known as the MiG @-@ 3 @-@ 82 or MiG @-@ 9 . Late in 1941 , a decision was made to phase out production of the Mikulin AM @-@ 35A engine used by the MiG @-@ 1 and MiG @-@ 3 in favor of the Mikulin AM @-@ 38 engine used in the Ilyushin Il @-@ 2 . The MiG design team had already created a version of the MiG @-@ 3 called the I @-@ 210 using a Shvetsov ASh @-@ 82 radial engine instead of the inline , liquid @-@ cooled engine . A number of changes were made in order to accommodate the larger circumference of the radial engine , but the redesign of the engine cowling was a failure and the I @-@ 210 proved to be slower than the Yak @-@ 1 or the LaGG @-@ 3 when it first flew on 23 July 1941 . 
 Artem Mikoyan and Mikhail Gurevich continued development and another prototype was built , the MiG I @-@ 211 , or the MiG @-@ <unk> , using the improved ASh @-@ 82F engine . Improvements from the I @-@ 210 included aerodynamic refinements of the engine cowling , the cockpit was moved aft 24 @.@ 5 cm ( 9 @.@ 6 in ) , the oil cooler inlets were moved to the wing roots , the oil cooler was moved entirely inside fuselage and a larger tail was fitted . It was armed with two 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) ShVAK cannon . It weighed some 300 kg ( 660 lb ) less than the I @-@ 210 , possibly due to an all @-@ metal structure , but this cannot be confirmed . 
 These refinements took most of 1942 to design and assembly of the I @-@ 211 did not begin until December 1942 . Its first flight was on 24 February 1943 . The reduction in drag and in weight greatly improved performance over the I @-@ 211 , with a top speed of 670 km / h ( 420 mph ) at a height of 7 @,@ 000 m ( 23 @,@ 000 ft ) and took only 4 @.@ 0 minutes to reach an altitude of 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 000 ft ) . The OKB had originally planned to build ten in the first quarter of 1943 , but the manufacturer 's trials took an unexpectedly long time to complete and were not finished until the first quarter of 1944 . By this time there was little demand for a high @-@ altitude fighter and the project was canceled with only a single aircraft built . 
 = = = Nomenclature = = = 
 In a number of older books , the MiG I @-@ 211 is called the MiG @-@ 5 . It is now established that the MiG @-@ 5 designation was reserved for the production version of the MiG DIS , a twin @-@ engine fighter that did not enter production . The acronym DIS comes from <unk> Istrebitel <unk> or long @-@ range escort fighter . Similarly the MiG @-@ 9 designation was intended for the production version of the MiG @-@ 3 with the ASh @-@ 82 radial engine . This name was reused shortly afterwards for the first Mikoyan @-@ Gurevich jet fighter . 
 = = Operators = = 
 Soviet Union 
 Soviet Air Force 
 = = Specifications ( I @-@ 211 ) = = 
 Data from Gordon , Soviet Airpower in World War 2 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 7 @.@ 954 m ( 26 ft 1 in ) 
 Wingspan : 10 @.@ 20 m ( 33 ft 5 ½ in ) 
 Height : 3 @.@ 63 m ( 11 ft 10 in ) 
 Wing area : 17 @.@ 44 m ( 187 @.@ 7 sq ft ) 
 Empty weight : 2 @,@ 528 kg ( 5 @,@ 573 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 3 @,@ 100 kg ( 6 @,@ 834 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Shvetsov M @-@ 82F air @-@ cooled radial piston engine , 1 @,@ 380 kW ( 1 @,@ 850 hp ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 670 km / h ( 416 mph ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 440 km ( 894 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 11 @,@ 300 m ( 37 @,@ 065 ft ) 
 Armament 
 2 × forward @-@ firing ShVAK 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 787 in ) cannon mounted on the bottom of the engine cowling 
 = Maryland Route 151 = 
 Maryland Route 151 ( MD 151 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known for most of its length as North Point Boulevard , the state highway runs 10 @.@ 80 miles ( 17 @.@ 38 km ) from 7th Street in Sparrows Point north to U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) in Baltimore . MD 151 is a four- to six @-@ lane divided highway that connects the communities of Edgemere and Dundalk on the Patapsco River Neck peninsula of southeastern Baltimore County with industrial areas in Sparrows Point and East Baltimore . MD 151 was originally constructed in the early 1920s from Sparrows Point to Edgemere . The highway was connected to Baltimore by the Baltimore County portion of MD 20 , a number also assigned to the highway from Rock Hall to Chestertown in Kent County . During World War II , MD 151 was extended north through Dundalk on a new divided highway parallel to MD 20 and through East Baltimore on an expanded Erdman Avenue to connect the Bethlehem Steel complex at Sparrows Point with MD 150 and US 40 . In the late 1960s and early 1970s , Interstate 695 ( I @-@ 695 ) was constructed parallel to MD 151 between Edgemere and MD 157 in Dundalk . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 151 begins at an intersection with 7th Street within the former Bethlehem Steel complex , which is now owned by <unk> . Sparrows Point Boulevard continues south to a gate south of F Street . MD 151 heads northeast as a four @-@ lane divided highway . The state highway leaves the steel complex by crossing over the Patapsco & Back Rivers Railroad and Wharf Road , also identified as MD <unk> , with which MD 151 has a modified trumpet interchange . At Sparrows Point Road , MD 151 's name changes to North Point Boulevard and the highway curves north to bypass Edgemere . The state highway intersects MD 158 ( Bethlehem Boulevard ) ; to the east MD 158 provides access to North Point Road , which heads south through Edgemere toward North Point State Park and Fort Howard . Just north of MD 158 , MD 151 has a partial interchange with I @-@ 695 ( Baltimore Beltway ) , which includes a ramp from MD 151 to northbound I @-@ 695 and a loop ramp from southbound I @-@ 695 to MD 151 . The movements to and from the Francis Scott Key Bridge to the south are made via MD 158 to the west . 
 MD 151 passes under a rail line owned by Norfolk Southern Railway and intersects Wise Avenue before passing through the North Point Village neighborhood of Dundalk , where the highway is paralleled by North Point Road on the east . At Cove Road , a connector between MD 151 and I @-@ 695 , North Point Road switches to the west side of MD 151 . The area north of North Point Village , where the Patapsco River Neck narrows to a width of 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) between the Back River and Bear Creek , was the site of the Battle of North Point , a September 12 , 1814 engagement that was part of the encompassing Battle of Baltimore in the War of 1812 . At Bread and Cheese Creek , northbound MD 151 crosses to the east side of I @-@ 695 , which runs in the median of the state highway . Northbound MD 151 and northbound I @-@ 695 and the southbound directions of each highway are connected to each other by ramps . Northbound MD 151 crosses over I @-@ 695 and has a U @-@ turn ramp before the highway 's partial cloverleaf interchange with the ramps between I @-@ 695 and the northern end of MD 157 ( Merritt Boulevard ) . There is no access from northbound MD 151 to MD 157 or between MD 151 and the ramps to I @-@ 695 . The state highway continues northwest along the southern edge of the Eastpoint Mall ahead of its cloverleaf interchange with MD 150 ( Eastern Avenue ) , then enters an industrial area where the highway has a grade crossing of the Canton Railroad . 
 MD 151 enters the city of Baltimore just west of its intersection with Rolling Mill Road and Kane Street . The state highway passes under I @-@ 95 , a Norfolk Southern Railway railyard , and the Amtrak Northeast Corridor . At North Point Road , MD 151 's name changes to Erdman Avenue and the highway veers west to pass under CSX 's Philadelphia Subdivision . The state highway veers northwest at its crossing of I @-@ 895 ( Harbor Tunnel Thruway ) just before the highway 's cloverleaf interchange with US 40 ( Pulaski Highway ) , which also includes a ramp from southbound MD 151 to southbound I @-@ 895 . Connections between eastbound US 40 and northbound MD 151 are made via Mapleton Avenue just east of I @-@ 895 . MD 151 continues northwest concurrent with US 40 Truck as a six @-@ lane boulevard between the Armistead Gardens neighborhood to the east and industrial facilities on the west . The state highway passes by Archbishop Curley High School and through the Belair @-@ Edison neighborhood before reaching its northern terminus at US 1 ( Belair Road ) , onto which US 40 Truck turns west . Erdman Avenue continues northwest as a two @-@ lane street along the eastern edge of Clifton Park to MD 147 ( Harford Road ) . 
 MD 151 is a part of the National Highway System as an intermodal connector from I @-@ 695 in Dundalk to I @-@ 95 in Baltimore and as a principal arterial from I @-@ 95 to its northern terminus at US 1 in Baltimore . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 151 was originally assigned only to Sparrows Point Road , which was improved as a concrete road from the southern end of the highway at the Bethlehem Steel complex to North Point Road in Edgemere by 1921 . North Point Road was also built as a concrete road from Edgemere to the North Point are of Dundalk by 1921 . That highway , which was designated MD 20 in 1927 , was extended south toward Fort Howard and north from North Point to US 40 in Baltimore in 1923 . By 1934 , heavy traffic between Baltimore and Sparrows Point led the Maryland State Roads Commission to recommend MD 151 and MD 20 from Sparrows Point to Baltimore be expanded from 20 to 40 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 to 12 @.@ 2 m ) in width . 
 Modern MD 151 was constructed between 1940 and 1944 as a defense access project to better connect Baltimore with Bethlehem Steel 's steel mills and shipyards at Sparrows Point . MD 151 was reconstructed and extended north as a four @-@ lane divided highway from Sparrows Point to Wise Avenue in Dundalk between 1940 and 1942 . This construction included the highway 's bypass of Edgemere ; the bypassed portion of Sparrows Point Road from the expanded highway east to MD 20 was designated MD 718 by 1946 . In Baltimore , Erdman Avenue was expanded to a divided highway from US 1 to US 40 and extended south to North Point Road by 1942 ; MD 151 's underpasses of the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad ( now CSX ) and Pennsylvania Railroad ( now Amtrak ) and its interchange with US 40 were completed at that time . MD 151 from Wise Avenue to the Baltimore City line was constructed between 1942 and 1944 ; this work included the cloverleaf interchange with MD 150 . 
 With the construction of modern MD 151 , MD 20 was split into several disjoint segments of North Point Road : one from near Fort Howard to MD 151 in Edgemere , another along the northbound side of MD 151 from Edgemere to North Point Village , a third on the southbound side of MD 151 from North Point Village to the MD 150 – MD 151 interchange , and a fourth between MD 151 and US 40 in Baltimore . The Baltimore City segment was removed from the state highway system in 1956 . The portion of MD 20 from near Fort Howard to MD 718 in Edgemere was transferred to county maintenance in 1987 . The remaining portions of MD 20 and MD 718 were removed from the state highway system around 1999 . 
 MD 151 's interchanges with Wharf Road in Sparrows Point and with MD 20 and Bethlehem Boulevard in Edgemere were built by 1963 . The state highway 's partial interchange with Merritt Boulevard was constructed in 1969 and the crossover interchange with I @-@ 695 was built in 1971 . I @-@ 695 was completed between Merritt Boulevard and MD 151 in Edgemere in 1974 . In 1999 , as part of the reconstruction of I @-@ 695 from the Key Bridge to Edgemere from a two @-@ lane viaduct to a four @-@ lane surface freeway , MD 151 's interchange with MD 20 and MD 158 in Edgemere was reduced to a standard intersection and the highway 's present partial interchange with I @-@ 695 was built . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Auxiliary routes = = 
 MD <unk> is the designation for the 0 @.@ 07 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 11 km ) one @-@ lane ramp from northbound MD 151 to eastbound Sparrows Point Road between Sparrows Point and Edgemere . 
 MD <unk> is the designation for Wharf Road , which runs 0 @.@ 60 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) from its interchange with MD 151 north to its intersection with MD 158 in Sparrows Point . Wharf Road 's trumpet interchange with MD 151 includes an intersection with county @-@ maintained Wharf Road , which continues south along Jones Creek , and a teardrop median on the north side of the interchange between the road and the southbound MD 151 interchange ramps . 
 = Intimidator 305 = 
 Intimidator 305 is a steel roller coaster by Intamin at Kings Dominion in Doswell , Virginia , United States . Debuting on April 2 , 2010 as the park 's fourteenth roller coaster , Intimidator 305 is located in the Safari Village section near Anaconda . Standing at 305 feet ( 93 m ) tall and reaching speeds of 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) , it is the second Giga Coaster to be built in North America – the first was Millennium Force at Cedar Point . The $ 25 million investment was the largest of any ride in the park 's history . It is named and themed after NASCAR driver Dale Earnhardt , the Intimidator . 
 Intimidator 305 has a first drop of 300 feet ( 91 m ) , with a maximum descent angle of 85 degrees . Intimidator 305 features yellow supports with red track . The lift hill structure for Intimidator 305 is unique in that the lift @-@ hill and crest only have two main points of support . The overall height of Intimidator 305 is higher than the observation platform of the Eiffel Tower , making it one of the tallest rides at Kings Dominion . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Announcement = = = 
 Intimidator 305 , the first Giga Coaster built since Steel Dragon 2000 in 2000 , was announced on Thursday , August 20 , 2009 . Local news media , then Cedar Fair CEO Dick Kinzel and Dale Earnhardt Incorporated CEO Jeff Steiner , and Dale Earnhardt 's daughter Taylor Earnhardt were in attendance to the announcement . The official announcement , led by Kings Dominion Head Manager Ed Kuhlmann , was accompanied by animation videos of the ride and a working model . The roller coaster is themed to NASCAR racing legend Dale Earnhardt . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Intimidator 305 sits on the former land occupied by the Safari Monorail which closed in 1993 . Kings Dominion broke ground on Intimidator 305 on June 1 , 2009 . The first pieces of track arrived a few days later . On August 19 , the first pieces of steel were put into place . The 305 @-@ foot ( 93 m ) lift hill was topped off in November 2009 . Construction crews continued to construct the ride throughout the winter and the last piece of track was lifted into place on January 9 , 2010 . Intimidator 305 's first test run was on Sunday , March 14 , 2010 . 
 = = = Modifications = = = 
 Some riders experienced problems due to the G @-@ forces inherent in the ride 's original design . Riders reported greying or blacking out after the first drop . Kings Dominion temporarily installed trim brakes on the first drop in order to reduce the speed while a long @-@ term solution could be devised . The brakes were adjusted and positioned by late May 2010 . 
 During the following off @-@ season , Kings Dominion widened the first high @-@ speed turn to lower the amount of G @-@ force experienced on the ride . The park 's goal was to reduce the number of blackouts some riders were experiencing . The modification allowed them to remove the trim brakes on the ride 's first drop , allowing the roller coaster to achieve its original maximum speed . 
 = = Ride experience = = 
 Intimidator 305 has been described as a mix of both Millennium Force and Maverick , both located at Cedar Point . Intamin designed the ride to feature the high lift hill like Millennium Force . Following the lift hill are low @-@ to @-@ the @-@ ground tight turns and hills , similar to Maverick . The ride features six air @-@ time humps and three near @-@ ground @-@ level high @-@ speed turns over 5 @,@ 100 feet ( 1 @,@ 600 m ) of track . 
 = = = Layout = = = 
 While the train is being loaded in the station , the catch car of the cable lift is latched onto the middle car of the train . Before the train leaves the station , a recording that states , " Gentlemen , start your engines ! " is heard followed by a loud revving sound . Once the train is dispatched , the train ascends the 45 @-@ degree lift hill at 17 miles per hour ( 27 km / h ) to a maximum height of 305 feet ( 93 m ) . Once the train crests the top of the lift , the train descends down the 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) , 85 @-@ degree drop , reaching speeds up to 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) . The drop is steep enough and sudden enough that riders towards the back of the train are thrown out of their seats into the restraints , so that during the 300 @-@ foot near @-@ vertical drop they feel as if they 're about to fall out of the ride . The train turns right into a 270 @-@ degree turn , reaching about 5G 's ( nearly 6G 's before modifications ) before ascending the 150 @-@ foot ( 46 m ) airtime hill . The train then descends into a high @-@ speed bunny hop before entering another high @-@ speed turn . The train then maneuvers 3 sharp twists before entering the final high @-@ speed turn . The train then climbs another airtime hill , followed by another airtime hill before entering a final twist and then climbing a small , twisty bunny hop into the magnetic brakes . One cycle of the ride lasts about 3 minutes . 
 = = = Trains and theme = = = 
 Intimidator 305 features two trains themed as Dale Earnhardt 's black number 3 car . The trains feature headlights at the front of each train as well as advertisement stickers that are found on NASCAR cars . One train is red with the other being silver . Each train has eight four @-@ passenger cars , allowing thirty @-@ two passengers per train . The trains are arranged in stadium @-@ style seating with overhead lap bars fitted with soft , padded over @-@ the @-@ shoulder straps . In early July 2010 , the ride received a unique new restraint design . The over @-@ the @-@ shoulder part of the harness now resembles a padded seat belt rather than the typical over @-@ the @-@ shoulder restraints used by Intamin . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Intimidator 305 won the Golden Ticket Award for " Best New Roller Coaster in 2010 " by Amusement Today . 
 = = Incidents = = 
 While performing a test run prior to the park opening on July 9 , 2013 , one of the roller coaster trains became stuck near the top of the lift hill . The train was eventually brought down a week later , and the ride remained closed indefinitely . Kings Dominion later explained the closure through a statement released on their official Facebook page on August 28 , 2013 , which stated that a problem with the weight distribution on the gearbox caused a part to warp and fail . The replacement part had to be custom @-@ built in another country causing the extended closure . The ride eventually reopened on September 14 , 2013 . 
 = Halvdan Koht = 
 Halvdan Koht ( 7 July 1873 – 12 December 1965 ) was a Norwegian historian and politician representing the Labour Party . 
 Born in the north of Norway to a fairly distinguished family , he soon became interested in politics and history . Starting his political career in the Liberal Party , he switched to the Labour Party around the turn of the 20th century . He represented that party in the Bærum municipal council for parts of the interwar period . He was never elected a member of Parliament , but served nonetheless as Norwegian Minister of Foreign Affairs from 1935 to 1941 . In the latter capacity he sought to preserve Norway 's neutrality in the Second World War , an action that garnered him political infamy . Growing discontentment with Koht 's political decisions ultimately led to his exit from the cabinet . After the war , however , he returned to an academic career track and wrote major works in the 1950s and 1960s . 
 As an academic he was a professor of history at the Royal Frederick University ( now the University of Oslo ) from 1910 to 1935 , having become a research fellow in 1900 and docent in 1908 . Among many honors , he held an honorary degree at the University of Oxford . He was a prolific writer , and touched on numerous subjects during his long academic career . He wrote several biographies ; his works on Johan Sverdrup and Henrik Ibsen spanned several volumes each . He became known for syntheses on Norwegian history , and emphasised the roles of peasants and wage labourers as historical agents who found their place in an expanding notion of the Norwegian nation . He was also interested in the United States and its history , and was a pioneer in Norway in this respect . 
 Koht 's views on the Norwegian language also garnered him nationwide academic recognition . He championed the <unk> language reform , the declared aim of which was to consolidate the two standards of written Norwegian . A reform pushing the formal written language in this direction was indeed implemented in 1938 , but historical events led to the failure of this policy . A pertinacious and unyielding advocate of international peace , Koht was a founding member of the Norwegian Peace Association and an ordinary member of the Norwegian Nobel Committee . As an activist and politician he was described as a strong @-@ willed and individualistic , and nurturing a strong belief in taking an academic and legal perspective on political problems . 
 = = Background = = 
 Halvdan Koht was born on 7 August 1873 in Tromsø , one of the larger cities in Northern Norway . He was the second of four children born to Paul Steenstrup Koht ( 1844 – 1892 ) , an educator and politician , and Betty Giæver ( 1845 – 1936 ) , a part @-@ time teacher with a penchant for singing , languages and drawing . Betty 's antecedents were mixed : she was maternally descended from Northern Germany , yet on her father 's side she was of Norwegian origin — a distinguished forebear on that side was her great @-@ grandfather , the civil servant Jens Holmboe from Tromsø . Through the offspring of his maternal grand @-@ uncle , Halvdan Koht was a third cousin of the parliamentarian Ola <unk> Giæver . In Paul Koht 's lineage , <unk> Stub was a distant ancestor . The name Koht stems from German immigrants to Norway in the 17th century . 
 He was intended to have the name Joachim , but this was stopped on request from Joachim G. Giæver who voiced his dislike for the name . He was then christened Halfdan , changed to Halvdan some years later . The family lived in Tromsø , where Paul Steenstrup Koht was a headmaster and mayor . The family moved to Skien when Halvdan was twelve years old , where his father again immersed himself in politics : he served as mayor as well as parliamentarian for the Liberal Party . Koht finished school here , taking his examen artium in 1890 . His father was among his teachers for a while in Norwegian and Greek . In 1893 , one year after the death of Koht 's father , the family moved to Bekkelaget , a borough in Aker . Koht studied at the Royal Frederick University ( now the University of Oslo ) . 
 In September 1898 in Kristiania , Koht married Karen Elisabeth <unk> ( 1871 – 1960 ) , an essay writer and women 's rights activist one and a half years his senior ; she bore him three children . One child died in infancy , but the remaining two had distinguished careers : Åse <unk> Skard ( née Koht ) became a child psychologist and Paul Koht an ambassador . Through Åsa , Halvdan Koht was a father @-@ in @-@ law of literary scholar Sigmund Skard and a grandfather of politician and academic Torild Skard , psychologist and <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> and politician and organisational leader Halvdan Skard . In the late 1920s , Karen 's declining health and Halvdan 's preoccupation with his work placed a strain on their relationship . Disenchanted with the loveless union , Koht entered several extramarital friendships in the following decade , often pen friends . During the Second World War , there were rumors about a romantic relationship with his secretary Unni <unk> . After 1945 the relationship to Karen regrew in strength . 
 = = Education = = 
 Koht graduated with a <unk> degree from the Royal Frederick University in 1896 . He studied history with geography as a minor subject until 1895 ; his main history teacher was Gustav Storm . The next examination was in different languages , both classical and modern . Koht had the choice between Ancient Greek and Classical Latin or Norwegian and German ( including Norse ) ; he chose the Norwegian and German . In 1895 , after finishing his history studies , he spent three months in the Mediterranean , travelling with three ships , the first from Norway to Venice , the second from Venice to Constantinople , the third back to Norway . He studied German literature during this travels . In December 1896 Koht was finally examined by Sophus Bugge and earned his degree . He was one of just three students to be examined in Norwegian and German in late 1896 , and had been the only candidate in history the previous year . 
 A break from the studies came in the second half of 1892 . After his father 's death , he could not afford to attend university that semester . He worked briefly as a private tutor in the Skien district , and was paid to write in the newspaper Varden . On returning to his studies he worked as a Kristiania correspondent for the newspaper ; eventually he also worked for <unk> . In 1901 he took over from Erik <unk> as obituarist and anniversary writer in Verdens Gang . In the next years he would contribute extensively to publications such as Den <unk> Mai , <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> , Syn og <unk> , Samtiden , <unk> , Dagbladet , Verdens Gang and Tidens Tegn ; these were mostly Liberal or Norwegian nationalist publications . 
 For some months after graduating Koht worked as an unpaid volunteer at the University Library of Oslo , while also continuing to attend university lectures . He was then given a scholarship , the " Gustav Bruun Endowment " of NOK 1 @,@ 800 . The University <unk> Koht 's award to NOK 3600 . From 1897 to 1899 he studied abroad with this fellowship . He studied at the University of Copenhagen , the University of Leipzig and in Paris ( École des <unk> études , École des <unk> ) . He was especially influenced by Karl <unk> in Leipzig . 
 From 1899 to 1901 Koht worked as a substitute at the University Library of Oslo , and part @-@ time as a school teacher . He was also engaged by Gustav Storm to help him with publishing the source text <unk> <unk> . In 1908 , after eight years of work , Koht completed the two last volumes of Norsk Forfatter @-@ lexikon , a biographical dictionary of Norwegian writers . However , it was a posthumous work , the principal author — Jens <unk> Halvorsen — having died in 1900 . 
 = = Academic career = = 
 = = = Appointments and doctorate = = = 
 In 1901 he was appointed as a research fellow at the Royal Frederick University . He rarely had responsibility for any teaching of the students , and since he was often busy with Norsk Forfatter @-@ lexikon he remained a research fellow until 1907 . In 1908 he took his <unk> degree on the thesis Die Stellung <unk> und <unk> im Deutsch @-@ <unk> <unk> 1863 – 1864 . Opponents at the dissertation were Ebbe Hertzberg and <unk> Nielsen . 
 Koht was then hired as a docent at the University in 1908 . Because Koht had internal opponents at the university , the <unk> was designated to cover " cultural history " instead of " history " . A while later the university changed it to " history " . The cabinet changed it back to " cultural history " , before the Parliament finally decided on " history " . Koht was going to start his tenure as a docent , but argued with Waldemar Christofer Brøgger that he deserved to travel abroad first . From 1908 to 1909 Koht travelled around in the United States , England and Sweden , visiting the peace conferences in London ( 1908 ) , Chicago ( 1909 ) and Stockholm ( 1910 ) . During these years , his wife , daughter and her nanny lived in Eidsvoll . Koht then returned to Norway and the university , and remained docent until being promoted to professor in 1910 . He remained professor until 1935 , and also served as the dean of his Faculty from 1912 to 1917 . 
 = = = Fields of research = = = 
 Koht faced considerable skepticism among academics when announcing his intentions to study social history from the farmers ' perspective . Gustav Storm claimed that farmers in Norway had " done no effort of their own " . Ludvig <unk> <unk> exclaimed that a person whom Koht wanted to study , the farmer @-@ politician John G. <unk> , was a " crook ... oh well , <unk> sua <unk> <unk> " . Koht was given NOK 100 to do research in Nordmøre on <unk> . In 1896 professor <unk> Bang replied to Koht 's wish to study social history : " Yes , do not go out and become a socialist ! " 
 In 1910 , Koht completed the dissertation Bonde mot <unk> i <unk> historie , in which he further developed his theories on the role of the farmers in history . Published in the journal <unk> <unk> in 1912 , it featured an elaboration on Koht 's theory about class and the nation . According to Koht , the community of the nation was expanded in a democratic way when the agrarian movement , then the labour movement , both rose from political passivity to demand a place in the political and national sphere . He wrote about this in the 1910 article Norsk <unk> as well . The book Norsk <unk> , published in 1926 as a compilation of Koht 's presented material in his university lectures , represented the culmination of Koht 's work on the topic of class conflict between the agrarian and the urban population . Koht argued that the peasant movement had abandoned the cause of class interest in favour of universal rights and social reforms . The same perspective had to be applied to the struggle of the labour movement , Koht maintained . An economic background for the farmers ' rising was presented in 1912 , in <unk> og <unk> i norsk historie , originally a lecture for the second Norwegian conference of historians . This lecture was also where his historical materialism came to fruition . In 1951 he stated that he " has never thought that the theories could be foundational for a political or social uprising " . 
 Koht 's stay in the United States had an impact on his historical views and adaptation of historical materialism , and he also tried to encourage the study of American history in Norway . American culture did not have a particularly high standing in Norway at the time . In school , Koht did not learn proper English . Before he embarked to the US , some historian colleagues insinuated that the country " barely had any history " and was not worth visiting . Koht 's first writing on the subject came in 1910 with the lecture Genesis of American Independence . He followed with <unk> og <unk> i Amerika ( " Monetary Power and Labor in America " , 1910 ) , which was based on " People 's Academy " lectures , then <unk> <unk> ( " American Culture " , 1912 ) and Den <unk> <unk> ( " The American Nation " , 1920 ) . He would return briefly to American academia during his career , for instance in the autumn of 1930 to hold a course at Harvard University . 
 Wishing to unite materialism and idealism , Koht became interested in psychology and the role of individuals in history . The latter focus led to his becoming , in the words of his biographer Åsmund Svendsen , " one of the greatest biographers of the 20th century " . Inspired by the work with Norsk Forfatter @-@ lexikon , he wrote a life of the author Henrik Wergeland in 1908 . Later he published biographies both of Norwegians and foreigners : Otto von Bismarck ( 1911 ) , Ivar Aasen ( 1913 ) , Johan Sverdrup in three volumes between 1916 and 1925 , Marcus Thrane in 1917 , Henrik Ibsen in two volumes in 1928 and 1929 , and Haakon VII of Norway in 1943 . He also wrote about 400 pieces in the first edition of Norsk biografisk leksikon , a biographical dictionary which would become a preeminent source on important figures in Norwegian history . Between 1909 and 1932 he published letters and original writings of Henrik Ibsen , Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson , <unk> <unk> <unk> and Henrik Wergeland . He chaired <unk> from 1918 to 1927 and Norsk <unk> <unk> from 1923 to 1928 , two institutions that dealt with publishing of source texts . He also chaired the Norwegian Historical Association from 1912 to 1927 and 1932 to 1936 , the Norwegian Genealogical Society from 1928 to 1940 and the Comité International des Sciences Historiques from 1926 to 1933 . 
 = = = Honorary positions = = = 
 Koht became a fellow of the learned society Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters in 1908 . Between 1923 and 1939 he was both praeses and vice praeses . He held honorary degrees from the University of Oxford , the University of Chicago and the University of Warsaw . He was decorated by France as a Knight of the Legion of Honour , and in 1952 he received the Gunnerus Medal from the Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters . He was also a member of the International Society for the History of Medicine . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Early involvement and local politics = = = 
 Koht 's father introduced his son to politics , taking him to the Liberal Party national convention in 1891 , where he was allowed to enter since he studied at the university . Koht 's first political arena was the Norwegian Students ' Society , where he vehemently argued that the flag of Norway should not contain the union badge ( the " flag case " ) . In 1893 he left this forum , co @-@ founded a new students ' association called Den <unk> <unk> , and , as the students ' association collectively entered the Liberal Party , became a board member of the local party branch in Kristiania . He continued his fight against the union badge , and the union as a whole . In 1905 , when the union was dissolved altogether , he agitated for the establishment of a republic , but a plebiscite decided to keep the monarchy . 
 Though he never adhered to Christianity in his adolescent or adult life , Koht valued the faith in the <unk> of human beings , as prompted " the greatest religions " , and he started to feel solidarity with the labour movement and the working classes , leading to the radicalisation of his views : from 1900 he voted for the Norwegian Labour Party , and had four years prior to that began to consider himself a socialist . While living in the United States , he developed a form of historical materialism , which led to a fusion of history scholarship and political views . He viewed the Liberal Party as an important agent in Norwegian history , since it pronounced the rights of the farmers , but he now viewed the working class as the next class to be included in the political life , and specifically through the Labor Party . In Koht 's Liberal Party period , he cooperated with some of their more radical members , among them Carl Jeppesen , who later would join the Labour Party . He joined the Labour Party when he returned from the United States and moved to Bærum in 1909 . He lived with his family in Stabekk , but commissioned a house in Lysaker in 1910 . The house , designed by architect Arnstein Arneberg , was dubbed " <unk> " . The university offered him no office , so he had to conduct his research at home . 
 Koht served as a member of Bærum municipal council in the terms 1916 – 1919 , 1928 – 1931 and 1931 – 1934 . In 1952 he wrote the 50 @-@ year history of Bærum Labour Party . 
 = = = Foreign affairs politician = = = 
 Internationally , Koht tried to prop up the institutions that maintained public international law . In 1923 he participated in the arbitrations between Denmark and Norway about the disposition of Eastern Greenland . Sovereignty was claimed by Denmark . Koht teamed up with the conservative politician C. J. Hambro , who had edited <unk> @-@ <unk> <unk> to which Koht had contributed . The negotiations led to an agreement on Norwegian trade rights in the area , but a question of sovereignty over Eastern Greenland remained unsolved . In 1931 , forces in and outside of the then @-@ Agrarian government annexed " Erik the Red 's Land " . 
 In the 1930s Koht became the foremost international politician of the Labour Party . He positioned himself in the Labour Party as the prospective Minister of Foreign Affairs should the party form a government . He did so because fellow historian and Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1928 , Edvard Bull , Sr. , had died , making Koht the " Foreign Minister @-@ designate " . The Labour Party also polled well in the Norwegian parliamentary election , 1933 , leading them to prepare for office . The Labour government was formed on 20 March 1935 . Koht became Minister of Foreign Affairs in Johan Nygaardsvold 's Cabinet . Among Koht 's first actions as minister was to persuade the Labour Party not to pull Norway out of the League of Nations , something the party had declared that it would do as recently as 1934 . In foreign policy matters Koht and Nygaardsvold usually made decisions without consulting the other ministers , merely informing the rest of the cabinet of the decisions that had been made . 
 After the League of Nations failed as an effective international body , Koht again favoured the strict neutrality policy to which Norway had adhered before the League of Nations membership . For many years , he was reluctant to an expansion of a Norwegian military defense capacity . He did not vehemently and principally oppose such an expansion , and had been quite friendly to the principle of a national defense in the past . His neutrality policy nonetheless put him on the " defense @-@ skeptical " side together with Johan Nygaardsvold and most of his cabinet . Among the more " defense @-@ friendly " in and around the cabinet , not the least from 1936 , were Trygve Bratteli , Haakon Lie , Finn Moe , Trygve Lie , Oscar Torp , Martin Tranmæl and Minister of Defense Fredrik Monsen . In 1936 Koht expressed great concern for the consequences of the arms race taking place in Europe , which he felt could easily lead to war . 
 Following the 1936 outbreak of the Spanish Civil War , the Nygaardsvold Cabinet followed a policy of non @-@ intervention in the conflict between the Spanish government and rebels led by General Franco . Koht 's view of the matter was that Norway should not be involved in the conflict in any way ; this became the policy of the government for the duration of the civil war . The government soon banned the sale or transfer of Norwegian arms , aircraft and ships to Spain . Koht himself promoted a ban on the use of Norwegian ships to transport arms , ammunition and aircraft to foreign countries in general , to ensure that there could be no Norwegian connection to any such items that were delivered to Spain . The strict non @-@ intervention policy promoted by Koht and Prime Minister Nygaardsvold was heavily criticised by forces within the Labour Party . Martin Tranmæl , a central figure in the apparatus of the Labour Party and the editor of the party newspaper Arbeiderbladet , led the critics of the policy towards the conflict in Spain . Tranmæl and other critics saw the non @-@ intervention policy of the government as giving equal standing to both the elected government of Spain and the rebels . Koht went to great lengths to avoid any direct Norwegian involvement in the conflict , especially trying to block Norwegians from travelling to Spain to join the International Brigades . On 19 September 1936 , Koht attempted to have the League of Nations impose a ceasefire in Spain , to be followed by a popular referendum on the country 's constitution . Koht 's proposal received little support and failed . 
 For Koht personally the civil war in Spain came close to ending his cabinet career on several occasions . On 9 April 1937 , following a series of incidents where Francoist warships intercepted Norwegian vessels sailing on Spanish ports and confiscated both cargoes and ships , and Norwegian protests failing to gain results , Koht made a formal proposal to dispatch the Norwegian minelayer Olav Tryggvason to Spain to protect Norwegian shipping . After the proposal met opposition in parliament and was set to fail , Koht offered to resign . Prime Minister Nygaardsvold refused to accept Koht 's resignation , stating that he " would rather be shot than lose Koht " . The case came close to causing the whole cabinet 's fall in parliament , before it was agreed that it would be dropped . When Koht in 1938 attempted to establish a trade agreement with Franco , he was blocked by his own party and the Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions . Again requesting to be allowed to resign , Koht stayed after months of debating ended with the party giving the cabinet free rein to do what it saw as best with regards to trade with Franco . By October 1938 Koht had negotiated a trade agreement with Franco . The formal Norwegian recognition of the Franco government as the representative of Spain followed on 31 March 1939 , three days after the fall of Madrid to the nationalist forces . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 = = = = Pre @-@ war phase = = = = 
 With the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , the Norwegian government declared the country neutral in the conflict . Both warring sides subsequently stated that they would respect Norway 's neutrality , provided that she protect her neutrality against trespasses by the other side . Koht was clear from early on that Norway should remain neutral , but also that in the event of her being forced to enter the war it was critical that it was on the side of the British . 
 Over the first months of the Second World War Norwegian neutrality was violated repeatedly in the air and at sea by both warring parties , most dramatically with the 16 February Altmark Incident in <unk> . This , along with other incidents , and the lack of a firm Norwegian response , led the warring parties to the impression that Norway could or would not effectively protect her neutrality . Initially the German view of Norwegian neutrality had been one of it being positive for the German war effort , allowing German merchant ships to transport cargo via Norwegian territorial waters without interference from the British . 
 On 5 April the Allies sent notes to both Norway and Sweden warning that they would take any action necessary if the Germans were allowed to use the neutral countries ' territory to their advantage . Koht responded with a speech in which he said that the Allies had nothing to gain by interfering with Norwegian shipping lanes — the British had a more significant trade with Norway than the Germans . The next day the Allies decided to launch a mining operation on the Norwegian coast , and to land troops at Narvik in case the Germans responded to the mining by landing in Norway . Shortly before the mining was carried out , Koht warned the British that no further neutrality violations would be tolerated , and that in the future the Norwegians would respond with force . The Germans too repeatedly violated Norwegian neutrality , and , following a visit from the Norwegian fascist leader Vidkun Quisling to Hitler in December 1939 , began serious planning for a possible occupation of Norway . Following the Altmark Incident , Hitler ordered the invasion of Norway . In response to the British mining operation on 8 April 1940 , the Norwegian government lodged formal protests with the British and French governments , while secretly remaining set on avoiding war with the Allies at all cost . Koht told the Norwegian parliament that he believed that the Allies were trying to bring Norway into the war . The Allied mining of the Norwegian coast coincidentally distracted the Norwegian government from realising that large German forces had been on their way to invade Norway for several days prior . 
 = = = = German invasion and war = = = = 
 At the advent of the Nazi German Operation Weserübung , the invasion of Norway of 9 April 1940 , Germany sent the envoy Curt Bräuer to present demands of capitulation . Koht personally met with Bräuer , and rejected his demands and threats of war , stating that " war had already started " . Koht and the cabinet fled Norway 's capital in the morning of 9 April . Even though Koht rejected Bräuer 's initial contact , he did convince the cabinet to listen to further German proposals for negotiations later the same day . All Norwegian negotiations with the Germans ended after a failed attempt to capture the Norwegian king and government in <unk> early on 10 April . Koht was willing to take up the fight against the invaders . He wrote several key speeches , some of which were delivered by King Haakon VII , to convey staunch resistance to the German demands . 
 Vital to the Norwegian effort to try to halt the German advance was assistance from the Allies , which Koht requested in the early hours of 9 April , although skeptical of the potential of Allied aid . When the rest of the government fled from Molde to Tromsø , landing on 1 May , Koht and Ljungberg ( Minister of Defense ) continued from there with the cruiser HMS Glasgow to London . Here , from 5 May they negotiated with British government representatives ( Lord Halifax , Chamberlain and Admiral Philips ) on British aid to Norway . Koht also made a radio speech from London on the BBC , broadcasting to Norway , and a speech on American radio . On 8 and 9 May he met Reynaud , Gamelin and Daladier in Paris . The Norwegian Ministers departed from London on 11 May , arriving back in Norway on 17 May . The talks with the Allies resulted in concrete promises and plans for large French reinforcements for the Norwegian front . These plans were however abandoned by the Allies on 24 May 1940 , following the worsening situation for the Allies in France , and an evacuation decided . Koht was informed by British Minister to Norway Sir Cecil Dormer on 1 June that the Allied Forces had decided to retreat from Norway , owing to the difficult situation at the Western Front . 
 In response to the Allied decision to evacuate , the cabinet sent Koht to Luleå in Sweden to try to reinvigorate a previously rejected plan to create a demarcation line between the Germans and Norwegian in Northern Norway . Swedish troops were planned to occupy Narvik . The plan was named the Mowinckel plan , after its initiator , the former prime minister Johan Ludwig Mowinckel . During a meeting with the Swedish minister of foreign affairs , Christian Günther , who was to act as a middle man with Germans in relation to the plan , Koht revealed that the Allies were about to evacuate Norway . Although Günther never revealed the evacuation plans to the Germans , Koht was heavily criticised for doing so by his colleagues upon his return to Norway . 
 = = = = In exile = = = = 
 The cabinet eventually fled the country on 7 June . Koht landed in London on 19 June 1940 , now heading the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in exile . Norway was now a close ally of the United Kingdom , but Koht was seen as clinging somewhat to his neutrality policy , and not embracing the alliance with the United Kingdom enough . From the autumn of 1940 , Trygve Lie championed a change in policy which meant seeking lasting allies in the western world . Koht viewed this as " distrust " . A schism between him and the rest of the cabinet grew as it also became known that Koht 's Ministry of Foreign Affairs had received reports of a possible forthcoming assault on Norway , without Koht having informed the cabinet thoroughly . Furthermore , there was discontent over Koht 's decision to establish the headquarters of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in exile in Bracknell , several miles west of the cabinet headquarters . 
 Koht was granted leave of absence on 19 November 1940 , and ultimately left the post of Minister of Foreign Affairs on 20 February 1941 , being succeeded by Trygve Lie . Koht decided to travel to Canada and then the United States . He lived with his daughter Åsa and her family in Washington , DC , returning to Norway after the end of the Second World War . 
 = = = Political legacy = = = 
 Trygve Lie , who after the war had become the first Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations , characterised Koht in his memoirs as an expert on foreign affairs , but introverted . He had relatively little contact with other politicians , kept to himself to study in peace , and spent much time on his extensive writing . Koht reportedly preferred to solve a problem by himself instead of involving co @-@ workers and employees , even the experts in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . His way of thinking was logical and rational , but he allegedly nurtured an " exaggerated belief in paragraphs " and a " dogmatic belief in international law " , and wrongly thought that other countries would obey formal regulations at most times . Koht had few or no alternatives to his neutrality policy , and in many ways he based his entire career in foreign affairs on that policy . Trygve Lie claimed that before the Second World War , the neutrality policy had " become a religion " for Koht . 
 Koht 's role in the weak and unorganised defense against Operation Weserübung was debated during and after the occupation . After the World War , a commission named <unk> av 1945 ( " Scrutiny Commission of 1945 " ) was set to scrutinise the actions of the Norwegian government in 1940 . It concluded with a partial criticism of Koht 's dispositions . After receiving <unk> 's analysis , Koht volunteered to undergo an Impeachment trial . The Parliament of Norway did not find it necessary , and no such trial took place . 
 Since Koht lived in Lysaker , Bærum Municipality wanted to honor him by naming a street after him . When the street was named in 1967 , Koht was still controversial . The street was therefore named Professor <unk> vei ( " Professor Koht 's Road " ) to emphasise his academic , rather than his political career . 
 = = Language views = = 
 Hailing from Tromsø , Koht spoke a Northern Norwegian dialect in his early life . In Skien his dialect provoked negative reactions from his peers . He was inspired by the dialects of Skien 's surroundings ( Telemark ) ; from 1891 he wrote the " rural " language form Landsmål with strong tinges of Bø dialect . Before this he had attempted to write both " Knudsen Riksmål " and " Aasen Landsmål " , but neither stuck . Early publications on the Norwegian language controversy were Det norske <unk> historie ( 1898 ) and Det <unk> <unk> for <unk> ( 1900 ) . He became a board member of the Landsmål @-@ based publishing house Det Norske <unk> , and edited the Landsmål periodical Syn og <unk> from 1901 to 1908 , until 1905 together with Rasmus Flo . He chaired Noregs <unk> , an association the propagation of Landsmål , from 1921 to 1925 . In 1929 , Landsmål was renamed Nynorsk . 
 Koht spoke of language in a social context in general and of the class struggle in particular . He eventually used the Labour Party as a vehicle for his language activism , especially after being asked by the party to write <unk> og <unk> in 1921 . In it , he synthesised the class struggle and language struggle in Norway , and because he was an integrationist he wanted a popular gathering around one written language . Koht became a member of <unk> in 1934 , and in 1936 the Labour Party agreed that a language reform should be carried out , moving the two language forms Bokmål and Nynorsk closer to one another . The language reforms took place in 1938 and promoted the <unk> ideal . The reforms were reversed in 1941 under Nazi rule ; the original changes were reinstated after the end of the occupation of Norway by Nazi Germany . According to historian Kåre Lunden , Koht was much hated by many because of his language reforms , which were routinely perceived as attacks and degradations on their preferred language . His ideals were dubbed " det <unk> knot " , i.e. " the <unk> mishmash " . For his own part , Koht often used spellings that contrasted with both Nynorsk and Bokmål . The definite article , which is formally the suffix " -et " , was substituted with the suffix " -e " , such as in the titles of his publications Det <unk> <unk> for <unk> and <unk> . 
 = = Peace activism = = 
 Koht 's first travel abroad was in 1890 , when he accompanied his father as well as Hans Jacob Horst and John Theodor Lund to an <unk> peace conference in London . In 1895 he was a founding member and board member of the Norwegian Peace Association , serving as chairman from 1900 to 1902 . From 1901 to 1902 he edited his own monthly periodical named <unk> ( " Peace Times " ) . 
 The Peace Association was dominated by Liberal Party politicians — from a Marxist perspective , " bourgeois " people . Historian Nils Ivar <unk> had noted that the socialists who were active in the bourgeois peace movement — the most prominent being Koht , Adam Egede @-@ Nissen and Carl <unk> — were " radicalised sons of the bourgeoisie " . This meant that they were " capable of asserting themselves among the ship @-@ owners and county governors in the board " of the Norwegian Peace Association . Koht also followed his own goals during his first period as chairman . He wanted to tie the " apolitical " peace movement closer to the labour movement , to create " economic justice " and to employ the use of arbitration in labour conflicts . These goals were not embraced by all of the members , particularly not those who wanted to keep the Peace Association politically neutral . A larger problem , however , was that Koht rated Norwegian nationalism higher than pacifism . He had thus carried out his compulsory military service " with fervor " , notes <unk> . Koht demanded that the Peace Association did not resist to an armed defense of the " fatherland " . The national convention in 1902 refused to acknowledge this principle , and Koht therefore resigned his membership . He was followed by others , as a result of a schism in the Peace Association between the pacifists and the more pragmatic peace activists . Koht has also been assessed as an ineffective organisational leader . The defense question more or less solved itself when the Swedish @-@ Norwegian union was peacefully dissolved in 1905 . Koht later returned to the Peace Association to serve as a board member from 1910 to 1912 . 
 He became a member of Institut International de la Paix in 1913 . He was a consultant for the Norwegian Nobel Institute from 1904 to 1913 , with the task of examining proposed candidates for the Nobel Peace Prize . From 1918 to 1942 he served on the Norwegian Nobel Committee . In 1931 , he gave the Award Ceremony Speech for the <unk> Jane Addams and Nicholas Murray Butler , but was absent in the decisive meeting in 1936 that awarded the Nobel Peace Prize to Carl von Ossietzky . He was also absent while serving as Minister of Foreign Affairs , not wishing to combine the two roles . He returned briefly afterwards , before leaving again in 1942 . Another reason for his inactivity was that he had not lived in Norway since 1940 , but either way the Prize was not awarded in any of the years from 1939 to 1943 . 
 Koht 's academic writing also encompassed the peace issue . His books on the subject include Histoire du mouvement de la paix en <unk> ( " History of the Peace Movement in Norway " , 1900 ) and <unk> i Noregs @-@ <unk> ( " The Notion of Peace in the History of Norway " , 1906 ) . 
 = = Post @-@ political life = = 
 Having stepped down from the exiled cabinet in 1941 , Koht lived in the United States for the remainder of the war . There he continued his literary production ; however , the books Norway Neutral and Invaded ( 1941 ) and The Voice of Norway ( 1944 ) were both released in London . The first book dealt directly with the advent of war in Norway , and was released in Swedish in the same year . The second book , written together with his son @-@ in @-@ law Sigmund Skard , dealt more with older history and the literature of Norway . It was released in Swedish in 1944 and Norwegian in 1948 . Koht returned to Norway at the end of war . 
 Upon returning to Norway , Koht published three books on the war @-@ time events in Norway : For <unk> og <unk> i <unk> 1939 – 1940 , <unk> <unk> til <unk> . Minne frå <unk> i <unk> 1940 and Norsk <unk> fram til 9 @.@ <unk> 1940 . <unk> frå <unk> , all of which were released in 1947 . These memoir @-@ like books have been analysed as putting a self @-@ apologetic message forth . His political career was effectively ended , but some of his ideas had prevailed . For instance , his analysis of the class situation in Norway became a part of the general social @-@ democratic ideology of the post @-@ war years . 
 Despite not holding the professor chair any longer , Koht continued his academic writing ; his principal work from the post @-@ war epoch was the six @-@ volume <unk> i norsk historie . The six volumes each describe a decisive moment in Norwegian history . The first volume , released in 1950 , centers on " <unk> <unk> contra Henrik <unk> " . The second volume ( 1951 ) describes Olav <unk> and Norway 's descent into dependency to Denmark in 1537 . The third and fourth volumes , released in 1952 and 1955 , are about medieval kings : Sverre I and Harald I. The fifth volume ( 1956 ) focuses on " Queen Margaret and the Kalmar Union " . The sixth and final volume ( 1960 ) chronicles the years from 1657 to 1661 , when Denmark ( and thus Norway ) transitioned into an absolute monarchy . 
 Koht died on 12 December 1965 in Bærum . He was buried at Nordre gravlund in Oslo . Two works by Koht have been released posthumously : the memoirs Minne frå <unk> år in 1968 and the diary <unk> <unk> 1933 – 1940 in 1985 . His son @-@ in @-@ law Sigmund Skard wrote a biography of him , <unk> Halvdan Koht ( " Halvdan Koht the Man " ) in 1982 . 
 = Housing in Scotland = 
 Housing in Scotland includes all forms of built habitation in what is now Scotland , from the earliest period of human occupation to the present day . The oldest house in Scotland dates from the Mesolithic era . In the Neolithic era settled farming led to the construction of the first stone houses . There is also evidence from this period of large timber halls . In the Bronze Age there were cellular round houses , crannogs ( built on artificial islands ) and hillforts that enclosed large settlements . In the Iron Age cellular houses begin to be replaced on the northern isles by simple Atlantic roundhouses , substantial circular buildings with a drystone construction . The largest constructions that date from this era are the circular brochs and duns and wheelhouses . 
 In the Middle Ages cruck timber construction was used in cottages , but the most common building material was stone . From the twelfth century , burghs contained the houses of significant inhabitants , but little has survived of the urban housing of the poor . In the early modern era most of the population was housed in small hamlets and isolated dwellings . Most farming was based on the Lowland fermtoun or Highland baile . As the population expanded , some of these settlements were sub @-@ divided to create new hamlets , with temporary sheilings becoming permanent settlements . The standard layout of a house was a byre @-@ dwelling or long house , with humans and livestock sharing a common roof . Cottages in the Highlands tended to be cruder while those from the Lowlands had distinct rooms and were clad with plaster or paint and even had glazed windows . In towns , traditional thatched half @-@ timbered houses occurred beside the larger , stone and slate @-@ roofed town houses of merchants and the urban gentry . In the eighteenth century new farm buildings replaced the fermtoun and regional diversity was replaced with a standardisation of building forms . The Industrial Revolution transformed the scale of Scottish towns . Gridiron plans were used to lay out new towns in Edinburgh , Glasgow and smaller burghs . In Glasgow the growing workforce was lived in squalid sub @-@ urban tenements like those of the Gorbals . New towns aimed at improving society through the foundation of architecturally designed communities , were an important part of Scottish thinking from the mid @-@ eighteenth century . 
 After the First World War the government responded to urban deprivation with a massive programme of council house building . Many were on greenfield sites of semi @-@ detached homes or terraced cottages . In the 1930s schemes tended to be more cheaply built , but a survey of 1936 found that almost half of Scotland 's houses were still inadequate . There was also extensive private building of sub @-@ urban " bungalow belts " , particularly around Edinburgh . From the mid @-@ twentieth century , public architecture became more utilitarian , as part of the impulse to produce a comprehensive welfare state and the influence of modernism . As the post @-@ war desire for urban regeneration gained momentum it would focus on the tower block . Another solution adopted in Scotland was the building of new towns like Glenrothes and Cumbernauld . Initially praised , they were receiving heavy criticism by the twenty @-@ first century . The creation of Scottish Homes in 1989 increased the stock of private housing and reducing the role of the state sector and the direction of planning by local authorities . The 1980s saw the growth of speculative house building by developers , many introducing English brick and half @-@ timbered vernacular styles to Scotland . Sales of council houses were also popular in Scotland . There have been increasing attempts to preserve much of what survives from Scotland 's architectural heritage and programmes of urban regeneration resulting in a return of resident populations to major urban centres . By 2011 there were 2 @.@ 37 million households of which over sixty per cent were owner occupied . The number of single occupied household increased since 2001 largely accounting for an increase in the number of households . The devolved Scottish government took a distinct perspective on homelessness , making accommodation a right for the voluntarily homeless . 
 = = Prehistory = = 
 = = = Stone Age = = = 
 The oldest house for which there is evidence in Scotland is the oval structure of wooden posts found at South Queensferry near the Firth of Forth , dating from the Mesolithic period , about 8240 BCE . The earliest stone structures are probably the three hearths found at Jura , dated to about 6000 BCE . With the development of agriculture , groups of settlers began building stone houses on what is now Scottish soil in the Neolithic era , around 6 @,@ 000 years ago , and the first villages around 500 years later . Neolithic habitation sites are particularly common and well @-@ preserved in the Northern and Western Isles , where a lack of trees led to most structures being built of local stone . The stone building at Knap of Howar at Papa Westray , Orkney is one of the oldest surviving houses in north @-@ west Europe , making use of locally gathered rubble in a dry @-@ stone construction , it was probably occupied for 900 years , between 3700 and 2800 BCE . Skara Brae on the Mainland of Orkney also dates from this era , occupied from about 3100 to 2500 BCE and is Europe 's most complete Neolithic village . From the Neolithic era there is evidence of timber halls . These are probably unique to Scotland and were massive roofed buildings made of oak , all of which seem to have been subsequently burnt down . There is debate as to the role of these buildings , which have been seen variously as regular farming homesteads of Neolithic families and as related to a series of monumental constructions such as barrows . The hall at Balbridie , Aberdeenshire was 85 feet ( 26 m ) long , 43 feet ( 13 m ) wide and may have had a roof 30 feet ( 9 m ) high , making it large enough to accommodate up to 50 people . 
 = = = Bronze Age = = = 
 As bronze working developed from about 2000 BCE , there was a decline in the building of large new structures , which , with a reduction of the total area under cultivation , suggests a fall in population . From the Early and Middle Bronze Age there is evidence of cellular round houses of stone , as at Jarlshof and Sumburgh on Shetland . At Jarlshof these are oval houses with thick stone walls , which may have been partly subterranean at the earliest period of inhabitation , a technique that provided both structural stability and insulation . There is also evidence of the occupation of crannogs , roundhouses partially or entirely built on artificial islands , usually in lakes , rivers and estuarine waters . They were often constructed of layers of brushwood and rubble . Sometimes they were revetted around the edges with vertical piles and sometimes surfaced with logs of oak . As elsewhere in Europe , hill forts were first introduced in this period , including the occupation of Eildon hill near Melrose in the Scottish Borders , from around 1000 BCE , which accommodated several hundred houses on a fortified hilltop , and Traprain Law in East Lothian , which had a 20 @-@ acre enclosure , sectioned in two places west of the summit , made up of a coursed , stone wall with a rubble core . 
 = = = Iron Age = = = 
 In the early Iron Age , from the seventh century BCE , cellular houses begin to be replaced on the northern isles by simple Atlantic roundhouses , substantial circular buildings with a drystone construction . Important examples are at Quanterness , Bu , Pierowall , and Tofts Ness on Orkney , and at <unk> on Shetland . From about 400 BCE more complex Atlantic roundhouses began to be built , as at Howe , Orkney and Crosskirk , Caithness . The largest constructions that date from this era are the circular broch towers , probably dating from about 200 BCE . Most ruins only survive up to a few metres above ground level , although there are five extant examples of towers whose walls still exceed 21 feet ( 6 m ) in height . There are at least 100 broch sites in Scotland . Despite extensive research , their purpose and the nature of the societies that created them are still a matter of debate . Archaeologists since the 1960s have distinguished brochs from smaller structures of similar construction , usually called duns . The heaviest evidence of the occupation of crannogs was in this era , but they would continue to be used until the Middle Ages . This period also saw the beginnings of wheelhouses , a roundhouse with a characteristic outer wall , within which was a circle of stone piers ( bearing a resemblance to the spokes of a wheel ) , but these would flourish most in the era of Roman occupation . There is evidence for about 1 @,@ 000 Iron Age hillforts in Scotland , most located below the Clyde @-@ Forth line . The majority are circular , with a single palisade around an enclosure . They appear to have been largely abandoned in the Roman period , but some seem to have been reoccupied after their departure . 
 = = Middle Ages = = 
 = = = Rural houses = = = 
 Very few rural houses have survived from the Medieval era in Scotland . As in England , cruck construction was used , employing pairs of curved timbers to support the roof , however , unlike in England , they were usually hidden from view . The major timbers often belonged to the local laird and were known as " master 's wood " or " master 's timbers " and were often reused . The responsibility for infilling the walls usually belonged to the tenants . There was extensive use of turf to fill in the walls , sometimes on a stone base , but they were not long lasting and had to be rebuilt perhaps as often as every two or three years . In some regions , including the south @-@ west and around Dundee , solid clay walls were used , or combinations of clay , turf and stray , rendered with clay or lime to make them weatherproof . With a lack of long span structural timber , the most common building material was stone , employed in both mortared and dry stone construction . Different regions used broom , heather , straw , turfs or reeds for roofing . Central to most houses was the hearth . The simplest were in the centre of the floor , with smoke exiting through a hole in the roof and this form tended to be used longer in the Highlands . More developed forms had a <unk> of a single flagstone or walling . There is evidence of Lowland houses with canopies for smoke extraction . 
 = = = Burghs = = = 
 From the twelfth century , burghs , towns that were granted certain legal privileges from the crown , developed , particularly on the east coast . They were typically surrounded by a palisade or had a castle and usually had a market place , with a widened high street or junction , often marked by a mercat cross , beside houses for the nobles , burgesses and other significant inhabitants , which were often built in a relatively elaborate style and by the end of the period some would had slate roofs or tiles . Very little has survived of the houses of the urban poor . They were probably largely located in the <unk> , away from the main street frontages . From Aberdeen and Perth there is evidence of nearly forty buildings dating from the twelfth to the fourteenth centuries , with walls of planks or wattles . 
 = = Early modern = = 
 = = = Rural settlement = = = 
 Most of the early modern population , in both the Lowlands and Highlands , was housed in small hamlets and isolated dwellings . Most farming was based on the lowland fermtoun or highland baile , settlements of a handful of families that jointly farmed an area notionally suitable for two or three plough teams . As the population expanded , some of these settlements were sub @-@ divided to create new hamlets and more marginal land was settled , with sheilings ( clusters of huts occupied while summer pasture was being used for grazing ) , becoming permanent settlements . The standard layout of a house throughout Scotland before agricultural improvement was a byre @-@ dwelling or long house or blackhouse with humans and livestock sharing a common roof , often separated by only a partition wall , leading to the byre ( barn ) Contemporaries noted that cottages in the Highlands and Islands tended to be cruder , with single rooms , slit windows and earthen floors , often shared by a large family . In contrast , many Lowland cottages had distinct rooms and chambers , were clad with plaster or paint and even had glazed windows . 
 = = = Urban settlement = = = 
 By the sixteenth century perhaps ten per cent of the population lived in one of the many burghs . A characteristic of Scottish burghs were long main streets of tall buildings , with <unk> , <unk> and alleys leading off it , many of which survive today . Many houses in Scottish towns had forms derived from those in major urban centres in Tuscany and the Low Countries , although realised with traditional Scottish techniques and materials . Timber @-@ framed houses were common across urban centres in Europe , but , perhaps because of the shortage of large timbers and an abundance of workable stone in Scotland , houses with only timber fronts were more common . Despite the logistical problems timbered houses enjoyed a resurgence in the late sixteenth century , particularly in Edinburgh where there were large numbers of board , jettied and boarded construction . Increasingly half @-@ timbered houses occurred beside the larger , stone and slate @-@ roofed town houses of merchants and the urban gentry . By the late seventeenth century these had taken on a recognisably Flemish or Dutch appearance . They were often narrow , with four stories , gabled and crow stepped , but often built in stone and harl . They sometimes had ground floor arcades or piazzas . Most wooden thatched houses have not survived , but stone houses of the period can be seen in Edinburgh at Lady Stair 's House , Acheson House and the six @-@ story Gladstone 's Land , an early example of the tendency to build upward in the increasingly crowded towns , producing horizontally divided tenements . 
 = = Improvement and Industrial Revolution = = 
 = = = Agricultural improvement = = = 
 In the eighteenth century there was a conscious attempt to improve agriculture among the gentry and nobility . The Society of Improvers was founded in 1723 , including in its 300 members dukes , earls , lairds and landlords . Enclosures began to displace the <unk> system and free pasture . New farm buildings , often based on designs in patterns books , replaced the fermtoun , and regional diversity was replaced with a standardisation of building forms . Smaller farms retained the linear outline of the longhouse , with dwelling house , barn and byre in a row , but in larger farms a three- or four @-@ sided layout became common , separating the dwelling house from barns and servants quarters . Hundreds of thousands of cottars and tenant farmers from central and southern Scotland were forcibly moved from the farms and small holdings their families had occupied for hundreds of years . Many small settlements were dismantled . Of those that remained many were now crofters : poor families living on " crofts " — very small rented farms with indefinite tenure used to raise various crops and animals , with kelping , fishing , spinning of linen and military service as important sources of revenue . Many lived in blackhouses with double thickness walls about 6 feet ( 2 m ) high , made of local stone and packed with rubble and earth and thatched with reeds . They were <unk> inside and were usually warmed by a peat fire on a slab floor , the smoke from which gave them their name . Others were forced either to the new purpose @-@ built villages built by the landowners such as John Cockburn at Ormiston and Archibald Grant 's Monymusk , to the new industrial centres of Glasgow , Edinburgh , northern England , or to Canada or the United States . 
 = = = Urban growth = = = 
 The Industrial Revolution transformed the scale of Scottish towns . In Edinburgh classicism , together with its reputation as a major centre of the Enlightenment , resulted in the city being nicknamed " The Athens of the North " . In the second half of the eighteenth century a New Town of classically inspired buildings was laid out according to a plan drawn up by James Craig . This gridiron plan , building forms and the architectural detailing would be copied by many smaller towns throughout Scotland , although rendered in locally quarried materials . 
 With industrialisation Glasgow became the " second city of the Empire " , growing from a population of 77 @,@ 385 in 1801 to 274 @,@ 324 by 1841 . Between 1780 and 1830 three middle class " new towns " were laid out on gridiron plans , similar to those in Edinburgh , to the south and west of the old town . The other side of increasing wealth and planned architecture for the aristocracy and middle classes was the growth of urban sprawl . In Glasgow the growing workforce was left to the mercy of market forces as sub @-@ urban tenements were thrown up , particularly to the east of the city , like those of the Gorbals to the south , where overcrowding , lack of sanitation and general poverty contributed to disease , crime , and very low life expediency . 
 Urban centres increasing made use of locally mined stone . While Edinburgh made extensive use of yellow sandstone , the commercial centre and tenements of Glasgow were built in distinctive red sandstone . After a major fire in the largely wooden Aberdeen in the 1740s , the city fathers decreed that major buildings should be in the locally abundant granite , beginning a new phase in large @-@ scale mining and leading to the " granite city " , becoming a centre of a major industry in the nineteenth century , which supplied Scotland and England with faced stone , pavement slabs and pillars . 
 = = = New towns = = = 
 The sometimes utopian concept of the new town , aimed at improving society through the foundation of architecturally designed communities , was an important part of Scottish thinking from the mid @-@ eighteenth to the twentieth century . In addition to the new towns of Edinburgh and Glasgow , these included the complete rebuilding of Inverary for John Campbell , 5th Duke of Argyll by John Adam and Robert Mylne , between 1772 and 1800 . Helensburgh near Glasgow was laid out in 1776 on a gridiron plan . From 1800 , Robert Owen 's New Lanark , designed as a self @-@ contained community , combining industry with ordered and improved living conditions , was an important milestone in the historical development of urban planning . 
 Scotland also produced one of the major figures in urban planning in sociologist Patrick Geddes ( 1854 – 1932 ) , who developed the concept of conurbation , and discarded the idea of " sweeping clearances " to remove existing housing and the imposition of the gridiron plan , in favour of " conservative surgery " : retaining the best buildings in an area and removing the worst . He put this into practice , purchasing and improving slum tenements in James Court , and in new developments at Ramsay Garden , Edinburgh . 
 = = Twentieth century = = 
 = = = Council housing and slum clearance = = = 
 In the twentieth century the distinctive Scottish use of stone architecture declined as it was replaced by cheaper alternatives such as Portland cement , concrete , and mass @-@ production brick . Stone would however be retained as a material for some housing stock in Edinburgh , Aberdeen and Dumfries , and would undergo revivals . During the First World War the government became increasingly aware of Scotland 's housing problems , particularly after the Glasgow rent strike of 1915 . A royal commission of 1917 reported on the " unspeakably filthy privy @-@ middens in many of the mining areas , badly constructed incurably damp labourers ' cottages on farms , whole townships unfit for human occupation in the crofting counties and islands ... groups of lightless and unventilated houses in the older burghs , clotted masses of slums in the great cities " . The result was a massive programme of council house building . In 1914 90 per cent of housing stock was in private hands , but by 1981 public sector housing would be peak at 55 per cent ( compared with 29 @.@ 1 per cent in England and Wales ) . Many early council houses were built on greenfield sites away from the pollution of the city , often constructed of semi @-@ detached homes or terraced cottages . Knightswood , north @-@ west of Glasgow , was built as a show piece from 1923 – 29 , with a library , social centre and seven shopping " parades " . In 1937 the Scottish Special Housing Association ( <unk> ) was established to develop housing for economic growth , but most schemes depended on local initiatives . 
 In the 1930s schemes tended to be more cheaply built , like Blackhill , Glasgow , with a thousand houses built as two and three storey tenements . These building schemes were designed to rehouse those displaced by urban slum clearance , by which thousands of tenements were demolished . However , often crammed into poor land near railways or gasworks , they soon became notorious . A survey of 1936 found that almost half of Scotland 's houses were still inadequate . Residents tended to prefer low @-@ rise solutions to rehousing and there was extensive private building of sub @-@ urban " bungalow belts " , particularly around Edinburgh , laid out with squares and crescents . They helped make the fortunes of builders including Miller Homes , Ford and Torrie and <unk> and Mickel . 
 = = = Post @-@ war planning = = = 
 From the mid @-@ twentieth century , public architecture became more utilitarian , as part of the impulse to produce a comprehensive welfare state and the influence of modernism . The main thrust of post @-@ war planning was in clearance and rebuilding . The process began in Paisley , where from 1955 the populations of districts were decanted , the buildings demolished and rebuilding began . The result in the first district , George Street / Canal Street , were low flats built in render and reused rubble around landscaped courtyards , with a 15 @-@ storey tower at one end . As the post @-@ war desire for urban regeneration gained momentum it would focus on the tower block , championed in Glasgow by David Gibson , convener of the city housing committee . Projects like the brutalist Red Road Flats ( 1964 – 69 ) originally offered hope of a new beginning and an escape from the overcrowded nineteenth @-@ century tenements of the city , but lacked a sufficient infrastructure and soon deteriorated . They also made extensive use of asbestos as a fire retardant , leading to long term health problems for builders and residents . Robert Matthew ( 1906 – 75 ) and Basil Spence ( 1907 – 76 ) were responsible for redeveloping the Gorbals in Glasgow . 
 Another solution adopted in Scotland was the building of new towns like Glenrothes ( 1948 ) and Cumbernauld ( 1956 ) , designed to take excess population from the cities . These used a new low , dense pattern of community design , with terraced cottages and low flats . Cumbernauld was praised for its architecture when first built , but the uncompleted centre and the layout of the town in general , were receiving heavy criticism by the twenty @-@ first century : its modernist architecture described by one resident as " the lego fantasy of an unhappy child " . The brutalist tendency in comprehensive Scottish urban planning would be derided by critics for its " tabula rasa planning " and " architect 's arrogance " . The introduction of the Housing ( Scotland ) Act 1988 merged the <unk> with the Scottish Housing Association to form Scottish Homes , which had duty to provide housing stock , but did not retain possession , reducing the role of the state sector and the overall direction of planning by local authorities . 
 = = = Private building and urban renewal = = = 
 The drive to use housing to transform and reorder society subsided in the 1970s . The 1980s saw the growth of speculative house building by developers . These introduced English brick and half @-@ timbered vernacular styles to Scotland , which had been largely unknown before this period . Many were small and built to minimum standards with little regard to energy or environmental issues . Sales of council houses were popular in Scotland and until the mid @-@ 1990s , unlike in England , local authorities could use the whole of their capital receipts for development , including the building of new houses . Under the Scottish Assembly , Scottish Homes was abolished and replaced by Communities Scotland in 2001 , which had a responsibility to provide affordable housing and environmental improvement . In 2011 it was in turn replaced by the Scottish Housing Regulator , whose remit includes Scottish local authority landlords . 
 There have been increasing attempts to preserve much of what survives from Scotland 's architectural heritage , including the great buildings and monuments , and the classically influenced houses of towns such as Edinburgh and Glasgow . There have also been attempts at preserving the surviving Glasgow tenements , many of which have been renovated , restored to their original pink and honeyed sandstone from the black fronts created by pollution and brought up to modern standards of accommodation . Urban regeneration has also been attempted in areas of post @-@ industrial decline , such as the Merchant City in Glasgow , which was returned to housing from the 1980s , with warehouse loft conversions and more recently the waterfront in Edinburgh , resulting in a return of resident populations to major urban centres . 
 = = Modern households = = 
 In 2011 there were estimated to be 2 @.@ 37 million households in Scotland . Of these approximately 1 @.@ 5 million ( 62 @.@ 5 per cent ) were owner @-@ occupied homes , 319 @,@ 000 ( 12 @.@ 7 per cent ) homes rented from local authorities , 305 @,@ 000 ( 11 @.@ 5 per cent ) privately rented homes , and 277 @,@ 000 ( 11 @.@ 5 per cent ) homes rented from housing associations . The total number had increased by around 173 @,@ 000 ( 7 @.@ 9 per cent ) over the previous ten years , with the rate of increase having slowed substantially since the start of the economic downturn in 2007 . The rate of growth in households was affected by falls in new housing supply ( which includes new builds , refurbishments and conversions ) . This fell in each year from 2008 – 09 to 2010 – 11 , from around 27 @,@ 600 units in 2007 – 08 to 17 @,@ 100 units in 2010 – 11 . The number of households increased after 2010 in every local authority except Clackmannanshire , <unk> and West Dunbartonshire . The area with the greatest increase since 2001 in percentage terms was Aberdeenshire with an additional 13 @,@ 800 households ( 15 @.@ 2 per cent ) . Edinburgh City saw the largest absolute increase of 17 @,@ 000 households ( 8 @.@ 3 per cent ) . Overall 2 @.@ 8 per cent of dwellings are vacant and 1 @.@ 5 per cent are second homes , with the largest proportions in rural areas . 
 The average household size has decreased , with more people living alone or in smaller households . Between 2005 and 2010 , the number of households containing just one adult increased by five per cent and the number of two adult households increased by eight per cent , while the number of households containing one adult fell by 11 per cent and the number of households containing two or more adults with children fell by three per cent . The number of households containing three or more adults increased by 11 per cent . These changes in household composition contributed to a four per cent increase in the number of households in Scotland between 2005 and 2010 , which was higher than the increase in the population over this time ( 2 @.@ 5 per cent ) . 
 Since the establishment of a separate Scottish Parliament and devolved government in 1999 , there has been a response to homelessness in Scotland that has been distinctive from the rest of the UK , described as a " rights @-@ based approach " . The 2001 Housing ( Scotland ) Act required local authorities to house homeless people while claims of priority need were investigated . Even if applicants were found not to be in priority need , councils were required to provide accommodation for a reasonable period . The 2003 Homelessness ( Scotland ) Act went further in phasing out the distinction between priority and non @-@ priority need , so that by 2012 all people unintentionally homeless would be entitled to a permanent home . Partly as a result of these changing definitions , the number of applications for assistance assessed as in priority need increased from 20 @,@ 000 in 2000 / 01 to 34 @,@ 940 in 2008 / 09 . The number of households in temporary accommodation also increased in from 4 @,@ 600 in 2002 to 10 @,@ 815 by 2010 . Some local authorities expressed concerns that they would be unable to meet expanding demand from existing permanent accommodation . From 2012 – 13 the number of people seeking help for homelessness fell by 11 per cent to 9 @,@ 474 . The number of people made homeless or threatened with homelessness fell by a tenth to 7 @,@ 649 . The number of people in temporary accommodation was about 6 per cent lower than the peak period in early 2011 when temporary placements were in excess of 12 @,@ 000 . The 2 @,@ 821 households with children in temporary accommodation was a decrease of 472 households ( 14 per cent ) from the previous year . These households contained a total of 4 @,@ 574 children , a decrease of 727 children ( 14 per cent ) . 
 = Adolfo Rodríguez Saá = 
 Adolfo Rodríguez Saá ( born July 25 , 1947 ) is an Argentine Peronist politician . Born in a family that was highly influential in the history of the San Luis Province , he became governor in 1983 , after the end of the National Reorganization Process military dictatorship . He remained governor up to 2001 , being re @-@ elected in successive elections . 
 President Fernando de la Rúa resigned in that year , amid the December 2001 riots , and the Congress appointed Rodríguez Saá as president of Argentina . In response to the 1998 – 2002 Argentine great depression , he declared the highest sovereign default in history and resigned days later amid civil unrest . The Congress appointed a new president , Eduardo Duhalde , who completed the term of office of De la Rúa . Rodríguez Saá ran for the 2003 and 2015 presidential elections but did not win . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rodríguez Saá was born to an important political family in San Luis . The Rodriguez Saá family is well known in the Province of San Luis and can be traced to the 19th century and to descendants of the federal caudillo Juan Saá , who fought in the battle of Pavón during the Argentine Civil War . Rodríguez Saá 's grandfather and namesake Adolfo Rodríguez Saá and his great @-@ uncle were both governors of the province , and his father was the police chief . 
 He attended the " Juan Pascual Pringles " school , which was associated with the National University of Cuyo . He studied law at the University of Buenos Aires , graduating in 1971 . He worked as a teacher in his former school for two years . He was an editor of the anti @-@ Peronist pamphlet " La voz de San Luis " ( Spanish : The voice of San Luis ) , but became a Peronist in 1969 during his studies in Buenos Aires . He joined the Peronist Youth in the year of his graduation and worked as their representative in San Luis . 
 The Peronist party , proscribed since 1955 , was allowed to run for the 1973 elections . The Peronist party won the elections , and Héctor Cámpora became president . Rodríguez Saá became a provincial legislator , and led the Peronist deputies in the chamber . He joined the right @-@ wing Peronist unions , led by <unk> <unk> . He opposed the governor Elías <unk> , who was aligned with left @-@ wing Peronism . After the 1976 Argentine coup d 'état , he left politics and worked in a law firm with his brother . 
 = = Governor = = 
 The National Reorganization Process dictatorship came to an end in 1983 , when Raúl Alfonsín won the 1983 elections . Rodríguez Saá became governor of San Luis in those elections , in a close contest with the Radical Civic Union . He was helped by the clergy of the province , who opposed the radical candidate because of his secularism . 
 As a governor , Rodríguez Saá attracted huge investments to the province , which led to the growth of local industries , public works , social services and tourism . Levels of employment and industrial production , as well as measures of scholastic achievement and crime @-@ fighting success were higher than those of the country at large . He was a populist and authoritarian governor who was accused of nepotism , corruption and restricting freedom of the press . He united the governors of the smaller Argentine provinces in a front , called Frente Federal <unk> . 
 He ran in the primary elections of the Justicialist Party ( PJ ) for the 1989 presidential elections . Carlos Menem , governor of La Rioja , prevailed in both the primary and the main elections and became the new president of Argentina . Rodríguez Saá was elected to the Constituent Assembly that drafted the 1994 amendment of the Argentine Constitution . He attempted to run in the primary elections for the 1995 presidential elections against Menem , who was seeking re @-@ election . Not seeing any chance of prevailing against the president , he abandoned his candidacy . He also attempted to run in the primary elections for the 1999 presidential elections , and resigned his candidacy again , this time on behalf of Eduardo Duhalde , governor of the Buenos Aires Province . Duhalde lost the elections to the radical Fernando de la Rúa , and Rodríguez Saá was again re @-@ elected as governor . He attempted to divide the city of San Luis into four municipalities , as the mayor was a political rival , but had to drop the project because of the popular unrest generated by the proposal . 
 = = Presidency = = 
 President Fernando de la Rúa resigned after the December 2001 riots that had been caused by the 1998 – 2002 Argentine great depression . As his vice president Carlos Álvarez had resigned as well months before , Congress called for a special assembly to designate a new president . Adolfo Rodríguez Saá became president after being elected with 169 votes to 138 . He was supported by the PJ and smaller right @-@ wing parties such as Republican Force and Action for the Republic . The Unión <unk> Radical ( UCR ) and Alternative for a Republic of Equals voted against him . He was replaced in the governor 's office by vice @-@ governor María Alicia Lemme , and took office on December 23 , 2001 . 
 Rodríguez Saá got the mandate of interim president , with instructions from the Assembly to call for elections the following March 3 , with the run @-@ off on March 17 if needed . The new president would complete de la Rúa 's term of office . Those elections were held with ley de <unk> , double simultaneous voting , and the victor took the reins of government on April 5 . 
 During his short time in office , Rodríguez Saá announced the creation of a new currency , the <unk> , which would have circulated alongside the peso and the dollar . The civil unrest of previous days resurfaced when he announced his cabinet , as it included Carlos Grosso as Chief of the Cabinet of Ministers . Grosso was a very unpopular former mayor of Buenos Aires . As a result , Rodríguez Saá gave up his whole cabinet before they could take office , with the sole exception of Rodolfo Gabrielli , in the Interior Ministry . He also declared a sovereign default on the Argentine national debt , which was celebrated by the chamber of deputies . It was the highest sovereign default in history . Those measures , uncharacteristic of an interim president with a brief term of office , were <unk> by the leaders of the Justicialist party . 
 Rodríguez Saá prepared a budget bill for 2002 , which was sent to the Congress . It included an important decrease in the deficits , as requested by Anne Krueger from the International Monetary Fund . Krueger also requested a new <unk> law , to determine the way the nation and the provinces manage tax revenues . Rodríguez Saá called for a meeting with governors in <unk> , but only six governors out of twenty @-@ three attended : Carlos Ruckauf , Juan Carlos Romero , <unk> <unk> , Ángel Mazza , Carlos <unk> and Alicia Lemme . José Manuel de la Sota , governor of Córdoba , withdrew his support , suspecting that Rodríguez Saá had plans to cancel the elections and stay as president up to 2003 . On December 30 , he returned to San Luis with Daniel Scioli and resigned , alleging lack of support from the rest of the Justicialist Party . <unk> , Maza and minister Rodolfo Gabrielli tried to convince him to stay as president ; his brother Alberto Rodríguez Saá supported his decision . In announcing his resignation in a Cadena nacional , he recounted the achievements of his one @-@ week administration and accused Justicialist governors and legislators of meanness and shortsightedness . He dispatched his resignation from San Luis to Buenos Aires , and the Congress accepted it on January 1 , 2002 . The Senate chairman Ramón Puerta would have been the interim president , but resigned as well , so Eduardo Camaño , president of the Chamber of Deputies , was appointed interim president instead . After new deliberations , they elected Eduardo Duhalde as president , this time with a mandate that would fill the remaining time of de la Rúa 's mandate . 
 = = Post @-@ presidency = = 
 After the end of Eduardo Duhalde 's term , Rodríguez Saá ran for the presidency in the April 2003 elections . Those elections allowed the <unk> law , and the PJ did not provide an official candidate . Each <unk> was allowed instead to run for presidency on his own " <unk> " , and Rodríguez Saá did so . The other candidates of the PJ were Néstor Kirchner and Carlos Menem . Rodríguez Saá came in fourth , with 14 @.@ 1 % of the vote , behind both of the other PJ candidates and Ricardo López Murphy . Kirchner became the president of Argentina after those elections . 
 Rodríguez Saá 's brother Alberto Rodríguez Saá became the new governor of San Luis in 2003 . <unk> with Carlos Menem , they attempted to create an alternative political group against Kirchner within the PJ . Adolfo Rodríguez Saá was elected Senator for San Luis representing this group at the 2005 election . He was reelected in 2011 , with a term of office up to 2017 . He tried to run for governor of Buenos Aires Province in 2011 , but the local judiciary did not allow him , as he did not have the required time living in the province . The mayor Sergio Massa organized the coalition United for a New Alternative to run for the 2015 presidential election and invited Rodríguez Saá to join , but he refused to join and ran with his own party , Federal Commitment . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Adolfo Rodríguez Saá was kidnapped on October 21 , 1993 . He was governor of San Luis at the time . He was taken to a room in the hotel " Y no C " and forced to perform for a pornographic video . He was forced to pay a ransom of 3 million dollars and was left in the trunk of a car . The video has never been made public , and the kidnappers Walter Alejandro Salgado , <unk> Esther <unk> and Eduardo Alberto <unk> were sentenced in 1995 . The trial took 11 days , and it included the testimonies of 132 witnesses . It was aired on live television . Esther <unk> claimed during the trial that she had been his lover for eight years . All the kidnappers have served their sentences and currently live in other provinces . 
 <unk> Saá has worked as a cattle rancher in San Luis since his defeat in the 2003 elections . 
 = Cyclone Erica = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Erica ( RSMC Nadi designation : 10F , JTWC designation : 23P ) of March 2003 was a powerful cyclone that severely affected New Caledonia and was considered the worst to affect the country since Cyclone Beti . The system was the eighth cyclone and the fifth severe tropical cyclone of the 2002 @-@ 03 South Pacific cyclone season . Cyclone Erica developed from a monsoonal trough on 4 March just off of Queensland . Originally , the storm moved slowly towards the east and then north early in its existence . However , increasing wind shear caused the storm to be degenerated into a tropical low . After conditions once again became more favorable for development , the remnants regenerated into a tropical cyclone on 10 March . Steadily intensifying , Erica reached peak intensity on 13 March as a Category 5 equivalent on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . 
 On the same day Erica paralleled the coast of New Caledonia before making landfall on the southern end of the island at L 'Île @-@ des @-@ Pins . However , at the same time the cyclone also entered an area with strong wind shear and thus began to weaken . After passing the island , an extratropical transition begun , weakening the cyclone as it moved towards the southeast . On 15 March , Erica completed its transition into an extratropical cyclone and later fully dissipated the next day . 
 Cyclone Erica severely impacted the island nation of New Caledonia , causing intense winds and heavy rain . An estimated 892 families were affected by the cyclone on the island , and two people were killed . As many as 60 % of people on the west coast lost power . On 17 March only 17 of the 66 secondary schools on the island were functioning . After the storm it was feared that the existing dengue fever epidemic on the island would spread . Erica caused $ 15 million ( 2003 USD ) in damages , primarily on New Caledonia . Following the deaths and damage , the name " Erica " was later retired . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of Cyclone Erica can be traced back to a tropical low which developed within a monsoonal trough near the Tiwi Islands on 13 February . Two days later , the low moved inland near the Western Australia – Northern Territory border . After passing south of Alice Springs , the low turned east and entered the Coral Sea on 3 March 2003 . Strong wind shear separated the convection from the system at the time . However , shear quickly weakened the next day . With the lower shear , the low was able to intensify and at 0630 UTC on 4 March , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a tropical cyclone formation alert . Despite the center of the storm being elongated , conditions for further development were present . At 0600 UTC the Bureau of Meteorology in Australia upgraded the low to a Category 1 cyclone and gave it the name Erica . 
 As Erica moved towards the south and subsequently to the north , the cyclone strengthened , becoming equivalent to a tropical storm according to the JTWC by 1500 UTC on 5 March . Erica later attained maximum sustained winds of 105 km / h ( 65 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) . However the system began to move against the direction of the wind shear environment , and it lost much of its organization . On 7 March at 2230 UTC , Erica lost cyclone status and degenerated into a tropical low . The remnant circulation moved slowly to the northeast , and the wind shear conditions abated . As a result , Erica began to gain some signs of organization . At this time the remnants moved towards the southeast as a result of an upper – level trough developing over Australia . 
 The area of low pressure gained sufficient shower activity and organization to be renamed as a tropical cyclone at 1800 UTC on 10 March while located southwest of the Solomon Islands capital of Honiara . Erica gradually intensified , attaining the equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ( SSHS ) Originally moving to the southeast at a slow pace , Erica began to accelerate due to the influence of weak mid – level ridge to its east . Continuing to intensify , the cyclone reached its peak intensity on 13 March with a minimum barometric pressure of 915 mbar ( 27 @.@ 0 inHg ) , and peak winds of 260 km / h ( 150 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) . The eye of the cyclone began to shrink in diameter and become symmetrical . Later on 13 March , Erica began to parallel the western coast of New Caledonia while maintaining a strong intensity , before crossing the extreme southern end of the island at the Caledonian island commune of L 'Île @-@ des @-@ Pins . 
 After passing the island , Erica accelerated and began to rapidly weaken in the presence of strong wind shear . As a result , the cyclone began a phase of extratropical transition as it quickly paced to the southeast . On 15 March , Erica completed this transition . The remnant low continued to the east – southeast , before the Meteorological Service of New Zealand Limited office at Wellington , New Zealand ( TCWC Wellington ) issued their last advisory on Erica at 1800 UTC on 16 March . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Australia = = = 
 As a tropical low , Erica brought strong winds to northern Queensland . Several large trees were uprooted , one of which fell on a car in Cape Tribulation and another on a house in Port Douglas . Numerous trees were defoliated and some boats were reported to have been pulling their moorings due to the wind . Power lines were also damaged by the low . 
 = = = New Caledonia = = = 
 On 12 March , officials in New Caledonia issued a pre @-@ alert as Erica was forecast to impact the territory . Evacuation centers were set up in churches and community halls . All schools throughout the island were closed and airports were shut down . 
 Despite the rapid weakening before landfall , Erica produced intense winds , gusting to a record 202 km / h ( 125 mph ) in Nouméa . Ten @-@ minute sustained winds were recorded up to 144 km / h ( 89 mph ) around the center of the storm . 
 An estimated 892 families were affected by Erica , and Erica was also reported to have caused two deaths and injured 80 people . In addition 1 @,@ 000 people were estimated to be homeless . Several communication lines were severed , and tribes and farms were devastated . 20 % of electricity customers in Nouméa were without power , and 60 % of customers on the main island 's west coast were also without power . In <unk> , police assessed that half of the population was without shelter , and in <unk> , it was estimated that 90 % of the crops were destroyed by Erica . On 17 March 2003 , only 17 of the 66 secondary schools in New Caledonia were functioning , with others still closed primarily due to safety concerns . The University of New Caledonia was also badly damaged . However , all primary schools were functioning . 
 South Province , New Caledonia formed an emergency committee following the storm , led by Jacques Lafleur . The committee assisted in filing damage claims caused by the cyclone . After the storm , 60 French specialists were sent to New Caledonia to help in rebuilding areas hit hard by Erica . Ministry of Overseas France head Brigitte <unk> arrived in Nouméa on 17 March to investigate the damage . Following the visit , Brigitte <unk> announced that US $ 17 million would be sent to rebuild 1 @,@ 000 homes on the island nation , including an additional US $ 500 @,@ 000 in disaster relief to the island country . A transport aircraft stationed in Tahiti brought 1 @.@ 5 short tons ( 1 @,@ 400 kg ) of emergency supplies . 
 Following Erica 's heavy rains , it was feared that the already existing dengue fever epidemic would become more widespread . Prior to Erica , there were already 437 cases of dengue fever in 2003 alone . The risk for leptospirosis was also increased by Erica . High winds and strong rains resulted in damages of at least US $ 15 million , particularly to schools . Two fatalities total were reported as a result of Erica . The name Erica was retired after the season . 
 = Nagapattinam = 
 Nagapattinam ( <unk> , previously spelt <unk> or Negapatam ) is a town in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu and the administrative headquarters of Nagapattinam District . The town came to prominence during the period of Medieval Cholas ( 9th – 12th century CE ) and served as their important port for commerce and east @-@ bound naval expeditions . The Chudamani Vihara in Nagapattinam constructed by the Sri Lankan king with the help of Chola kingdom is an important Buddhist structure of the times . Nagapattinam was settled by the Portuguese and , later , the Dutch under whom it served as the capital of Dutch Coromandel from 1660 to 1781 . In November 1781 , the town was conquered by the British East India Company . It served as the capital of Tanjore district from 1799 to 1845 under Madras Presidency of the British . It continued to be a part of Thanjavur district in Independent India . In 1991 , it was made the headquarters of the newly created Nagapattinam District . Nagapattinam is administered by a Selection @-@ grade municipality covering an area of 14 @.@ 92 km2 ( 5 @.@ 76 sq mi ) and had a population of 102 @,@ 905 as of 2011 . 
 A majority of the people of Nagapattinam are employed in sea @-@ borne trading , fishing , agriculture and tourism . Kayarohanaswami Temple and <unk> Temple , Nagapattinam are the major Hindu pilgrimage sites . Nagapattinam is the base for tourism for Sikkal , Velankanni , Poompuhar , <unk> , Vedaranyam , Mannargudi and Tharangambadi . Roadways is the major mode of transport to Nagapattinam , while the city also has rail and sea transport . The town , along with the district , was severely damaged by the Indian Ocean Tsunami of 2004 . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Nagapattinam is derived from Nagar referring to people from Sri Lanka who settled here and <unk> referring to town . It was also called <unk> <unk> during the Chola period , when it was one of the important ports . Ptolemy refers to Nagapattinam as <unk> and mentions it as one of the most important trade centres of the ancient Tamil country . This view is doubtful as there are no contemporary evidences to prove the existence of a metropolis in the name of " <unk> " or " <unk> " . Nagapattinam was referred by early writers and the Portuguese as " the city of Coromandel " . Appar and Tirugnanasambandar , the 7th @-@ century saint poets refer to the city as Nagai in their verses in Tevaram . The town was originally called " Nagai " and the word <unk> was attached during the Chola era when it emerged as an important port . 
 = = History = = 
 There are urn burials in and around the city from the Sangam period indicating some level of human habitation . There are no direct references to Nagapattinam during the c ( 3rd century BCE to 3rd century CE ) . The neighbouring port , <unk> ( modern day Poompuhar ) , was the capital of the Chola kingdom of the Sangam Age , referred to widely in Tamil scriptures like <unk> . 
 The early works of Tevaram by the 7th @-@ century poets Appar and Tirugnanasambandar mention the town had fortified walls , busy road building and a busy port . The inscriptions from the <unk> temple indicate the construction was initiated during the reign of the Pallava king , Narasimha Pallava II ( 691 – 729 CE ) . A Buddhist pagoda was built under Chinese influence by the Pallava king and the town was frequented by Buddhist travelers . Thirumangai Azhwar , the 9th century <unk> saint poet , is believed to have stolen the golden Buddha statue to fund the Ranganathaswamy Temple at Srirangam ; the authenticity of the theory is questionable . 
 In the 11th century CE , Chudamani Vihara , a Buddhist monastery , was built by Javanese king Sri Vijaya <unk> with the patronage of Raja Raja Chola . Nagapattinam was the prominent port of Cholas for trade and a conquering gateway to the east . 
 In the early 16th century the Portuguese made commercial contacts with the town and established a commercial centre in 1554 CE . The Portuguese also conducted missionary enterprise here . In 1658 , the Dutch made an agreement with King Vijaya <unk> of Thanjavur on 5 January 1662 , by which ten villages were transferred from the Portuguese to the Dutch — Nagapattinam Port , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> . Ten Christian churches and a hospital were built by the Dutch . They released Pagoda coins with the name Nagapattinam engraved in Tamil . As per agreement between the first <unk> King <unk> of Thanjavur and the Dutch , <unk> and surrounding villages were handed over to the Dutch on 30 December 1676 . In 1690 , the capital of Dutch Coromandel changed from Pulicat to Nagapattinam . 
 This town fell into the hands of the British in 1781 after the two naval battles between British and French fleets were fought off the coast of Negapatam , as it was then known : the first in 1758 as part of the Seven Years ' War and the second in 1782 as part of the Fourth Anglo @-@ Dutch War . The town was taken by the British from the Dutch in 1781 ( who had been formally brought into the war in 1780 ) . When the Dutch and British reached a peace agreement in 1784 , Nagapattinam was formally ceded to the British . 277 villages , with Nagore as the headquarters , were handed over to the East India Company . 
 From 1799 to 1845 CE Nagapttinam was the headquarters of Tanjore district . Nagapattinam and Nagore were incorporated as a single municipality in 1866 CE . The town remained one of the chief ports to the Madras Presidency . The port suffered decline after the inclusion of Tranquebar and Tuticorin ports . After India 's independence , Sirkazhi continued to be a part of Thanjavur district until 1991 , and later became part of the newly created Nagapattinam district . Nagapattinam was severely affected by the tsunami which followed the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Nagapattinam lies at 10 @.@ 77 ° N 79 @.@ 83 ° E ﻿ / 10 @.@ 77 ; 79 @.@ 83 . The town is bounded by Bay of Bengal in the east , <unk> river in the south , Thiruvarur district in the west , <unk> district in the north west and Karaikkal & Puducherry in the north . The town lies in the sea level . The municipality covers an area of 14 @.@ 92 km2 ( 5 @.@ 76 sq mi ) Nagapattinam is situated at a distance of 350 km ( 220 mi ) from Chennai , 14 km ( 8 @.@ 7 mi ) from Karaikal , 40 km ( 25 mi ) from Mayiladuthurai , 40 km ( 25 mi ) from Kumbakonam , 80 km ( 50 mi ) from Thanjavur and 25 km ( 16 mi ) from Thiruvarur . The town receives an annual rainfall of 350 mm ( 14 in ) . Nagapattinam has a tropical climate during the summer months of March to May . The proximity to the sea results in a high humidity throughout the year , which reaches 70 % during August to May . The town has a plain terrain of alluvial soil consisting of sand , silt and clay . Vettar , the tributaries of river Cauvery are the major water bodies . Paddy is the major crop in the region , followed by groundnut , pulses , sugarcane , cotton and sesame . The town is one of the cyclone @-@ prone zones and was devastated during the 2004 tsunami . A very fine layer of high saline soil was deposited in the paddy fields . 
 = = = 2004 tsunami = = = 
 The 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake was an undersea megathrust earthquake that on 26 December 2004 , with an epicentre off the west coast of Sumatra , Indonesia , which triggered a series of devastating tsunamis along the coasts of most landmasses bordering the Indian Ocean . Nagapattinam district was the most affected part in Tamil Nadu , accounting for 6 @,@ 064 off the 8 @,@ 009 casualties in the state . A large number of the casualties were from the fishing community , who resided close to the seashore . The property losses impacted the fishing industry , as most of the boats were damaged by the inundation . The immediate aftermath created a lull in tourism . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 According to 2011 census , Nagapattinam had a population of 102 @,@ 905 with a sex @-@ ratio of 1 @,@ 026 females for every 1 @,@ 000 males , much above the national average of 929 . A total of 11 @,@ 884 were under the age of six , constituting 6 @,@ 089 males and 5 @,@ 795 females . Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes accounted for 8 @.@ 67 % and 0 @.@ 62 % of the population respectively . The average literacy of the town was 78 @.@ 74 % , compared to the national average of 72 @.@ 99 % . The town had <unk> households . There were 33 @,@ 532 workers , comprising 209 cultivators , 320 main agricultural labourers , 605 in house hold industries , 29 @,@ 875 other workers , 2 @,@ 523 marginal workers , 35 marginal cultivators , 130 marginal agricultural labourers , 64 marginal workers in household industries and 2 @,@ 294 other marginal workers . As per the religious census of 2011 , Nagapattinam had 71 @.@ 4 % Hindus , 24 @.@ 79 % Muslims , 3 @.@ 68 % Christians , 0 @.@ 01 % Sikhs , 0 @.@ 02 % Buddhists , 0 @.@ 01 % Jains and 0 @.@ 08 % following other religions . 
 The decadal growth rate was higher during the decade ending in 1981 , due to an increase in the town limits from 8 @.@ 7 km2 ( 3 @.@ 4 sq mi ) to 14 @.@ 95 km2 ( 5 @.@ 77 sq mi ) . The overall growth rate has declined over the period due to migration of people to other urban centres . There are 40 slums in the town as of 2001 , with an estimated 44 % residing in these slums . Out of 40 slums , 14 were affected by the 2004 tsunami . With the help of grant schemes and tsunami assistance programmes , these were rebuilt to tsunami @-@ proof houses . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The main occupation of Nagapattinam is fishing in the waters of Bay of Bengal . The fish are sold in the daily and weekly fish markets in the town . There is a large number of ice factories for preserving the fish . The industry suffered a setback after the tsunami that struck the coast on 26 December 2004 . 
 There is limited agricultural activity , but much agricultural commerce is conducted in the town . A majority of the people are employed in service industry , belonging to the tertiary sector . The town is also the centre of retail provisions trading for the towns and villages surrounding Nagapattinam . 
 Tourism is a major economic driver with the presence of heritage and historic points like Nagore , Velankanni , Sikkal , Kodikkarai , Vedaranyam , Mannargudi and Tharangambadi . 
 There is limited industrial activity — the major industries are household , tailoring , embroidery , plastic wire and metal manufacturing . Cauvery Basin Refinery , a subsidiary of Chennai Petroleum Corporation Limited ( <unk> ) is near Nagapattinam . Established in 1993 , it is a major contributor to the economy of the town . The development of industries is constrained by the town being linear and by the applicability of Coastal Regulation Zone ( <unk> ) regulations that prevent large @-@ scale construction and industrial buildings . 
 All major nationalised banks such as State Bank of India , Indian Bank , Central Bank of India , Punjab National Bank , Indian Overseas Bank and private banks like ICICI Bank , City Union Bank have branches in Nagapattinam . All these banks have their automated teller machines located in various parts of the town . 
