 Julian <unk> has commented that witch trials tended to occur at times of crisis such as Scotland experienced during the late 1690s . The Glorious Revolution of 1688 , although it had restored the " presbyterian polity of the kirk " , nevertheless left many " disappointed at the low moral tone and lack of religious enthusiasm of their compatriots " . The Glencoe Massacre of 1692 and the subsequent inquiry had " eroded the moral legitimacy of the government " , and a series of harvest failures from 1695 onwards led to a period of famine . There was also the threat of a French invasion : " as the Bargarron witches were being tried , taxes and troops were being levied in the west to repel the expected invaders " . 
 In 1839 a small hole was discovered in the wall of Shaw 's bedroom at Bargarron House , which by then had become a local attraction , through which an accomplice may have passed the items she supposedly removed from her mouth . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Shortly after the trial in 1697 the former Scottish Secretary of State James Johnstone observed that " the parliaments of France and other <unk> who are persuaded of the being of witches never try them now because of the experience they have had that it 's impossible to distinguish possession from nature in disorder " . 
 Shaw married the Reverend John Millar , the parish minister of Kilmaurs , Ayrshire , in 1719 . He died two years later , after which Shaw went on to become a successful businesswoman . She was involved in the manufacture of thread , at first in a small way , but as the quality of her product began to be recognised , on an increasingly large scale . Her Bargarran trademark thread became a mark of quality , and others in the area began to emulate her techniques , starting an industry in which Paisley once dominated the world , and which shaped the town 's history . The last known record of Shaw is her marriage in February 1737 to William Livingstone , a prosperous Edinburgh businessman . 
 In May 2008 a memorial was built at <unk> Cross in Paisley , the site where the witches ' charred remains were buried . It replaced the original horseshoe marking the spot , which had disappeared during the 1970s , as had its replacement later . The bronze tondo , with a stainless steel horseshoe embedded in it , includes the inscription " Pain <unk> , Suffering <unk> , Injustice Done " . A campaign was launched in 2008 petitioning the Scottish Parliament to pardon all the 4000 men , women and children prosecuted under the 16th and 17th @-@ century witchcraft laws , but legislators argued that it was inappropriate to pardon those tried and convicted under the laws of their time . 
 = Joshua Soule Zimmerman = 
 Joshua Soule Zimmerman ( January 16 , 1874 – September 2 , 1962 ) was an American lawyer , politician , and orchardist in the U.S. state of West Virginia . In the early years of the 20th century , Zimmerman served as the Prosecuting Attorney for Hampshire County and as a Democratic member of the West Virginia House of Delegates . 
 Zimmerman was born in La Plata to Reverend George Henry Zimmerman , a Methodist pastor and church administrator . He began his post @-@ secondary education at Roanoke College and received a Bachelor of Arts degree from Randolph – Macon College in 1892 . He worked as a clerk in the United States Census Office in Washington , D.C. , and earned a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1896 from Columbian University Law School . Following his graduation , Zimmerman opened a law office in Romney , West Virginia , in July 1896 and engaged in the practice of law there . He provided legal services to a number of companies and organizations including Capon Valley Bank , Hampshire County 's Legal Advisory Board , the Hampshire County Food Administration , and Hampshire County orchard owners . Zimmerman was the secretary for the Winchester and Western Railroad . 
 While serving in the West Virginia House of Delegates , Zimmerman was appointed by West Virginia Governor John Jacob Cornwell to serve on a West Virginia Legislature select committee charged with drafting a road transportation bill known as the West Virginia State Road Law . He was again appointed by Governor Cornwell to serve on a similar select committee following the ratification of the " Good Roads Amendment " of the Constitution of West Virginia in 1920 . In addition to serving in the West Virginia House of Delegates , Zimmerman was the chairman of the Hampshire County Democratic Party Committee and a member of the Second District Congressional Committee ; he also participated in judicial , senatorial , and state conventions . Zimmerman played an active role in the commercial apple orchard industry of Hampshire County , and he operated at least three commercial orchards there . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Joshua Soule Zimmerman was born on January 16 , 1874 , near La Plata in Charles County , Maryland , at the ancestral home of his mother , Henrietta A. Rowe Zimmerman . His father was Reverend George Henry Zimmerman , a Methodist pastor and church administrator whose family originated from an estate in Baltimore County near Baltimore , Maryland . Zimmerman 's father presided over the Moorefield district of the Methodist Episcopal Church , South ( 1894 – 1898 ) . Zimmerman had two brothers : Edgar Rowe Zimmerman of Ruxton , Maryland , and George Henry Zimmerman of <unk> , Kentucky . 
 The pastoral profession of Zimmerman 's father caused his family to relocate to a number of towns throughout Maryland , Virginia , and West Virginia . Zimmerman spent the majority of his youth in Woodstock and Salem , Virginia , before his father transferred to Romney , West Virginia , to preside over the Moorefield district of the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . 
 = = Education = = 
 Zimmerman attended Roanoke College in Salem , Virginia , from 1885 to 1886 , and in 1888 he began attending Randolph – Macon College in Ashland , Virginia , where he graduated with a Bachelor of Arts degree in 1892 . Following his graduation , Zimmerman worked briefly as a tutor on a plantation near Shelby , Mississippi . 
 In 1893 , Zimmerman accepted the position of a clerk in the United States Census Office in Washington , D.C. , during the second administration of President Grover Cleveland . During his three years serving in the United States Census Office , Zimmerman completed night courses in jurisprudence at Columbian University Law School , and he graduated from the institution with a Bachelor of Laws degree in 1896 . While attending Columbian University , Zimmerman also served as editor of the 1896 Class Book and resided at 915 I Street , Northwest near Mount Vernon Square . 
 Zimmerman was a member of the Phi Delta Theta social fraternity and of the Phi Delta Phi legal honor society . He was later made a Golden Legionnaire of the Phi Delta Theta fraternity . 
 = = Law career = = 
 Following his graduation from Columbian University Law School , Zimmerman opened his law office in Romney , West Virginia , in July 1896 and began engaging in the practice of law there . His first legal case argued before the Hampshire County Circuit Court was West Virginia v. Smith , in which his client was charged with " breaking and entering with intent to commit larceny " . Zimmerman lost this case . In Hu Maxwell and Howard Llewellyn Swisher 's History of Hampshire County , West Virginia : From Its Earliest Settlement to the Present ( 1897 ) , Zimmerman was described as " a young man " who had " made his success at the bar of Hampshire " . Zimmerman 's law practice expanded , and he began arguing cases in adjoining West Virginia county courts and in both the West Virginia state and United States federal courts . 
 Only seven years after starting his law practice , Zimmerman was appointed to fill the unexpired term of Prosecuting Attorney for Hampshire County , William B. Cornwell , who had resigned from the position . Zimmerman was subsequently reelected twice to the position , and he served as Hampshire County 's prosecuting attorney from 1900 until 1910 ( a total of nine years and three months ) . Zimmerman also served as one of three chancery commissioners for Hampshire County , during which he served with Christian Streit White , Robert White , and James Sloan Kuykendall . He was a member of the West Virginia Bar Association . 
 Zimmerman was the lawyer for the Capon Valley Bank , headquartered in Wardensville , West Virginia , and provided his legal services to secure the bank 's incorporation . During World War I , Zimmerman served as a member of Hampshire County 's Legal Advisory Board and was the lawyer for the County Food Administration . Following the outbreak of World War I , Zimmerman registered for the draft during the registration for men aged 18 through 45 under the Selective Service Act of 1917 . After the Winchester and Western Railroad Company received its charter on August 31 , 1916 , to build and operate a rail line connecting Wardensville and the Lost River valley of West Virginia to the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad and the Cumberland Valley Railroad at Winchester , Virginia , Zimmerman served as the company 's secretary . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Zimmerman became a prominent leader within the Democratic Party in Hampshire County , which was the dominant political party in the county . At various times , Zimmerman served as the chairman of the Hampshire County Democratic Party Committee , a member of the Second District Congressional Committee , and attended judicial , senatorial , and state conventions . 
 = = = West Virginia House of Delegates = = = 
 Zimmerman was nominated as the Democratic Party candidate for a seat representing Hampshire County in the West Virginia House of Delegates in 1920 . Zimmerman won the seat against Republican Party candidate C. W. Rogers in the November 1920 general election and subsequently served as a member of the West Virginia House of Delegates from 1921 to 1924 . Following his election , Zimmerman was made the Democratic Party 's floor leader in the West Virginia House of Delegates . 
 Zimmerman was appointed by West Virginia Governor John Jacob Cornwell to serve on a West Virginia Legislature select committee charged with drafting a road transportation bill under West Virginia Senate Joint Resolution No. 21 of May 21 , 1919 , known as the West Virginia State Road Law . The new West Virginia State Road Law became necessary following the authorization of a 50 million USD bond issue during the 1920 general election . Zimmerman was again appointed by Governor Cornwell to serve on a similar select committee following the ratification of the " Good Roads Amendment " of the Constitution of West Virginia in 1920 . 
 During the 1921 legislative session , Zimmerman was assigned to the Judiciary , Roads , and Game and Fish committees . Also during the 1921 legislative session , he sponsored the following bills : 
 H.B. 274 ( Ch . 158 ) , which gave county courts the authority to impose a " special building levy " not to exceed 30 cents for the purpose of completing the construction or repair of county courthouses . 
 H.B. 392 ( Ch . 49 ) , which provided for the establishment of a county high school for Hampshire County and authorized the Hampshire County Board of Education to impose a levy not to exceed 30 cents for three years to construct and maintain the high school . 
 Throughout his tenure in the West Virginia House of Delegates , Zimmerman supported legislation that strictly enforced prohibition . 
 = = Agricultural pursuits = = 
 Zimmerman played an active role in the commercial apple orchard industry of Hampshire County , in which he was responsible for the promotion of several of the county 's orchard companies , served as an officer and legal advisor to orchard companies , and owned 150 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 km2 ) of his own commercial apple orchards . In November 1906 , Zimmerman , Henry Bell Gilkeson , R. W. Dailey , Jr . , and P. J. <unk> were incorporators of the Mill Mountain Orchard Company , which operated orchards along the top of Mill Creek Mountain west of Romney . According to the 1919 Census of the Commercial Apple Orchards in West Virginia published by the West Virginia Department of Agriculture , Zimmerman was engaged in the management of three commercial apple orchards near Romney , West Virginia : Fairfax Orchard Company , which produced Stark Delicious apples ; Gilkeson , Hart & Zimmerman Orchard , which produced York Imperial , Pennsylvania Winesap , Ben Davis , <unk> Winesap , Jonathan , Grimes Golden , and Rome Beauty apples ; and the Mill Mountain Orchard Company , which produced York Imperial , <unk> Winesap , Pennsylvania Winesap , Rambo , Northern Spy , Canada Red , Ben Davis , Grimes Golden , Jonathan , Rome Beauty , Yellow Transparent , and Stark apples . 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 Zimmerman married Kitty Campbell Vance on October 10 , 1900 , near Romney , West Virginia . Kitty Campbell Vance was the daughter of John T. and Mary Elizabeth Inskeep Vance of Romney . Zimmerman and his wife Kitty had four children : 
 Mary Elizabeth Zimmerman Kump ( March 21 , 1903 – 1994 ) , married Garnett Kerr Kump in 1940 in Hampshire County , West Virginia 
 George Henry Zimmerman ( February 20 , 1905 – 1987 ) 
 Kitty Campbell Zimmerman McCracken , married James Paris McCracken of Cisco , Texas at the Romney Presbyterian Church in Romney , West Virginia on August 20 , 1946 
 Vance Zimmerman ( August 5 , 1910 – September 27 , 1976 ) , married Mildred Sites in 1937 in Hampshire County , West Virginia 
 Zimmerman was an active layperson in the Methodist Episcopal Church , South , and served as a steward of the Romney Methodist Episcopal Church , South congregations . He also served for a number of years as the superintendent of the congregation 's Sunday school program . Zimmerman represented the church in the Moorefield district and at annual conferences of the Methodist Episcopal Church , South . Despite his involvement in the Southern Methodist church , his wife Kitty and several of his children were Presbyterian . 
 = = Later life and death = = 
 Zimmerman 's wife Kitty predeceased him in 1937 . He died in Williamsport , Maryland , on September 2 , 1962 . Zimmerman is interred with his wife Kitty at Indian Mound Cemetery in Romney , West Virginia . He had practiced law in Romney , West Virginia , for 66 years . 
 = Hallie Ford Museum of Art = 
 The Hallie Ford Museum of Art ( HFMA ) is the museum of Willamette University in Salem , Oregon , United States . It is the third largest art museum in Oregon . Opened in 1998 , the facility is across the street from the Oregon State Capital in downtown Salem , on the western edge of the school campus . Hallie Ford exhibits collections of both art and historical artifacts with a focus on Oregon related pieces of art and artists in the 27 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) facility . The museum also hosts various traveling exhibits in two of its six galleries . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to the creation of the Hallie Ford Museum , Willamette University previously collected various pieces of art donated to the university . By 1896 the collections were housed in a museum located on the fourth floor of Waller Hall . By 1940 the museum had moved to the second floor of the gymnasium ( now the Theatre Playhouse ) . At that time the museum 's collection included birds , various documents , minerals , wood specimens , shells , plant specimens , and Native American artifacts , among others . 
 In 1990 , the school received a donation of around 250 pieces of ancient , European , Middle Eastern , and Asian art from the <unk> family . Alumnus Dan Schneider suggested to an art faculty member , Roger Hull , that the school should have a museum to display the university ’ s art collection in 1992 . Then in 1994 Roger Hull made a presentation to the school ’ s trustees to push for the creation of an art museum . Over the next two years plans were developed and donations were made that led to the purchase of a building near campus for a museum . One large donation came from Hallie Ford and the Ford Family Foundation that allowed the purchase and remodel to move forward . The museum officially opened in 1998 with over 3 @,@ 000 pieces of art , and was the second largest art museum in the state at that time . 
 The museum was named top fine arts venue and art gallery in the local region in 2002 by residents . In 2003 , the facility received a Certificate of Award from the Oregon Art Education Association , and was named as the third best art gallery in Oregon ’ s mid @-@ Willamette Valley region . Attendance at the museum was approximately 16 @,@ 000 in the first full @-@ year of operation and increased to around 30 @,@ 000 people per year in 2003 . 
 In July 2007 , the museum began a remodeling project to add storage to the basement areas and the room used for studying prints . The $ 850 @,@ 000 remodel was completed in December 2007 with funding coming from a donation by Maribeth Collins . Also in 2007 , Hallie Ford Museum of Art was given an American Masterpieces grant by the National Endowment for the Arts through the Oregon Arts Commission . This $ 50 @,@ 000 grant helped to fund an exhibit entitled “ The Art of Ceremony ” regarding tribal ceremonies of Native American tribes in Oregon . The museum introduced the " Breath of Heaven , Breath of Earth " exhibit in 2013 , which was billed as its most ambitious exhibit . 
 = = Building = = 
 The building housing the museum was built in 1965 for Pacific Northwest Bell . This International Style building contains 27 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 500 m2 ) on three floors ( two above ground ) , and was designed by local architect James L. Payne . In 1996 , the building then owned by US West Communications was purchased by the university . Willamette then remodeled the building during 1997 to 1998 with the design coming from Jon Weiner of Soderstrom Architects of Portland , Oregon . 
 The building opened on October 3 , 1998 , with a two @-@ story atrium gallery , curves located throughout the interior space , marble panels , and an enclosed garden on the exterior . Additionally , the brick faced structure has an exterior patio constructed of slate . There are a total of six galleries at the museum , with four used for permanent collections and two galleries used for traveling exhibits . In 2008 , colored reflector panels were added to the narrow second floor windows in order to provide more color to the exterior . Measuring 69 @.@ 5 inches high by 21 @.@ 75 inches wide , some of the panels are illuminated from the interior . 
 = = Collections = = 
 Hallie Ford Museum of Art has a diverse collection of art from across cultures and eras . Six exhibition galleries contain artwork from different mediums such as sculptures , paintings , basketry , and prints . Artwork includes Native American art , European paintings , American art , and contemporary art . The museum also features local art and artists . 
 Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Gallery contains basketry made by Native American tribes in the Pacific Northwest . These pieces are from the Byrd and <unk> Collections acquired during the 1940s . The museum also contains the Carl Hall Gallery that holds a variety of work , including work by former faculty members . Other galleries at the museum include the Melvin Henderson @-@ Rubio Gallery that exhibits traveling collections , General Collections Gallery that displays Asian and European artwork , the Study Gallery that shows small temporary collections , and the Print Study Room that exhibits prints and photographs . 
 HFMA holds two paintings by German landscape painter Frederick Ferdinand Schafer ( 1839 – 1927 ) . Morning in the Adirondacks and Olympic Mountains , Washington were both acquired in 1996 by the museum . Other pieces of art include Egyptian art , Korean art , African art , Indian art , and etchings by Dutch artist Anthonie Waterloo . The museum also houses the Paulus Collection of photograph glass negatives of the Salem area from the early Twentieth Century . 
 Hallie Ford Museum of Art is a member of both the American Association for State and Local History , and the American Alliance of Museums . The museum has an endowment of $ 4 @.@ 5 million as of 2005 . 
 = = = Past exhibits = = = 
 Seattle painter Michael Spafford ’ s works were featured in a 1999 show HFMA . In 2005 , the museum displayed a retrospective of Portland artist Michael Brophy . The museum held a show in 2007 featuring work by Oregon painter Amanda Snyder . Other exhibits have included shows on Rick Bartow , Jacob Lawrence , David Giese , Fay Jones , Eunice Parsons , David <unk> , Mary Lou Zeek , and Robert Hess among other artists . HFMA has also hosted traveling exhibits on Egyptian art in 2002 , was one of three U.S. stops for the " Toi Maori : The Eternal Thread " exhibit , exhibited a collection of ancient glass work in 2007 , and displayed an exhibit on ancient Roman and Greek artifacts . 
 = = Namesake = = 
 Hallie Ford was one of the founders of the Ford Family Foundation . She graduated from East Central University in Oklahoma and moved to Oregon after graduation . Ford became a trustee at Willamette University in 1975 . She was the wife of Kenneth W. Ford and they built Roseburg Forest Products Company in Roseburg , Oregon , beginning in 1936 . From this they later started a foundation that would grow to become the Ford Family Foundation in 1996 . Ford died on June 4 , 2007 , at age 102 . 
 = Dimitrije Ljotić = 
 Dimitrije Ljotić ( Serbian Cyrillic : <unk> <unk> ; 12 August 1891 – 23 April 1945 ) was a Serbian fascist politician and ideologue who established the Yugoslav National Movement ( Zbor ) in 1935 and collaborated with German occupational authorities in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia during World War II . 
 He joined the Serbian Army with the outbreak of the Balkan Wars , fought on the Serbian side during World War I and remained in active service until 1920 , when he decided to pursue a career in politics . He joined the People 's Radical Party that year and became regional deputy for the Smederevo District in 1930 . In 1931 , he was appointed to the position of Yugoslav Minister of Justice by King Alexander I but resigned following a disagreement between him and the king over the layout of the Yugoslav political system . Ljotić founded Zbor in 1935 . The party received little support from the largely anti @-@ German Serbian public and never won more than 1 percent of the vote in the 1935 and 1938 Yugoslav parliamentary elections . Ljotić was arrested in the run @-@ up to the latter elections and briefly sent to an insane asylum after the authorities accused him of having a " religious mania " . He voiced his opposition to the Cvetković – Maček Agreement in 1939 and his supporters reacted to it violently . Zbor was soon outlawed by the Yugoslav government , forcing Ljotić into hiding . He remained in hiding until April 1941 , when the Axis powers invaded Yugoslavia . Ljotić was later invited by the Germans to join the Serbian puppet government of Milan Aćimović and was offered the position of economic commissioner . He never took office , partly because he disliked the idea of playing a secondary role in the administration and partly because of his unpopularity . He resorted to indirectly exerting his influence over the Serbian puppet government through two of his closest associates whom the Germans had selected as commissioners . In September 1941 , the Germans gave Ljotić permission to form the Serbian Volunteer Detachments , which were later renamed the Serbian Volunteer Corps ( SDK ) . 
 Ljotić was publicly denounced as a traitor by the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile and Chetnik leader Draža Mihailović in July 1942 . He and other Serbian collaborationist officials left Belgrade in October 1944 and made their way to Slovenia , from where they intended to launch an assault against the Independent State of Croatia ( NDH ) . Between March and April , Ljotić and Mihailović agreed to a last @-@ ditch alliance against the Yugoslav Partisans and their forces came together under the command of Chetnik General Miodrag Damjanović on 27 March . Ljotić was killed in an automobile accident on 23 April and was buried in Šempeter pri Gorici . His funeral service was jointly conducted by Bishop Nikolaj Velimirović and Serbian Orthodox Patriarch Gavrilo Dožić , whose release from the Dachau concentration camp Ljotić had secured the previous December . In early May , Damjanović led the SDK – Chetnik formations under his command into northwestern Italy , where they surrendered to the British and were placed in detainment camps . Many were later extradited to Yugoslavia , where several thousand were executed by the Partisans and buried in mass graves in the Kočevski Rog plateau . Others immigrated to the west , where they established émigré organizations intended to promote Zbor 's political agenda . The antagonism between these groups and those affiliated with the Chetniks continued in exile . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dimitrije Ljotić was born in Belgrade on 12 August 1891 to Vladimir Ljotić and his wife Ljubica ( née Stanojević ) . His father was a prominent politician in the port town of Smederevo and served as the Serbian government consul to Greece . The Ljotić family was descended from two brothers , Đorđe and Tomislav Dimitrijević , who hailed from the village of Blace , in Greek Macedonia . The origin of the surname Ljotić rests with Đorđe , who often went by the nickname " <unk> " . The two brothers settled in the village of <unk> in or around 1750 and relocated to Smederevo in the latter half of the 18th century . The <unk> were closely connected with the Karađorđević dynasty , which had ruled Serbia several times throughout the 19th century . 
 In 1858 , the rival Obrenović dynasty seized power in the country and forced Prince Alexander Karađorđević into exile . Ljotić 's father was forced out of the country in 1868 after being implicated in a conspiracy against the Obrenović dynasty and its head , Prince Milan . He did not return to Serbia until Milan 's abdication on 6 March 1889 . Apart from being a close friend of Serbia 's future king , Peter I , Ljotić 's father was also the first person to translate The Communist Manifesto into Serbian . Ljotić 's maternal great @-@ grandfather , knez <unk> , was an outlaw who was killed in the Slaughter of the <unk> in January 1804 . 
 Ljotić finished primary school in Smederevo . He attended gymnasium in Salonika , where his family had relocated in 1907 . Ljotić was religiously devoted in his youth and even contemplated a career in the Serbian Orthodox Church . He was greatly influenced by Leo Tolstoy 's doctrine of Christian non @-@ violence , but later rejected this doctrine during World War I. Following his father 's advice , he went on to study law and graduated from the Law School of the University of Belgrade . With the outbreak of the Balkan Wars , Ljotić joined the Serbian Army . 
 In the autumn of 1913 , he accepted a state scholarship to study in Paris . He stayed in the city for nearly a year , and while studying at the Institute of Agriculture he was exposed to the right @-@ wing , proto @-@ fascist ideas of writer Charles Maurras . Maurras was a French counter @-@ revolutionary who founded the far @-@ right political movement known as Action Française and whose writings went on to influence European fascists and the ideologues of the Vichy Regime during World War II . Ljotić described Maurras as a " rare shining spirit " and cited him as one of his greatest intellectual influences . 
 Ljotić returned from Paris on 1 September 1914 , and rejoined the Serbian Army . He attained the rank of corporal by year 's end and was wounded during the <unk> Pole Offensive . During the winter of 1915 – 16 , he participated in the Serbian Army 's retreat through Albania . Ljotić remained on active service after the war ended , with a unit guarding the border between the newly formed Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes and the Kingdom of Italy near the town of Bakar . During this time , he also worked for the intelligence service of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . In 1919 , he helped break a railway strike meant to disrupt the flow of munitions intended for anti @-@ Communist forces fighting against Béla Kun in Hungary . In 1920 , he ordered troops under his command to arrest striking railway workers , convinced that all were complicit in a Communist conspiracy . Ljotić was demobilized on 17 June 1920 . He subsequently married <unk> <unk> , a Roman Catholic Croat from the village of <unk> on the Croatian Littoral . The couple had two sons , Vladimir and Nikola , and a daughter , Ljubica . Ljotić and his wife relocated to Belgrade not long after their marriage . Ljotić passed his bar examination on 22 September 1921 , and began practicing law . He later became vice @-@ president of the diocesan council of the Serbian Orthodox Church in the town of Požarevac , and represented the Požarevac diocese in the church 's patriarchal council . 
 = = Interwar political career = = 
 = = = People 's Radical Party and Ministry of Justice = = = 
 Ljotić joined the People 's Radical Party ( Serbian : Narodna radikalna stranka , NRS ) of Nikola Pašić in 1920 , stating that it was " God 's will " . He ran for public office in the 1927 parliamentary elections , and received 5 @,@ 614 votes . This accounted for 19 @.@ 7 percent of votes cast in the Smederevo District and was not enough to see him win the seat in parliament , and it was won by Democratic Party politician Kosta <unk> . Ljotić left the NRS shortly after these elections . 
 On 20 June 1928 , Montenegrin politician Puniša Račić assassinated Croatian Peasant Party ( Croatian : Hrvatska seljačka stranka , HSS ) representatives Pavle Radić and Đuro Basariček and mortally wounded HSS leader Stjepan Radić in a shooting which took place on the floor of the parliament of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes . The shooting led to King Alexander suspending the Vidovdan Constitution on 6 January 1929 and proclaiming a royal dictatorship . The country was renamed Yugoslavia and divided into 9 banovinas ( or provinces ) , all of which were named after the country 's major rivers . The pre @-@ 1912 territory of the former Kingdom of Serbia was divided mostly between the banovinas of Danube and Morava , and to a lesser extent , of the banovinas of Drina and Zeta . 
 In 1929 , Ljotić was granted the first of several audiences with Alexander . He became regional deputy for the Smederevo District in 1930 . On 16 February 1931 , he was appointed to the position of Yugoslav Minister of Justice in King Alexander 's royal dictatorship as a result of his unwavering loyalty to the Karađorđević dynasty . In June of that year , Ljotić suggested to Alexander that the Yugoslav political system be structured on the Italian fascist model . He presented him with a draft constitution that proposed " an organic constitutional hereditary monarchy , undemocratic and non @-@ parliamentary , based on the mobilization of popular forces , gathered around economic , professional , cultural and charity organizations , that would be politically accountable to the king . " The king rejected Ljotić 's constitution as being too authoritarian . On 17 August , Ljotić resigned from his post after the government decided to create a single government @-@ backed political party in Yugoslavia . 
 = = = Zbor = = = 
 In 1934 , Alexander was assassinated in Marseille by a Bulgarian mercenary working for the Ustaše . That year , Ljotić made contact with three pro @-@ fascist movements and the publishers of their respective newspapers — Otadžbina ( Fatherland ) , published in Belgrade ; the monthly Zbor ( Rally ) , published in Herzegovina ; and the weekly Buđenje ( Awakening ) , published in <unk> ( modern Zrenjanin ) . Ljotić contributed to all three publications and became most influential with the Otadžbina movement . He subsequently founded the Yugoslav National Movement ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : <unk> <unk> pokret ) , which was also known as the United Active Labour Organization ( <unk> <unk> organizacija rada , or Zbor ) . Zbor was created by the merger of three fascist movements — Yugoslav Action from Zagreb , the " Fighters " from Ljubljana , and Buđenje from <unk> . It was officially established in Belgrade on 6 January 1935 , the sixth anniversary of King Alexander 's dictatorship proclamation . Its members elected Ljotić its president , the Croat Juraj <unk> its vice @-@ president , the Slovene Fran <unk> as second vice @-@ president and the Serb Velibor Jonić as its secretary @-@ general . Zbor 's official stated goal was the imposition of a planned economy and " the racial and biological defense of the national life @-@ force and the family " . Otadžbina became its official newspaper . 
 Zbor was declared illegal upon establishment , since virtually all political parties in Yugoslavia had been banned since the declaration of King Alexander 's dictatorship in 1929 . On 2 September 1935 , Jonić and attorney Milan Aćimović petitioned the Yugoslav Ministry of the Interior to legalize Zbor . On 8 November , the Ministry of the Interior conceded and recognized Zbor as an official political party . German officials in Yugoslavia quickly took notice of the movement , with the German envoy to Yugoslavia , Viktor von Heeren , providing it with financial assistance and infiltrating it with German agents . A German observer noted : " The movement Zbor represents a kind of national socialist party . Its principles are the struggle against Freemasons , against Jews , against Communists and against western capitalism . " German industrial firms provided Zbor with further financial aid , as did German intelligence services . 
 Most of the support that Zbor received in Serbia came from members of the urban middle class , as well as right @-@ wing students and members of the armed forces . The majority of Zbor 's members were ethnic Serbs , though some Croats and Slovenes also joined . Its membership fluctuated often , primarily due to disagreements over Ljotić 's authoritarianism and his lack of popularity and political power in Serbia . Ljotić was an unpopular figure in Serbia due to his pro @-@ German sympathies and religious fanaticism . The limited amount of support received by Zbor itself stemmed from the fact that radical right @-@ wing sentiment was not strong amongst the Serbian population . The reason for this was that right @-@ wing politics were associated with Germany . Being extremely anti @-@ German , the majority of ethnic Serbs rejected fascist and Nazi ideas outright . Zbor never had more than 10 @,@ 000 active members at any given time , with most of its support coming from Smederevo and from the ethnic German ( Volksdeutsche ) minority in Vojvodina that had been exposed to Nazi propaganda since 1933 . 
 During Milan Stojadinović 's premiership , many members of Zbor left the party and joined Stojadinović 's Yugoslav Radical Union ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Jugoslovenska radikalna zajednica , <unk> ) . Nevertheless , the movement continued to advocate the abandonment of individualism and parliamentary democracy . Ljotić called for Yugoslavia to unite around a single ruler and return to its religious and cultural traditions , embracing the teachings of Christianity , traditional values and corporatism . He advocated a centrally organized state , stating that the unification of South Slavs was a historical and political inevitability and that Serbs , Croats and Slovenes shared " blood kinship and feeling of common fate . " At the same time , the Yugoslavia that Ljotić envisioned was one that was to be dominated by Serbia . Zbor openly promoted antisemitism , being the only party in Yugoslavia to openly do so , as well as xenophobia . 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 Despite its opposition to parliamentary democracy , Zbor participated in the 1935 Yugoslav parliamentary elections . It offered 8 @,@ 100 candidates throughout Yugoslavia . On 5 May the Yugoslav government first announced the results of the elections , which showed that 72 @.@ 6 percent of the eligible electorate had cast a total of 2 @,@ 778 @,@ 172 ballots . The party of Bogoljub Jevtić had received 1 @,@ 738 @,@ 390 ( 62 @.@ 6 % ) votes and 320 seats in parliament and the Opposition Bloc led by Vladko Maček had received 983 @,@ 248 ( 35 @.@ 4 % ) votes and 48 seats . Zbor finished last in the polls , with 23 @,@ 814 ( 0 @.@ 8 % ) votes , and had acquired no seats in parliament . Of all the votes it had received , 13 @,@ 635 came from the Danube Banovina , in which Ljotić 's home district of Smederevo was located . The election results initially published by authorities caused an upheaval amongst the public , forcing the government to publish the results of a recount on 22 May . The recount showed that 100 @,@ 000 additional ballots that had not been recorded on 5 May had been cast and that Jevtić 's party had received 1 @,@ 746 @,@ 982 ( 60 @.@ 6 % ) votes and 303 seats , the Opposition Bloc had received 1 @,@ 076 @,@ 345 ( 37 @.@ 4 % ) and 67 seats , and that Zbor had received 24 @,@ 008 ( 0 @.@ 8 % ) votes and again no seats . 
 In 1937 , Ljotić began attacking Stojadinović through Zbor publications and accused him of complicity in King Alexander 's assassination three years earlier . Stojadinović 's government responded by exposing Ljotić as having been funded by the Germans and provided with financial resources by them to spread Nazi propaganda and promote German economic interests in Serbia . The incriminating material linking Ljotić with the Germans was given to Yugoslav authorities by German Luftwaffe commander Hermann Göring , a supporter of Stojadinović . Stojadinović used these revelations to his benefit in the following year 's parliamentary elections , presenting his opponents , including Ljotić , as " disloyal agitators " . Ljotić responded by attacking Stojadinović through issues of Otadžbina , many of which were subsequently banned . The Stojadinović government went on to prohibit all Zbor rallies and newspapers , confiscated Zbor propaganda material , and arrested Zbor leaders . In September 1938 , Ljotić was arrested after the Yugoslav gendarmerie opened fire on a crowd of Zbor supporters , killing at least one person . A frequent churchgoer , he was charged with religious mania and briefly sent to an insane asylum before being released . On 10 October , Stojadinović dissolved the Parliament of Yugoslavia , proclaimed new elections and arranged further arrests of Zbor members . Ljotić responded by publicly stating that Zbor supporters were being arrested in order to prevent them from participating in the forthcoming elections . The parliamentary elections of December 1938 offered three candidates — Stojadinović , Maček , and Ljotić . During voting itself , members of opposition parties , including Zbor , were arrested and subjected to police intimidation and voting registers were allegedly falsified in Stojadinović 's favour . Zbor finished last in the elections , receiving 30 @,@ 734 ( 1 @.@ 01 % ) votes , and again winning no seats in parliament . 17 @,@ 573 of the votes in favour of Zbor were cast in the Danube Banovina , while the amount of votes in the Dalmatian Littoral Banovina increased from 974 in May 1935 to 2 @,@ 427 in December 1938 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Activities in Yugoslavia = = = 
 In August 1939 , Ljotić 's cousin , Milan Nedić , was appointed Yugoslav Minister of Defense . Later that year , almost all Zbor publications , including Otadžbina , Buđenje , Zbor , <unk> put ( Our Path ) and Vihor ( Whirlwind ) , were prohibited . Ljotić exploited the connections he had with Nedić to ensure that the banned Zbor @-@ published journal Bilten ( Bulletin ) was distributed to members of the Royal Yugoslav Army . The journal was published illegally in a military printing house and distributed throughout the country by military couriers . Ljotić was the journal 's main contributor and editor @-@ in @-@ chief . Fifty @-@ eight issues of Bilten were published from March 1939 until October 1940 , in which Ljotić advocated a pro @-@ Axis Yugoslav foreign policy and criticized Belgrade 's tolerance of Jews . As many as 20 @,@ 000 copies each were printed of later issues of the journal . Ljotić was particularly pleased with being able to exert his ideological influence over young military academy trainees as well as older officers . 
 With the outbreak of World War II , Ljotić supported Yugoslavia 's policy of neutrality in the conflict while promoting the position that Yugoslav diplomacy should focus on relations with Berlin . He vehemently opposed the August 1939 Cvetković – Maček Agreement and repeatedly wrote letters to Prince Paul urging him to annul it . In these letters , he advocated an immediate re @-@ organization of the government according to Zbor ideology , the abolishment of Croatian autonomy , the division of the Royal Yugoslav Army into contingents of mostly ethnic Serbs , with some Croat and Slovene volunteers , who would be armed , and contingents of most Croats and Slovenes in the armed forces , who would serve as labour units and would be unarmed . Effectively , the purpose of all these points was to reduce non @-@ Serbs in Yugoslavia to the status of second @-@ class citizens . By this point , Zbor was infiltrated by the German Gestapo , the Abwehr ( German military intelligence ) , and the Schutzstaffel ( SS ) . In 1940 , the Royal Yugoslav Army purged its pro @-@ German elements and Ljotić lost much of the influence he held over the armed forces . 
 Ljotić 's followers responded to the Cvetković – Maček Agreement with violence , clashing with the youth wing of the Communist Party of Yugoslavia ( KPJ ) . These incidents attracted as many as 5 @,@ 000 new members to Zbor and led to the formation of a Zbor student wing known as the White Eagles ( Serbo @-@ Croatian : Beli <unk> ) . In July 1940 , Ljotić expressed his bitter opposition to the diplomatic recognition of the Soviet Union by Belgrade , which was meant to strengthen Yugoslavia internally in the case of war . 
 On 23 October 1940 , White Eagles members massed outside the campus of the University of Belgrade . University president Petar <unk> was a Zbor sympathizer . The Belgrade police , who were alleged to have had foreknowledge of the riots , withdrew from the area before violence erupted . The White Eagles members then threatened faculty and students with pistols and knives , stabbed some of them , hailed Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini as their heroes and shouted " down with the Jews ! " Members of <unk> Jug ( Slavic South ) , a Serbian nationalist movement , participated in the riots , which were orchestrated by Ljotić to provoke martial law and bring about a more centralized system of control in the university . The Serbian public responded to the riots with outrage . On 24 October , the Yugoslav government revoked Zbor 's legal status . On 2 November , the Ministry of Interior sent a list of Zbor members to all municipal administrators in Serbia . The government cracked down on Zbor by detaining several hundred members , forcing Ljotić into hiding . One of the only public figures in Serbia to speak in favour of Ljotić during this period was Serbian Orthodox Bishop Nikolaj Velimirović , who praised his " faith in God " and " good character " . Although a government investigation found that Zbor was guilty of high treason for accepting German funds , the authorities were careful not to arrest Ljotić in order to not provoke the Germans . Ljotić was placed under government surveillance but authorities quickly lost track of him . He hid with friends in Belgrade and remained in contact with Nedić and Velimirović . On 6 November , Nedić resigned from his post to protest the government crackdown on Zbor . Additional issues of Bilten continued to be printed despite his resignation . These supported a pro @-@ Axis Yugoslav foreign policy , criticized the government 's tolerance of Jews and Freemasons and attacked pro @-@ British members of the government for their opposition to Yugoslavia signing the Tripartite Pact . Ljotić remained in hiding until April 1941 . 
 = = = Occupation of Yugoslavia = = = 
 With the Axis invasion of Yugoslavia , several dozen Royal Yugoslav Army officers affiliated with Zbor were captured by the Wehrmacht but were quickly released . The Germans sent Ljotić a written notice assuring his freedom of movement in German @-@ occupied Serbia . Not long after German forces entered Belgrade , Ljotić 's followers were given the task of selecting an estimated 1 @,@ 200 Jews from the city 's non @-@ Jewish population . 
 When they first occupied the country , the Germans prohibited the activity of all Serbian political parties except Zbor . Although they originally intended to make Ljotić the head of a Serbian puppet government , both Ljotić and the Germans realized that his unpopularity would make any government led by him a failure . The Germans believed that Ljotić had a " dubious reputation among Serbs " . Ljotić told Gestapo officer Karl Wilhelm Krause that " [ an ] uncompromised man with generally recognized authority and force of personality ... [ is ] needed to convince the people that the Germans are their friends , that they want the best for the people and that they are the saviours of humankind from Communism . " The Germans soon invited Ljotić to join the initial Serbian puppet government , the Commissioner Administration of Milan Aćimović . Ljotić was offered the position of economic commissioner but never took office , partly because he disliked the idea of playing a secondary role in the administration and partly because of his unpopularity . He resorted to indirectly exerting his influence over the Serbian puppet government through two of his closest associates , Stevan Ivanić and Miloslav Vasiljević , whom the Germans had selected as commissioners . The only official function Ljotić held in German @-@ occupied Serbia was administrator of Smederevo . He helped in the town 's reconstruction after large parts of it were destroyed in an ammunition depot explosion in June 1941 . 
 In July and August , the Germans gave Ljotić permission to broadcast three of his speeches over Radio Belgrade and consulted him prior to appointing Nedić as leader of the Government of National Salvation in the Territory of the Military Commander in Serbia . In one of his July speeches , Ljotić proclaimed that the ultimate aim of the Soviet Union was " the destruction of the national and Christian order , which would be followed by the rule of Jews over all nations . " 
 = = = = Formation of the Serbian Volunteer Detachments = = = = 
 In response to the Communist uprising that had erupted in the aftermath of the German occupation of Serbia , hundreds of prominent and influential Serbs signed an " Appeal to the Serbian Nation " which was published in major Belgrade newspapers on 11 August . The appeal called upon the Serbian population to help the authorities in every way in their struggle against the Communist rebels , and called for loyalty to the Nazis and condemned the Partisan resistance as unpatriotic . Ljotić was one of 546 signatories . 
 The Germans trusted Ljotić more than any other ethnic Serb in occupied Yugoslavia . In need of a reliable collaborationist force to combat the Communists , they gave him permission to form the Serbian Volunteer Detachments ( Serbian : Srpski dobrovoljački <unk> , SDO ) in September 1941 . The SDO initially launched public appeals calling for volunteers " in the struggle against the Communist danger " and eventually grew to consist of 3 @,@ 500 armed men . These appeals failed to mention guerrilla leader Draža Mihailović or his Chetniks . By November , Ljotić was openly denouncing Mihailović . In one newspaper article , he accused him of being responsible for the deaths of many Serbs and for causing widespread destruction as a result of his " naïve " cooperation with the Communists . 
 In direct response to the Communist uprising , the Germans decreed that 100 Serbian civilians would be executed for every German soldier killed and 50 would be executed for every German soldier wounded . This policy culminated in the Kragujevac massacre of October 1941 , in which a division of Ljotić 's volunteers was involved . Earlier that month , the Chetniks and Partisans had ambushed a column of German soldiers near Gornji <unk> , killing 10 and wounding 26 . The Germans turned to Kragujevac for retaliation , not because of anti @-@ German activity in the town but because not enough adult males could be found otherwise to meet the required quota for executions . According to eyewitnesses , SDO commander <unk> Petrović and his men entered a barracks in which hostages were being held and , with German approval , freed those whom they recognized as supporters of Ljotić and Nedić , as well as those whose political attitudes they considered to be " nationally correct " . Petrović accused those whom he had failed to free of supporting the Communists and spreading Communist propaganda , thus " infecting " Serbian society with their leftist ideas . Most of those who remained in German hands and were subsequently executed were high school students . According to the post @-@ war testimony of Kosta <unk> , another high @-@ ranking SDO commander , Petrović also ordered the arrests of countless Romani civilians from surrounding villages and handed them over to the Germans for execution . More than 3 @,@ 000 citizens of Kragujevac were killed during the massacre . 
 = = = = Serbian Volunteer Corps and propaganda efforts = = = = 
 On 22 October , the Grand Anti @-@ Masonic Exhibition opened in Belgrade , organized by Zbor with German financial support . The exhibition sought to expose an alleged Judeo @-@ Masonic / Communist conspiracy for world domination through several displays featuring anti @-@ Semitic propaganda . Serbian collaborationist newspapers such as <unk> ( Renewal ) and Naša Borba ( Our Struggle ) wrote positively of the exhibit , declaring Jews to be " the ancient enemies of the Serbian people " and that " Serbs should not wait for the Germans to begin the extermination of the Jews . " The latter newspaper , Naša Borba , had been established by Ljotić earlier in the year and its title echoed that of Hitler 's Mein Kampf ( My Struggle ) . Most of its contributors were well educated and included university students , teachers , lawyers and engineers . Ljotić and his associates were responsible for the printing of fifty antisemitic titles between 1941 and 1944 . Ljotić also founded the <unk> <unk> ( Labour Service ) , a youth movement similar to the Hitler Youth . 
 In November , Ljotić intervened on behalf of 300 – 500 men detained by the Germans as suspected Freemasons . He persuaded German military administration chief Harald Turner that the captured men were not Freemasons and told him that they were not to be shot as hostages . According to his personal secretary , Ljotić also asked Turner to not order the killing of Jews , stating " [ I am ] against Jews ruling my country 's economy , but I am against their murder . " He added that " their innocently @-@ spilled blood cannot bring any good to the people who do this . " Turner was reportedly surprised by Ljotić 's statements , given his history of antisemitism . 
 On 28 March 1942 , Nedić indicated to Turner that , in the event of his departure , Ljotić was the only person who could be considered his successor as leader of the Government of National Salvation . Turner remarked that " [ Nedić ] could not [ have been ] serious about this because Ljotić was a prophet and visionary , not a leader and statesman . " In December , the SDO was renamed the Serbian Volunteer Corps ( Serbian : Srpski dobrovoljački korpus , SDK ) and placed under the command of General der Artillerie ( lieutenant general ) Paul Bader . Although it was not formally part of the Wehrmacht , the SDK received arms , ammunition , food and clothing from the Germans . Like the Serbian State Guard ( Serbian : Srpska državna straža , SDS ) , the SDK was under the direct command of the Higher SS and Police Leader August Meyszner and the Commanding General in Serbia . During operations its units were put under the tactical command of German divisions . It was the only group of armed Serbs that the Germans ever trusted during the war , its units often being praised for valour in action by German commanders . The SDK often helped the Gestapo track down and round up Jewish civilians who had managed to evade capture by the Germans and was involved in sending Jewish prisoners to the Banjica concentration camp . SDK units were not allowed to move from their assigned territory without German authorization . Members took an oath in which they pledged to fight to the death against both Communist forces and the Chetniks , to stay in the SDK for at least six months and to " serve the cause of the Serbian people . " Ljotić himself had no control over the SDK , which was directly commanded by <unk> . Most officers in the SDK came either from the ranks of the disbanded Royal Yugoslav Army or the Yugoslav gendarmerie . Morale was high amongst the volunteers , with education officers similar to those employed by the Soviets and the Yugoslav Partisans being assigned to each company , battalion and regiment to teach and indoctrinate soldiers and help maintain high levels of morale . According to SDK ideology , Ljotić was a " guiding spirit " in his " political and philosophical pronouncements " . In his instructions to unit commanders , Ljotić stressed the importance of volunteers believing in and having respect for God . He urged them to pray regularly and warned that poor battlefield results and failure to gain the support of the Serbian public came as a result of the " wavering religiosity and faith " of commanders and their frequent cursing of God 's name . Ljotić criticized the widespread practice of alcoholism , gambling and sexual decadence found amongst volunteers . He also condemned acts of unnecessary violence committed by them when they were reported . 
 On 15 July 1942 , Mihailović sent a telegram to the Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile asking them to publicly denounce Ljotić , Nedić and the openly collaborationist Chetnik leader Kosta Pećanac as traitors . The Yugoslav government @-@ in @-@ exile responded by doing so publicly over BBC Radio . In October , Ljotić was forced to withdraw his two representatives in the Serbian puppet government in order to avoid being held responsible for the unpopular and difficult economic measures and food policies enacted by Nedić that month . With the surrender of Italy in September 1943 , Montenegrin Chetnik commander Pavle Đurišić established ties with Ljotić . Ljotić later provided Đurišić with weapons , food , typewriters , and other supplies . 
 = = = Retreat and death = = = 
 In February 1944 , the 2nd Battalion of the 5th SDK Regiment was sent to Montenegro to assist Đurišić 's Chetniks , in accordance with Ljotić 's plans . Of the 893 men who were sent , 543 were killed in action fighting the Partisans . On 6 September , Mihailović took control of several Serbian collaborationist formations , including the SDK . Ljotić sent Ratko <unk> , a Zbor member and editor of Naša Borba , and a detachment of 30 men to Montenegro to persuade Đurišić to withdraw his Chetniks towards German @-@ held Slovenia , where Ljotić had a plan to mass Serbian forces and launch an attack against the NDH . On 4 October , Ljotić , along with Nedić and about 300 Serbian government officials , escaped from Belgrade with German officials . In early October , the SDK was tasked to defend the Šabac bridgehead on the Sava River against the Partisans , together with some German units under the command of Colonel <unk> , head of the 5th Police Regiment . The battle for Belgrade commenced on 14 October , and the Germans decided to evacuate the SDK to a location where it could be used in guarding duties and anti @-@ Partisan actions , since it was considered unsuitable for conventional operations . Hitler ordered that the SDK be moved to the Operational Zone of the Adriatic Littoral , and placed it under the command of the Higher SS and Police Leader Odilo Globocnik . The commander of Army Group F ordered the evacuation of the SDK from the railway station in Ruma on 17 October . Between 19 and 21 October , the High Command of the Southeast cleared the SDK for transport west . At the end of October , Ljotić and the SDK arrived in the city of Osijek . It was here that German official Hermann Neubacher agreed to arrange their safe passage towards the Slovenian coast . While the retreat of collaborationist troops through the NDH was easy , there were exceptions . In November , the Ustaše removed between thirty and forty SDK officers from transports moving through Zagreb , after which they were summarily executed . 
 In December , Ljotić arranged for the release of Velimirović and Serbian Orthodox Patriarch Gavrilo Dožić from the Dachau concentration camp . Velimirović had been imprisoned by the Germans in July 1941 on the suspicion that he was a Chetnik sympathizer and Ljotić had written several letters to German officials that summer , urging them to release the Bishop on account that he had allegedly praised Hitler before the war . Velimirović was transferred to Dachau alongside Dožić via Budapest and Vienna in September 1944 and was held there as an " honorary prisoner " . Upon being released , he and Dožić were relocated to a tourist resort and then to a hotel in Vienna as guests of the German government , where they met with Ljotić and other Serbian collaborationist officials . Discussions between the Serbian side and the Germans took place here . Ljotić and Nedić petitioned Neubacher so that the forces of Chetnik commander Momčilo Đujić could be allowed passage to Slovenia , as did Slovene collaborationist General Leon Rupnik . Đujić had allegedly been a Zbor supporter before the war and is said to have voted for Ljotić in the 1938 Yugoslav parliamentary elections . The Germans urged Nedić to raise a force of 50 @,@ 000 men to fight advancing Soviet forces . Nedić agreed in principle to the creation of such an army , but insisted that it could not be used to fight the Soviets . He also demanded that any new collaborationist government include Mihailović . Ljotić stood vehemently opposed to the creation of a new Serbian government in any form , insisting that the Kingdom of Yugoslavia be re @-@ established under Peter II . This plan received the support of both Dožić and Velimirović . 
 In early 1945 , Đurišić decided to move to the Ljubljana Gap independent of Mihailović , and arranged for Ljotić 's forces already in Slovenia to meet him near Bihać in western Bosnia to assist his movement . In order to get to Bihać , Đurišić had to make a safe @-@ conduct agreement with elements of the Armed Forces of the Independent State of Croatia and with Montenegrin separatist Sekula Drljević . He was captured by the Ustaše and Drljević 's followers in April 1945 and killed along with other Chetnik leaders , some Serbian Orthodox priests and others . Between March and April , Ljotić and Mihailović exchanged messages concerning a last @-@ ditch alliance against the Partisans . Although the agreement was reached too late to be of any practical use , the forces of Ljotić and Mihailović came together under the command of Chetnik General Miodrag Damjanović on 27 March . Together , they tried to contact the western Allies in Italy in an attempt to secure foreign aid for a proposed anti @-@ Communist offensive to restore royalist Yugoslavia . In mid @-@ April , at Ljotić 's request , Dožić and Velimirović blessed approximately 25 @,@ 000 members of the SDS , SUK , Serbian Border Guard , and the Special Police , as well as Đujić 's and Dobroslav Jevđević 's Chetniks and Slovene collaborators , who had gathered on the Slovenian coast . 
 On 22 April , Đujić contacted Ljotić and requested to meet with him in the town of Postojna to coordinate a general Chetnik – SDK withdrawal towards Italy . Ljotić left from the village of <unk> the following day to meet with Đujić . His chauffeur , Ratko Živadinović , had very poor eyesight and , on approaching a bridge on the <unk> River , failed to notice that it had been partially destroyed by Partisan saboteurs . Ljotić was killed in the ensuing car accident . He was buried in a Hungarian count 's abandoned crypt in the town of Šempeter pri Gorici . His funeral service was conducted jointly by Dožić and Velimirović , with the latter eulogizing Ljotić as " the most loyal son of Serbdom . " Velimirović went on to describe him as " a politician bearing a cross " and an " ideologue of religious nationalism " whose importance " [ transcended ] the boundaries of Serbian politics " . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 In early May , Damjanović led most of the troops under his command into northwestern Italy , where they surrendered to the British and were placed in detention camps . Many were extradited to Yugoslavia , where between 1 @,@ 500 and 3 @,@ 100 were executed by the Partisans and buried in mass graves in the Kočevski Rog plateau . Others immigrated to western countries , where they established émigré organizations intended to promote Zbor 's political agenda . Many of Ljotić 's followers settled in Munich , where they ran their own publishing house and printed a newspaper called Iskra ( Spark ) . In 1974 , Ljotić 's brother was shot and killed by agents of the Yugoslav State Security Service ( <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> ) . The antagonism between pro @-@ Ljotić groups and those affiliated with the Chetniks continued in exile . 
 Following the war , Ljotić 's body was removed from the tomb in which it was buried . Two theories exist about what happened to it . One claims it was removed by Ljotić 's followers and taken to an unknown location following the creation of the Free Territory of Trieste in 1947 . The other theory holds that Ljotić was buried in Šempeter pri Gorici until the signing of the Treaty of Osimo in 1977 , when his followers removed his body from the tomb in which it was buried and took it to an unknown location outside Yugoslavia , possibly to Italy . 
 = = Views = = 
 Ljotić was staunchly anti @-@ Semitic . He is said to have advocated the extermination of Jews for years prior to the outbreak of World War II . He claimed in his speeches that a " Great Director " was behind all of the world 's problems and referred to " a collective personality consisting of a people without land , language , a stable religion ... a people without roots ... the Jews . " Ljotić claimed that the supposed Jewish conspiracy began during the French Revolution and was involved in every significant historical event since then . He also claimed that Jews and Freemasons were responsible for the Russian Revolution . In his writings , Ljotić portrayed Jews as being responsible for the advent of liberal democracy , Freemasonry and Communism , and , as such , enemies of both Zbor and the Yugoslav state . Ljotić advocated " liquidating the influence of Masons , Jews , and every other spiritual progeny of Jews " as the only way of preventing the outbreak of war in Yugoslavia . He also attributed the political unpopularity of Zbor to the " subversive influence " of Serbian Jews on education and the media . Nevertheless , Ljotić 's antisemitism largely lacked racialist ideology due to its incongruity with Christian belief . Despite Ljotić 's efforts and those of Zbor , antisemitism in Serbia did not reach the levels seen in other regions of Europe and the Jewish community there was largely spared from harassment and violence until the arrival of German troops in April 1941 . 
 Ljotić considered fascism the only form of resistance to future global Jewish control . He lauded Hitler for exposing the " conspiracy of World Jewry " and dubbed him " the saviour of Europe " . Ljotić 's admiration of Germany stemmed partly from his fascination with the country 's military power and fear of its political ambitions . Although the ideology of Zbor itself shared many parallels with other European fascist movements , Ljotić often stressed the differences between the fascism of Zbor and that of the fascist movements in Germany and Italy despite their numerous similarities . Most authors describe Ljotić as a fascist , but the historian Jozo Tomasevich claims this view is " too one @-@ sided a characterization " . 
 Ljotić believed that divine providence had " destined the Serbian people for a certain grand role " . This concept became a recurring theme in his writings . A staunchly patriotic and deeply religious man who believed in the core religious ethics of the Serbian Orthodox Church , he advocated absolute loyalty to the Karađorđević dynasty . He was an ardent monarchist and believed in authoritarianism , the corporative organization of the state , and the integrity of Yugoslavia . He considered himself a Christian politician , and his devotion to the Christian faith earned him the nickname Mita <unk> ( <unk> Mita ) . He often regarded Serbian Orthodox clerics with suspicion , accusing some of being Freemasons and / or British agents , while encouraging others to join Zbor . Many did , but at least two are known to have been murdered by Ljotić 's forces during the war . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following the breakup of Yugoslavia , local councillors in Smederevo campaigned to have the town 's largest square named after Ljotić . Despite the ensuing controversy , the councillors defended Ljotić 's wartime record and justified the initiative by stating that " [ collaboration ] ... is what the biological survival of the Serbian people demanded " during World War II . Later , the Serbian magazine Pogledi published a series of articles attempting to exonerate Ljotić . In 1996 , future Yugoslav President Vojislav Koštunica praised Ljotić in a public statement . Seeking to promote a romantic and nationalist picture of anti @-@ Communism , Koštunica and his Democratic Party of Serbia ( Demokratska stranka <unk> , DSS ) actively campaigned to rehabilitate figures such as Ljotić and Nedić following the overthrow of Slobodan Milošević and his socialist government in October 2000 . Attempts to rehabilitate Ljotić have generated a mixed response from the Serbian Orthodox Church . 
 Using devices drawn from modern experimental theatre , Serbian playwright Nebojša <unk> has written a stage production about Ljotić 's life titled Ljotić . Stock footage of Ljotić attending the funeral of a fallen SDK member is featured in Dušan <unk> 's 1968 film Innocence Unprotected . 
 = Milan Baroš = 
 Milan Baroš ( Czech pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born 28 October 1981 ) is a Czech football striker who currently plays for Liberec in the Czech First League . 
 In 2005 , he was part of the Liverpool team which won the UEFA Champions League . He went on to win Ligue 1 with Lyon in 2007 , the FA Cup with Portsmouth in 2008 and the Süper Lig with Galatasaray in 2012 . He has also had spells with Baník Ostrava , where he started his career , and English club Aston Villa . 
 Born in <unk> <unk> , Baroš represented the Czech Republic international team in 93 matches , scoring on 41 occasions . He won the Golden Boot as top scorer of the Euro 2004 tournament , where his nation reached the semi @-@ finals . He went on to play in three more major international tournaments . His 41 goals for the Czech Republic is second behind only Jan Koller . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Baroš was born in the Czech town of <unk> <unk> . He grew up in the village of <unk> . In 2009 he married Tereza <unk> , who he started dating in 2005 . Their son Patrik was born on 1 September 2009 . 
 On 1 November 2007 , Baroš was arrested in France while driving at 271 km / h ( 168 mph ) in his black Ferrari F430 , on a freeway limited to 130 km / h ( 81 mph ) . Stopped by French police between Lyon and Geneva in the region of Ain , the local authorities said the radar reading of 271 km / h was the fastest speed ever recorded in the region , surpassing the previous mark of 248 km / h ( 154 mph ) set by a motorcyclist in 2000 . As a result , Baroš had his car and licence confiscated and had to return to Lyon in a taxi . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 As a boy , Baroš played for youth clubs in <unk> and <unk> pod <unk> before joining the youth team of Baník Ostrava at the age of 12 . In 1998 he made his debut for the club in the Czech First League , the top division of Czech football , becoming a regular over the next few seasons . In 2000 , he won the Talent of the Year award at the Czech Footballer of the Year awards . He was described by the Czech News Agency in the 2000 – 01 season as " perhaps the biggest star of the [ Czech ] football league " . He played his last game for the club on 2 December 2001 , in a 1 – 0 loss at Viktoria Žižkov . During his time in Ostrava , he scored 23 league goals in 76 appearances . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 Baroš joined Liverpool in 2002 in a transfer worth £ 3 @.@ 2 million , although he did not move straight away due to delays in obtaining a work permit for him . He made his club debut in a UEFA Champions League tie away to Barcelona on 13 March ; he played last 16 minutes in place of Emile Heskey as the match finished goalless . It was his only appearance of the 2001 – 02 season . 
 In the 2002 – 03 season , Baroš scored twice on his Premiership debut away to Bolton Wanderers on 14 September 2002 , as Liverpool won 3 – 2 away . Baroš was a substitute in the 2003 Football League Cup Final against Manchester United . He entered the game in the second half , but did not play to the end of the game , being substituted himself a minute before the end of the game . Liverpool won the game 2 – 0 to win the cup , the first major trophy of Baroš ' career . Towards the end of the season , he scored twice in a 6 – 0 away win over already @-@ relegated West Bromwich Albion in April 2003 . He ended his first season in the Premiership with 12 goals for the club . 
 Baroš broke his ankle in a September 2003 match against Blackburn Rovers , a match which also saw team @-@ mate Jamie Carragher sustain a broken leg . Baroš subsequently missed five months of football and scored just two goals in the 2003 – 04 season . His first goal came in a league match against Leeds United in February 2004 , while his other goal was in March in a 1 – 1 Champions League draw against Marseille . Baroš would later claim that had manager Gérard Houllier stayed at the club after the summer of 2004 , he would have put in a transfer request . As it was , Houllier left the club and was replaced by Rafael Benítez . 
 Baroš entered the 2004 – 05 season having been the top goalscorer in the summer 's Euro 2004 tournament . With Michael Owen and Emile Heskey having been sold and new signing Djibril Cissé out with a long @-@ term injury , Baroš was now Liverpool 's only senior striker . Despite being the club 's joint top scorer with 13 goals , including a hat @-@ trick against Crystal Palace , Spaniard Fernando Morientes was preferred to Baroš in Liverpool 's starting lineup for the League Cup Final , a match they lost to Chelsea . However , he did start the 2005 Champions League Final , being substituted after 85 minutes as the game finished 3 – 3 in normal time . Liverpool went on to win the match on penalties . Baroš reportedly dropped the trophy during the team 's celebration , leaving a dent , but Liverpool decided not to mend it because it " added to the character " of the trophy . He finished the season with 13 goals , becoming the joint @-@ top scorer for the club . Baroš also received his first red card during the campaign , being sent off for a high challenge on Everton 's Alan Stubbs in the Merseyside derby on 20 March . 
 In June 2005 , former manager Gérard Houllier , then with French club Lyon , made an approach to sign Baroš . The player rejected the approach , but only made two substitute appearances for Liverpool in the 2005 – 06 season before leaving the club . He left Liverpool with league figures of 19 goals in 68 appearances . 
 = = = Aston Villa = = = 
 Baroš moved to Premiership side Aston Villa for a fee of £ 6 @.@ 5 million in August 2005 , signing a four @-@ year contract . He was given the number 10 shirt . Just ten minutes into his Aston Villa debut , he scored the only goal in his new team 's league victory over Blackburn . He played a crucial role in Villa 's League Cup second round victory against Wycombe Wanderers in September . With Villa trailing 3 – 1 at half time , Baroš scored shortly after the beginning of the second half and won a penalty , which Gareth Barry converted . He also provided the cross for Barry 's second goal of the game as Villa scored seven goals in the second half , resulting in a final score of 8 – 3 , their biggest win in over 40 years . He set up the first Aston Villa goal in a November match against Sunderland in dubious circumstances ; back @-@ heeling the ball , which " looked to have gone out of play " to Aaron Hughes . Hughes ' pass found Kevin Phillips , who opened the scoring against his old club . He later scored a goal himself in the same game , which ended 3 – 1 to Villa . 
 In the Boxing Day match against Everton , Baroš was involved thoroughly in the proceedings . He opened the scoring in the 35th minute , having handled the ball immediately beforehand . This was not punished and the referee awarded a goal . Baroš subsequently celebrated in front of the travelling Everton fans , making a gesture as if to listen to them . A number of missiles from the crowd were subsequently thrown in Baroš ' direction . The goal was just his third in what Glenn Moore of The Independent described as " an indifferent season " for Baroš . He went on to score his second goal of the game , and Villa 's fourth , earning him man of the match honours . Baroš scored twice in January 2006 's fourth round FA Cup win against Port Vale , and added another in the following round 's 1 – 1 draw with Manchester City . Late in the season , he scored two goals in the Second City derby against Birmingham City at Villa Park , marking his 11th and 12th goals of the season and winning another man of the match award . He would score no further goals that season . 
 Baroš failed to score at the start of the 2006 – 07 season , leading new manager Martin O 'Neill to challenge him in October to prove himself before the January transfer window . He subsequently scored his first goal of the season in December 2006 , eight months since scoring his last one , with a close @-@ range equaliser against Sheffield United in a 2 – 2 draw . Although he also managed to score for Aston Villa in a 2 – 1 loss to Manchester United in the FA Cup , he left the club in January 2007 , having scored just once in 17 league matches that season . 
 = = = Lyon = = = 
 On 22 January 2007 , Baroš signed with French side Lyon , signing a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year contract and reuniting with former manager Gérard Houllier from his time at Liverpool . The deal swapped Baroš with Lyon striker John Carew , who joined Aston Villa on a three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year deal . Just two days after joining the club , he made his Lyon debut in a league match against Bordeaux . He appeared as a substitute , as league leaders Lyon lost 2 – 1 for their first home defeat of the season . Baroš took part in that year 's Champions League , featuring as a substitute in a 0 – 0 draw in Rome against Roma . He played no further part in that season 's Champions League campaign , as he remained on the bench in the return leg as Lyon were eliminated . 
 In May 2007 , Baroš was accused of making a racist gesture towards his Cameroonian opponent Stéphane Mbia during Lyon 's match against Rennes on 18 April . After having been fouled by Mbia several times , Baroš held his nose in front of Mbia and waved his hand as if to waft away an unpleasant smell . In the ensuing controversy , Baroš insisted that his gesture was not intended to be racist in any way , and he was only trying to tell Mbia to get out of his face and leave him alone . Baroš and Mbia were brought before an official disciplinary hearing of the Ligue de Football Professionnel ( LFP ) , which ruled that Baroš was innocent of racist behaviour , but he was nevertheless suspended for the remaining three games of the season for unsportsmanlike conduct . The end of the season saw Lyon win the league title , but nonetheless manager Houllier left the club . 
 Baroš scored in Lyon 's opening game of the 2007 – 08 season as his club won 2 – 0 against Auxerre . However , he played significantly less under new manager Alain Perrin , making just six starts and scoring a total of three league goals . In mid @-@ November , Baroš revealed a break down in his relationship with Perrin and hinted at a move to another club . 
 = = = Portsmouth = = = 
 Baroš joined Premier League side Portsmouth on loan from Lyon in January 2008 until the end of the season , with the option of making the move permanent at the end of the loan . Baroš played a significant role in the club winning the 2008 FA Cup . He won Portsmouth 's match @-@ winning penalty kick in the quarter @-@ final at Manchester United and assisted Nwankwo Kanu 's deciding goal in the semi final match against West Bromwich Albion with a suspected handball that went unnoticed by both the referee and his assistant . The final match of Baroš ' loan spell was the 2008 FA Cup Final victory over Cardiff City at Wembley Stadium , where he appeared as an 87th @-@ minute substitute for Kanu . By the end of the season , Baroš had played 16 matches for Portsmouth , including seven as a substitute , although he failed to score . He was one of a number of Portsmouth players to be absent at the team parade after the club won the FA Cup , leading to speculation he could have played his last game for the club . At the end of the season , Baroš returned to Lyon . 
 = = = Galatasaray = = = 
 In August 2008 , Baroš joined Turkish champions Galatasaray from Lyon for a fee of € 4 @.@ 7 million . He made his first appearance against <unk> , playing the last 15 minutes . Baroš scored his first two goals for the club in the UEFA Cup first round , first leg game against Bellinzona . Three days later , in his first league start , he once again scored two goals against <unk> , with Galatasaray going on to win the match 4 – 1 . On 21 December 2008 , Baroš scored a hat @-@ trick in the 4 – 2 Süper Lig derby win against Beşiktaş , converting two penalties and scoring one from open play . He scored another hat @-@ trick later in the season against Hacettepe . He finished the 2008 – 09 season as the Süper Lig top scorer with 20 goals . 
 Baroš scored his first goal of the 2009 – 10 season in his third league game when he scored twice in a 4 – 1 win against <unk> . His next two goals came on 13 September where Galatasaray played rivals Beşiktaş . Galatasaray won the match 3 – 0 , with Baroš scoring his third and fourth goals of the season . He scored a total of five times in ten matches before breaking his left foot in two places after a tackle by <unk> <unk> in the Fenerbahçe – Galatasaray derby on 25 October 2009 . He returned to action four and a half months later on 14 March 2010 for a game against Ankaragücü , scoring a goal on his comeback . During the season , he scored his third hat @-@ trick for the club in a match against <unk> . He finished the season with league figures of 11 goals in 17 matches . 
 In August 2010 , a week before the start of the 2010 – 11 Süper Lig , he extended his contract with Galatasaray for two seasons , keeping him contracted to the club until the end of the 2012 – 13 season . Although he had been injured during pre @-@ season training , Baroš appeared as a substitute in his club 's UEFA Europa League qualification match against Karpaty Lviv , scoring twice as Galatasaray returned from 2 – 0 down to draw the match . At the end of September , he scored his fourth hat @-@ trick for the club against Istanbul Büyükşehir Belediyespor , although he failed to complete the game due to an injury . He scored two more goals in a 4 – 2 loss against Ankaragücü on 17 October , but was injured again . Baroš was suspended for three matches in March 2011 after insulting referee <unk> <unk> in a match against Beşiktaş . By the end of the season , Baroš had appeared in 17 league games and scored 9 goals . 
 Galatasaray started the 2011 – 12 season well and were top of the league in January , having won eight consecutive league matches . Baroš did not start a match for his club for four weeks , but scored an important goal against <unk> in the eighth match of the streak . The club won a ninth @-@ straight game , with Baroš scoring his seventh goal of the season , in the 5 – 1 win against <unk> <unk> , although he left the game with an injury . He returned from injury in a February match against Antalyaspor , coming on as a substitute , but was on the field of play just 15 minutes before receiving a red card . His dismissal resulted in a three @-@ match suspension . Baroš scored his last goal for the club in April 2012 in the last match of the regular season against <unk> . 
 In 2012 , Baroš was told by then @-@ coach Fatih <unk> that he would not play for the club any more . He played no competitive football after Euro 2012 and finally left the club in February 2013 . 
 = = = Return to Baník Ostrava = = = 
 On 18 February 2013 , Czech club Baník Ostrava announced that Baroš had rejoined the club where he started his career , signing a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract . Under the terms of the contract , his salary was donated to support the youth club of the team . Having not played a competitive match since 21 June of the previous year , he played his first match of the season on 23 February , coming on as a substitute in the 0 – 0 home draw with Dynamo České Budějovice . He scored a hat @-@ trick in Ostrava 's 3 – 0 league victory against Hradec Králové on 9 March 2013 , his first hat @-@ trick in the top flight of Czech football . 
 = = = Antalyaspor = = = 
 On 16 July 2013 , Baroš agreed a one @-@ year contract with Turkish club Antalyaspor . He made his club debut in August , appearing as a substitute in a 0 – 0 Süper Lig draw against Kayseri <unk> . He scored his first goal for Antalyaspor against Bursaspor in August , then his second against <unk> in October . He suffered damage to his anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) in December 2013 , ruling him out of action for the rest of the season . Baroš returned to the Czech Republic for treatment in January 2014 . 
 = = = Third spell at Baník Ostrava and Mladá Boleslav = = = 
 24 September 2014 saw Baroš re @-@ join Ostrava ; he signed a contract until the end of the 2014 – 15 season . Following the end of the 2014 – 15 season , Baroš left Ostrava and signed a two @-@ year contract with Mladá Boleslav . Following the end of the 2015 – 16 season , Baroš left Mladá Boleslav and signed a two @-@ year contract with Liberec . 
 = = International career = = 
 Baroš started representing the Czech Republic in 1997 , at under @-@ 15 level . Over the next three years he moved up to play at higher age groups , specifically under @-@ 16 , 17 and 18 . Baroš played in the 2000 Olympic tournament , making three appearances for the team . He took part in two other major tournaments at junior level : the 2000 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship , at which the Czech Republic placed second , and the 2002 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship , which the Czech Republic won . 
 Baroš made his first appearance for the senior national side on 25 April 2001 in a friendly match against Belgium , scoring on his debut . Baroš and national teammate Pavel Nedvěd were both shown the red card in a November 2001 qualification match for the following year 's World Cup , as the Czech Republic were eliminated by Belgium . 
 At UEFA Euro 2004 , Baroš scored the first goal for the Czech Republic in their first game of the tournament , a come @-@ from @-@ behind 2 – 1 victory over Latvia . With the goal he became the youngest goalscorer at the European Championships for the Czech Republic . His second goal of the tournament came against the Netherlands ; the Dutch team had taken a two @-@ goal lead over the Czechs before Jan Koller scored from a Baroš pass . Baroš then scored before Vladimír Šmicer completed the scoring , as the Czechs won the game 3 – 2 . The third group match saw the Czech Republic make nine changes to their starting lineup , having already qualified for the quarter @-@ finals . Baroš appeared as a substitute and scored the winning goal , as opponents Germany failed to advance to the next stage of the tournament . Baroš added two goals in two minutes of the second half of the Czechs ' quarter @-@ final win over Denmark , and finished as the tournament 's Golden Boot winner with five goals . 
 In qualification for the 2006 World Cup , Baroš scored five goals for his country , including four in consecutive matches in 2005 . An injury to his foot , picked up in a match on 3 June , kept him out of 2006 FIFA World Cup games against the United States and Ghana . He did appear in the Czechs ' final group game against Italy , but appeared unfit and left the game after 64 minutes to be replaced by David <unk> . 
 In the run up to UEFA Euro 2008 , Baroš had not scored an international goal since March 2007 . He started the Czech Republic 's second group game against Portugal , but Portugal won 3 – 1 and Baroš failed to score . Jan Koller was preferred to Baroš in the starting lineup for the next match , against Turkey . Despite neither playing in the match nor even being on the pitch , Baroš suffered the indignity of receiving a yellow card during stoppage time at the end of the match . 
 Baroš was banned indefinitely from playing for his national side in April 2009 after a breach of discipline , having attended a bar late at night . However , he was recalled to the national side after the appointment of Ivan Hašek as head coach . On 12 August 2009 , he marked his return to international duty with a goal from the penalty spot in the 3 – 1 home win against Belgium in a friendly match . The following month , Baroš scored a career high of four goals against San Marino , in a World Cup qualifier which the Czech Republic won 7 – 0 . In doing so , he became only the second player from the Czech Republic to score four goals in an international match . He was selected as part of the squad for Euro 2012 . After the tournament , during which he failed to score , Baroš announced his retirement from international football , having scored a total of 41 international goals in 93 matches . His total of 41 international goals for his country is second only to strike partner Jan Koller , who holds the record with 55 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Baroš gained the nickname " the <unk> Maradona " in his native Czech Republic due to perceived similarities with the Argentinian footballer of the same name . He was noted particularly for being a quick player with good dribbling skill . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 5 April 2015 . Source : League matches ; Cup and League Cup matches Liverpool European matches European club matches from 2006 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Liverpool 
 League Cup : 2003 
 UEFA Champions League : 2005 
 Olympique Lyon 
 Ligue 1 : 2006 – 07 
 Trophée des champions : 2007 
 Portsmouth 
 FA Cup : 2008 
 Galatasaray 
 Süper Lig : 2011 – 12 
 Turkish Super Cup : 2012 
 Mladá Boleslav 
 Czech Cup : 2015 – 16 
 = = = Country = = = 
 Czech Republic 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship : 2002 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 UEFA Euro 2004 Top Scorer 
 UEFA Euro 2004 All @-@ Star Team 
 Süper Lig Top Scorer : 2008 – 09 
 = Minnesota Timberwolves failed relocation to New Orleans = 
 In 1994 , several groups were involved in an attempt to relocate the Minnesota Timberwolves of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) from Minneapolis , Minnesota , to New Orleans , Louisiana . The proposed relocation would have been the second involving a Minneapolis @-@ based franchise in the span of two years , as Minneapolis had lost its National Hockey League ( NHL ) franchise to Dallas , Texas in 1993 . Timberwolves owners Marv <unk> and Harvey Ratner were considering selling the team due to problems with the mortgage on the Target Center , the team 's arena that had been built only four years earlier as part of Minneapolis ' 1989 entry into the NBA . The events of the attempted relocation resulted in Glen Taylor , businessman and former Minnesota State Senator , purchasing the team and keeping it in Minneapolis . 
 After their failed courting of the Timberwolves , New Orleans made attempts to lure the Vancouver Grizzlies and Charlotte Hornets to the city in the 2000s and found success when the Hornets , who had considered both New Orleans and Memphis ( where the Grizzlies eventually moved ) , elected to move to Louisiana in 2002 . The Hornets would since then revive their franchise name back in Charlotte in 2014 , while the original Charlotte Hornets would be renamed the New Orleans Pelicans in 2013 . 
 = = Relocation speculation = = 
 By the 1994 NBA All @-@ Star Game , speculation as to whether or not the Timberwolves would remain in Minneapolis following the 1994 – 95 season became an issue . On February 11 , 1994 , NBA commissioner David Stern announced that he and his representatives would serve as mediators in an effort to resolve issues related to the debt owed on the Target Center , the Timberwolves home arena . The Timberwolves ownership was seeking a public or private entity to purchase the $ 73 million remaining on the arena 's mortgage , otherwise the team would be sold and in all likelihood moved from Minnesota . Although mediation talks were just beginning to keep the team in place , by the following week it was revealed that ownership had met with representatives from San Diego , Nashville and New Orleans to discuss the potential relocation of the franchise . By late February , New Orleans emerged as the likely city for the team to relocate to if a deal could not be reached to keep the team in Minneapolis . This became the case after the potential ownership group Top Rank signed a letter of intent to purchase the team and move it to New Orleans if debt issues at the Target Center were not resolved . 
 Although a potential local ownership group was identified in late February , local opposition to a perceived bailout of multi @-@ millionaire ownership began to take hold . A citizens opposition group called Don 't Target Us ( referencing the Target Center in their name ) formed to voice their opposition to a public purchase of the facility . Additionally , polling at the time showed support for public intervention as being unfavorable with 60 percent of those polled being against intervention . However support for intervention on the arena issue began to take shape as well with several at the local and state level stating their intention to make a deal happen . Additionally , businesses near the arena starting a campaign to keep the team in Minneapolis . 
 While political maneuvering was continuing in Minnesota , by early April it was reported that Nashville had become the favored place for relocation over New Orleans . The Nashville offer became the preferred option as it included $ 80 million for the franchise from Gaylord Entertainment and an additional $ 20 million to be paid to the city of Minneapolis to pay down debt at the Target Center . New Orleans later reemerged as the lead candidate for relocation by the end of April when Top Rank announced a purchase price of $ 152 @.@ 5 million . By early May , the Minnesota state legislature approved a bill that would use public funds to purchase the Target Center for $ 48 million . The purchase by the state was contingent on ownership agreeing to keep the franchise in the arena for 30 years . However , ownership could not find a local suitor willing to pay what Top Rank had offered for the franchise setting the stage for relocation . 
 = = Proposed move to New Orleans = = 
 After months of speculation , on May 23 , 1994 , Top Rank successfully purchased the franchise for $ 152 @.@ 5 million with the intention of relocating it to New Orleans . The purchase occurred following an agreement between Top Rank and Timberwolves ownership that allowed Top Rank to purchase the franchise if no local ownership groups were found by May 20 , 1994 . On June 6 , 1994 , Top Rank officially filed the paperwork to the NBA seeking to relocate the Timberwolves to New Orleans for the 1994 – 95 NBA season . The filings also identified Fred Hofheinz as the sole Top Rank stockholder , with Houston lawyer John O 'Quinn and stockbroker Robert <unk> serving as the team 's major partners . 
 With the timber wolf being a species not native to Louisiana , there was much speculation as to what the relocated franchise would be called . Although never officially changed , some of the proposed names included : Rhythm from New Orleans Mayor Marc Morial and Angels from Louisiana Governor Edwin Edwards . After speculation as to where the team would play their home games while a new arena was constructed , Superdome officials notified the league that enough dates would be available to schedule 41 home games at the dome for the 1994 – 95 season . Prior to this announcement , the team was rumored to play games at the Lakefront Arena , the Pete Maravich Assembly Center in Baton Rouge or the Mississippi Coast Coliseum in Biloxi when the Superdome was unavailable . 
 = = Remaining in Minneapolis = = 
 On June 15 , 1994 , the National Basketball Association 's franchise relocation committee voted unanimously to block the sale of the franchise to Top Rank resulting in the Timberwolves remaining in Minneapolis through at least the 1994 – 95 season . Top Rank 's offer was rejected by the league due to questions surrounding their financing plan . The $ 152 million purchase price would have been paid for through $ 40 million from unknown investors ; up to $ 76 @.@ 25 million in loans from banks that had yet to make commitments ; and $ 50 million or more from undisclosed sources based on projected revenues from the un @-@ built arena in New Orleans . Also , the league filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court in Minneapolis seeking an injunction against any transfer of the team from Minnesota . On June 21 , 1994 , the league officially denied sale of the franchise to Top Rank resulting in the Timberwolves remaining in Minneapolis . On June 28 , 1994 , Top Rank would file a counter @-@ suit in Louisiana Civil District Court . The suit sought to have ownership fulfill their contractual obligation to sell the team to Top Rank . The following day , federal district court ruled that the franchise was to remain in Minneapolis through June 15 , 1995 . 
 After over eight months of working to purchase the franchise , local businessman Bill Sexton withdrew his bid to purchase the Timberwolves in August . However , Glen Taylor later headed a group to purchase the team with the NBA approving the transaction in October 1994 . By 1995 Top Rank would enter involuntary bankruptcy and as a result , the NBA rejected their offer securing the franchise in Minneapolis . 
 In the years following the attempt to relocate the Timberwolves , the New Orleans Regional Basketball Alliance sought to lure an existing franchise to the city . After completion of the New Orleans Arena , the Alliance led efforts to relocate the Vancouver Grizzlies to the city . The New Orleans bid ultimately lost out to Memphis , and by early 2002 the city looked to the Charlotte Hornets to potentially relocate to the city . The Hornets became attractive to relocate following a failed referendum for a new arena in Charlotte . On May 10 , 2002 , the NBA voted in favor of the relocation of the Hornets to New Orleans marking the return of the NBA to the city since the relocation of the New Orleans Jazz to Salt Lake City in 1979 . In November 2002 , the Timberwolves made their first trip to New Orleans since the failed relocation efforts of the Top Rank group in 1994 . 
 = Irreemplazable = 
 Irreemplazable is the first extended play by American recording artist Beyoncé . Comprising Spanish , English and Spanglish re @-@ recordings of songs from her second studio album B 'Day ( 2006 ) , it featured as a bonus disc for the United States deluxe edition of B 'Day , before being released separately on August 28 , 2007 by Columbia Records . It was produced by Cuban American musician Rudy Pérez who also helped with writing the songs in Spanish . Copies purchased from Walmart also contain a DVD featuring Beyoncé 's concert and television performances and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage . 
 Irreemplazable received a mixed review from Allmusic 's Andy Kellman , who criticized its lack of content and the fact that the EP was released several months after the deluxe edition of B 'Day . Irreemplazable peaked at number 105 on the Billboard 200 , and has sold 57 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . It also appeared on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums , the Top Latin Albums and the Latin Pop Albums charts . " Bello Embustero " including on the album was nominated for Record of The Year at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2007 . 
 = = Background and promotion = = 
 Growing up in Houston , Texas , Beyoncé was surrounded by the Spanish language , and learned some Spanish as a child , which she later forgot . When re @-@ recording songs for Irreemplazable , Beyoncé 's vocal coach provided the Spanish lyrics phonetically , and each line was recorded up to four times for the EP . Beyoncé has stated that she intends to take up Spanish lessons in the future . She said of the EP 's recording , " This is such an honor for me to be able to connect with all my fans . I had so much fun singing in Spanish . It reminded me of growing up in Houston " . The Denver Post 's John Wenzel interpreted the release of Irreemplazable as " an effort to meet the exploding market for Spanish language music " . 
 Irreemplazable was released as the bonus disc on the B 'Day deluxe edition in the United States on April 3 , 2007 , before being released separately by Columbia Records on August 28 , 2007 @.@ iTunes Store began selling the EP on August 27 , 2007 . However , a remix of " Get Me Bodied " was available only on the individual release of Irreemplazable . Beyoncé appeared on Tr3s ' television show Mi TRL on August 2 , 2007 and showed a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes special , " Making of the Spanish EP " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The Spanish @-@ language songs in the EP were written by Cuban American composer Rudy Pérez and he wrote the lyrics phonetically to help Beyoncé perform the songs in Spanish . " We spent hours and hours working on it . She wanted to make it perfect . She worked hard . That 's why people are saying it sounds like she 's fluent in Spanish , " Perez added . Pérez changed some of the words in Spanish as he felt it they " didn 't fit the music " and " doesn 't make sense " . He assisted with Beyoncé on pronouncing her r 's in Spanish . Irreemplazable opens with " Amor Gitano " , a duet with Alejandro Fernández originally from Fernández ' fifteenth studio album , Viento a Favor . " Listen " , a theme song from Dreamgirls , in which Beyoncé appears , was re @-@ recorded under the title " Oye " . The EP 's title track is a Spanish version of " Irreplaceable " , a song that was highly successful in its English recording . Three recordings of " Beautiful Liar " appear on Irreemplazable : a Spanish version ( titled " Bello Embustero " ) , a remixed English version and a Spanglish version . A <unk> remix of " Irreemplazable " is the EP 's seventh track , while Timbaland 's remix of " Get Me Bodied " , which features vocals from Voltio , closes Irreemplazable . An exclusive DVD accompanied the EP in Wal @-@ mart stores , containing behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage and taped performances from The Beyoncé Experience and Beyoncé 's appearance on The Early Show , as well as a documentary named " La Evolución Latina de Beyoncé " ( " The Latin Evolution of Beyoncé " ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Giving it two and a half stars , Andy Kellman of Allmusic said that " there 's not that much to the disc , " and alleged that it was unnecessary , concluding " if you 're a die @-@ hard Beyoncé fan , you 'll probably feel jerked around a bit — especially if you bought B 'Day when it came out in September 2006 and bought the deluxe edition seven months later , only to find out that the bonus material would later come out on its own ( with a track not on the second disc of the deluxe edition ! ) . " Kellman selected " Amor Gitano " , " Irreemplazable " and the " Get Me Bodied " remix as the highlights of the EP . The EP led to Beyoncé receiving a nomination for Pop New Artist of the Year at the 2008 Lo Nuestro Awards , and " Bello Embustero " was nominated for Record of The Year at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2007 . 
 Irreemplazable debuted on the United States Billboard 200 at number 105 on the chart of September 15 , 2007 , selling over 6 @,@ 000 copies that week . It remained on the chart for three weeks . On the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums , the EP made its entry at number forty @-@ one on September 15 , 2007 , and lasted five weeks . Irreemplazable performed better on the Latin charts , debuting at number three on the Top Latin Albums and number two on the Latin Pop Albums . The EP stayed on the charts for twelve and thirteen weeks , respectively . As of October 6 , 2010 , Irreemplazable had sold 57 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Irreemplazable , adapted from Allmusic and album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Hurricane Alice ( December 1954 ) = 
 Hurricane Alice is the only known Atlantic hurricane to span two calendar years and one of only two named Atlantic tropical cyclones , along with Tropical Storm Zeta of 2005 , to do so . The twelfth tropical cyclone and the eighth hurricane of the 1954 Atlantic hurricane season , Alice developed on December 30 , 1954 from a trough of low pressure in the central Atlantic Ocean in an area of unusually favorable conditions . The storm moved southwestward and gradually strengthened to reach hurricane status . After passing through the Leeward Islands on January 2 , 1955 , Alice reached peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) before encountering cold air and turning to the southeast . It dissipated on January 6 over the southeastern Caribbean Sea . 
 Alice produced heavy rainfall and moderately strong winds across several islands along its path . Saba and Anguilla were affected the most , with total damage amounting to $ 623 @,@ 500 ( 1955 USD ) . There was an earlier hurricane named Alice in the season . Operationally , lack of definitive data prevented the U.S. Weather Bureau from declaring the system a hurricane until January 2 . It received the name Alice in early 1955 , though re @-@ analysis of the data supported extending its track to the previous year , resulting in two tropical cyclones of the same name in one season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A cold front moved southeastward from the East Coast of the United States on December 23 , 1954 , and passed over Bermuda two days later . A strong anticyclone developed behind the cold front , and on December 26 a trough extended southward from the cold front . The anticyclone moved southeastward as the trough and cold front moved eastward . The trough gradually decelerated as high pressures altered the upper level flow to that of an easterly flow . Convection increased over the trough as it moved over relatively warm waters , about 1 ° C above normal , and began undergoing tropical cyclogenesis after a circulation began to develop along the northern portion of the trough . The system continued to organize as it moved to the west , and based on three ship reports confirming a closed circulation , it is estimated the system developed into a tropical depression on December 31 while located 770 miles ( 1245 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda in the Lesser Antilles . 
 With a narrow ridge of high pressure to its north , the depression moved west @-@ southwestward . Atmospheric conditions were unusually favorable for the time of the year due to the ridge of high pressure preventing cold air from reaching the central Atlantic Ocean . This allowed the depression to intensify into a tropical storm later on December 30 , based on direct observations . There were few direct observations for the following days , but it is estimated the storm intensified into a hurricane on December 31 while located about 475 miles ( 770 km ) east @-@ northeast of Barbuda . On January 1 , 1955 , a ship within 10 miles ( 16 km ) of the center reported hurricane @-@ force winds and a pressure of 987 mbar . Based on this report and several other ship reports , the system was recognized as a tropical low by the San Juan Weather Bureau Office . The hurricane continued to the southwest , and entered the Caribbean Sea on January 2 after passing between Saint Martin and Saint Barthélemy . A portion of the eyewall moved over Saint Martin and Saba . Based on near @-@ hurricane @-@ force winds from the affected islands , an information bulletin named the system as Hurricane Alice while in the northeastern Caribbean Sea . Throughout its track , Alice was a small tropical cyclone with a diameter of only around 60 miles ( 95 km ) . 
 Reconnaissance aircraft flew into Hurricane Alice on January 3 and confirmed the existence of the tropical cyclone by reporting winds between 60 and 65 mph ( 95 to 105 km / h ) and a warm core center . It is estimated Alice continued to intensify as it tracked southwestward in the Caribbean Sea , and attained peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) while located about 95 miles ( 150 km ) west @-@ northwest of Montserrat . While near its peak the hurricane developed a ring of convection around its eye , and Alice maintained peak winds for about 24 hours until cold air from the north weakened it . Extratropical cyclogenesis occurred north of Bermuda on January 3 , which weakened the high pressure system to the north of Alice and turned the flow in the Caribbean Sea to that of cold northwesterly winds . Alice turned to the southeast on January 4 and weakened to a tropical storm shortly thereafter . Convection gradually became disorganized , and after weakening to a tropical depression on January 5 , Alice dissipated on January 6 while located about 100 miles ( 160 km ) west @-@ northwest of Grenada . 
 = = Impact , naming and records = = 
 Subsequent to the confirmation of the existence of Hurricane Alice , the U.S. Weather Bureau Office in San Juan , Puerto Rico warned the islands of the northern Lesser Antilles to prepare for strong winds and rough seas . Hurricane Alice produced moderate to strong winds across the islands , peaking at 81 mph ( 130 km / h ) in Saint Barthélemy and 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) in Saba . The hurricane dropped moderate to heavy rainfall across several islands , including a peak of 11 @.@ 27 inches ( 286 mm ) in 48 hours recorded at Saba . Due to its small size , only a few islands received significant effects from the hurricane . Saint @-@ Barthélemy , Saba , Anguilla , Sint Eustatius , and Saint Kitts reported damage from the hurricane , totaling $ 623 @,@ 500 ( 1955 USD , $ 4 @.@ 7 million 2006 USD ) . Damage was heaviest on Saba and Anguilla , occurring primarily to shipping facilities and crops . 626 houses were destroyed or severely damaged on Anguilla , as well . The damage was caused mostly by heavy rainfall and rough seas , not the direct action of the wind . The passage of Hurricane Alice greatly troubled the economies of the small affected islands . Additionally , the outer rainbands of the storm alleviated dry conditions on Puerto Rico which had persisted since the previous October . No deaths were reported . 
 This storm formed on December 30 ; however , in the days before satellites , meteorologists had to rely on reports from ships and islands in the Atlantic to locate and track storms . This information was often sketchy ; two cyclones , including a Category 2 hurricane , operationally went undetected in 1954 . It was officially recognized as a significant tropical cyclone on January 2 , 1955 . At the time , the National Weather Service used the same naming list each year , so the name given to this storm was " Alice " and it was designated as a part of the 1955 Atlantic hurricane season . However , it was found during post @-@ storm analysis that the storm had actually formed on December 30 , and was instead a part of the 1954 season . Therefore , the season had two storms named " Alice " — the first storm of the season , and the last . Had Alice been discovered before the end of the calendar year , it would have been named Irene , the next name on the 1954 list . Some reports named this storm <unk> to avoid confusion with the earlier Alice from June 1954 . 
 Alice formed later in the calendar year than any Atlantic tropical cyclone on record , forming six hours later in the season than Tropical Storm Zeta in 2005 . Alice was one of only eight Atlantic tropical cyclones to form in the month of December . Alice was the first of two Atlantic tropical cyclones to exist in two calendar years , the other being 2005 's Zeta . The hurricane was also one of only six tropical or subtropical cyclones to exist in the month of January and the strongest to do so . 
 = Prom Queen ( Glee ) = 
 " Prom Queen " is the twentieth episode of the second season of the American musical television series Glee , and the forty @-@ second overall . It aired May 10 , 2011 on Fox in the United States . The episode was written by series creator Ian Brennan , directed by Eric Stoltz , and featured the return of guest star Jonathan Groff . In " Prom Queen " , the McKinley High School glee club New Directions is tapped to provide the music for the school 's junior prom . The episode shows the myriad dramas surrounding a high school prom , with the high @-@ stakes race for prom king and queen that involves five members of the glee club , students scrambling to find dates and outfits , and the delights and disappointments of the prom itself . 
 Upon its initial airing , this episode was viewed by 9 @.@ 29 million American viewers and garnered a 3 @.@ 7 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The total viewership was up slightly from the previous episode , " Rumours " . The episode received mixed reviews , which generally favored the final segment with the prom king and queen denouement over the earlier portions of the show . The music , however , was mostly received with enthusiasm , and special praise was given to the pre @-@ prom renditions of " Rolling in the Deep " and " Isn 't She Lovely " . Six songs were covered , all of which were released as singles and charted on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the McKinley High junior prom approaches , Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) and Quinn Fabray ( Dianna Agron ) are front @-@ runners to be crowned prom king and queen . Contender Noah " Puck " Puckerman ( Mark Salling ) learns that his relationship with Lauren Zizes ( Ashley Fink ) has damaged his bad boy reputation , and resolves to restore it by spiking the prom punch bowl . Meanwhile , Dave Karofsky ( Max Adler ) and Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) intensify their election efforts with their anti @-@ bullying group , the Bully Whips . 
 Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) asks the school glee club , New Directions , to perform at the prom . Dateless members Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) , Rachel Berry ( Lea Michele ) and Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) decide to attend as a group . Rachel 's ex @-@ boyfriend Jesse St. James ( Jonathan Groff ) returns and sings an impromptu duet of " Rolling in the Deep " with her . He apologizes for treating her badly , and joins her prom group . 
 Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) asks Blaine Anderson ( Darren Criss ) to the prom ; Blaine reveals that he was beaten up after a formal dance at his old school shortly after coming out , but agrees to go . He and Kurt 's father Burt ( Mike O 'Malley ) express misgivings about Kurt 's daring homemade prom outfit , but Kurt is determined to be himself and wear it . Pleased by the sudden absence of homophobic bullying at school , Kurt suggests that his former tormentor Karofsky should consider coming out . Karofsky refuses , but makes a tearful apology to Kurt . 
 Artie Abrams ( Kevin McHale ) asks his ex @-@ girlfriend Brittany Pierce ( Heather Morris ) to prom by serenading her with " Isn 't She Lovely ? " , but she declines , and Artie joins Puck in planning to spike the punch . At the prom , the two of them and Sam sing " Friday " . Rachel performs " Jar of Hearts " , and Blaine , backed up by Brittany and Tina Cohen @-@ Chang ( Jenna Ushkowitz ) , sings " I 'm Not Gonna Teach Your Boyfriend How to Dance with You " . Upset by Jesse 's reunion with Rachel , Finn starts a fight with him . The two are ejected by Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) , who also catches Artie pouring liquid into the punch . Artie refuses to implicate Puck in the wrongdoing , and ultimately confesses to using non @-@ alcoholic lemonade . 
 Karofsky is elected prom king , and non @-@ candidate Kurt is elected prom queen . Kurt runs from the gym in humiliation and is consoled by Blaine . Distressed at having lost , Quinn slaps Rachel , though she immediately regrets it , while Santana is comforted by Brittany , who tells her to be herself rather than hide her lesbian identity . Kurt is able to calm down and return for his coronation ; his comment — " Eat your heart out , Kate Middleton " — garners applause that swells into an ovation . Karofsky , abruptly faced with having to publicly dance with another boy in the traditional dance between King and Queen , cannot do it ; rejecting Kurt 's suggestion that he come out then and there , he instead leaves Kurt alone on the dance floor . Blaine asks Kurt to dance with him , and they are soon joined by the rest of the student body . 
 = = Production = = 
 Jesse St. James ( Groff ) , who was the star of rival show choir Vocal Adrenaline and appeared in several episodes to romance Rachel during the first season prior to breaking up with her shortly before the Regionals competition , returned in this episode . Quinn 's mother Judy Fabray ( Charlotte Ross ) also returned . Other recurring characters who appeared included glee club members Mike Chang ( Harry Shum , Jr . ) , Sam Evans ( Overstreet ) and Lauren Zizes ( Fink ) , Principal Figgins ( Theba ) , school reporter Jacob Ben Israel ( Josh Sussman ) , cheerleader Becky Jackson ( Lauren Potter ) , Kurt 's boyfriend Blaine Anderson ( Criss ) and former school bully Dave Karofsky ( Adler ) . Adler felt that the episode was the first time viewers saw Karofsky 's true self . Following its broadcast , he recounted receiving messages from people who had been inspired to come out , and commented , " I can 't believe that this episode of television is seriously changing some lives . It 's an incredible experience . " 
 On April 17 , 2011 , an extra named Nicole Crowther revealed the prom king and queen result on the social networking Twitter . Co @-@ creator Brad Falchuk replied to her , " hope you 're qualified to do something besides work in entertainment . Who are you to spoil something talented people have spent months to create ? " As a result , Crowther was reportedly fired from the show , however , Crowther later claimed that she had not been a Glee extra since October 2010 , and that she learned the spoiler from a dinner party and not on set . Following the scandal , speculation arose that the ending might be reshot when Monteith tweeted a photograph of himself standing next to Agron , who was wearing a tiara . The show did not comment on this , though Crowther stated that Glee would not be reshooting . 
 The prom itself took three very long days to shoot , according to Criss , and involved a lot of hard work , though he added that it was " so much fun " and the actors and extras involved " had a blast . " In the original script , Kurt was persuaded to attend his coronation by Blaine . Colfer requested that Kurt " do that for himself and not be persuaded by a second party " , and events were duly changed . The actor had serious reservations about the episode , and called it " the most difficult " he had worked on ; he explained that the combination of Kurt as prom queen , wearing a kilt and tiara and dancing to " Dancing Queen " caused him concern that " they were just pushing it way too much " , and that Kurt 's " helpful and progressive " depiction would be tarnished . Once completed , Colfer conceded , " it did turn out to be a beautiful episode . I was so wrong . " 
 The episode featured six musical cover versions . Criss performed " I 'm Not Gonna Teach Your Boyfriend How to Dance with You " by Black Kids . Rebecca Black 's " Friday " was performed by Salling , McHale and Overstreet . Series co @-@ creator Ryan Murphy explained the use of the viral hit as a tribute to popular culture . Michele and Groff covered John Legend 's a cappella arrangement of Adele 's " Rolling in the Deep " . Stevie Wonder 's " Isn 't She Lovely ? " sung by McHale , Christina Perri 's " Jar of Hearts " sung by Michele , and ABBA 's " Dancing Queen " performed by Riley and Rivera were also featured . All six songs were released as singles , available for digital download . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Prom Queen " was first broadcast on May 10 , 2011 in the United States on Fox . It garnered a 3 @.@ 7 / 11 Nielsen rating / share in the 18 – 49 demographic , and received 9 @.@ 29 million American viewers during its initial airing . It ranked as the second most @-@ watched scripted show of the week among adults aged 18 – 49 . The total viewership for this episode was up from the previous episode , " Rumours " — which was watched by 8 @.@ 85 million American viewers upon first airing — though the rating / share remained flat . 
 The episode 's Canadian broadcast , also on May 10 , 2011 , drew 1 @.@ 82 million viewers and placed sixteenth in the weekly program rankings . Again , viewership increased on " Rumours " , which was watched by 1 @.@ 49 million viewers and ranked eighteenth . In the UK , where the episode aired on May 23 , 2011 , it was watched by 2 @.@ 11 million viewers , which made it the most @-@ watched show on cable for the week . Here too , Glee gained viewers from the previous episode 's 2 @.@ 07 million , which was the second most @-@ watched cable program . In Australia , " Prom Queen " attracted 1 @.@ 04 million viewers on June 1 , 2011 , and was the eighth most @-@ watched program of the night and twenty @-@ sixth of the week . This was again up from " Rumours " , which received 959 @,@ 000 viewers , and was the twelfth most @-@ watched show of the night and thirty @-@ second of the week . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The episode received a somewhat positive reaction from reviewers . IGN 's Robert Canning was representative of this , and gave it a " good " rating of 7 @.@ 5 out of 10 : " The episode as a whole was fine for what it was , touching on most of the hallmarks of a decent prom episode " , though he " was a bit let down by the final moments of the episode as [ he ] felt it too quickly tried to pin a happy ending on everything " . He also called the drama around Rachel and Jesse and Quinn and Finn " superficial stuff " , a view shared by Meghan Brown of The Atlantic who said much of the drama " felt shallow and forced " , except for the first Kurt and Karofsky scene , which she described as " painful and poignant " . Brown 's colleague , Kevin Fallon , stated that " Like prom , this episode was Glee at its best and its worst " , and MTV 's Aly Semigran thought that it " wasn 't as strong — or cohesive — as last week 's ' Rumours ' " , but said it " certainly had its moments , especially some notably hilarious ones . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club wrote , " If the entirety of this show were like the last 10 minutes of this episode , it just might be the best show on TV . " 
 As much as VanDerWerff liked " Rolling in the Deep " , he felt the return of Jesse and its resulting storyline " was a mess " and " just didn 't work " . Canning was little moved by the drama surrounding Jesse and Rachel , or the resulting brawl and slap , and Brown thought these developments " lacked any real emotional stakes , and seemed tonally inconsistent with the snarky snap of the rest of the episode " . VanDerWerff found the otherwise excellent final segment marred by Quinn 's regression to a " generic bitchy cheerleader " stereotype , which he was saddened by as Agron is among his favorite Glee performers . 
 Sue 's scenes drew little response . Canning referred to her " unfunny torture bits " and called the idea " too over @-@ the @-@ top to actually work " , though Amy Reiter of the Los Angeles Times was happy to get " more great lines from Sue , who was the right blend of evil and funny " . VanDerWerff felt that her role was too prominent , and that the Puck and Artie storyline , with the exception of Artie trying to make up with Brittany , was " fairly painful " . 
 Colfer as Kurt received kudos in most reviews . Semigran wrote , " I give Chris Colfer all the credit in the world , because no matter what the material , he knocks it out of the park every time . " James Poniewozik of Time agreed that given the episode 's material , " it 's important to have it in the hands of an actor as good as Chris Colfer " . The scene with Kurt , Burt , Finn and Blaine was singled out by Jenna Mullins of E ! Online , who observed that it " quickly turned into much more than just prom ensembles . It 's the jumps from quirky to heavy that make Glee special , and I love watching the cast handle so much in one scene . " 
 Although Canning said that the announcement of Kurt as prom queen " effectively caught [ him ] off guard , right in the gut , as good TV should " , others were critical of the story at that moment , including Brown , who said that there was no logic to Kurt 's victory , no explanation of how it might have happened , and no sense in Figgins acceding to it . Semigran and VanDerWerff also called Figgins 's actions into question . The sequence after the announcement was lauded by Fallon and Canning , who were impressed by the spliced presentation of multiple aftermaths . Poniewozik said it led to the episode 's " theme of community — that is , that not all these characters ' problems may be equal , but that they 're best able to handle them when they recognize what they have in common . Everyone ... can feel like an outsider on prom night . " VanDerWerff also talked about the sense of community , which " has mostly been absent in season two " , and noted that " Glee somehow found a way to show off the best AND worst of high school and worked past its own storytelling issues to capture raw emotion . " 
 = = = Music and performances = = = 
 The musical performances in " Prom Queen " were praised more than the episode itself . Anthony Benigno of The Faster Times called it " the best musical night this show 's had in eight months " , and Fallon characterized the numbers as " pretty darned good " . Brett Berk of Vanity Fair had the opposite view : he gave three of the six songs a single star out of five , his lowest grade , and two more only received two stars . " 
 " Rolling in the Deep " as sung by Rachel and Jesse received considerable praise , though Berk gave it a single star because it was an Adele song , and Entertainment Weekly 's Sandra Gonzalez would have given it an " A " if she had " never heard the Adele version " , but as she had , gave it a " B − " instead . Among the many favorable comments , John Kubicek of BuddyTV called it " one of the best vocal performances this show has ever seen " . Benigno complimented Groff and Michele 's " fantastic voices " , gave the song an " A " and wrote simply , " they crush it " . Rolling Stone 's Erica Futterman called the performance a " passion @-@ filled winner " , though she detected " some oversinging " . 
 " Isn 't She Lovely " was as enthusiastically received — it was Brown 's " favorite number " , and she added that Artie 's " voice sounded great " . It was also Berk 's favorite ; he commented , " I still melt at Artie 's serenade " , and gave it four stars out of five . Gonzalez and Benigno both gave it an " A " , and the latter explained : " the arrangement ... gives the track a wonderful , spontaneous feel " , and " this nerdy white boy has himself some soul . " Kubicek dissented , and explained that Artie getting emotional in song two weeks in a row " is a tad boring " . While most reviewers disliked " Friday " in the original , Rebecca Black version , the commentary for the prom incarnation sung by Puck , Sam and Artie was generally positive despite this — Gonzalez said she hated herself " for giving this horrendously addictive version of a horrendous song a B. " VanDerWerff said the song was " way , way , way too long , though it was more fun than [ he ] expected it to be " , Raymund Flandez of The Wall Street Journal called it " darn good and infectious " , and Mullins said it was " much catchier than the original " . Benigno gave the song an " A − " , and called it a " rafter @-@ raiser " . 
 The remaining songs were reviewed less widely . " Jar of Hearts " was praised by Mullins as an " absolutely beautiful performance " , and Fallon said it was " haunting and filmed gorgeously " . Kubicek wrote , " it 's nice to just hear her sing a song " , and also stated that the two songs Rachel sang in the episode were " two of [ his ] favorite songs from the entire season " . Benigno gave it a " B " , his lowest grade of the night , and asked the show to " stop doing these numbers " : " We get it . She 's in pain and she can sing . Move on . " He gave " I 'm Not Gonna Teach Your Boyfriend How to Dance With You " an " A " , and questioned why it had taken so long for Criss to receive numbers independent of the Warblers . Kubicek wrote that it was " Blaine doing what Blaine does best : fun bubblegum pop " , but Gonzalez was surprised that she did not love it and gave it a " B " , as she " really missed the backing of Blaine 's Warbler cohorts . " 
 The use of " Dancing Queen " as the song for Kurt 's dance was questioned by Benigno , who called it " borderline poor taste " , and by VanDerWerff , who felt it was not the " <unk> of musical choices " — VanDerWerff was also critical of the <unk> behind Santana singing the song for the king @-@ and @-@ queen dance when she was a known prom queen candidate — though Benigno nevertheless gave the song an " A " , and Gonzalez gave it an " A − " . Some reviewers criticized the performance on musical grounds : Kubicek called it " a simple karaoke version " , and lamented that it suffered in comparison to the previous Santana and Mercedes duet , " River Deep – Mountain High " , while Futterman faulted the arrangement , which " waters down power vocals " , and gave the duo " the thin sound of Abba 's original even though they 're both much better than that . " 
 = = = Chart history = = = 
 All six of the cover versions featured debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 , and most featured on other musical charts . On the Hot 100 , the show 's rendition of " Rolling In The Deep " debuted at number twenty @-@ nine , in the same week that Adele 's original version remained at the top of the same chart . It was at number thirty @-@ one on the Canadian Hot 100 . The cover of Rebecca Black 's " Friday " was at number thirty @-@ four on the Hot 100 , and charted higher than Black 's original , which peaked at number fifty @-@ eight . It was number thirty @-@ three on the Canadian Hot 100 . The other four songs on the Hot 100 were " Jar Of Hearts " at number forty @-@ nine , which also made number thirty @-@ nine on the Canadian Hot 100 ; " Isn 't She Lovely " at number sixty @-@ five , which also made number eighty @-@ three on the Canadian Hot 100 ; " I 'm Not Gonna Teach Your Boyfriend How To Dance With You " at number seventy @-@ two , which also made number eighty @-@ seven on the Canadian Hot 100 ; and " Dancing Queen " at number seventy @-@ four . Out of the six songs that were featured in the episode , three were featured on the eighth soundtrack album of the series , Glee : The Music , Volume 6 : " Rolling In The Deep " , " Isn 't She Lovely " , and " Dancing Queen " . 
 = Big Four Bridge = 
 The Big Four Bridge is a six @-@ span former railroad truss bridge that crosses the Ohio River , connecting Louisville , Kentucky , and Jeffersonville , Indiana . It was completed in 1895 , and updated in 1929 . The largest single span is 547 feet ( 167 m ) , with the entire bridge spanning 2 @,@ 525 feet ( 770 m ) . It took its name from the defunct Cleveland , Cincinnati , Chicago and St. Louis Railway , which was nicknamed the " Big Four Railroad " . It is now a converted pedestrian and bicycle bridge from Louisville into Jeffersonville , Indiana . 
 Access to the Big Four Bridge is limited to pedestrian and bicycle use . A pedestrian ramp on the Kentucky side was opened on February 7 , 2013 . The original approaches that carried rail traffic onto the main spans were first removed in 1969 , earning the Big Four Bridge the nickname " Bridge That Goes Nowhere " . The George Rogers Clark Memorial Bridge downstream , which carries U.S. 31 across the river , was previously the only bridge allowing bicyclists and pedestrians to travel between Louisville and the neighboring Indiana cities of New Albany , Clarksville , and Jeffersonville . 
 In February 2011 , Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear and Indiana Governor Mitch Daniels announced that the two states , along with the City of Jeffersonville , would allocate $ 22 million in funding to complete the Big Four Bridge project , creating a pedestrian and bicycle path to link Louisville and Jeffersonville . Indiana would spend up to $ 8 million and the City of Jeffersonville would provide $ 2 million in matching dollars to pay for construction of a ramp to the Big Four Bridge . Kentucky pledged $ 12 million to replace the deck on the bridge and connect it to the spiral ramp that was completed in Waterfront Park . 
 On February 7 , 2013 , the Louisville ramp was opened for pedestrian and bicycle traffic . Initially planned for August 2013 , the Jeffersonville ramp opened on May 20 , 2014 . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Big Four Bridge is a six @-@ span bridge , totaling 2 @,@ 525 ft ( 770 m ) long , with a clearance of 53 ft ( 16 m ) . The northernmost span is a riveted , 8 @-@ panel Parker through truss . The next three spans are 547 ft ( 167 m ) long , and are riveted , 16 @-@ panel Pennsylvania through trusses . The two southern spans are riveted , 10 @-@ panel Parker through trusses . It carried a single track of railway . 
 = = History = = 
 The Big Four Bridge was first conceived in Jeffersonville in 1885 by various city interests . The Louisville and Jeffersonville Bridge Company was formed in 1887 to construct the Big Four Bridge , after a charter by the state of Indiana ; Kentucky also chartered the company in 1888 . The riverboat industry , a big economic factor in Jeffersonville , had requested that the bridge be built further upstream from the Falls of the Ohio , but the United States Army Corps of Engineers approved the building site , even after the vocal protestations . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Construction began on October 10 , 1888 . The Big Four Bridge would be the only Louisville bridge with serious accidents during its building ; thirty @-@ seven individuals died during its construction . The first twelve died while working on a pier foundation when a caisson that was supposed to hold back the river water flooded , drowning the workers . Another four men died a few months after that when a wooden beam broke while working on a different pier caisson . 
 The Big Four Bridge had one of the biggest bridge disasters in the United States , occurring on December 15 , 1893 when a construction crane was dislodged by a severe wind , causing the falsework support of a truss to be damaged and the truss — with forty @-@ one workers on it — to fall into the Ohio River . Twenty of the workers survived , but twenty @-@ one died . The accident almost cost more lives , as a ferry crossing the Ohio River just barely missed being hit by the truss . Hours later , a span next to the damaged span also fell into the river , but was unoccupied at the time , causing no injuries . As a result , falsework was <unk> reinforced to prevent further occurrences , and also to prevent strong winds from causing similar damage by using special bracing on the bottom frame of the truss . Also , a new rule was enforced : " never trust a bolted joint any longer than is necessary to put a riveted one in place " . 
 The Big Four Bridge was finally completed in September 1895 . Because of the location of the bridge and the growth of the Kennedy Interchange , the interchange had to avoid the columns that were on the approach to the bridge , causing the interchange to have several two @-@ lane ramps rather than a single stretch of highway , and helped earn the nickname Spaghetti Junction . Due to the various accidents , the Louisville and Jeffersonville Bridge Company was financially strapped after building the bridge , and later in 1895 sold it to the Indianapolis @-@ based Cleveland , Cincinnati , Chicago and St. Louis Railway , also known as the Big Four Railroad . This gave the railway its first entry into the Louisville market , although the railroad would have likely used the bridge even if they had not bought it , as they desired access to Louisville . 
 = = = Rail operation = = = 
 One effect of the opening of the Big Four Bridge was increased transportation of freight by rail , significantly decreasing the number of packet boats that at one time crossed the Ohio River by the dozens . 
 On February 19 , 1904 , a Baltimore and Ohio train accidentally crossed the Big Four Bridge , due to engineer Dick Foreman falling asleep and going the wrong way at Otisco , Indiana . The fireman kept shoveling coal and did not pay attention . It was the conductor that finally noticed the error midway across the Big Four Bridge . The wayward train had to back up all the way back to Otisco . 
 On September 12 , 1905 , the first interurban crossed the Big Four Bridge . In January 1918 , two interurbans collided on the Big Four Bridge , killing three and injuring twenty aboard . 
 Due to the increasing weight of the rail traffic , contracts were finalized in June 1928 to build a bigger Big Four Bridge , which opened on June 25 , 1929 . The new Big Four Bridge was built on the piers of the old bridge , a " novel building process " , as it sped up the time necessary to build the new bridge ; the old one served to reinforce the new one as it was being built . The old piers would still be used , but the falsework was entirely removed . During construction , the Big Four Bridge 's usual rail traffic was routed over the Kentucky & Indiana Terminal Bridge . The interurbans that used the Big Four Bridge would instead disembark at <unk> , Indiana and have the passengers board buses into Louisville for the duration of the Big Four 's reconstruction . 
 = = = Ownership = = = 
 In 1988 Oscar Arias , President of Costa Rica , contacted Louisville mayor Jerry Abramson to inquire about buying the bridge to dismantle it and reassemble in Costa Rica , as he believed it would be cheaper to import the bridge than build a new one . At the time the city did not actually own the bridge , and the plan never went through . 
 = = Post @-@ railway use = = 
 The Big Four Bridge fell into disuse after the Big Four Railroad 's parent company , the New York Central Railroad , was merged into the Penn Central in 1968 . The Big Four Bridge 's former traffic was then routed over Louisville 's Fourteenth Street Bridge . By 1969 both approach spans had been removed and sold for scrap . As a result , the Big Four Bridge became the first Louisville bridge to fall out of use , and gained the nickname " Bridge That Goes Nowhere " . 
 During the 1970s and 1980s , local radio station <unk> @-@ 102 FM lit up the Big Four Bridge as part of their " Bridge the Gap " Christmas promotion , which was used as a fund raiser for needy local families . Some of the lights spelled out " LRS 102 " . 
 After unsuccessful litigation to stop the project , the Big Four Bridge was converted into a pedestrian and bicycle bridge as part of Louisville Waterfront Park and the ongoing revitalization of the Louisville riverfront . This conversion had been proposed and planned since the 1990s . The Indiana Department of Transportation pledged $ 1 million for the project to build a ramp to the Big Four Bridge on the Indiana side , on Riverside Drive , and Jeffersonville pledged $ 200 @,@ 000 ; early estimates were that the Indiana ramp would cost $ 2 @.@ 8 million , but was likely to increase . The Kentucky ramp was expected to cost $ 4 million ; the ramp foundation is already done . Fixing the Big Four Bridge was expected to cost $ 3 million and take 18 months . The only other facility still standing that was owned by the Cleveland , Cincinnati , Chicago and St. Louis Railway is the Spring Street Freight House . However , the mayor of Jeffersonville , Tom Galligan , called for a redesign of the entrance ramp to the bridge on the Indiana side , stressing that the proposed ramp would be unattractive and that the building of the column on a flood plain would probably not be possible . Galligan pointed out that neither the United States Coast Guard nor the Army Corps of Engineers had approved of the planned <unk> . Galligan said he would rather have a ramp that reached over the floodwall and ended on Mulberry Street , causing a less severe incline on and off the bridge . Previous plans to access the Big Four Bridge included building an elevator . 
 The plans for bicycling included a suspension ramp that would allow bicyclists to leave the Big Four Bridge without dismounting their bikes . Due to the length of time any new downtown bridge would take to be built , and needing an alternative for cyclists and pedestrians to get across the Ohio River when the George Rogers Clark Bridge is closed , which happens yearly during Thunder Over Louisville , bicyclists preferred the idea of converting the Big Four rather than relying on a new downtown bridge or the Clark Bridge . By mid @-@ July 2009 , work had begun to convert the bridge to a pedestrian walkway . With the approach ramps , the bridge will span about 1 mile . In February 2013 , pedestrians were allowed to access the completed bridge from the ramp on the Kentucky side with construction still continuing on the Indiana ramp . The Indiana ramp opened on May 20 , 2014 . Lighting along the bridge is required for safety and had been redesigned to please nearby residents . Originally , the lighting was to be like on the Kentucky side , which has computer @-@ controlled lights that can show various colors . The Indiana construction also had to be cautious of historic properties . 
 During Thunder Over Louisville , the Big Four Bridge sets the limit on how close private boats can get to the fireworks , which are centered two bridges away on the George Rogers Clark Memorial Bridge . 
 The Waterfront Development Corporation plans to spend $ 500 @,@ 000 in upgrades to the Louisville Waterfront Park near the bridge , which will take place from late 2015 to early 2016 . Improvements will include additional landscaping , a new path west from the ramp , and a plaza underneath the bridge . 
 = = Fires = = 
 Between its closing as a rail bridge and its reopening as a pedestrian span , the bridge has seen occasional fires ; two in the 1970s , one in 1987 and one in 2008 . In 1987 Christmas lights posted on the bridge to promote a toy drive started the fire ; both the Jeffersonville and Louisville Fire Departments fought six to eight hours to put out the blaze . 
 On May 7 , 2008 the bridge caught fire a quarter @-@ mile ( 400 m ) north of the Louisville end , shortly after noon , 70 to 80 ft ( 21 to 24 m ) above the Ohio River ; suspected to have started from an electrical problem . This fire had more troubles due to the age and condition of the bridge ; the wood trusses on the bridge were unsafe for firefighters to scale , due to the fire on the bridge ten years before . Louisville Fire & Rescue chief Greg Frederick decided that firefighters were not to be sent onto the bridge ; a boat from the Harrods Creek Fire Department was used to put out the fire , as Louisville 's fire boat did not have a hose that could reach the blaze on the bridge . 
 It took two and a half hours to control the fire . Navigation lights used for the heavy barge traffic were being changed at the time of the report , according to Mike Kimmel of Louisville Waterfront Development . The Coast Guard shut down river traffic for about a mile around the bridge because debris was falling off the aging bridge . An official determination on the cause of the fire was expected in June 2008 . 
 = Leonard Marshall = 
 Leonard Allen Marshall Jr . ( born October 22 , 1961 ) is a former American football defensive lineman who played twelve seasons in the National Football League ( NFL ) . Selected 37th overall in the 1983 NFL Draft , he spent the first ten seasons of his career with the New York Giants where he accumulated 79 @.@ 5 sacks , ranking him third in team history . He was twice selected to the Pro Bowl and twice named NFL Defensive Lineman of the Year following the 1985 and 1986 seasons . He won two championships with the Giants , recording three sacks in the two Super Bowl games which he played in . Marshall is most famously known for his 1991 hit on Joe Montana that knocked him out of the NFC championship game and sidelined him for almost two years , ending his career with the 49ers . After his time with the Giants , Marshall went on to play a season each for the New York Jets and Washington Redskins , then retired from football at the age of 33 . He played college football at Louisiana State University . 
 Marshall has been active in several business and entrepreneurial activities since retiring . He also has spent time as a football camp instructor , a football head coach , a student , a professor , and a radio broadcaster . In 2013 , Marshall was diagnosed with Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy ( CTE ) , a degenerative brain disease detected in a growing number of retired NFL players . Marshall has been involved with efforts to spread awareness about the issue . 
 = = Early life and college = = 
 Marshall was born in Franklin , Louisiana . He was the oldest of seven children , whose father , Leonard Marshall Sr. , was a foreman at a shipyard . Initially , Marshall 's father did not like the idea of his son playing football , as he thought it was " a stupid game " that would prevent him son from doing more productive things . Later in his life however , Marshall Sr. expressed happiness over his son 's success , and even rooted against his beloved Dallas Cowboys when his son 's Giants teams played them . 
 Marshall played college football at Louisiana State University from 1979 to 1982 , accumulating 180 tackles and 5 sacks during his four year career . During his senior year he recorded 53 tackles and 4 sacks and was named the team 's defensive Most Valuable Player . Marshall also played a crucial role in LSU 's 1982 victory over the University of Alabama , making several key tackles and prompting Hall of Fame coach Bear Bryant to state his regret after the game for not being able to successfully recruit Marshall . The team finished 8 – 3 – 1 that year and narrowly lost , 21 – 20 , to the University of Nebraska in the Orange Bowl . 
 Marshall graduated from Louisiana State University with a degree in Business Administration . He was later inducted into the LSU Hall of Fame in 2008 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 Marshall was selected 37th overall by the New York Giants in the 1983 NFL Draft . He was the fourth defensive lineman taken that year . At the time , Los Angeles Raiders managing general partner Al Davis described him as the steal of the draft . 
 During his rookie season with the Giants , Marshall struggled initially with weight problems , drawing the ire of the coaching staff . After trimming down , Marshall made an impact and played strongly against the run but was unable to mount much of a pass rush and finished with only 0 @.@ 5 sacks on the season . He improved significantly in 1984 however , recording 6 @.@ 5 sacks . He also made several key tackles to help the Giants preserve a 16 @-@ 13 win over the Los Angeles Rams during the wild @-@ card round of the playoffs . 
 Marshall 's emergence as a pass rusher continued in 1985 as he racked up 15 @.@ 5 sacks , earning him a trip to the Pro Bowl and recognition as NFL defensive lineman of the year . Marshall repeated both honors in 1986 , teaming up with Hall of Fame linebacker Lawrence Taylor to form a potent pass rush on the right side of the Giants defense . He finished the year with 12 sacks , helping the Giants to a 14 @-@ 2 record and an appearance in Super Bowl XXI to face off against the Denver Broncos . Marshall recorded two sacks in the Giants 39 @-@ 20 victory , earning him his first Super Bowl ring . 
 Marshall recorded 8 sacks in 10 games played during a strike @-@ shortened 1987 season in which the Giants finished 6 @-@ 9 @-@ 1 . He compiled another 8 sacks the following year as he split time with fellow defensive end John Washington . During the 1989 season Marshall collected 9 @.@ 5 sacks , with the Giants losing in the first round of the playoffs that year to the Los Angeles Rams . Marshall later described the season as a lost opportunity as he felt the Giants had the best team in the league . 
 Marshall engaged in a prolonged contract holdout leading up to the 1990 season . He reported late , and after struggling initially to regain his starting job he recovered to finish the year with 4 @.@ 5 sacks . The Giants went 13 @-@ 3 during the regular season and advanced to the NFC Championship Game where the two @-@ time defending Super Bowl champion San Francisco 49ers awaited them . In the fourth quarter of the game , Marshall hit 49ers quarterback Joe Montana so hard that he suffered a bruised sternum , bruised stomach , cracked ribs , and a broken hand . Montana was forced to leave the game and would not play again in the NFL for another 23 months , ending his career with the 49ers . The collision was later ranked as the third most " devastating hit " in NFL history by Fox Sports Net , and the third most " devastating hit " in sports history by The Best Damn Sports Show Period . It would also turn out to be the moment of Marshall 's career that he came to be most well @-@ known for . Marshall finished the game with four tackles , two sacks , and two forced fumbles , and was named NFL defensive player of the week . The Giants won the game 15 @-@ 13 and advanced to Super Bowl XXV where they faced the Buffalo Bills . Marshall recorded the team 's only sack in helping the Giants to a 20 @-@ 19 victory , earning him his second Super Bowl ring . 
 Marshall continued to play at a high level in 1991 as he totalled 11 sacks for the year . In 1992 he clashed with new Giants coach Ray Handley however , and the two got into a well @-@ publicized shouting match during halftime of a September game against Dallas . He ended up with four sacks on the year and entered into free agency afterwards . Marshall finished out his career playing a season each for the New York Jets and Washington Redskins . 
 Marshall retired from football at the age of 33 . He later signed a ceremonial contract in 1996 that allowed him to retire as a Giant . Upon signing the contract he stated , " I wanted to retire as a Giant because it 's where my career began . They were people who believed in my talents and helped mold me into the man I am today , and I wanted to thank them for that . " 
 Marshall was selected to two Pro Bowls , and finished his career with 83 @.@ 5 sacks in the regular season , and 7 in the postseason . His total of 79 @.@ 5 as a Giant ranks him third in team history . 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 = = = = Regular season = = = = 
 GP : games played , GS : games started , Sk : sacks , <unk> : total tackles , FF : forced fumbles , FR : fumbles recovered , Int : interceptions , <unk> : safeties 
 = = = = Postseason = = = = 
 = = Life after football = = 
 = = = Teaching / mentoring = = = 
 Marshall hosted the Leonard Marshall Football Academy for a number of years , a football camp teaching the game 's fundamentals to youth players between the ages 8 of 18 . 
 Marshall served as a professor of Sports Management at Seton Hall 's Stillman School of Business from 2004 to 2009 . 
 In 2010 , Marshall was named head football coach at Hudson Catholic Regional High School in Jersey City , NJ . 
 = = = Business activities = = = 
 Marshall was founder of Pro Star Athletic , one of the largest sports licensed apparel companies of the 1990 ’ s . He later negotiated sale of the company to International Apparel Manufactures Group of New York in 1999 . 
 Marshall is a partner with the Playbook Franchise Fund , which invests in franchise businesses to provide stable income for high net worth individuals , in particular current and former professional athletes . 
 Marshall was named Vice President of Philanthropic Development for Seeman Holtz Financial Group in 2007 . In 2015 he was named Director of Strategic Initiatives and Brand Ambassador for the publicly traded restaurant chain The Original Soup Man . 
 Marshall owned and managed The Marshall and Fox Sports Asset Management Group and was CEO and owner of Capital Source Mortgage . 
 = = = CTE diagnosis and advocacy = = = 
 Marshall was diagnosed with Chronic Traumatic Encephalopathy ( CTE ) in 2013 , a degenerative brain disease afflicting many retired football players that has been linked to repeated head trauma . Tests for the disease were performed at UCLA using newly developed technology that allowed detection in living patients for the first time . Marshall says he began to notice symptoms such as memory loss , severe headaches , and mood swings in 2006 , and that his erratic behavior took a major toll on the personal relationships in his life , including his marriage . 
 Marshall was part of a class action lawsuit against the NFL that initially resulted in a $ 765 million settlement , but was later amended to allow for a payout expected to exceed $ 1 billion . Marshall is involved with efforts to educate the public about concussion and head trauma issues , serving as a speaker for both the Practice Like Pros and Brain Unity Trust organizations . He was featured in the documentary United States of Football examining the subject of concussions in the NFL and youth league football . Marshall also founded the Game Plan Foundation to provide assistance for former athletes suffering from neurological disorders . 
 = = = Medical marijuana = = = 
 Marshall uses <unk> ( CBD ) , a chemical extract of the cannabis plant , to treat the symptoms of CTE that he suffers from . He credits CBD with significantly improving his quality of life since he first started medicating with it in February 2016 . 
 Marshall has spoken publicly in support of cannabis as an effective treatment option for mitigating the symptoms of head trauma @-@ related health issues . He also says it can serve as a safer alternative to the pain @-@ relieving opioid drugs that many NFL players become addicted to . Marshall has stated that the NFL should make allowances for the use of cannabis products as a medical treatment for players . 
 Marshall served as a keynote speaker and moderator at the Cannabis World Congress and Business Expo in New York City on June 15 – 17 , 2016 . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 Marshall hosted a radio show on WFAN in New York . Named The Leonard Marshall Show , it was recorded in Hollywood , Florida near his former residence in Boca Raton . Marshall currently provides pre @-@ game and post @-@ game commentary for Giants games on WFAN . During his time as a player , Marshall was a frequent presence on The Howard Stern Show and he co @-@ hosted NY Football with Dick Lynch . 
 Marshall is co @-@ author of When the Cheering Stops , a book about the Giants 1990 championship season that was released in 2010 . 
 Marshall received a master 's degree in Business Finance from Seton Hall University in 2007 . 
 Marshall is a noted philanthropist who has received several awards in recognition of his charitable work . 
 = Joseph Mitchell Parsons = 
 Joseph Mitchell " Yogi " Parsons ( July 22 , 1964 – October 15 , 1999 ) was an American who was executed for the August 1987 murder of Richard Lynn Ernest . Parsons hitched a ride with Ernest in California and stabbed him to death at a remote rest area in Utah . After assuming Ernest 's identity , Parsons continued to insist that he was Ernest when he was later arrested . 
 Parsons , who called himself the " Rainbow Warrior " , pleaded guilty to the murder . During his sentencing hearing , Parsons said that he killed Ernest to fend off a homosexual advance , but was unable to present any evidence to support this claim in his defense . The jury sentenced him to death . In 1999 , Parsons stated that " it 's time to move on " and dropped his appeals , allowing his execution to proceed . Discussion was later raised whether " Rainbow Warrior " was a reference to homosexuality or Parsons ' favorite auto racing team . 
 Parsons chose to die by lethal injection , and he shunned attention , describing himself as " Utah 's forgotten inmate " . His 1999 execution at Utah State Prison was the first to be carried out in a new chamber designed for both lethal injections and firing squads . 
 = = Background = = 
 Joseph Mitchell Parsons was born on July 22 , 1964 to Joseph Michael and Marie Parsons in New York City . Joseph Mitchell spent the first five years of his life without his father , who was incarcerated in jail . His parents worked odd jobs from sewing fuzzy dice to construction . Joseph Mitchell 's half @-@ sister Dinah said that his father beat him frequently until he wet himself . After Joseph Michael left the family , Marie took Joseph Mitchell and Dinah to Florida , where Marie met and married Lawrence Gordon . Dinah met a drug dealer nicknamed Yogi , who Parsons admired . Parsons later adopted the nickname and had " Yogi " tattooed onto his right arm . 
 After a year in Florida , Parsons was caught stealing cash from an apartment management office . He ended up with three burglary convictions during his four years in the state as a minor . He graduated from high school with a C average and sold shoes in a shopping mall . When Parsons ' stepfather refused to buy him a motorcycle , Parsons took one for a test drive from a dealer in Fort Lauderdale and did not return . He went to New Jersey to see his biological father , but was rebuffed . Parsons ' sister @-@ in @-@ law Theresa Gomez said , " He rejected him ... Who knows what went through his mind ? " Parsons then rode the motorcycle west to Las Vegas , Nevada . 
 = = = Imprisonment in Nevada = = = 
 On the night of October 16 to 17 , 1982 , Parsons met David Wood in Las Vegas and took a cab to the Strip in search of marijuana . Near the destination , Parsons pointed a .22 @-@ caliber revolver at the driver 's neck to rob him . After stealing the driver 's taxi , the two were caught in an alley and placed under citizen 's arrest by Charles Conant and his brother @-@ in @-@ law Ronald Maske , who were both armed with guns . During trial , Parsons characterized himself as an orphan who stayed out of trouble and testified against Wood . The court did not have access to Parsons ' juvenile record , and was unaware of his parents on the East Coast . Parsons later stated that he provided false testimony against Wood in a plea bargain for a lighter sentence . Wood was convicted and spent 13 years in prison . No visitors came to see Parsons during his five years at Nevada State Prison . In August 1987 , Parsons was paroled to a halfway house in Reno . He walked out of the facility before his release date and fled on a stolen motorcycle . 
 = = Death of Richard Ernest = = 
 On August 30 , 1987 , Parsons was hitchhiking along Interstate 15 near Barstow , California . He was picked up by 30 @-@ year @-@ old Richard Lynn Ernest , a concrete laborer from Loma Linda , California on his way to a construction job in Denver , Colorado . Ernest did not know that Parsons was a fugitive . At about 3 a.m. on August 31 , Ernest was too tired to drive and stopped at the Lunt Park rest area near Cedar City , Utah to get some sleep . Parsons stabbed Ernest to death and drove off in his blue Dodge Omni . 
 At about 5 a.m. , Parsons stopped at a Texaco service station 23 miles to the north . He was wearing Ernest 's clothes and had assumed his identity . Parsons told the station attendant he needed to hose out red construction paint from the car 's interior and offered to give him Ernest 's construction tools . The attendant said that he observed Parsons throwing away clothing , books , posters and carpentry tools into a dumpster . Parsons asked the attendant about the distance to Denver and spoke of Ernest 's 9 @-@ year @-@ old son as his own . He purchased cigarettes and food with Ernest 's MasterCard credit card before leaving . At 7 : 23 a.m. , Parsons used the credit card to check into a Quality Inn at Richfield , Utah . He used the card again at about 10 a.m. to purchase seat covers and floor mats from Kmart to cover up the blood stains in the car . A clerk called the Richfield Police Department after Parsons attempted to purchase $ 300 worth of items at 12 : 34 p.m. and the credit card was found to be over its limit . The attendant back at the Texaco station called the Beaver County Sheriff 's Office after discovering bloody items in the dumpster . Deputy Raymond Goodwin found Ernest 's bank statement and Parsons ' bloody clothes in the dumpster . After calling Ernest 's wife Beverley , the officers concluded that the person who visited the service station was not Richard Ernest . At about 4 : 25 p.m. on August 31 , a Utah Highway Patrol officer found Parsons sleeping in Ernest 's car at the Red Creek rest area on Interstate 70 , west of Salina , Utah . When Parsons was brought into the Richfield police station where the bloody clothes were gathered , he continued to insist that he was Ernest . When officers asked for his street address , Parsons asked for a lawyer . Sheriff Kenneth Yardley recalled that Parsons asked if he could keep his book to read . 
 On September 1 , 1987 , Ernest 's body was discovered underneath a sleeping bag dumped on the east side of Interstate 15 , about a mile north of the rest area where he had been killed . He had been stabbed nine times , including in the heart and throat . 
 = = = Trial and sentencing = = = 
 Iron County prosecutor Scott Burns stated that he had witnesses from three different states and crime scenes in three different counties . While awaiting trial in the county jail , Parsons became afflicted with a severe case of crab lice . Lieutenant Matt Yengich told investigators that Parsons likely contracted the lice from " some type of homosexual interaction " . 
 During a court hearing for the murder , Parsons said , " Why are we doing this ? I did it and everyone knows I did it . " He pleaded guilty to motor vehicle theft , aggravated robbery and first @-@ degree murder on September 18 , 1987 . Parsons ' sentence was decided by a jury . Parsons said that he was defending himself with a four @-@ inch knife when Ernest grabbed his leg and thought that Ernest 's multiple wounds were " superficial . " Parsons was unable to present evidence to corroborate his claim of a sexual advance by Ernest . Ernest 's family and friends stated in court that Ernest was not gay or bisexual . Prosecution witnesses testified of Parsons ' homosexual activity in jail . According to forensic psychiatrist David Tomb from the University of Utah , the descriptions of Parsons ' sexual history indicated that he " may have been the one initiating the contact and became angry when [ Ernest ] turned him down . " A medical examiner testified that Ernest appeared to have been stabbed while sleeping and was unable to defend himself . On February 18 , 1988 , a jury of six men and six women sentenced Parsons to death . He was sent to Utah State Prison . 
 = = = Appeals = = = 
 Parsons filed an appeal disputing the constitutionality of his first @-@ degree murder conviction with the Utah Supreme Court . His attorney argued that Parsons had already been convicted of another charge for the crime , making his murder conviction a violation of double jeopardy . On October 16 , 1989 , the court unanimously upheld the conviction and rejected his appeal on the grounds that Parsons should have raised that objection before he waived his right to a trial with his guilty plea . On March 5 , 1990 , District Judge J. Philip Eves rejected Parsons ' complaint that he was denied his right to legal counsel while in prison and set his execution date for April 30 , 1990 . A new team of attorneys , which included Gregory Sanders and Ronald Yengich of the Rocky Mountain Defense Fund , took up Parsons ' appeal that he had ineffective counsel during his trial . On January 12 , 1994 , the Utah Supreme Court rejected Parsons ' petition for a writ of habeas corpus . 
 On July 6 , 1999 , Parsons abandoned a federal appeal of his sentence to the U.S. 10th Circuit Court of Appeals , stating that he preferred execution than waiting for years on death row . He complained that he was bored in prison , which he called " torture , plain and simple . " The last visit Parsons had received was two hours with his mother in 1996 . On August 16 , 1999 , District Judge Philip Eves signed a death warrant and scheduled Parsons ' execution for October 15 . 
 = = Execution = = 
 Parsons submitted a last request to walk under the stars , play basketball , and watch science @-@ fiction films to prison warden Hank <unk> . Parsons also asked for his remains to be cremated and turned over to his family . Prison spokesperson Jack Ford said that the requests would be granted , but that Parsons would only be allowed to shoot some hoops in a fenced recreation area instead of a game of basketball in the prison gymnasium . The authorities were concerned that an injury could delay the execution . Parsons was permitted to walk outdoors at night to the place of execution . 
 On the evening before his execution , Parsons watched The Mummy and was visited in his death watch cell by his brother and his cousin . They shared his last meal of Burger King hamburgers , French fries , milkshakes , root beer , and chocolate chip ice cream . Parsons ' attorney said he believed his client chose this meal because the Burger King slogan " Have it your way " was a reflection of him taking control of his life . After playing a game of Uno , he asked for the score of the 1999 American League Championship Series game . Parsons was permitted to call his mother Marie Gordon Rivera in Florida and his sister . 
 Parsons would become the first inmate to be executed in a new chamber that was built in 1998 at Utah State Prison for use in either firing squads or lethal injections . Two people , whose identities were withheld , were selected to administer individual injections , of which only one was lethal so that neither would know with certainty who executed the prisoner . The prison selected among paramedics or nurses because the American Medical Association prohibits licensed physicians from participating in executions . A mild sedative was delivered intravenously to calm Parsons before the deadly drugs were administered . 
 At 12 : 10 a.m. on October 15 , 1999 , Parsons was executed by lethal injection . Seven minutes later , a physician checked Parsons ' stopped heartbeat with a stethoscope and pronounced him dead at 12 : 18 a.m. Parsons ' last words were : " Love to my family and friends . And Woody , the rainbow warrior rules . Thank you . " 
 Parsons had mentioned to attorney Greg Sanders a hatred of homosexuals , and after the execution , prison spokesperson Jack Ford said that " rainbow " may have been a homosexual reference to the victim . Fellow inmate Doug " Woody " Lovell stated " Rainbow Warrior " was instead referring to the colorful racing car of NASCAR champion Jeff Gordon . 
 = = = Public reaction = = = 
 Although Parsons requested that no one protest his death , the American Civil Liberties Union of Utah planned to organize a candlelight vigil in opposition to the execution . A group of less than 50 people gathered outside the prison , mostly criminal justice students from Weber State University . 
 Unlike the previous execution of John Albert Taylor in 1996 ( or Ronnie Lee Gardner that would follow in 2010 ) , Parsons ' execution attracted little media attention , with representatives from only 12 news organizations . Spokesperson Jack Ford called the level of interest virtually " nonexistent " . Deputy attorney general Reed Richards presumed that the media apathy was a result of Parsons ' choice of lethal injection , which was more broadly adopted in the United States than execution by firing squad , which was unique to Utah . Parsons ' court @-@ appointed attorney Greg Sanders said that his client called himself " Utah 's forgotten inmate " . Ernest 's widow Beverley , who attended the execution , said that she was grateful for the lack of media scrutiny . Ernest 's brother @-@ in @-@ law Jonathan Woods stated , " The world is less for having lost Richard . I hope , for Parsons ' sake , the world will be less for having lost him , but that is not how I feel . " 
 = Return of the Jedi = 
 Return of the Jedi ( also known as Star Wars : Episode VI – Return of the Jedi ) is a 1983 American epic space opera film directed by Richard Marquand . The screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas was from a story by Lucas , who was also the executive producer . It was the third film released in the Star Wars saga and the first film to use THX technology . The film is set one year after The Empire Strikes Back and was produced by Howard Kazanjian for Lucasfilm Ltd . The film stars Mark Hamill , Harrison Ford , Carrie Fisher , Billy Dee Williams , Anthony Daniels , David Prowse , Kenny Baker , Peter Mayhew and Frank Oz . 
 The Galactic Empire , under the direction of the ruthless Emperor , is constructing a second Death Star in order to crush the Rebel Alliance once and for all . Since the Emperor plans to personally oversee the final stages of its construction , the Rebel Fleet launches a full @-@ scale attack on the Death Star in order to prevent its completion and kill the Emperor , effectively bringing an end to the Empire 's hold over the galaxy . Meanwhile , Luke Skywalker , a Jedi apprentice , struggles to bring Darth Vader , whom he finds out is actually his father Anakin Skywalker and a fallen Jedi , back from the Dark Side of the Force . 
 David Lynch and David Cronenberg were considered to direct the project before Marquand signed on as director . The production team relied on Lucas ' storyboards during pre @-@ production . While writing the shooting script , Lucas , Kasdan , Marquand , and producer Howard Kazanjian spent two weeks in conference discussing ideas to construct it . Kazanjian 's schedule pushed shooting to begin a few weeks early to allow Industrial Light & Magic more time to work on the film 's effects in post @-@ production . Filming took place in England , California , and Arizona from January to March 1982 ( 1982 @-@ 03 ) . Strict secrecy surrounded the production and the film used the working title Blue Harvest to prevent price gouging . 
 The film was released in theaters on May 25 , 1983 , six years to the day after the release of the first film , receiving mostly positive reviews . The film grossed between $ 475 million and $ 572 million worldwide . Several home video and theatrical releases and revisions to the film followed over the next 20 years . Star Wars continued with Episode I : The Phantom Menace as part of the film series ' prequel trilogy . A sequel , Star Wars : The Force Awakens , was released on December 18 , 2015 as part of the new sequel trilogy . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Luke Skywalker initiates a plan to rescue Han Solo from the crime lord Jabba the Hutt with the help of Princess Leia , Lando Calrissian , Chewbacca , C @-@ 3PO , and R2 @-@ D2 . Leia infiltrates Jabba 's palace on Tatooine , disguised as a bounty hunter with Chewbacca as her prisoner . Lando is already there , disguised as a guard . Leia releases Han from the carbonite , but she is captured and enslaved . Luke arrives soon afterward but , after a tense standoff with Jabba and a battle with his rancor , is captured . Jabba sentences him , Han and Chewbacca to death , planning to feed them to the Sarlacc , a pit monster . They are taken to the Great Pit of <unk> , the Sarlacc 's nesting ground . Luke , with R2 @-@ D2 's help , frees himself and battles Jabba 's guards . During the chaos , Boba Fett attempts to attack Luke , but Han , temporarily blinded from the carbonite , inadvertently knocks him into the Sarlacc pit . Meanwhile , Leia strangles Jabba to death , and Luke destroys Jabba 's sail barge as the group escapes . While the others rendezvous with the Rebel Alliance , Luke returns to Dagobah , where he finds that Yoda is on his deathbed . Before he dies , Yoda confirms that Darth Vader , once known as Anakin Skywalker , is Luke 's father , and that " there is another " . The ghost of Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi confirms that this " other " is Luke 's twin sister : Leia . Obi @-@ Wan tells Luke that he must fight Vader again to defeat the Empire . Obi @-@ Wan also warns Luke to keep his emotions in check , as his anger could lead him to the Dark Side . 
 The Rebels learn that the Empire has been constructing a second Death Star under the direct supervision of the Emperor himself . As the station is protected by an energy shield , Han leads a strike team to destroy the shield generator on the forest moon of Endor ; doing so would allow a squadron of starfighters to destroy the Death Star . The strike team , accompanied by Luke and Leia , travels to Endor in a stolen Imperial shuttle . On Endor , Luke and his companions encounter a tribe of Ewoks and , after an initial conflict , gain their trust . Later , Luke tells Leia that she is his sister , Vader is their father , and he must go and confront him . Luke surrenders to Imperial troops and is taken to Vader . Luke tries to convince Vader to turn from the dark side of the Force , but fails . 
 Vader takes Luke to the new Death Star to meet the Emperor , who is intent on turning him to the dark side . The Emperor reveals that the Death Star is fully operational and the Rebel fleet will fall into a trap . On Endor , Han 's strike team is captured by Imperial forces , but a surprise counterattack by the Ewoks allows the Rebels to battle the Imperials . Meanwhile , Lando , piloting the Millennium Falcon , leads the Rebel fleet to the Death Star , only to find that the station 's shield is still active and the Imperial fleet is waiting for them . The Emperor tempts Luke to give in to his anger and join him . Luke engages Vader in a lightsaber duel . Vader senses that Luke has a sister and suggests turning her to the dark side . Enraged , Luke overpowers Vader and severs his father 's prosthetic right hand . Upon seeing the remnants of Vader 's prosthetic , he sees a parallel between himself and Vader , and fears he will become like Vader . The Emperor tells Luke to kill Vader and take his place , but Luke refuses , declaring himself a Jedi as his father had been . On Endor , the strike team defeats the Imperial forces and destroys the shield generator , allowing the Rebel fleet to launch their assault on the Death Star . Simultaneously , the Emperor tortures Luke with Force lightning . Unwilling to let his son die , Vader kills the Emperor , but is mortally wounded in the process . He asks Luke to remove his mask , and after a brief talk , he dies peacefully . 
 As the battle between the Imperial and Alliance fleets continues , Lando leads a group of Rebel ships into the Death Star 's core and destroys the main reactor . As Luke escapes on a shuttle with his father 's body , the Falcon flies out of the Death Star as the station explodes . On Endor , Leia reveals to Han that Luke is her brother , and they kiss . Luke returns to Endor and cremates his father 's body on a funeral pyre . As the Rebels celebrate their victory over the Empire , Luke smiles as he sees the ghosts of Obi @-@ Wan , Yoda , and the redeemed Anakin watching over them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker , one of the last living Jedi and a skilled X @-@ wing fighter pilot 
 Harrison Ford as Han Solo , a rogue smuggler and Luke and Leia 's friend and Leia 's love interest 
 Carrie Fisher as Princess Leia Organa , the former princess of the destroyed planet Alderaan , Luke 's twin sister , and Han 's love interest 
 Billy Dee Williams as Lando Calrissian , the former Baron Administrator of Cloud City and one of Han 's companions 
 Anthony Daniels as C @-@ 3PO , Luke 's humanoid protocol droid 
 Peter Mayhew as Chewbacca , a loyal Wookiee and Han 's longtime companion 
 Sebastian Shaw as Anakin Skywalker , Luke and Leia 's father ; he was partly replaced by Hayden Christensen in the 2004 DVD release 
 Ian McDiarmid as the Emperor , the scarred and deformed founder and supreme ruler of the Galactic Empire and Vader 's master 
 Frank Oz as Yoda , Luke 's self @-@ exiled Jedi master living on Dagobah 
 David Prowse as Darth Vader , a powerful cyborg dark Force @-@ powered warrior who serves as the supreme Imperial Military commander 
 James Earl Jones provides the voice of Darth Vader 
 Alec Guinness as Obi @-@ Wan " Ben " Kenobi , Luke 's deceased Jedi master 
 Kenny Baker and Denis Lawson reprise their roles as R2 @-@ D2 and Wedge Antilles from Star Wars , and Kenneth Colley and Jeremy Bulloch reprise their roles as Admiral <unk> and Boba Fett from The Empire Strikes Back . Michael Pennington portrays Moff <unk> , the commander of the second Death Star . Warwick Davis appears as Wicket W. Warrick , an Ewok who leads Leia and eventually her friends to the Ewok tribe . Baker was originally cast as Wicket , but was replaced by Davis after falling ill with food poisoning on the morning of the shoot . Davis had no previous acting experience and was cast only after his grandmother had discovered an open call for dwarfs for the new Star Wars film . Caroline Blakiston portrays Mon Mothma , a co @-@ founder and leader of the Rebel Alliance . David Barclay and Toby Philpott served as principal puppeteers for Jabba the Hutt and Larry Ward provided his uncredited voice . Michael Carter played Jabba 's aide , Bib Fortuna ( voiced by Erik <unk> ) , while Femi Taylor and Claire Davenport appeared as his slave dancers . 
 To portray the numerous alien species featured in the film a multitude of puppeteers , voice actors , and stunt performers were employed . Admiral Ackbar was performed by puppeteer Timothy M. Rose , with his voice provided by Erik <unk> . <unk> <unk> was portrayed by Richard Bonehill in costume for full body shots , while he was otherwise a puppet operated by Mike Quinn and his voice was provided by <unk> <unk> . Sy <unk> was a marionette operated by Rose and Quinn , while her voice was provided by Annie Arbogast . Others include ; Simon Williamson as Max <unk> , Gamorrean Guard and a Mon Calamari ; Deep Roy as Droopy McCool ; Ailsa Berk as <unk> ; Paul Springer as Ree @-@ <unk> , Gamorrean Guard and a Mon Calamari ; Hugh <unk> as a Gamorrean Guard , <unk> and a Mon Calamari ; Gerald Home as <unk> and the Mon Calamari officer ; Phil Herbert as <unk> <unk> ; Tik and Tok ( Tim Dry and Sean Crawford ) as <unk> and Yak @-@ Face ; and Phil Tippett as the Rancor . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 As with the previous film , Lucas personally financed Return of the Jedi . Lucas also chose not to direct Return of the Jedi himself , and started searching for a director for the film . Lucas approached David Lynch , who had been nominated for the Academy Award for Best Director for The Elephant Man in 1980 , to helm Return of the Jedi , but Lynch declined in order to direct Dune . David Cronenberg was also offered the chance to direct the film , but he declined the offer to make <unk> and The Dead Zone . Lucas eventually chose Richard Marquand . Lucas may have directed some of the second unit work personally as the shooting threatened to go over schedule ; this is a function Lucas had willingly performed on previous occasions when he had only officially been producing a film ( e.g. More American Graffiti , Raiders of the Lost Ark ) . Lucas did operate a B camera on the set a few times . Lucas himself has admitted to being on the set frequently due to Marquand 's relative inexperience with special effects . Lucas praised Marquand as a " very nice person who worked well with actors " . Marquand did note that Lucas kept a conspicuous presence on set , joking , " It is rather like trying to direct King Lear – with Shakespeare in the next room ! " 
 The screenplay was written by Lawrence Kasdan and Lucas ( with uncredited contributions by David Peoples and Marquand ) , based on Lucas ' story . Kasdan claims he told Lucas that Return of the Jedi was " a weak title " , and Lucas later decided to name the film Revenge of the Jedi . The screenplay itself was not finished until rather late in pre @-@ production , well after a production schedule and budget had been created by Kazanjian and Marquand had been hired , which was unusual for a film . Instead , the production team relied on Lucas ' story and rough draft in order to commence work with the art department . When it came time to formally write a shooting script , Lucas , Kasdan , Marquand and Kazanjian spent two weeks in conference discussing ideas ; Kasdan used tape transcripts of these meetings to then construct the script . 
 The issue of whether Harrison Ford would return for the final film arose during pre @-@ production . Unlike the other stars of the first film , Ford had not contracted to do two sequels , and Raiders of the Lost Ark had made him an even bigger star . Ford suggested that Han Solo be killed through self @-@ sacrifice . Kasdan concurred , saying it should happen near the beginning of the film to instill doubt as to whether the others would survive , but Lucas was vehemently against it and rejected the concept . Gary Kurtz , who produced Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back but was replaced as producer for Return of the Jedi , said in 2010 that the ongoing success with Star Wars merchandise and toys led George Lucas to reject the idea of killing off Han Solo in the middle part of the film during a raid on an Imperial base . Luke Skywalker was also to have walked off alone and exhausted like the hero in a Spaghetti Western but , according to Kurtz , Lucas opted for a happier ending to encourage higher merchandise sales . 
 Yoda was originally not meant to appear in the film , but Marquand strongly felt that returning to Dagobah was essential to resolve the dilemma raised by the previous film . The inclusion led Lucas to insert a scene in which Yoda confirms that Darth Vader is Luke 's father because , after a discussion with a children 's psychologist , he did not want younger moviegoers to dismiss Vader 's claim as a lie . Many ideas from the original script were left out or changed . For instance , the Ewoks were going to be <unk> , the Millennium Falcon would be used in the arrival at the forest moon of Endor , and Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi would return to life from his spectral existence in the Force . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming began on January 11 , 1982 and lasted through May 20 , 1982 , a schedule six weeks shorter than The Empire Strikes Back . Kazanjian 's schedule pushed shooting as early as possible in order to give Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) as much time as possible to work on effects , and left some crew members dubious of their ability to be fully prepared for the shoot . Working on a budget of $ 32 @.@ 5 million , Lucas was determined to avoid going over budget as had happened with The Empire Strikes Back . Producer Howard Kazanjian estimated that using ILM ( owned wholly by Lucasfilm ) for special effects saved the production approximately $ 18 million . However , the fact that Lucasfilm was a non @-@ union company made acquiring shooting locations more difficult and more expensive , even though Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back had been big hits . The project was given the working title Blue Harvest with a tagline of " Horror Beyond Imagination . " This disguised what the production crew was really filming from fans and the press , and also prevented price gouging by service providers . 
 The first stage of production started with 78 days at Elstree Studios in England , where the film occupied all nine stages . The shoot commenced with a scene later deleted from the finished film where the heroes get caught in a sandstorm as they leave Tatooine . ( This was the only major sequence cut from the film during editing . ) While attempting to film Luke Skywalker 's battle with the rancor beast , Lucas insisted on trying to create the scene in the same style as Toho 's Godzilla films by using a stunt performer inside a suit . The production team made several attempts , but were unable to create an adequate result . Lucas eventually relented and decided to film the rancor as a high @-@ speed puppet . In April , the crew moved to the Yuma Desert in Arizona for two weeks of Tatooine exteriors . Production then moved to the redwood forests of northern California near Crescent City where two weeks were spent shooting the Endor forest exteriors , and then concluded at ILM in San Rafael , California for about ten days of bluescreen shots . One of two " skeletal " post @-@ production units shooting background matte plates spent a day in Death Valley . The other was a special Steadicam unit shooting forest backgrounds from June 15 – 17 , 1982 for the speeder chase near the middle of the film . Steadicam inventor Garrett Brown personally operated these shots as he walked through a disguised path inside the forest shooting at less than one frame per second . By walking at about 5 mph ( 8 km / h ) and projecting the footage at 24 frame / s , the motion seen in the film appeared as if it were moving at around 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 John Williams composed and conducted the film 's musical score with performances by the London Symphony Orchestra . Orchestration credits also include Thomas Newman . The initial release of the film 's soundtrack was on the <unk> Records label in the United States . Sony Classical Records acquired the rights to the classic trilogy scores in 2004 after gaining the rights to release the second trilogy soundtracks ( The Phantom Menace and Attack of the Clones ) . In the same year , Sony Classical re @-@ pressed the 1997 RCA Victor release of Return of the Jedi along with the other two films in the trilogy . The set was released with the new artwork mirroring the first DVD release of the film . Despite the Sony digital re @-@ mastering , which minimally improved the sound heard only on high @-@ end stereos , this 2004 release is essentially the same as the 1997 RCA Victor release . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Meanwhile , special effects work at ILM quickly stretched the company to its operational limits . While the R & D work and experience gained from the previous two films in the trilogy allowed for increased efficiency , this was offset by the desire to have the closing film raise the bar set by each of these films . A compounding factor was the intention of several departments of ILM to either take on other film work or decrease staff during slow cycles . Instead , as soon as production began , the entire company found it necessary to remain running 20 hours a day on six @-@ day weeks in order to meet their goals by April 1 , 1983 . Of about 900 special effects shots , all VistaVision optical effects remained in @-@ house , since ILM was the only company capable of using the format , while about 400 4 @-@ <unk> opticals were subcontracted to outside effects houses . Progress on the opticals was severely retarded for a time due to ILM rejecting about 100 @,@ 000 feet ( 30 @,@ 000 m ) of film when the film perforations failed image registration and steadiness tests . 
 = = Release = = 
 Return of the Jedi 's theatrical release took place on May 25 , 1983 . It was originally slated to be May 27 , but was subsequently changed to coincide with the date of the 1977 release of the original Star Wars film . With a massive worldwide marketing campaign , illustrator Tim Reamer created the image for the movie poster and other advertising . At the time of its release , the film was advertised on posters and merchandise as simply Star Wars : Return of the Jedi , despite its on @-@ screen " Episode VI " distinction . The original film was later re @-@ released to theaters in 1985 . 
 In 1997 , for the 20th anniversary of the release of Star Wars ( retitled Episode IV : A New Hope ) , Lucas released The Star Wars Trilogy : Special Edition . Along with the two other films in the original trilogy , Return of the Jedi was re @-@ released on March 14 , 1997 with a number of changes and additions , which included the insertion of several alien band members in Jabba 's throne room , the modification of the Sarlacc to include a beak , the replacement of music at the closing scene , and a montage of different alien worlds celebrating the fall of the Empire . According to Lucas , Return of the Jedi required fewer changes than the previous two films because it is more emotionally driven than the others . 
 = = = Title change = = = 
 The original teaser trailer for the film carried the name Revenge of the Jedi . In December 1982 , Lucas decided that " Revenge " was not appropriate as Jedi should not seek revenge and returned to his original title . By that time thousands of " Revenge " teaser posters ( with artwork by Drew Struzan ) had been printed and distributed . Lucasfilm stopped the shipping of the posters and sold the remaining stock of 6 @,@ 800 posters to Star Wars fan club members for $ 9 @.@ 50 . 
 Star Wars : Episode III – Revenge of the Sith , released in 2005 as part of the prequel trilogy , later alluded to the dismissed title Revenge of the Jedi . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 The original theatrical version of Return of the Jedi was released on VHS and Laserdisc several times between 1986 and 1995 , followed by releases of the Special Edition in the same formats between 1997 and 2000 . Some of these releases contained featurettes ; some were individual releases of just this film , while others were boxed sets of all three original films . 
 On September 21 , 2004 , the Special Editions of all three original films were released in a boxed set on DVD . It was digitally restored and remastered , with additional changes made by George Lucas . The DVD also featured English subtitles , Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 EX surround sound , and commentaries by George Lucas , Ben Burtt , Dennis Muren , and Carrie Fisher . The bonus disc included documentaries including Empire of Dreams : The Story of the Star Wars Trilogy and several featurettes including " The Characters of Star Wars " , " The Birth of the Lightsaber " , and " The Legacy of Star Wars " . Also included were teasers , trailers , TV spots , still galleries , and a demo for Star Wars : Battlefront . 
 With the release of Star Wars Episode III : Revenge of the Sith , which depicts how and why Anakin Skywalker turned to the dark side of the Force , Lucas once again altered Return of the Jedi to bolster the relationship between the original trilogy and the prequel trilogy . The original and 1997 Special Edition versions of Return of the Jedi featured British theatre actor Sebastian Shaw playing both the dying Anakin Skywalker and his ghost . In the 2004 DVD , Shaw 's portrayal of Anakin 's ghost is replaced by Hayden Christensen , who portrayed Anakin in Attack of the Clones and Revenge of the Sith . All three films in the original unaltered Star Wars trilogy were later released , individually , on DVD on September 12 , 2006 . These versions were originally slated to only be available until December 31 , 2006 , although they remained in print until May 2011 and were packaged with the 2004 versions again in a new box set on November 4 , 2008 . Although the 2004 versions in these sets each feature an audio commentary , no other extra special features were included to commemorate the original cuts . 
 A Blu @-@ ray Disc version of the Star Wars saga was announced for release in 2011 during Star Wars Celebration V. Several deleted scenes from Return of the Jedi were included for the Blu @-@ ray version , including a sandstorm sequence following the Battle at the Sarlacc Pit , a scene featuring Moff <unk> and Death Star officers during the Battle of Endor , and a scene where Darth Vader communicates with Luke via the Force as Skywalker is assembling his new lightsaber before he infiltrates Jabba 's palace . On January 6 , 2011 , 20th Century Fox Home Entertainment announced the Blu @-@ ray release for September 2011 in three different editions and the cover art was unveiled in May . 
 On April 7 , 2015 , Walt Disney Studios , 20th Century Fox , and Lucasfilm jointly announced the digital releases of the six released Star Wars films . Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment released Return of the Jedi through the iTunes Store , Amazon Video , Vudu , Google Play , and Disney Movies Anywhere on April 10 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Depending on sources , Return of the Jedi grossed between $ 475 million and $ 572 million worldwide . Box Office Mojo estimates that the film sold over 80 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes has an 80 % approval rating with an average score of 7 @.@ 2 / 10 based on 84 reviews from critics . Its consensus states " Though failing to reach the cinematic heights of its predecessors , Return of the Jedi remains an entertaining sci @-@ fi adventure and a fitting end to the classic trilogy " . On Metacritic , the film received a score of 52 / 100 based on 14 reviews from mainstream critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews . " 
 Contemporary critics were largely positive . In 1983 , film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four stars out of four , and James Kendrick of Q Network Film Desk described Return of the Jedi as " a magnificent experience . " The film was also featured on the May 23 , 1983 TIME magazine cover issue ( where it was labeled " Star Wars III " ) , where the reviewer Gerald Clarke said that while it was not as exciting as the first Star Wars film , it was " better and more satisfying " than The Empire Strikes Back , now considered by many as the best of the original trilogy . Vincent Canby of The New York Times called it " by far the dimmest adventure of the lot " . <unk> 's James Berardinelli wrote about the 1997 special edition re @-@ release that " Although it was great fun re @-@ watching Star Wars and The Empire Strikes Back again on the big screen , Return of the Jedi doesn 't generate the same sense of enjoyment . And , while Lucas worked diligently to re @-@ invigorate each entry into the trilogy , Jedi needs more than the patches of improved sound , cleaned @-@ up visuals , and a few new scenes . Still , despite the flaws , this is still Star Wars , and , as such , represents a couple of lightly @-@ entertaining hours spent with characters we have gotten to know and love over the years . Return of the Jedi is easily the weakest of the series , but its position as the conclusion makes it a must @-@ see for anyone who has enjoyed its predecessor . " 
 While the action set pieces – particularly the Sarlacc battle sequence , the speeder bike chase on the Endor moon , the space battle between Rebel and Imperial pilots , and Luke Skywalker 's duel against Darth Vader – are well @-@ regarded , the ground battle between the Ewoks and Imperial stormtroopers remains a bone of contention . Fans are also divided on the likelihood of Ewoks ( being an extremely primitive race of small creatures armed with sticks and rocks ) defeating an armed ground force comprising the Empire 's " best troops " . Lucas has defended the scenario , saying that the Ewoks ' purpose was to distract the Imperial troops and that the Ewoks did not really win . His inspiration for the Ewoks ' victory came from the Vietnam War , where the indigenous Vietcong forces prevailed against the technologically superior United States . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 At the 56th Academy Awards in 1984 , Richard Edlund , Dennis Muren , Ken Ralston , and Phil Tippett received the " Special Achievement Award for Visual Effects . " Norman Reynolds , Fred Hole , James L. <unk> , and Michael Ford were nominated for " Best Art Direction / Set Decoration " . Ben Burtt received a nomination for " Best Sound Effects Editing " . John Williams received the nomination for " Best Music , Original Score " . Burtt , Gary Summers , Randy Thom and Tony Dawe all received the nominations for " Best Sound " . At the 1984 BAFTA Awards , Edlund , Muren , Ralston , and Kit West won for " Best Special Visual Effects " . Tippett and Stuart Freeborn were also nominated for " Best Makeup " . Reynolds received a nomination for " Best Production Design / Art Direction " . Burtt , Dawe , and Summers also received nominations for " Best Sound " . Williams was also nominated " Best Album of Original Score Written for a Motion Picture or Television Special " . The film also won for " Best Dramatic Presentation " , the older award for science fiction and fantasy in film , at the 1984 Hugo Awards . 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movies – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – Nominated 
 = = Marketing = = 
 = = = Novelization = = = 
 The novelization of Return of the Jedi was written by James Kahn and was released on May 12 , 1983 , thirteen days before the film 's release . 
 = = = Radio drama = = = 
 A radio drama adaptation of the film was written by Brian Daley with additional material contributed by John Whitman and was produced for and broadcast on National Public Radio in 1996 . It was based on characters and situations created by George Lucas and on the screenplay by Lawrence Kasdan and George Lucas . The first two Star Wars films were similarly adapted for National Public Radio in the early 1980s , but it was not until 1996 that a radio version of Return of the Jedi was heard . Anthony Daniels returned as C @-@ 3PO , but Mark Hamill and Billy Dee Williams did not reprise their roles as they had for the first two radio dramas . They were replaced by newcomer Joshua Fardon as Luke Skywalker and character actor Arye Gross as Lando Calrissian . John Lithgow voiced Yoda , whose voice actor in the films has always been Frank Oz . Bernard Behrens returned as Obi @-@ Wan Kenobi and Brock Peters reprised his role as Darth Vader . Veteran character actor Ed Begley , Jr. played Boba Fett . Edward Asner also guest @-@ starred speaking only in grunts as the voice of Jabba the Hutt . The radio drama had a running time of three hours . 
 Principal production of the show was completed on February 11 , 1996 . Only hours after celebrating its completion with the cast and crew of the show , Daley died of pancreatic cancer . The show is dedicated to his memory . 
 The cast and crew recorded a get @-@ well message for Daley , but the author never got the chance to hear it . The message is included as part of the Star Wars Trilogy collector 's edition box set . 
 = = = Comic book adaptation = = = 
 Marvel Comics published a comic book adaptation of the film by writer Archie Goodwin and artists Al Williamson , Carlos Garzon , Tom Palmer , and Ron Frenz . The adaptation appeared in Marvel Super Special # 27 and as a four @-@ issue limited series . It was later reprinted in a mass market paperback . 
 = = = Book @-@ and @-@ record set = = = 
 Lucasfilm adapted the story for a children 's book @-@ and @-@ record set . Released in 1983 , the 24 @-@ page Star Wars : Return of the Jedi read @-@ along book was accompanied by a 33 ⅓ rpm 7 @-@ inch ( 18 cm ) gramophone record . Each page of the book contained a cropped frame from the film with an abridged and condensed version of the story . The record was produced by Buena Vista Records . 
 = An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump = 
 An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump is a 1768 oil @-@ on @-@ canvas painting by Joseph Wright of Derby , one of a number of candlelit scenes that Wright painted during the 1760s . The painting departed from convention of the time by depicting a scientific subject in the reverential manner formerly reserved for scenes of historical or religious significance . Wright was intimately involved in depicting the Industrial Revolution and the scientific advances of the Enlightenment , but while his paintings were recognised as something out of the ordinary by his contemporaries , his provincial status and choice of subjects meant the style was never widely imitated . The picture has been owned by the National Gallery , London since 1863 and is still regarded as a masterpiece of British art . In June 2015 it was on loan to Tate Britain . 
 The painting depicts a natural philosopher , a forerunner of the modern scientist , recreating one of Robert Boyle 's air pump experiments , in which a bird is deprived of air , before a varied group of onlookers . The group exhibits a variety of reactions , but for most of the audience scientific curiosity overcomes concern for the bird . The central figure looks out of the picture as if inviting the viewer 's participation in the outcome . 
 = = Historical background = = 
 In 1659 , Robert Boyle commissioned the construction of an air pump , then described as a " pneumatic engine " , which is known today as a vacuum pump . The air pump was invented by Otto von Guericke in 1650 , though its cost deterred most contemporary scientists from constructing the apparatus . Boyle , the son of the Earl of Cork , had no such concerns — after its construction , he donated the initial 1659 model to the Royal Society and had a further two redesigned machines built for his personal use . Aside from Boyle 's three pumps , there were probably no more than four others in existence during the 1660s : Christian Huygens had one in The Hague , Henry Power may have had one at Halifax , and there may have been pumps at Christ 's College , Cambridge and the Montmor Academy in Paris . Boyle 's pump , which was largely designed to Boyle 's specifications and constructed by Robert Hooke , was complicated , temperamental , and problematic to operate . Many demonstrations could only be performed with Hooke on hand , and Boyle frequently left critical public displays solely to Hooke — whose dramatic flair matched his technical skill . 
 Despite the operational and maintenance obstacles , construction of the pump enabled Boyle to conduct a great many experiments on the properties of air , which he later detailed in his New Experiments Physico @-@ <unk> , Touching the Spring of the Air , and its Effects ( Made , for the Most Part , in a New <unk> Engine ) . In the book , he described in great detail 43 experiments he conducted , on occasion assisted by Hooke , on the effect of air on various phenomena . Boyle tested the effects of " rarified " air on combustion , magnetism , sound , and barometers , and examined the effects of increased air pressure on various substances . He listed two experiments on living creatures : " Experiment 40 , " which tested the ability of insects to fly under reduced air pressure , and the dramatic " Experiment 41 , " which demonstrated the reliance of living creatures on air for their survival . In this attempt to discover something " about the account upon which Respiration is so necessary to the Animals , that Nature hath furnish 'd with Lungs " , Boyle conducted numerous trials during which he placed a large variety of different creatures , including birds , mice , eels , snails and flies , in the vessel of the pump and studied their reactions as the air was removed . Here , he describes an injured lark : 
 … the Bird for a while appear 'd lively enough ; but upon a greater <unk> of the Air , she began manifestly to droop and appear sick , and very soon after was taken with as violent and irregular <unk> , as are wont to be observ 'd in Poultry , when their heads are wrung off : For the Bird threw her self over and over two or three times , and dyed with her Breast upward , her Head downwards , and her Neck awry . 
 By the time Wright painted his picture in 1768 , air pumps were a relatively commonplace scientific instrument , and itinerant " lecturers in natural philosophy " — usually more showmen than scientists — often performed the " animal in the air pump experiment " as the centrepiece of their public demonstration . These were performed in town halls and other large buildings for a ticket @-@ buying audience , or were booked by societies or for private showings in the homes of the well @-@ off , the setting suggested in both of Wright 's demonstration pieces . One of the most notable and respectable of the travelling lecturers was James Ferguson FRS , a Scottish astronomer and probable acquaintance of Joseph Wright ( both were friends of John Whitehurst ) . Ferguson noted that a " lungs @-@ glass " with a small air @-@ filled bladder inside was often used in place of the animal , as using a living creature was " too shocking to every spectator who has the least degree of humanity " . 
 The full moon in the picture is significant as Lunar Circle meetings were timed to make use of its light when travelling . Darwin 's study in his original house survives at Beacon St , Lichfield <unk> <unk> , http : / / <unk> / and is recognisable as the site of the painting . The eight paned window is unchanged ; the door position remains as depicted in the painting , though the architrave is missing . A full moon can be seen from this room at the same bearing and inclination as in the painting , just after midnight when the moon is full . Darwin 's " philosophical feasts " that started with the afternoon meal often carried on throughout the night . Wright met Darwin in the early 1760s , probably through their common connection of John Whitehurst , first consulting Darwin about ill health in 1767 when he stayed in the Darwin household for a week . The energy and vivacity of both Erasmus and Mary ( Polly ) Darwin impressed Wright . In the 1980s Eric Evans ( National Gallery ) suggested that Darwin is the figure in the left foreground who holds a watch . As this composed timekeeper is not consistent with Darwin 's flamboyant character , it is more likely that this is Dr William Small . The attention to timekeeping fits with Dr Small 's role as the social secretary for the Lunar circle . Small returned from Virginia in 1764 and established his practice in Birmingham in 1765 , consistent with this being a meeting in 1767 . The profile and wig of this figure are consistent with a contemporary portrait of Small by Tilly Kettle . 
 = = Painting = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 During his apprenticeship and early career Wright concentrated on portraiture . By 1762 , he was an accomplished portrait artist , and his 1764 group portrait James Shuttleworth , his Wife and Daughter is acknowledged as his first true masterpiece . Benedict Nicolson suggests that Wright was influenced by the work of Thomas Frye ; in particular by the 18 bust @-@ length mezzotints which Frye completed just before his death in 1762 . It was perhaps Frye 's candlelight images that tempted Wright to experiment with subject pieces . Wright 's first attempt , A Girl reading a Letter by candlelight with a Young Man looking over her shoulder from 1762 or 1763 , is a trial in the genre , and is fetching though uncomplicated . Wright 's An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump forms part of a series of candlelit nocturnes that he produced between 1765 and 1768 . 
 There was a long history of painting candlelit scenes in Western art , although as Wright had not at this date travelled abroad , there remains uncertainty as to what paintings he might have seen in the original , as opposed to prints . Nicolson , who made studies of both Wright and other candlelight painters such as the 17th @-@ century Utrecht <unk> , thought their paintings , among the largest in the style , those most likely to have influenced Wright . However Judy Egerton wonders if he could have seen any , preferring as influences the far smaller works of the Leiden <unk> Godfried <unk> ( 1643 – 1706 ) , whose reputation was much greater in the early 18th century than subsequently . He had worked in England from 1692 to 1697 , and several of his paintings can be placed in English collections in Wright 's day . 
 Although he was the leading expert writing in English , Nicolson does not suggest that Wright is likely to have known of the 17th @-@ century candlelit narrative religious subjects of Georges de La Tour and <unk> Bigot , which , in their seriousness , are the closest works to Wright that are lit only by candle . The Dutch painters ' works and other candlelit scenes by 18th @-@ century English painters such as Henry Morland ( father of George ) tended instead to exploit the possibilities of semi @-@ darkness for erotic suggestiveness . Some of Wright 's own later candlelit scenes were by no means as serious as his first ones , as seen from their titles : Two Boys Fighting Over a <unk> and Two Girls Dressing a Kitten by Candlelight . 
 The first of his candlelit masterpieces , Three Persons Viewing the Gladiator by Candlelight , was painted in 1765 , and showed three men studying a small copy of the " Borghese Gladiator " . Viewing the Gladiator was greatly admired ; but his next painting , A Philosopher giving that Lecture on the Orrery , in which a Lamp is put in place of the Sun ( normally known by the shortened form A Philosopher Giving a Lecture on the Orrery or just The Orrery ) , caused a greater stir , as it replaced the Classical subject at the centre of the scene with one of a scientific nature . Wright 's depiction of the awe produced by scientific " miracles " marked a break with traditions in which the artistic depiction of such wonder was reserved for religious events , since to Wright the marvels of the technological age were as awe @-@ inspiring as the subjects of the great religious paintings . 
 In both of these works the candlelit setting had a realist justification . Viewing sculpture by candlelight , when the contours showed well and there might even be an impression of movement from the flickering light , was a fashionable practice described by Goethe . In the orrery demonstration the shadows cast by the lamp representing the sun were an essential part of the display , used to demonstrate eclipses . But there seems no reason other than heightened drama to stage the air pump experiment in a room lit by a single candle , and in two later paintings of the subject by Charles @-@ Amédée @-@ Philippe van Loo the lighting is normal . 
 The painting was one of a number of British works challenging the set categories of the rigid , French @-@ dictated hierarchy of genres in the late 18th century , as other types of painting aspired to be treated as seriously as the costumed history painting of a Classical or mythological subject . In some respects the Orrery and Air Pump subjects resembled conversation pieces , then largely a form of middle @-@ class portraiture , though soon to be given new status when Johann Zoffany began to paint the royal family in about 1766 . Given their solemn atmosphere however , and as it seems none of the figures are intended to be understood as portraits ( even if models may be identified ) , the paintings can not be regarded as conversation pieces . The 20th @-@ century art historian Ellis Waterhouse compares these two works to the " genre <unk> " of contemporary French drama , as defined by Denis Diderot and Pierre Beaumarchais , a view endorsed by Egerton . 
 An anonymous review from the time called Wright " a very great and uncommon genius in a peculiar way " . The Orrery was painted without a commission , probably in the expectation that it would be bought by Washington Shirley , 5th Earl Ferrers , an amateur astronomer who had an orrery of his own , and with whom Wright 's friend Peter Perez Burdett was staying while in Derbyshire . Figures thought to be portraits of Burdett and Ferrers feature in the painting , Burdett taking notes and Ferrers seated with his son next to the orrery . Ferrers purchased the painting for £ 210 , but the 6th Earl auctioned it off , and it is now held by Derby Museum and Art Gallery . 
 = = = Detail = = = 
 An Experiment on a Bird in the Air Pump followed in 1768 , the emotionally charged experiment contrasting with the orderly scene from The Orrery . The painting , which measures 72 by 94 ½ inches ( 183 by 244 cm ) , shows a white cockatoo fluttering in panic as the air is slowly withdrawn from the vessel by the pump . The witnesses display various emotions : one of the girls worriedly watches the fate of the bird , while the other is too upset to observe and is comforted by her father ; two gentlemen ( one of them dispassionately timing the experiment ) and a boy look on with interest , while the young lovers to the left of the painting are absorbed only in each other . The scientist himself looks directly out of the picture , as if challenging the viewer to judge whether the pumping should continue , killing the bird , or whether the air should be replaced and the cockatoo saved . 
 Aside from that of the children , little sympathy is directed toward the bird ; David <unk> suggests the subjects of the painting show the dispassionate detachment of the evolving scientific society . Individuals are concerned for each other : the father for his children , the young man for the girl , but the distress of the cockatoo elicits only careful study . To one side of the boy at the rear , the cockatoo 's empty cage can be seen on the wall , and to further heighten the drama it is unclear whether the boy is lowering the cage on the pulley to allow the bird to be replaced after the experiment or hoisting the cage back up , certain of its former occupant 's death . It has also been suggested that he may be drawing the curtains to block out the light from the full moon . 
 Jenny Uglow believes that the boy echoes the figure in the last print of William Hogarth 's The Four Stages of Cruelty by pointing out the arrogance and potential cruelty of experimentation , while David Fraser also sees the compositional similarities with the audience grouped round a central demonstration . The neutral stance of the central character and the uncertain intentions of the boy with the cage were both later ideas : an early study , discovered on the back of a self @-@ portrait , omits the boy and shows the natural philosopher reassuring the girls . In this sketch it is obvious that the bird will survive , and thus the composition lacks the power of the final version . Wright , who took many of his subjects from English poetry , probably knew the following passage from " The Wanderer " ( 1729 ) by Richard Savage : 
 So in some Engine , that denies a Vent , 
 If <unk> is some Creature pent , 
 It sickens , droops , and pants , and gasps for Breath , 
 Sad o 'er the Sight swim shad <unk> Mists of Death ; 
 If then kind Air pours powerful in again . 
 New Heats , new Pulses quicken ev 'ry Vein ; 
 From the clear 'd , lifted , life @-@ rekindled Eye , 
 <unk> 'd , the dark and <unk> <unk> fly . 
 The cockatoo would have been a rare bird at the time , " and one whose life would never in reality have been risked in an experiment such as this " . It did not become well @-@ known until after it was shown in illustrations to the accounts of the voyages of Captain Cook in the 1770s . Prior to Cook 's voyage , cockatoos had been imported only in small numbers as exotic cage @-@ birds . Wright had painted one in 1762 at the home of William Chase , featuring it both in his portrait of Chase and his wife ( Mr & Mrs William Chase ) and a separate study , The Parrot . In selecting such a rarity for this scientific sacrifice , Wright not only chose a more dramatic subject than the " lungs @-@ glass " , but was perhaps making a statement about the values of society in the Age of Enlightenment . The white plumage of the cockatoo also shows much more effectively in the darkened room than the small dull @-@ coloured bird in Wright 's early oil sketch . A resemblance has been pointed out between the group of the bird and the two nearest figures and a type of depiction of the Trinity found in Early Netherlandish painting , where the Holy Spirit is represented by a dove , to which God the Father ( the philosopher ) points , while Christ ( the father ) gestures in blessing to the viewer . 
 On the table are various other pieces of equipment that the natural philosopher would have used during his demonstration : a thermometer , candle <unk> and cork , and close to the man seated to the right is a pair of Magdeburg hemispheres , which would have been used with the air pump to demonstrate the difference in pressure exerted by the air and a vacuum : when the air was pumped out from between the two hemispheres they were impossible to pull apart . The air pump itself is rendered in exquisite detail , a faithful record of the designs in use at the time . What may be a human skull in the large liquid @-@ filled glass bowl would not have been a normal piece of equipment ; William <unk> suggests that it and the candle , which is presumably lighting the bowl from behind , form a vanitas — the two symbols of mortality reflecting the cockatoo 's struggle for life . 
 = = = Style = = = 
 The powerful central light source creates a chiaroscuro effect . The light illuminating the scene has been described as " so brilliant it could only be the light of revelation " . The single source of light is obscured behind the bowl on the table ; some hint of a lamp glass can be seen around the side of the bowl , but David Hockney has suggested that the bowl itself may contain sulphur , giving a powerful single light source that a candle or oil lamp would not . In the earlier study a candle holder is visible , and the flame is reflected in the bowl . Hockney believes that many of the Old Masters used optical equipment to assist in their painting , and suggests that Wright may have used lenses to transfer the image to paper rather than painting directly from the scene , as he believes the pattern of shadows thrown by the lighting could have been too complicated for Wright to have captured so accurately without assistance . It may be observed , however , that the stand on which the pump is situated casts no shadow on the body of the philosopher , as it could be expected to do . 
 Wright 's Air Pump was unusual in that it depicted archetypes rather than specific people , though various models for the figures have been suggested . The young lovers may have been based on Thomas Coltman and Mary Barlow , friends of Wright 's , whom he later painted in Mr and Mrs Thomas Coltman ( also in the National Gallery ) after their marriage in 1769 ; Erasmus Darwin has been suggested as the man timing the experiment on the left of the table , and John <unk> , whom Darwin had invited to help with some air pump experiments in real life , as the natural philosopher ; but Wright never identified any of the subjects or suggested they were based on real people . 
 In The Orrery , all the subjects have been identified apart from the philosopher , who has physical similarities to Isaac Newton but differs enough to make positive identification impossible . Nicolson detects the strong influence of Frye throughout the picture . Particularly striking is the similarity between Frye 's mezzotint Portrait of a Young Man of 1760 – 1761 and the figure of the boy with his head cocked staring intently at the bird . In 1977 , Michael Wynne published one of Frye 's chalk drawings from around 1760 , An old man leaning on a staff , which is so similar to the observer in the right foreground in Wright 's picture to make it impossible that Wright had not seen it . There are other hints of Frye 's style in the painting : even the figure of the natural philosopher has touches of Frye 's Figure with Candle . Though Henry Fuseli would later also develop on the style of Frye 's work there is no evidence of him having painted anything similar until the early 1780s . So , although he had already been in England at the time the Air Pump was produced , it is unlikely that he was an influence on Wright . 
 Wright 's scientific paintings adopted elements from the tradition of history painting but lacked the heroic central action typical of that genre . While ground @-@ breaking , they are regarded as peculiar to Wright , whose unique style has been explained in many ways . Wright 's provincial status and ties to the Lunar Society , a group of prominent industrialists , scientists and intellectuals who met regularly in Birmingham between 1765 and 1813 , have been highlighted , as well as his close association with and sympathy for the advances made in the burgeoning Industrial Revolution . Other critics have emphasised a desire to capture a snapshot of the society of the day , in the tradition of William Hogarth but with a more neutral stance that lacks the biting satire of Hogarth 's work . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The scientific subjects of Wright 's paintings from this time were meant to appeal to the wealthy scientific circles in which he moved . While never a member himself , he had strong connections with the Lunar Society : he was friends with members John Whitehurst and Erasmus Darwin , as well as Josiah Wedgwood , who later commissioned paintings from him . The inclusion of the moon in the painting was a nod to their monthly meetings , which were held when the moon was full . Like The Orrery , Wright apparently painted Air Pump without a commission , and the picture was purchased by Dr Benjamin Bates , who already owned Wright 's Gladiator . An Aylesbury physician , patron of the arts and hedonist , Bates was a diehard member of the Hellfire Club who , despite his excesses , lived to be over 90 . Wright 's account book shows a number of prices for the painting : Pd £ 200 is shown in one place and £ 210 in another , but Wright had written to Bates asking for £ 130 , stating that the low price " might much injure me in the future sale of my pictures , and when I send you a receipt for the money I shall acknowledge a greater sum . " Whether Bates ever paid the full amount is not recorded ; Wright only notes in his account book that he received £ 30 in part payment . 
 Wright exhibited the painting at the Society of Artists exhibition in 1768 and it was re @-@ exhibited before Christian VII of Denmark in September the same year . Viewers remarked that it was " clever and vigorous " , while Gustave Flaubert , who saw it on a visit to England in 1865 – 66 , considered it " <unk> de naïveté et <unk> " . It was popular enough that a mezzotint was engraved from it by Valentine Green which was published by John Boydell on 24 June 1769 , and initially sold for 15 shillings . This was reprinted throughout the 18th and 19th centuries , in increasingly weak impressions . Ellis Waterhouse called it " one of the wholly original masterpieces of British art " . 
 From Bates , the picture passed to Walter Tyrell ; another member of the Tyrell family , Edward , presented it to the National Gallery , London in 1863 , after it had failed to sell at an auction at Christie 's in 1854 . The painting was transferred to the Tate Gallery in 1929 , although it was actually on loan to Derby Museum and Art Gallery between 1912 and 1947 . It has been lent out for exhibitions to the National Gallery of Art in Washington , D.C. in 1976 , the National Museum of Fine Arts in Stockholm in 1979 – 1980 , and Paris ( Grand Palais ) , New York ( Metropolitan ) and the Tate in London in 1990 . It was reclaimed by the National Gallery from the Tate in 1986 . They describe its condition as good , with minor alterations visible on some figures . It was last cleaned in 1974 . 
 The striking scene has been used as the cover illustration for many books on topics both artistic and scientific . It has even spawned pastiches and parodies : the book cover of The Science of Discworld , by Terry Pratchett , Ian Stewart and Jack Cohen , is a tribute to the painting by artist Paul Kidby , who substitutes Wright 's figures with the book 's protagonists . Shelagh Stephenson 's play An Experiment with an Air Pump , inspired by the painting , was the joint winner of the 1997 Margaret Ramsay Award and had its premiere at the Royal Exchange Theatre , Manchester in 1998 . 
 = Brainstorm ( 2000 film ) = 
 Brainstorm ( Portuguese : Bicho de Sete <unk> ) is a 2000 drama film directed by <unk> Bodanzky based on the autobiographical book Canto dos Malditos by <unk> Carrano Bueno . The film was made through a partnership between Brazilian and Italian studios and starred Rodrigo Santoro , Othon Bastos and Cassia Kiss . The film tells the story of Neto , a young man who is admitted to a psychiatric hospital after his father discovers he is a user of marijuana . There , Neto is submitted to abuse . In addition to abuse by psychiatric hospitals , the film deals with the issues of drugs and relationships between fathers and sons . 
 Bodanzky read Carrano 's book in 1996 and , impressed by the theme , assigned Luiz Bolognesi to adapt it into a film and transpose its setting from the 1970s to the 1990s . In addition to keeping the film in the present , Bodanzky chose to make it a documentary @-@ style film to create greater impact on the viewer . Bolognesi began writing in 1997 with the freedom to make changes to the original story . The film was shot in early 2000 in São Paulo , and was edited and finalized in Italy . 
 Brainstorm had its premiere at the Rio Film Festival in October 2000 . It subsequently received several awards and nominations both domestically and internationally ; among them , Best Actor at the Cartagena Film Festival , and Best Film at the Brasília Film Festival . Domestic critical response was generally favorable and focused on the acting and its themes . On the other hand , international critics were more mixed in their response . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens as Mr. Wilson reads a letter he has received from his son Neto , in which Neto declares his contempt for his father . It is followed by a flashback to explain the story ; Neto , a São Paulo <unk> teenager , has a troubled relationship with his father and his mother , Meire . 
 One day , Neto travels with his friend Lobo to Santos without informing his parents . They go to an apartment where they swim and eat food ; Neto leaves the place when Lobo suggests that they reciprocate for the food by letting the men there caress them . Alone in downtown , Neto begs for money , and he is helped by a woman called Leninha . She takes him home to have lunch with some friends ; after it , Neto and Leninha have sex . Later , at night , he is arrested for doing graffiti , and his parents pick him up at the police station . The following day , Neto is in his bedroom and his father finds a marijuana cigarette in his jacket . Neto 's sister advises his parents to send him to a mental institution . 
 Wilson tricks Neto and brings him to a hospital where he is forcibly admitted without any examination to verify its necessity . Neto is sedated by a nurse before receiving the diagnosis of Dr. Cintra . When he wakes up , Neto encounters Ceará , a hyperactive man , and finds out the hospital is decaying and careless . He also meets Rogério , an injectable drugs user committed by his family , who tells him it is impossible to escape and that if he were to try he would be drugged with haloperidol or electrocuted . Rogério also tells him not to consume the medications administered by nurses because it awakes the appetite in order to make patients look healthier . Meanwhile , Cintra has a conversation in which he discusses that if necessary he could easily admit more people , mostly homeless , to avoid losing the government subsidy . 
 After some time , Neto 's parents and sister visit him , and are deceived by the doctor who says Neto requires months of treatment . Neto begs his parents to take him with them and they refuse . Days later , Neto tries to escape but is captured and receives electric shock treatment . Suddenly , in another day , his father visits him to say he and Meire are missing him ; Neto asks to leave the place and Wilson takes him away . At home , his mother asks a downcast Neto if he wants to return to school or to work as a salesman ; he decides to work . The mother of one of his friends forbids Neto to see him , and he discovers Leninha is a married woman . Then , he becomes distressed to the point of leaving a client in the midst of a sale . To unwind , Neto goes to a party at night , where he mixes Coca @-@ Cola and <unk> . Drunk , he carries his friend Bel to the bathroom and they start to kiss each other . However , he goes berserk and starts to damage the place . The police are called and send him to another psychiatric hospital . 
 In this new institution , Neto angers the nurse Ivan after reporting to the hospital 's superior that the nurse overreacted while trying to calm a patient . The nurse has it out for him , and when Ivan sees Neto faking to take a pill , he injects the drug through a syringe . That night , Neto , after doping a nurse , goes to the hospital stockroom and asks the inmate Biu to set fire to a stack of drugs . When Ivan discovers this , Neto receives solitary confinement . After being released from solitary , Neto writes a letter to his father and silently gives it to him when he visits . After refusing to have his hair cut , Neto is locked in solitary once again . He sets fires to the cage and is rescued by the nurses . After reading the letter , Wilson takes him from the clinic . The films ends as Wilson cries while he and Neto are seem seated side by side curbside . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Rodrigo Santoro as Neto 
 Othon Bastos as Mr. Wilson 
 Cássia Kiss as Meire , Neto 's mother 
 Daniela <unk> as Neto 's sister 
 Jairo Mattos as Nurse Ivan 
 Altair Lima as Dr. Cintra Araújo 
 Caco <unk> as Rogério 
 <unk> Dias as <unk> 
 Gero Camilo as Ceará 
 Marcos Cesana as Biu 
 Luís Miranda as Nurse Marcelo 
 <unk> Alencar as Leninha 
 Gustavo Machado as Lobo 
 Cláudio Carneiro as Alex 
 <unk> Castro as Bel 
 = = Production = = 
 <unk> Bodanzky read the biographical book Canto dos Malditos by <unk> Carrano Bueno for the first time in 1996 , when she was signed to assist with the direction of a documentary on the subject . She found the book after entering a discussion and research group on mental health in Brazil . Impressed by its narrative , she asked Luiz Bolognesi to adapt it , as she knew he had a similar worldview and would have the respect necessary to work on the subject . Bolognesi was reluctant as he considered it a complicated subject ; he was close to giving up until he read and was touched by Paulo <unk> 's presentation of the book . 
 The Bodanzky 's main concern was transposing the story 's setting from the 1970s to current day because she wanted to cause an impact . She felt audiences would believe the situations in the film were unlikely if it was set in the past . She wanted to show that the end of Brazilian military government was not the end of what she dubbed " concentration camps " . To achieve this goal , she also used a documentary @-@ like film style to generate further impact . She filmed in actual hospitals that were disabled because of reports of mistreatment , and added extras to improve the realistic climate . 
 The original title of the film — Bicho de Sete <unk> — is based on the song of the same name by Zé Ramalho and Geraldo Azevedo . Bodanzky declared that it was necessary to replace the book title because the film was not exactly the transposition of the book to cinema , but an adaptation inspired on it . This title can be translated to " seven @-@ headed beast ; " " <unk> um <unk> de <unk> <unk> " ( " to make a seven @-@ headed beast " ) is an expression in Brazil commonly used to describe an overreaction that can be compared to the English expression " to make heavy weather . " 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The first version of the script was written in June 1997 during a trip for the project Cine <unk> , which screens Brazilian films around the country in places where the people cannot pay for or do not have access to movie theaters . The trip and the screenings helped Bolognesi to write the screenplay as he " learned that the slightest loss of attention could be mortal and irreversible . " The script needed to be rewritten five times in two years as it was analyzed by Bodanzky and other collaborators . Because of costs , producers suggested the removal of several parts that helped Bolognesi make the film flow faster . Another important group of critics were five teenagers who suggested making Neto a graffiti writer , for example . Lastly and most fundamental was Carrano 's approval a few months before the start of filming . 
 In adapting the book , Bolognesi considered the work as his inspiration but felt free to create situations or characters and to modify the personality of the characters . Carrano accepted Bodanzky and Bolognesi 's offer as they stated that their wish was to keep the base of the story while adapting it when necessary for the general public or to keep the efficacy of cinematic storytelling . Bolognesi wrote Neto as a shyer character than Carrano did , and made him not the leader of the class but a common student . His objective was to create a character that would reflect the regular viewer rather than " a hero . " He also softened some scenes and removed others that he thought the public would find unbelievable . 
 In addition to the central theme — the violence of institutions against the people outside the norms — Bolognesi felt the necessity of a parallel , " complementary " discussion . First , he tried to put Neto in a love story , but he could not write something satisfying . Making it a story of love and hate , Bolognesi decided to explore another theme he considered a taboo : the father @-@ son relationship . He based the " atmosphere " of the relation on Franz Kafka 's Letter to His Father . He used words from a letter by <unk> Rodrigues to a woman to open the film , as he wanted its feelings to guide the story . 
 Bodanzky considered the screenplay a key @-@ element on the production of Brainstorm ; it was her only way of attracting a good cast and staff because it was her first feature film . It aroused interest of lead actors Santoro , Bastos , Kiss , and the producers Sara Silveira , Caio and Fabiano Gullane . Marco Muller , Italian producer of <unk> Cinema , was also lured by the script , and the film became a Brazil @-@ Italy co @-@ production . 
 = = = Casting and cast preparation = = = 
 Santoro was recommended by Paulo <unk> , who acted along with him in the TV series Hilda Furacão . After seeing Santoro 's acting , he was Bodanzky 's first choice for Neto 's role ; " I never even thought of another person . ... When I saw him , I was impressed with his giving of himself to the role / character . I knew that Neto was him . " Santoro read the book and was " shocked , " which led him to contact Carrano ; after talking to the author , he was convinced to take the role . He found the story " very moving , but kind of over the top , " and was worried about overacting and making the character " fake . " To prepare himself for the role , he talked with interns and watched productions on the subject , among them the film One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest by Miloš Forman . 
 Sérgio Penna , a theatrical director and a theater guest professor at University of São Paulo , coordinated the cast preparation . His primary aim was to deconstruct the " superficial figure , stereotyped and crystallized by prejudice " image about psychiatric hospitals and the people who live there . The idea was to create another vision that would contain the first , but focus on " more humane and deep aspects . " Former psychiatric institution patients from the theatrical groups Pazzo a Pazzo and <unk> <unk> , both directed by Penna , appeared as guests . They , however , did not play characters that were interned but supporting characters who remained outside of the hospital . 
 = = = Filming and editing = = = 
 Filming took place in the city of São Paulo between February and April 2000 , with a budget of R $ 1 @,@ 5 million ( $ 700 @,@ 000 ) . The biggest difficult Bodanzky faced while producing the film was to find funders . She was helped by Ministry of Culture 's incentive laws ; however , the most companies did not want associate its brand to the theme . In addition to the Brazilian distributor <unk> , half of the film cost was gathered by European resources : Italian studio <unk> Cinema , Italian network RAI and Swiss Fondation <unk> . 
 Bodanzky and Bolognesi spent four months in Trieste , Italy editing the film along with Italian editors Jacopo Quadri and Letizia <unk> . However , the film was " dreamed , written and filmed " for Brazilian people , so they then returned to Brazil to listen to their opinions . After some screenings in Brazil , they felt the film was not working as they wanted . On the airplane back to Italy , they rewrote the screenplay ; they focused more on Neto and removed minor characters and subplots , while emphasizing the son @-@ father relationship . When they arrived they had a long discussion with the Italian producers before finally agreeing and finishing the film . The film was finalized in October at the Cinecittà studio in Rome , using the THX mixing technology and the standard Dolby Digital . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 When Bolognesi was re @-@ writing the screenplay , Bodanzky suggested that he listen to Arnaldo Antunes ' music . According to the writer , he found some songs that seemed to be composed for the film . He then wrote some scenes and characters to fit the compositions and integrate them into the narrative . The soundtrack consists of songs by <unk> , with lyrics by André <unk> . In addition , it features singer Décio Rocha , Zé Ramalho , Geraldo Azevedo and <unk> <unk> , the rap band Zona <unk> and the punk rock band Infierno . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 = = = Accolades and public reception = = = 
 Brainstorm had its premiere in October 2000 , when it was selected for and screened at the 2nd Rio Film Festival . Late in the month , it was also exhibited at the 24th São Paulo International Film Festival , where it was the only Brazilian film — out of eleven — to be chosen by the public as one of the twelve best films of the festival . It was also the most awarded film at the 33rd Brasília Film Festival , where it won seven awards out of thirteen , and at the 5th Recife Film Festival , where it won nine out of eleven awards . In early 2001 , the film was screened in public square during the <unk> Film Festival in Minas Gerais ; 11 % of the two thousand people audience gave the film a rating of " Good , " and 89 % of them gave it an " Excellent . " 
 It was released in the commercial circuit of theaters on June 22 , 2001 . Brainstorm grossed R $ 2 @,@ 184 @,@ 514 and was watched by 401 @,@ 565 people in the 50 Brazilian theaters in which it was released . In addition , the film won several national awards ; it was the most awarded film at the 1st Grande Prêmio BR de Cinema Brasileiro , winning seven out of thirteen awards : Best Film , Best Director , Best Screenplay , Best Score , Best Editing , Best Actor ( Santoro ) , and Best Supporting Actor ( Othon Bastos ) . The <unk> <unk> awarded the film Best Film , Best Director , Best Screenplay , and Best Actor ( Santoro ) . Santoro also received a Best Actor Award from the National Conference of Bishops of Brazil , and the Social Service of Commerce . 
 In August 2001 , Brainstorm was featured at the 54th Locarno International Film Festival , where it won the Young Jury 's Award . It subsequently won several international awards , <unk> Best Film at the 2001 Biarritz Film Festival , Best First Film at the 2001 Trieste Film Festival , and Best First Film and Best Actor at the 2002 Cartagena Film Festival . The film was awarded by the French Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports Jury 's Award at the 24th Créteil International Women 's Film Festival . It also entered into competition for Best Film at the 2001 Stockholm International Film Festival . Moreover , the film paved the way for new thinking about psychiatric institutions in Brazil which led to a law approved by Congress that forbade such institutions . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Domestic reception was generally positive . Folha de S.Paulo 's deemed it " a portrait of hell in motion , " " painted with such passion , competence and integrity " which makes it " both a torment and a pleasure . " The newspaper commented that all Bodanzky 's choices are " unerring " , that the documentary tone " amplifies the incisiveness of history " and the natural dialogue , and that " the absence of proselytism facilitates the entry of the viewer in the universe of characters . " Ivan Claudio of <unk> Gente praised all of the cast , including the extras whose " wandering like zombies in the courtyards of the asylum ... contribute to the realistic climate of the film . " He , however , highlighted Santoro , stating that the joint effort of the cast would be meaningless without his performance . Similar comments on the cast were woven by Veja magazine , which also commended " the feeling of terror . " Santoro and Camilo , as well as the other patient actors , were praised by Marcelo Forlani of <unk> who said , " It 's hard to believe that the actors here are not really crazy . " Forlani praised the photography and the sound editing as factors that differentiate it from other films . Furthermore , O Estado de S. Paulo <unk> it " the best Brazilian film since <unk> . " 
 In contrast , international critics were not so favorable . Derek Elley of American magazine Variety said that with " an unattractive palette of cold , blue @-@ green hues , pic does little to build sympathy for its protagonist or any of the other characters , and flashy visual effects for Neto 's mental dislocation add to the viewer 's own alienation . " The Hindu 's Gautaman Bhaskaran dubbed it " extremely gripping " , " disturbing " ; ultimately , he declared it has a " morbidity " and a " sense of truth , bitter and brutal " . Writing for Indian magazine Outlook , Namrata Joshi praised it as " stylishly shot , alternating between a cinema verite view of the Brazilian family life and MTV images of the underground Sao Paolo [ sic ] youth culture . " Joshi , however , criticized it for its " excessive [ ness ] in the portrayal of the traumas of Neto which are evoked in the fashion of a radical , nihilistic music video , " and the fact he found the reason to intern Neto " never convincingly grounded in the narrative . " Similarly , Neue Zürcher Zeitung , a Swiss newspaper , criticized it for relying too much on special effects and for not presenting a deeper insight in the emotional conflict . The World Socialist Web Site stated the film has a point in its subject " but the simplistic and outraged tone spoils the film " as " Anyone not already convinced that such institutions are monstrous will legitimately dismiss the work as intemperate propaganda . " 
 = Elizabeth David = 
 Elizabeth David CBE ( born Elizabeth Gwynne ; 26 December 1913 – 22 May 1992 ) was a British cookery writer who , in the mid @-@ 20th century , strongly influenced the revitalisation of the art of home cookery with articles and books about European cuisines and traditional British dishes . 
 Born to an upper @-@ class family , David rebelled against social norms of the day . She studied art in Paris , became an actress , and ran off with a married man with whom she sailed in a small boat to Italy , where their boat was confiscated . They were nearly trapped by the German invasion of Greece in 1940 but escaped to Egypt where they parted . She then worked for the British government , running a library in Cairo . While there she married , but the marriage was not long @-@ lived . 
 After the war , David returned to England , and , dismayed by the gloom and bad food , wrote a series of articles about Mediterranean food that caught the public imagination , and in 1950 A Book of Mediterranean Food . She boldly called for ingredients such as aubergines , basil , figs , garlic , olive oil and saffron , which at the time were scarcely available even in London . Within a few years , however , paella , moussaka , ratatouille , hummus and gazpacho became familiar dishes across Britain , both in restaurants and in home cooking . 
 Books on French and Italian cuisine followed , and within ten years David was a major influence on British cooking . She was deeply hostile to second @-@ rate cooking and to bogus substitutes for classic dishes and ingredients . 
 David opened a shop selling kitchen equipment in the 1960s . It continued to trade under her name after she left it in 1973 , but her reputation rests on her articles and her books , which have been constantly reprinted . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 David was born Elizabeth Gwynne , the second of four children , all daughters , of Rupert Sackville Gwynne and the Hon. Stella Ridley , daughter of the 1st Viscount Ridley . Both parents ' families had considerable fortunes , the Gwynnes from engineering and land speculation , and the <unk> from coal mining . Through the two families , David was of English , Scottish and Welsh or Irish descent , and , through an ancestor on her father 's side , also Dutch and Sumatran . David and her sisters grew up in Wootton Manor in Sussex , a Jacobean manor house with extensive modern additions by Detmar Blow . Her father , who had a weak heart , nevertheless insisted on pursuing a demanding political career , becoming Conservative MP for Eastbourne , and a junior minister in Andrew Bonar Law 's government . <unk> , combined with his vigorous recreational pastimes , chiefly racing , riding and adultery , brought about his death in 1924 , aged 51 . Elizabeth and her sisters Priscilla , Diana and Felicité , who had little affection from their widowed mother , were sent away to boarding schools . 
 As a teenager , David enjoyed painting , and her mother thought her talent worth developing . She was sent to Paris in 1930 , enrolling at the Sorbonne for a course in French civilisation which covered history , literature and architecture . She lodged with a Parisian family , whose fanatical devotion to the pleasures of the table she portrayed to comic effect in her French Provincial Cooking ( 1960 ) . Nevertheless , she acknowledged in retrospect that the experience had been the most valuable part of her time in Paris : " I realized in what way the family had fulfilled their task of instilling French culture into at least one of their British charges . Forgotten were the Sorbonne professors . … What had stuck was the taste for a kind of food quite ideally unlike anything I had known before . " Stella Gwynne was not eager for her daughter 's early return to England , after qualifying for her Sorbonne diploma , and sent her from Paris to Munich in 1931 to study German . 
 Back in England , David unenthusiastically went through the social rituals for upper @-@ class young women of presentation at court as a débutante and the associated dances . The respectable young Englishmen she met at the latter did not appeal to her . She decided that she was not good enough as a painter , and to her mother 's displeasure chose instead to become an actress . She joined the Oxford Repertory Company in 1933 , and moved to the Open Air Theatre in Regent 's Park , London the following year . Among her colleagues in the Regent 's Park company was an actor nine years her senior , Charles Gibson @-@ Cowan . His disregard for social conventions appealed strongly to her , and she also found him sexually irresistible . His being married did not daunt either of them . 
 David rented rooms in a large house near the park , spent a generous 21st birthday present on equipping the kitchen , and learned to cook . A gift from her mother of The Gentle Art of Cookery by Hilda Leyel was her first cookery book . She later wrote , " I wonder if I would have ever learned to cook at all if I had been given a routine Mrs Beeton to learn from , instead of the romantic Mrs Leyel with her rather wild , imagination @-@ catching recipes . " 
 = = = France , Greece , Egypt and India = = = 
 Recognising that she was not going to be a success on the stage , David worked for a while as a junior assistant at the fashion House of Worth , but she found the subservience of retail work irksome . She left in early 1938 , and she and Gibson @-@ Cowan bought a boat , just big enough to suffice , with the intention of sailing it to Greece . They crossed the Channel in July 1939 and navigated the boat through the canal system of France . They halted at Marseille and then , for more than six months , at Antibes , where David met and became greatly influenced by the ageing writer Norman Douglas , about whom she later wrote extensively . He inspired her love of the Mediterranean , encouraged her interest in good food , and taught her to " search out the best , insist on it , and reject all that was bogus and second @-@ rate . " David and Gibson @-@ Cowan finally left Antibes in May 1940 , sailing to Corsica and then to Sicily , where they were suspected of spying and were interned . After 19 days in custody in various parts of Italy , they were allowed to cross into Yugoslavia . They had lost almost everything they possessed – the boat , money , manuscripts , notebooks and David 's cherished collection of recipes . With the help of the British Consul in Zagreb they got to Athens in July 1940 . By this time , David was no longer in love with her partner , but remained with him from necessity . Gibson @-@ Cowan got a job teaching English on the island of Syros , where David learnt to cook with the fresh ingredients available locally . When the Germans invaded Greece in April 1941 , the couple managed to leave on a civilian convoy to Egypt . 
 Able to speak excellent French and good German , David secured a job in the naval cipher office in Alexandria . She was quickly rescued from her temporary refugee accommodation , having met an old English friend who had an " absurdly grandiose " flat in the city and invited her to keep house for him . She and Gibson @-@ Cowan amicably went their separate ways , and she moved into the grand flat . She engaged a cook , <unk> , a Greek refugee , whose eccentricities ( sketched in a chapter of Is There a Nutmeg in the House ? ) did not prevent him from producing magnificent food : " The flavour of that octopus stew , the rich wine dark sauce and the aroma of mountain herbs was something not easily forgotten . " In 1942 she caught an infection that affected her feet . She spent some weeks in hospital and felt obliged to give up her job in the cypher office . David then moved to Cairo , where she was asked to set up and run the Ministry of Information 's reference library . The library was open to everyone and was much in demand by journalists and other writers . Her circle of friends in this period included Alan Moorehead , Freya Stark , Bernard Spencer , Patrick Kinross , Olivia Manning and Lawrence Durrell . At her tiny flat in the city , she employed Suleiman , a Sudanese <unk> ( a cook @-@ housekeeper ) . She recalled : 
 Suleiman performed minor miracles with two Primus stoves and an oven which was little more than a tin box perched on top of them . His soufflés were never less than successful . … For three or four years I lived mainly on rather rough but highly flavoured colourful shining vegetable dishes , lentil or fresh tomato soups , delicious spiced <unk> , lamb kebabs grilled over charcoal , salads with cool mint @-@ flavoured yoghurt dressings , the Egyptian fellahin dish of black beans with olive oil and lemon and hard @-@ boiled eggs – these things were not only attractive but also cheap . 
 In her years in Cairo , David had a number of affairs . She enjoyed them for what they were , but with one exception she did not fall in love . Several of her young men , however , fell in love with her ; one of them was Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Tony David . By now in her thirties , David weighed the advantages and disadvantages of remaining a spinster until such time as the ideal husband might appear , and with considerable misgivings she finally accepted Tony David 's proposal of marriage . 
 Elizabeth Gwynne married Tony David in Cairo on 30 August 1944 . Within a year , her husband was posted to India . She followed him there in January 1946 , but she found life as the wife of an officer of the British Raj tedious , the social life dull , and the food generally " frustrating " . In June 1946 , she suffered severe sinusitis and was told by her doctors that the condition would persist if she remained in the summer heat of Delhi . Instead she was advised to go back to England . She did so ; her biographer Artemis Cooper observes , " She had been away from England for six years , and in that time she , and England , had changed beyond recognition . " 
 = = = Post @-@ war England = = = 
 Returning after her years of Mediterranean warmth and access to a profusion of fresh ingredients , David found her native country in the post @-@ war period grey and daunting . She encountered terrible food : " There was flour and water soup seasoned solely with pepper ; bread and gristle rissoles ; dehydrated onions and carrots ; corned beef toad in the hole . I need not go on . " She met an old flame in London , and their affair was rekindled , but when Colonel David returned from India in 1947 , she immediately resumed the role of wife , and they set up home in Chelsea , which was to remain her home for the rest of her life . Tony David proved ineffectual in civilian life , unable to find a suitable job , and ran up debts . 
 Partly to earn some money , and partly from an " agonized craving for the sun " , David began writing articles on Mediterranean cookery . Her first efforts were published in 1949 in the British magazine Harper 's Bazaar . From the outset , David refused to sell the copyright of her articles , and so she was able to collect and edit them for publication in book form . Even before all the articles had been published , she had assembled them into a typescript volume called A Book of Mediterranean Food and submitted it to a series of publishers , all of whom turned it down . One of them explained that a collection of unconnected recipes needed linking text . David took this advice , but conscious of her inexperience as a writer she kept her own prose short and quoted extensively from established authors whose views on the Mediterranean might carry more weight . In the published volume , the sections are linked by substantial extracts from works by writers including Norman Douglas , Lawrence Durrell , Gertrude Stein , D. H. Lawrence , Osbert Sitwell , Compton Mackenzie , Arnold Bennett , Henry James and Théophile Gautier . She submitted the revised typescript to John Lehmann , a publisher more associated with poetry than cookery , but he accepted it , agreeing to an advance payment of £ 100 . A Book of Mediterranean Food was published in 1950 . 
 David placed great importance on the illustration of books , and writers including Cyril Ray and John Arlott commented that the drawings by John Minton added to the attractions of the book . David herself was less convinced by Minton 's black and white drawings , but described his jacket design as " stunning " . She was especially taken with " his beautiful Mediterranean bay , his tables spread with white cloths and bright fruit " and the way that " pitchers and jugs and bottles of wine could be seen far down the street . " Finding the book selling rapidly , Lehmann commissioned David to write , and Minton to illustrate , a sequel . This was French Country Cooking . David gave Minton detailed instructions about some of his drawings , and was more pleased with them in this volume . David dedicated the book to her mother , despite their difficult relationship . 
 With the earnings from articles commissioned by magazine editors in the wake of the success of the first book , and the advance on the second book , David was able to tour France before completing the manuscript . This was her last holiday with her husband and was not wholly successful . Once French Country Cooking was finished , David decided to live in France for a time , leaving her husband in London . She spent a cold spring and a warm summer in Provence , from which her fourth book , Summer Cooking was partly drawn . Work on that book was postponed , as David had agreed with Lehmann that her next work should be about Italian food . 
 = = = Italian , French and other cuisines = = = 
 Since the brief and unpleasant time there with Charles Gibson @-@ Cowan in 1940 , David had been in Italy only once , to visit Norman Douglas in Capri in 1951 . She returned to Italy in March 1952 and spent nearly a year travelling around the country collecting material . By the time she completed the book , Lehmann 's publishing firm had been closed down by its parent company , and David found herself under contract to Macdonald , another imprint within the same group . She intensely disliked the company and wrote a most unflattering portrait of it in a 1985 article . 
 Italian Food , with illustrations by Renato Guttuso , was published in 1954 . At the time , many of the ingredients used in the recipes were practically unavailable in Britain . Looking back in 1963 , David wrote , " In Soho but almost nowhere else , such things as Italian pasta , and Parmesan cheese , olive oil , <unk> , and occasionally Parma ham were to be had . With southern vegetables such as aubergines , red and green peppers , fennel , the tiny marrows called by the French courgettes and in Italy zucchini , much the same situation prevailed . " David was less en rapport with Italy than with Greece and southern France , and found preparing and writing her Italian Food ( 1954 ) " uncommonly troublesome " . The effort she put into the book was recognised by reviewers . The Times Literary Supplement wrote , " More than a collection of recipes , this book is in effect a readable and discerning dissertation on Italian food and regional dishes , and their preparation in the English kitchen . " The Observer remarked , " Mrs. David … may be counted among the benefactors of humanity . " In The Sunday Times , Evelyn Waugh named Italian Food as one of the two books that had given him the most pleasure in that year . 
 For Summer Cooking , published in 1955 , David left Macdonald and signed with the publisher Museum Press . This book , her fourth , reflected her strong belief in eating food in season ; she loved " the pleasure of rediscovering each season 's vegetables " and thought it " rather dull to eat the same food all year round . " Unconstrained by the geographical agendas of her first three books , David wrote about dishes from Britain , India , Mauritius , Russia , Spain and Turkey , as well as France , Italy and Greece . Soon after the publication of this book , David was wooed away from her regular column in Harper 's by Vogue magazine , which offered her more money and more prominence . 
 With her increased income from Vogue and The Sunday Times , to which she also contributed regularly , David was able to visit many different areas of France . On these trips she completed her research on the book for which , according to Artemis Cooper in the Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , she would be best remembered : French Provincial Cooking ( 1960 ) . The book was dedicated to " <unk> , with love " . The initials concealed the name of Peter Higgins , with whom David had an affair that lasted throughout the 1950s and into the 1960s . Tony David was by now out of her life and had lived in Spain from 1953 ; they divorced in 1960 . Reviews of the new book were as complimentary as those for its predecessors . The Times Literary Supplement wrote , " French Provincial Cooking needs to be read rather than referred to quickly . It discourses at some length the type and origin of the dishes popular in various French regions , as well as the culinary terms , herbs and kitchen equipment used in France . But those who can give the extra time to this book will be well repaid by dishes such as La Bourride de Charles <unk> and <unk> <unk> . " The Observer said that it was difficult to think of any home that could do without the book and called David " a very special kind of genius " . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 In 1960 , David stopped writing for The Sunday Times , where she was unhappy about editorial interference with her copy , and joined the weekly publication The Spectator . Cooper writes , " Her professional career was at its height . She was hailed not only as Britain 's foremost writer on food and cookery , but as the woman who had transformed the eating habits of middle @-@ class England . " Her books were now reaching a wide public , having been reprinted in paperback by the mass @-@ market Penguin Books . Her private life was less felicitous . She was greatly distressed at the ending of her affair with Higgins , who fell in love with a younger woman , and for a period she drank too much brandy and resorted too often to sleeping pills . Probably as a result of these factors , and overwork , in 1963 , when she was 49 , David suffered a cerebral haemorrhage . She recovered , but her sense of taste was temporarily affected , and her confidence was badly shaken . 
 Together with four business partners , David opened a shop selling kitchen equipment . The partners were spurred on by the recent success of Terence Conran 's Habitat shops , which sold among much else imported kitchen equipment for which there was evidently a market . Elizabeth David Ltd opened at 46 Bourne Street , Pimlico , in November 1965 . 
 David was uncompromising in her choice of merchandise ; despite its large range of kitchen implements , the shop famously did not stock garlic presses . David wrote an article called " Garlic Presses are Utterly Useless " , refused to sell them , and advised customers who demanded them to go elsewhere . Not available elsewhere , by contrast , were booklets by David printed specially for the shop . Some of them were later incorporated into the collections of her essays and articles , An Omelette and a Glass of Wine and Is There a Nutmeg in the House ? . 
 David continued to write articles for magazines . She still included many recipes but increasingly wrote about places – markets , <unk> , farms – and people , including profiles of famous chefs and gourmets such as Marcel <unk> and Edouard de <unk> . In her later articles , she expressed strongly @-@ held views on a wide range of subjects ; she <unk> the word " crispy " , demanding to know what it conveyed that " crisp " did not ; she confessed to an inability to refill anybody 's wineglass until it was empty ; she insisted on the traditional form " Welsh rabbit " rather than the modern invention " Welsh rarebit " ; she poured scorn on the Guide Michelin 's standards ; she deplored " fussy garnish ... distract [ ing ] from the main flavours " ; she inveighed against the ersatz : " anyone depraved enough to invent a dish consisting of a wedge of steam @-@ heated bread spread with tomato paste and a piece of synthetic Cheddar can call it a pizza . " 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 While running the shop , David wrote another full @-@ length book , Spices , Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen ( 1970 ) , the first of a projected series on English cookery . The shop was never profitable , but David would not lower her standards in search of a commercial return . Gradually her partners found her approach unsustainable , and in 1973 she left the business . To her annoyance , the shop continued to trade under her name , as it was legally entitled to do . 
 In 1977 David was badly injured in a car accident , from which she took a long time to recover . While she was in hospital , the last book that she completed unaided , English Bread and Yeast Cookery ( 1977 ) , was published . Its scholarship won high praise , and The Times Literary Supplement suggested that a copy of the book should be given to every marrying couple . When she recovered from the accident , David pressed on with her researches for her next project , Harvest of the Cold Months : the Social History of Ice and <unk> . While the elements of this work were being slowly assembled , David published a book of her favourites of her essays and press articles , An Omelette and a Glass of Wine ( 1984 ) . This book was compiled with the help of Jill Norman , who became her literary executor and edited further David works after the author 's death . 
 In the 1980s , David made several visits to California , which she much enjoyed , but her health began to fail . She suffered a succession of falls which resulted in several spells in hospital . The death in 1986 of her younger sister Felicité , who had lived in the top floor of her house for thirty years , was a severe blow to David . In May 1992 she suffered a stroke , followed two days later by another , which was fatal . She died at her Chelsea home on 22 May 1992 , aged 78 , and was buried on 28 May at the family church of St Peter 's , <unk> . 
 = = Awards and legacy = = 
 David won the <unk> Writer of the Year award for English Bread and Yeast Cookery . She was also awarded honorary doctorates by the Universities of Essex and Bristol , and the award of a Chevalier de l 'Ordre du Mérite Agricole . However , the honour that most pleased her was being made a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1982 in recognition of her skills as a writer . In 1976 she was awarded an OBE . In 1986 she was awarded a CBE . 
 David has appeared in fictional form at least twice . In 2000 a novel , Lunch with Elizabeth David , by Roger Williams was published by Carroll & Graf , and in 2006 , the BBC broadcast Elizabeth David : A Life in Recipes , a film starring Catherine McCormack as Elizabeth David and Greg Wise as Peter Higgins . David 's papers are at the Schlesinger Library at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study , Harvard University . 
 In 2012 , to mark the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II , David was chosen by BBC Radio 4 as one of the 60 Britons who have been most influential during the 60 years of the Queen 's reign . In 2013 her portrait was one of a series of first @-@ class stamps issued to celebrate the centenary of ten " Great Britons " . In 2016 an English Heritage blue plaque was erected on her former home at 24 Halsey Street , Chelsea , where she had lived for 45 years : she was the first food writer to receive this form of recognition . The writer Auberon Waugh wrote that if asked to name the woman who had brought about the greatest improvement in English life in the 20th century , " my vote would go to Elizabeth David . " David 's biographer Artemis Cooper concludes her Oxford Dictionary of National Biography article thus : 
 David was the best writer on food and drink this country has ever produced . When she began writing in the 1950s , the British scarcely noticed what was on their plates at all , which was perhaps just as well . Her books and articles persuaded her readers that food was one of life 's great pleasures , and that cooking should not be a drudgery but an exciting and creative act . In doing so she inspired a whole generation not only to cook , but to think about food in an entirely different way . 
 = = Books = = 
 1950 : A Book of Mediterranean Food , decorated by John Minton . London : John Lehmann OCLC <unk> 
 1951 : French Country Cooking , decorated by John Minton . London : John Lehmann OCLC <unk> 
 1954 : Italian Food , illustrated by Renato Guttuso . London : Macdonald OCLC <unk> 
 1955 : Summer Cooking , illustrated by Adrian <unk> . London : Museum Press OCLC <unk> 
 1960 : French Provincial Cooking , illustrated by Juliet Renny . London : Michael Joseph OCLC <unk> 
 1970 : Spices , Salt and Aromatics in the English Kitchen . Harmondsworth : Penguin ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 1977 : English Bread and Yeast Cookery , with illustrations by Wendy Jones . Harmondsworth : Penguin ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 
 1984 : An Omelette and a Glass of Wine . Jill Norman ( ed . ) London : Robert Hale ISBN 0 @-@ 7090 @-@ 2047 @-@ 3 ( selection of previously published articles ) 
 = = = Posthumous publications = = = 
 1994 : Harvest of the Cold Months : the social history of ice and ices . London : Michael Joseph ISBN 0 @-@ 7181 @-@ 3703 @-@ 5 
 1997 : South Wind Through the Kitchen : the best of Elizabeth David . Jill Norman ( ed . ) London Michael Joseph ISBN 0 @-@ 7181 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 
 2000 : Is There a Nutmeg in the House ? ; Jill Norman ( ed . ) London : Michael Joseph ISBN 0 @-@ 7181 @-@ 3703 @-@ 5 
 2003 : Elizabeth David 's Christmas ; Jill Norman ( ed . ) London : Michael Joseph ISBN 0 @-@ 7181 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 2010 : At Elizabeth David 's Table : her very best everyday recipes . Jill Norman ( ed . ) Foreword by Jamie Oliver , Johnny Grey , Rose Gray , Sally Clarke , Simon Hopkinson , Hugh Fearnley @-@ <unk> . London : Michael Joseph ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 7181 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 = European Parliament = 
 The European Parliament ( EP ) is the directly elected parliamentary institution of the European Union ( EU ) . Together with the Council of the European Union ( the Council ) and the European Commission , it exercises the legislative function of the EU . The Parliament is composed of 751 ( previously 766 ) members , who represent the second largest democratic electorate in the world ( after the Parliament of India ) and the largest trans @-@ national democratic electorate in the world ( 375 million eligible voters in 2009 ) . 
 It has been directly elected every five years by universal suffrage since 1979 . However , voter turnout at European Parliament elections has fallen consecutively at each election since that date , and has been under 50 % since 1999 . Voter turnout in 2014 stood at 42 @.@ 54 % of all European voters . 
 Although the European Parliament has legislative power that the Council and Commission do not possess , it does not formally possess legislative initiative , as most national parliaments of European Union member states do . The Parliament is the " first institution " of the EU ( mentioned first in the treaties , having ceremonial precedence over all authority at European level ) , and shares equal legislative and budgetary powers with the Council ( except in a few areas where the special legislative procedures apply ) . It likewise has equal control over the EU budget . Finally , the European Commission , the executive body of the EU , is accountable to Parliament . In particular , Parliament elects the President of the Commission , and approves ( or rejects ) the appointment of the Commission as a whole . It can subsequently force the Commission as a body to resign by adopting a motion of censure . 
 The President of the European Parliament ( Parliament 's speaker ) is Martin Schulz ( S & D ) , elected in January 2012 . He presides over a multi @-@ party chamber , the two largest groups being the Group of the European People 's Party ( EPP ) and the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats ( S & D ) . The last union @-@ wide elections were the 2014 elections . 
 The European Parliament has three places of work – Brussels ( Belgium ) , the city of Luxembourg ( Luxembourg ) and Strasbourg ( France ) . Luxembourg is home to the administrative offices ( the ' General Secretariat ' ) . Meetings of the whole Parliament ( ' plenary sessions ' ) take place in Strasbourg and in Brussels . Committee meetings are held in Brussels . 
 = = History = = 
 The Parliament , like the other institutions , was not designed in its current form when it first met on 10 September 1952 . One of the oldest common institutions , it began as the Common Assembly of the European Coal and Steel Community ( ECSC ) . It was a consultative assembly of 78 appointed parliamentarians drawn from the national parliaments of member states ( see dual mandate ) , having no legislative powers . The change since its foundation was highlighted by Professor David Farrell of the University of Manchester ; 
 For much of its life , the European Parliament could have been justly labeled a ' multi @-@ lingual talking shop ' . 
 Its development since its foundation is a testament to the evolution of the Union 's structures without one clear " master plan " . Some such as Tom Reid of the Washington Post said of the union , " nobody would have deliberately designed a government as complex and as redundant as the EU " . Even the Parliament 's two seats , which have switched several times , are a result of various agreements or lack of agreements . Although most MEPs would prefer to be based just in Brussels , at John Major 's 1992 Edinburgh summit , France engineered a treaty amendment to maintain Parliament 's plenary seat permanently at Strasbourg . 
 = = = Consultative assembly = = = 
 The body was not mentioned in the original Schuman Declaration . It was assumed or hoped that difficulties with the British would be resolved to allow the Council of Europe 's Assembly to perform the task . A separate Assembly was introduced during negotiations on the Treaty as an institution which would counterbalance and monitor the executive while providing democratic legitimacy . The wording of the ECSC Treaty demonstrated the leaders ' desire for more than a normal consultative assembly by using the term " representatives of the people " and allowed for direct election . Its early importance was highlighted when the Assembly was given the task of drawing up the draft treaty to establish a European Political Community . In this , the Ad Hoc Assembly was established on 13 September 1952 with extra members but after the failure of the proposed European Defence Community the project was dropped . 
 Despite this the European Economic Community and Euratom were established in 1958 by the Treaties of Rome . The Common Assembly was shared by all three communities ( which had separate executives ) and it renamed itself the European Parliamentary Assembly . The first meeting was held on 19 March 1958 having been set up in Luxembourg , it elected Schuman as its president and on 13 May it rearranged itself to sit according to political ideology rather than nationality . This is seen as the birth of the modern European Parliament , with Parliament 's 50 years celebrations being held in March 2008 rather than 2002 . 
 The three communities merged their remaining organs as the European Communities in 1967 and the body was renamed to the current " European Parliament " in 1962 . In 1970 the Parliament was granted power over areas of the Community 's budget , which were expanded to the whole budget in 1975 . Under the Rome Treaties , the Parliament should have become elected . However , the Council was required to agree a uniform voting system beforehand , which it failed to do . The Parliament threatened to take the Council to the European Court of Justice leading to a compromise whereby the Council would agree to elections , but the issue of voting systems would be put off till a later date . 
 = = = Elected Parliament = = = 
 In 1979 , its members were directly elected for the first time . This sets it apart from similar institutions such as those of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe or Pan @-@ African Parliament which are appointed . After that first election , the parliament held its first session on 11 July 1979 , electing Simone Veil MEP as its President . Veil was also the first female President of the Parliament since it was formed as the Common Assembly . 
 As an elected body , the Parliament began to draft proposals addressing the functioning of the EU . For example , in 1984 , inspired by its previous work on the Political Community , it drafted the " draft Treaty establishing the European Union " ( also known as the ' Spinelli Plan ' after its rapporteur <unk> Spinelli MEP ) . Although it was not adopted , many ideas were later implemented by other treaties . Furthermore , the Parliament began holding votes on proposed Commission Presidents from the 1980s , before it was given any formal right to veto . 
 Since the election the membership of the European Parliament has simply expanded whenever new nations have joined ( the membership was also adjusted upwards in 1994 after German reunification ) . Following this the Treaty of Nice imposed a cap on the number of members to be elected , 732 . 
 Like the other institutions , the Parliament 's seat was not yet fixed . The provisional arrangements placed Parliament in Strasbourg , while the Commission and Council had their seats in Brussels . In 1985 the Parliament , wishing to be closer to these institutions , built a second chamber in Brussels and moved some of its work there despite protests from some states . A final agreement was eventually reached by the European Council in 1992 . It stated the Parliament would retain its formal seat in Strasbourg , where twelve sessions a year would be held , but with all other parliamentary activity in Brussels . This two seat arrangement was contested by Parliament but was later enshrined in the Treaty of Amsterdam . To this day the institution 's locations are a source of contention . 
 The Parliament gained more powers from successive treaties , namely through the extension of the ordinary legislative procedure ( then called the codecision procedure ) , and in 1999 , the Parliament forced the resignation of the Santer Commission . The Parliament had refused to approve the Community budget over allegations of fraud and mis @-@ management in the Commission . The two main parties took on a government @-@ opposition dynamic for the first time during the crisis which ended in the Commission resigning en masse , the first of any forced resignation , in the face of an impending censure from the Parliament . 
 = = = Barroso I = = = 
 In 2004 , following the largest trans @-@ national election in history , despite the European Council choosing a President from the largest political group ( the EPP ) , the Parliament again exerted pressure on the Commission . During the Parliament 's hearings of the proposed Commissioners MEPs raised doubts about some nominees with the Civil Liberties committee rejecting Rocco Buttiglione from the post of Commissioner for Justice , Freedom and Security over his views on homosexuality . That was the first time the Parliament had ever voted against an incoming Commissioner and despite Barroso 's insistence upon Buttiglione the Parliament forced Buttiglione to be withdrawn . A number of other Commissioners also had to be withdrawn or reassigned before Parliament allowed the Barroso Commission to take office . 
 Along with the extension of the ordinary legislative procedure , the Parliament 's democratic mandate has given it greater control over legislation against the other institutions . In voting on the Bolkestein directive in 2006 , the Parliament voted by a large majority for over 400 amendments that changed the fundamental principle of the law . The Financial Times described it in the following terms : 
 That is where the European parliament has suddenly come into its own . It marks another shift in power between the three central EU institutions . Last week 's vote suggests that the directly elected MEPs , in spite of their multitude of ideological , national and historical allegiances , have started to coalesce as a serious and effective EU institution , just as enlargement has greatly complicated negotiations inside both the Council and Commission . 
 In 2007 , for the first time , Justice Commissioner Franco Frattini included Parliament in talks on the second Schengen Information System even though MEPs only needed to be consulted on parts of the package . After that experiment , Frattini indicated he would like to include Parliament in all justice and criminal matters , informally pre @-@ empting the new powers they could gain as part of the Treaty of Lisbon . Between 2007 and 2009 , a special working group on parliamentary reform implemented a series of changes to modernise the institution such as more speaking time for <unk> , increase committee co @-@ operation and other efficiency reforms . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 The Lisbon Treaty finally came into force on 1 December 2009 , granting Parliament powers over the entire EU budget , making Parliament 's legislative powers equal to the Council 's in nearly all areas and linking the appointment of the Commission President to Parliament 's own elections . Despite some calls for the parties to put forward candidates beforehand , only the EPP ( which had re @-@ secured their position as largest party ) had one in re @-@ endorsing Barroso . 
 Barroso gained the support of the European Council for a second term and secured majority support from the Parliament in September 2009 . Parliament voted 382 votes in favour and 219 votes against ( 117 abstentions ) with support of the European People 's Party , European Conservatives and Reformists and the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe . The liberals gave support after Barroso gave them a number of concessions ; the liberals previously joined the socialists ' call for a delayed vote ( the EPP had wanted to approve Barroso in July of that year ) . 
 Once Barroso put forward the candidates for his next Commission , another opportunity to gain concessions arose . Bulgarian nominee <unk> <unk> was forced to step down by Parliament due to concerns over her experience and financial interests . She only had the support of the EPP which began to retaliate on left wing candidates before <unk> gave in and was replaced ( setting back the final vote further ) . 
 Before the final vote , Parliament demanded a number of concessions as part of a future working agreement under the new Lisbon Treaty . The deal includes that Parliament 's President will attend high level Commission meetings . Parliament will have a seat in the EU 's Commission @-@ lead international negotiations and have a right to information on agreements . However , Parliament secured only an observer seat . Parliament also did not secure a say over the appointment of delegation heads and special representatives for foreign policy . Although they will appear before parliament after they have been appointed by the High Representative . One major internal power was that Parliament wanted a pledge from the Commission that it would put forward legislation when parliament requests . Barroso considered this an infringement on the Commission 's powers but did agree to respond within three months . Most requests are already responded to positively . 
 During the setting up of the European External Action Service ( EEAS ) , Parliament used its control over the EU budget to influence the shape of the EEAS . MEPs had aimed at getting greater oversight over the EEAS by linking it to the Commission and having political deputies to the High Representative . MEPs didn 't manage to get everything they demanded . However , they got broader financial control over the new body . 
 = = Powers and functions = = 
 The Parliament and Council have been compared to the two chambers of a bicameral legislature . However , there are some differences from national legislatures ; for example , neither the Parliament nor the Council have the power of legislative initiative ( except for the fact that the Council has the power in some intergovernmental matters ) . In Community matters , this is a power uniquely reserved for the European Commission ( the executive ) . Therefore , while Parliament can amend and reject legislation , to make a proposal for legislation , it needs the Commission to draft a bill before anything can become law . The value of such a power has been questioned by noting that in the national legislatures of the member states 85 % of initiatives introduced without executive support fail to become law . Yet it has been argued by former Parliament president Hans @-@ Gert <unk> that as the Parliament does have the right to ask the Commission to draft such legislation , and as the Commission is following Parliament 's proposals more and more Parliament does have a de facto right of legislative initiative . 
 The Parliament also has a great deal of indirect influence , through non @-@ binding resolutions and committee hearings , as a " pan @-@ European soapbox " with the ear of thousands of Brussels @-@ based journalists . There is also an indirect effect on foreign policy ; the Parliament must approve all development grants , including those overseas . For example , the support for post @-@ war Iraq reconstruction , or incentives for the cessation of Iranian nuclear development , must be supported by the Parliament . Parliamentary support was also required for the transatlantic passenger data @-@ sharing deal with the United States . Finally , Parliament holds a non @-@ binding vote on new EU treaties but cannot veto it . However , when Parliament threatened to vote down the Nice Treaty , the Belgian and Italian Parliaments said they would veto the treaty on the European Parliament 's behalf . 
 = = = Legislative procedure = = = 
 With each new treaty , the powers of the Parliament , in terms of its role in the Union 's legislative procedures , have expanded . The procedure which has slowly become dominant is the " ordinary legislative procedure " ( previously named " codecision procedure " ) , which provides an equal footing between Parliament and Council . In particular , under the procedure , the Commission presents a proposal to Parliament and the Council which can only become law if both agree on a text , which they do ( or not ) through successive readings up to a maximum of three . In its first reading , Parliament may send amendments to the Council which can either adopt the text with those amendments or send back a " common position " . That position may either be approved by Parliament , or it may reject the text by an absolute majority , causing it to fail , or it may adopt further amendments , also by an absolute majority . If the Council does not approve these , then a " Conciliation Committee " is formed . The Committee is composed of the Council members plus an equal number of MEPs who seek to agree a compromise . Once a position is agreed , it has to be approved by Parliament , by a simple majority . This is also aided by Parliament 's mandate as the only directly democratic institution , which has given it leeway to have greater control over legislation than other institutions , for example over its changes to the Bolkestein directive in 2006 . 
 The few other areas that operate the special legislative procedures are justice & home affairs , budget and taxation and certain aspects of other policy areas : such as the fiscal aspects of environmental policy . In these areas , the Council or Parliament decide law alone . The procedure also depends upon which type of institutional act is being used . The strongest act is a regulation , an act or law which is directly applicable in its entirety . Then there are directives which bind member states to certain goals which they must achieve . They do this through their own laws and hence have room to manoeuvre in deciding upon them . A decision is an instrument which is focused at a particular person or group and is directly applicable . Institutions may also issue recommendations and opinions which are merely non @-@ binding , declarations . There is a further document which does not follow normal procedures , this is a " written declaration " which is similar to an early day motion used in the Westminster system . It is a document proposed by up to five MEPs on a matter within the EU 's activities used to launch a debate on that subject . Having been posted outside the entrance to the hemicycle , members can sign the declaration and if a majority do so it is forwarded to the President and announced to the plenary before being forwarded to the other institutions and formally noted in the minutes . 
 = = = Budget = = = 
 The legislative branch officially holds the Union 's budgetary authority with powers gained through the Budgetary Treaties of the 1970s and the Lisbon Treaty . The EU budget is subject to a form of the ordinary legislative procedure with a single reading giving Parliament power over the entire budget ( before 2009 , its influence was limited to certain areas ) on an equal footing to the Council . If there is a disagreement between them , it is taken to a conciliation committee as it is for legislative proposals . If the joint conciliation text is not approved , the Parliament may adopt the budget definitively . 
 The Parliament is also responsible for discharging the implementation of previous budgets based on the annual report of the European Court of Auditors . It has refused to approve the budget only twice , in 1984 and in 1998 . On the latter occasion it led to the resignation of the Santer Commission ; highlighting how the budgetary power gives Parliament a great deal of power over the Commission . Parliament also makes extensive use of its budgetary , and other powers , elsewhere ; for example in the setting up of the European External Action Service , Parliament has a de facto veto over its design as it has to approve the budgetary and staff changes . 
 = = = Control of the executive = = = 
 Unlike most EU states , which usually operate parliamentary systems , there is a separation of powers between the executive and legislative which makes the European Parliament more akin to the United States Congress than an EU state legislature . The President of the European Commission is proposed by the European Council on the basis of the European elections to Parliament . That proposal has to be approved by the Parliament ( by a simple majority ) who " elect " the President according to the treaties . Following the approval of the Commission President , the members of the Commission are proposed by the President in accord with the member @-@ states . Each Commissioner comes before a relevant parliamentary committee hearing covering the proposed portfolio . They are then , as a body , approved or rejected by the Parliament . In practice , the Parliament has never voted against a President or his Commission , but it did seem likely when the Barroso Commission was put forward . The resulting pressure forced the proposal to be withdrawn and changed to be more acceptable to parliament . That pressure was seen as an important sign by some of the evolving nature of the Parliament and its ability to make the Commission accountable , rather than being a rubber stamp for candidates . Furthermore , in voting on the Commission , MEPs also voted along party lines , rather than national lines , despite frequent pressure from national governments on their MEPs . This cohesion and willingness to use the Parliament 's power ensured greater attention from national leaders , other institutions and the public — who previously gave the lowest ever turnout for the Parliament 's elections . 
 The Parliament also has the power to censure the Commission if they have a two @-@ thirds majority which will force the resignation of the entire Commission from office . As with approval , this power has never been used but it was threatened to the Santer Commission , who subsequently resigned of their own accord . There are a few other controls , such as : the requirement of Commission to submit reports to the Parliament and answer questions from MEPs ; the requirement of the President @-@ in @-@ office of the Council to present its programme at the start of their presidency ; the obligation on the President of the European Council to report to Parliament after each of its meetings ; the right of MEPs to make requests for legislation and policy to the Commission ; and the right to question members of those institutions ( e.g. " Commission Question Time " every Tuesday ) . At present , MEPs may ask a question on any topic whatsoever , but in July 2008 MEPs voted to limit questions to those within the EU 's mandate and ban offensive or personal questions . 
 = = = Supervisory powers = = = 
 The Parliament also has other powers of general supervision , mainly granted by the Maastricht Treaty . The Parliament has the power to set up a Committee of Inquiry , for example over mad cow disease or CIA detention flights — the former led to the creation of the European veterinary agency . The Parliament can call other institutions to answer questions and if necessary to take them to court if they break EU law or treaties . Furthermore , it has powers over the appointment of the members of the Court of Auditors and the president and executive board of the European Central Bank . The ECB president is also obliged to present an annual report to the parliament . 
 The European Ombudsman is elected by the Parliament , who deals with public complaints against all institutions . Petitions can also be brought forward by any EU citizen on a matter within the EU 's sphere of activities . The Committee on Petitions hears cases , some 1500 each year , sometimes presented by the citizen themselves at the Parliament . While the Parliament attempts to resolve the issue as a mediator they do resort to legal proceedings if it is necessary to resolve the citizens dispute . 
 = = Members = = 
 The parliamentarians are known in English as Members of the European Parliament ( MEPs ) . They are elected every five years by universal adult suffrage and sit according to political allegiance ; about a third are women . Before 1979 they were appointed by their national parliaments . 
 Under the Lisbon Treaty , seats are allocated to each state according to population and the maximum number of members is set at 751 ( however , as the President cannot vote while in the chair there will only be 750 voting members at any one time ) . 
 The seats are distributed according to " <unk> proportionality " , i.e. , the larger the state , the more citizens are represented per MEP . As a result , Maltese and Luxembourgish voters have roughly 10x more influence per voter than citizens of the six large countries . 
 As of 2014 , Germany ( 80 @.@ 9 million inhabitants ) has 96 seats ( previously 99 seats ) , i.e. one seat for 843 @,@ 000 inhabitants . Malta ( 0 @.@ 4 million inhabitants ) has 6 seats , i.e. one seat for 70 @,@ 000 inhabitants . 
 The new system implemented under the Lisbon Treaty , including revising the seating well before elections , was intended to avoid political horse trading when the allocations have to be revised to reflect demographic changes . 
 Pursuant to this apportionment , the constituencies are formed . In six EU member states ( Belgium , France , Ireland , Italy , Poland , and the United Kingdom ) , the national territory is divided into a number of constituencies . In the remaining member states , the whole country forms a single constituency . All member states hold elections to the European Parliament using various forms of proportional representation . 
 = = = Transitional arrangements = = = 
 Due to the delay in ratifying the Lisbon Treaty , the seventh parliament was elected under the lower Nice Treaty cap . A small scale treaty amendment was ratified on 29 November 2011 . This amendment brought in transitional provisions to allow the 18 additional MEPs created under the Lisbon Treaty to be elected or appointed before the 2014 election . Under the Lisbon Treaty reforms , Germany was the only state to lose members from 99 to 96 . However , these seats were not removed until the 2014 election . 
 = = = Salaries and expenses = = = 
 Before 2009 , members received the same salary as members of their national parliament . However , from 2009 a new members statute came into force , after years of attempts , which gave all members an equal monthly pay , of 8 @,@ 020 @.@ 53 euro each in 2014 , subject to a European Union tax and which can also be taxed nationally . MEPs are entitled to a pension , paid by Parliament , from the age of 63 . Members are also entitled to allowances for office costs and subsistence , and travelling expenses , based on actual cost . Besides their pay , members are granted a number of privileges and immunities . To ensure their free movement to and from the Parliament , they are accorded by their own states the facilities accorded to senior officials travelling abroad and , by other state governments , the status of visiting foreign representatives . When in their own state , they have all the immunities accorded to national parliamentarians , and , in other states , they have immunity from detention and legal proceedings . However , immunity cannot be claimed when a member is found committing a criminal offence and the Parliament also has the right to strip a member of his immunity . 
 = = = Political groups = = = 
 MEPs in Parliament are organised into seven different parliamentary groups , including thirty non @-@ attached members known as non @-@ <unk> . The two largest groups are the European People 's Party ( EPP ) and the Socialists & Democrats ( S & D ) . These two groups have dominated the Parliament for much of its life , continuously holding between 50 and 70 percent of the seats between them . No single group has ever held a majority in Parliament . As a result of being broad alliances of national parties , European group parties are very decentralised and hence have more in common with parties in federal states like Germany or the United States than unitary states like the majority of the EU states . Nevertheless , the European groups were actually more cohesive than their US counterparts between 2004 and 2009 . 
 Groups are often based on a single European political party such as the socialist group ( before 2009 ) . However , they can , like the liberal group , include more than one European party as well as national parties and independents . For a group to be recognised , it needs 25 MEPs from seven different countries . Once recognised , groups receive financial subsidies from the parliament and guaranteed seats on committees , creating an incentive for the formation of groups . However , some controversy occurred with the establishment of the short @-@ lived Identity , Tradition , Sovereignty ( ITS ) due to its ideology ; the members of the group were far @-@ right , so there were concerns about public funds going towards such a group . There were attempts to change the rules to block the formation of ITS , but they never came to fruition . The group was , however , blocked from gaining leading positions on committees — traditionally ( by agreement , not a rule ) shared among all parties . When this group engaged in infighting , leading to the withdrawal of some members , its size fell below the threshold for recognition causing its collapse . 
 = = = Grand coalition = = = 
 Given that the Parliament does not form the government in the traditional sense of a Parliamentary system , its politics have developed along more consensual lines rather than majority rule of competing parties and coalitions . Indeed , for much of its life it has been dominated by a grand coalition of the European People 's Party and the Party of European Socialists . The two major parties tend to co @-@ operate to find a compromise between their two groups leading to proposals endorsed by huge majorities . However , this does not always produce agreement , and each may instead try to build other alliances , the EPP normally with other centre @-@ right or right wing Groups and the PES with centre @-@ left or left wing Groups . Sometimes , the Liberal Group is then in the pivotal position . There are also occasions where very sharp party political divisions have emerged , for example over the resignation of the Santer Commission . 
 When the initial allegations against the Commission emerged , they were directed primarily against Édith Cresson and Manuel Marín , both socialist members . When the parliament was considering refusing to discharge the Community budget , President Jacques Santer stated that a no vote would be tantamount to a vote of no confidence . The Socialist group supported the Commission and saw the issue as an attempt by the EPP to discredit their party ahead of the 1999 elections . Socialist leader , Pauline Green MEP , attempted a vote of confidence and the EPP put forward counter motions . During this period the two parties took on similar roles to a government @-@ opposition dynamic , with the Socialists supporting the executive and EPP renouncing its previous coalition support and voting it down . <unk> such as this has been increasing , in 2007 Simon Hix of the London School of Economics noted that : 
 Our work also shows that politics in the European Parliament is becoming increasingly based around party and ideology . Voting is increasingly split along left @-@ right lines , and the cohesion of the party groups has risen dramatically , particularly in the fourth and fifth parliaments . So there are likely to be policy implications here too . 
 During the fifth term , 1999 to 2004 , there was a break in the grand coalition resulting in a centre @-@ right coalition between the Liberal and People 's parties . This was reflected in the Presidency of the Parliament with the terms being shared between the EPP and the <unk> , rather than the EPP and Socialists . In the following term the liberal group grew to hold 88 seats , the largest number of seats held by any third party in Parliament . 
 = = = Elections = = = 
 Elections have taken place , directly in every member @-@ state , every five years since 1979 . As of 2014 there have been eight elections . When a nation joins mid @-@ term , a by @-@ election will be held to elect their representatives . This has happened six times , most recently when Croatia joined in 2013 ( see below ) . Elections take place across four days according to local custom and , apart from having to be proportional , the electoral system is chosen by the member @-@ state . This includes allocation of sub @-@ national constituencies ; while most members have a national list , some , like the UK and France , divide their allocation between regions . Seats are allocated to member @-@ states according to their population , since 2014 with no state having more than 96 , but no fewer than 6 , to maintain proportionality . 
 The most recent Union @-@ wide elections to the European Parliament were the European elections of 2014 , held from 22 to 25 May 2014 . They were the largest simultaneous transnational elections ever held anywhere in the world . The eighth term of Parliament started on 1 July 2014 . 
 The proportion of MEPs elected in 2009 who were female was 35 % ; in 1979 it was just 16 @.@ 5 % . 
