 There have been a number of proposals designed to attract greater public attention to the elections . One such innovation in the 2014 elections was that the pan @-@ European political parties fielded " candidates " for president of the Commission . However , European Union governance is based on a mixture of intergovernmental and supranational features : the President of the European Commission is nominated by the European Council , representing the governments of the member states , and there is no obligation for them to nominate the successful " candidate " . The Lisbon Treaty merely states that they should take account of the results of the elections when choosing whom to nominate . The so @-@ called " candidates " were Jean @-@ Claude Juncker for the European People 's Party , Martin Schulz for the Party of European Socialists , Guy Verhofstadt for the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party , Ska Keller and José <unk> jointly for the European Green Party and Alexis <unk> for the Party of the European Left . 
 Turnout has dropped consistently every year since the first election , and from 1999 it has been below 50 % . In 2007 both Bulgaria and Romania elected their MEPs in by @-@ elections , having joined at the beginning of 2007 . The Bulgarian and Romanian elections saw two of the lowest turnouts for European elections , just 28 @.@ 6 % and 28 @.@ 3 % respectively . 
 In England , Scotland and Wales , EP elections were originally held for a constituency MEP on a first @-@ past @-@ the @-@ post basis . In 1999 the system was changed to a form of PR where a large group of candidates would stand for a post within a very large regional constituency . One could vote for a party , but not a candidate ( unless that party had a single candidate ) . 
 = = Proceedings = = 
 Each year the activities of the Parliament cycle between committee weeks where reports are discussed in committees and <unk> delegations meet , political group weeks for members to discuss work within their political groups and session weeks where members spend 3 ½ days in Strasbourg for part @-@ sessions . In addition six 2 @-@ day part @-@ sessions are organised in Brussels throughout the year . Four weeks are allocated as constituency week to allow members to do exclusively constituency work . Finally there are no meetings planned during the summer weeks . The Parliament has the power to meet without being convened by another authority . Its meetings are partly controlled by the treaties but are otherwise up to Parliament according to its own " Rules of Procedure " ( the regulations governing the parliament ) . 
 During sessions , members may speak after being called on by the President . Members of the Council or Commission may also attend and speak in debates . Partly due to the need for translation , and the politics of consensus in the chamber , debates tend to be calmer and more polite than , say , the Westminster system . Voting is conducted primarily by a show of hands , that may be checked on request by electronic voting . Votes of MEPs are not recorded in either case , however ; that only occurs when there is a roll @-@ call ballot . This is required for the final votes on legislation and also whenever a political group or 30 MEPs request it . The number of roll @-@ call votes has increased with time . Votes can also be a completely secret ballot ( for example , when the president is elected ) . All recorded votes , along with minutes and legislation , are recorded in the Official Journal of the European Union and can be accessed online . Votes usually do not follow a debate , but rather they are grouped with other due votes on specific occasions , usually at noon on Tuesdays , Wednesdays or Thursdays . This is because the length of the vote is unpredictable and if it continues for longer than allocated it can disrupt other debates and meetings later in the day . 
 Members are arranged in a hemicycle according to their political groups ( in the Common Assembly , prior to 1958 , members sat alphabetically ) who are ordered mainly by left to right , but some smaller groups are placed towards the outer ring of the Parliament . All desks are equipped with microphones , headphones for translation and electronic voting equipment . The leaders of the groups sit on the front benches at the centre , and in the very centre is a podium for guest speakers . The remaining half of the circular chamber is primarily composed of the raised area where the President and staff sit . Further benches are provided between the sides of this area and the MEPs , these are taken up by the Council on the far left and the Commission on the far right . Both the Brussels and Strasbourg hemicycle roughly follow this layout with only minor differences . The hemicycle design is a compromise between the different Parliamentary systems . The British @-@ based system has the different groups directly facing each other while the French @-@ based system is a semicircle ( and the traditional German system had all members in rows facing a rostrum for speeches ) . Although the design is mainly based on a semicircle , the opposite ends of the spectrum do still face each other . With access to the chamber limited , entrance is controlled by ushers who aid MEPs in the chamber ( for example in delivering documents ) . The ushers can also occasionally act as a form of police in enforcing the President , for example in ejecting an MEP who is disrupting the session ( although this is rare ) . The first head of protocol in the Parliament was French , so many of the duties in the Parliament are based on the French model first developed following the French Revolution . The 180 ushers are highly visible in the Parliament , dressed in black tails and wearing a silver chain , and are recruited in the same manner as the European civil service . The President is allocated a personal usher . 
 = = = President and organisation = = = 
 The President is essentially the speaker of the Parliament and presides over the plenary when it is in session . The President 's signature is required for all acts adopted by co @-@ decision , including the EU budget . The President is also responsible for representing the Parliament externally , including in legal matters , and for the application of the rules of procedure . He or she is elected for two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year terms , meaning two elections per parliamentary term . The President is currently Martin Schulz MEP of the S & D. 
 In most countries , the protocol of the head of state comes before all others ; however , in the EU the Parliament is listed as the first institution , and hence the protocol of its President comes before any other European , or national , protocol . The gifts given to numerous visiting dignitaries depend upon the President . President Josep <unk> MEP of Spain gave his counterparts a crystal cup created by an artist from Barcelona who had engraved upon it parts of the Charter of Fundamental Rights among other things . 
 A number of notable figures have been President of the Parliament and its predecessors . The first President was Paul @-@ Henri Spaak MEP , one of the founding fathers of the Union . Other founding fathers include Alcide de Gasperi MEP and Robert Schuman MEP . The two female Presidents were Simone Veil MEP in 1979 ( first President of the elected Parliament ) and Nicole Fontaine MEP in 1999 , both <unk> . The previous president , Jerzy Buzek was the first East @-@ Central European to lead an EU institution , a former Prime Minister of Poland who rose out of the Solidarity movement in Poland that helped overthrow communism in the Eastern Bloc . 
 During the election of a President , the previous President ( or , if unable to , one of the previous Vice @-@ Presidents ) presides over the chamber . Prior to 2009 , the oldest member fulfilled this role but the rule was changed to prevent far @-@ right French MEP Jean @-@ Marie Le Pen taking the chair . 
 Below the President , there are 14 Vice @-@ Presidents who chair debates when the President is not in the chamber . There are a number of other bodies and posts responsible for the running of parliament besides these speakers . The two main bodies are the Bureau , which is responsible for budgetary and administration issues , and the Conference of Presidents which is a governing body composed of the presidents of each of the parliament 's political groups . Looking after the financial and administrative interests of members are five Quaestors . In August 2002 , Nichole <unk> [ née <unk> ] became the first American citizen to intern for a member of the European Parliament — Monica <unk> [ Green Party ] . 
 As of 2014 , the European Parliament budget was EUR 1 @.@ 756 billion . A 2008 report on the Parliament 's finances highlighted certain overspending and miss @-@ payments . Despite some MEPs calling for the report to be published , Parliamentary authorities had refused until an MEP broke confidentiality and leaked it . 
 = = = Committees and delegations = = = 
 The Parliament has 20 Standing Committees consisting of 25 to 71 MEPs each ( reflecting the political make @-@ up of the whole Parliament ) including a chair , a bureau and secretariat . They meet twice a month in public to draw up , amend to adopt legislative proposals and reports to be presented to the plenary . The <unk> for a committee are supposed to present the view of the committee , although notably this has not always been the case . In the events leading to the resignation of the Santer Commission , the rapporteur went against the Budgetary Control Committee 's narrow vote to discharge the budget , and urged the Parliament to reject it . 
 Committees can also set up sub @-@ committees ( e.g. the Subcommittee on Human Rights ) and temporary committees to deal with a specific topic ( e.g. on extraordinary rendition ) . The chairs of the Committees co @-@ ordinate their work through the " Conference of Committee Chairmen " . When co @-@ decision was introduced it increased the Parliament 's powers in a number of areas , but most notably those covered by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . Previously this committee was considered by MEPs as a " Cinderella committee " ; however , as it gained a new importance , it became more professional and rigorous , attracting increasing attention to its work . 
 The nature of the committees differ from their national counterparts as , although smaller in comparison to those of the United States Congress , the European Parliament 's committees are unusually large by European standards with between eight and twelve dedicated members of staff and three to four support staff . Considerable administration , archives and research resources are also at the disposal of the whole Parliament when needed . 
 Delegations of the Parliament are formed in a similar manner and are responsible for relations with Parliaments outside the EU . There are 34 delegations made up of around 15 MEPs , chairpersons of the delegations also cooperate in a conference like the committee chairs do . They include " <unk> delegations " ( maintain relations with Parliament outside the EU ) , " joint parliamentary committees " ( maintaining relations with parliaments of states which are candidates or associates of the EU ) , the delegation to the ACP EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the delegation to the Euro @-@ Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly . MEPs also participate in other international activities such as the Euro @-@ Latin American Parliamentary Assembly , the Transatlantic Legislators ' Dialogue and through election observation in third countries . 
 = = = Intergroups = = = 
 The Intergroups in the European Parliament are informal fora which gather MEPs from various political groups around any topic . They do not express the view of the European Parliament . They serve a double purpose : to address a topic which is transversal to several committees and in a less formal manner . Their daily secretariat can be run either through the office of MEPs or through interest groups , be them corporate lobbies or NGOs . The favored access to MEPs which the organization running the secretariat enjoys can be one explanation to the multiplication of Intergroups in the 1990s . They are now strictly regulated and financial support , direct or otherwise ( via Secretariat staff , for example ) must be officially specified in a declaration of financial interests . Also Intergroups are established or renewed at the beginning of each legislature through a specific process . Indeed , the proposal for the constitution or renewal of an Intergroup must be supported by at least 3 political groups whose support is limited to a specific number of proposals in proportion to their size ( for example , for the legislature 2014 @-@ 2019 , the EEP or S & D political groups could support 22 proposals whereas the Greens / EFA or the <unk> political groups only 7 ) . 
 = = = Translation and interpretation = = = 
 Speakers in the European Parliament are entitled to speak in any of the 24 official languages of the European Union , ranging from English and German to Maltese and Irish . Simultaneous interpreting is offered in all plenary sessions , and all final texts of legislation are translated . With twenty @-@ four languages , the European Parliament is the most multilingual parliament in the world and the biggest employer of interpreters in the world ( employing 350 full @-@ time and 400 free @-@ lancers when there is higher demand ) . Citizens may also address the Parliament in Basque , Catalan / Valencian and Galician . 
 Usually a language is translated from a foreign tongue into a translator 's native tongue . Due to the large number of languages , some being minor ones , since 1995 interpreting is sometimes done the opposite way , out of an interpreter 's native tongue ( the " <unk> " system ) . In addition , a speech in a minor language may be interpreted through a third language for lack of interpreters ( " relay " interpreting ) — for example , when interpreting out of Estonian into Maltese . Due to the complexity of the issues , interpretation is not word for word . Instead , interpreters have to convey the political meaning of a speech , regardless of their own views . This requires detailed understanding of the politics and terms of the Parliament , involving a great deal of preparation beforehand ( e.g. reading the documents in question ) . Difficulty can often arise when MEPs use profanities , jokes and word play or speak too fast . 
 While some see speaking their native language as an important part of their identity , and can speak more fluently in debates , interpretation and its cost has been criticised by some . A 2006 report by Alexander Stubb MEP highlighted that by only using English , French and German costs could be reduced from € 118 @,@ 000 per day ( for 21 languages then — Romanian , Bulgarian and Croatian having not yet been included ) to € 8 @,@ 900 per day . Many see the ideal single language as being English due to its widespread usage , although there has been a small @-@ scale campaign to make French the reference language for all legal texts , due to the claim that it is more clear and precise for legal purposes . 
 Because the proceedings are translated into all of the official EU languages , they have been used to make a multilingual corpus known as Europarl . It is widely used to train statistical machine translation systems . 
 = = Seat = = 
 The Parliament is based in three different cities with numerous buildings . A protocol attached to the Treaty of Amsterdam requires that 12 plenary sessions be held in Strasbourg ( none in August but two in September ) , which is the Parliament 's official seat , while extra part sessions as well as committee meetings are held in Brussels . Luxembourg hosts the Secretariat of the European Parliament . The European Parliament is the only assembly in the world with more than one meeting place and one of the few that does not have the power to decide its own location . 
 The Strasbourg seat is seen as a symbol of reconciliation between France and Germany , the Strasbourg region having been fought over by the two countries in the past . However , the cost and inconvenience of having two seats is questioned . While Strasbourg is the official seat , and sits alongside the Council of Europe , Brussels is home to nearly all other major EU institutions , with the majority of Parliament 's work being carried out there . Critics have described the two @-@ seat arrangement as a " travelling circus " , and there is a strong movement to establish Brussels as the sole seat . This is because the other political institutions ( the Commission , Council and European Council ) are located there , and hence Brussels is treated as the ' capital ' of the EU . This movement has received strong backing through numerous figures , including the Commission First @-@ Vice President who stated that " something that was once a very positive symbol of the EU reuniting France and Germany has now become a negative symbol — of wasting money , bureaucracy and the insanity of the Brussels institutions " . The Green Party has also noted the environmental cost in a study led by Jean Lambert MEP and Caroline Lucas MEP ; in addition to the extra 200 million euro spent on the extra seat , there are over 20 @,@ 268 tonnes of additional carbon dioxide , undermining any environmental stance of the institution and the Union . The campaign is further backed by a million @-@ strong online petition started by Cecilia <unk> MEP . In August 2014 , an assessment by the European Court of Auditors calculated that relocating the Strasbourg seat of the European Parliament to Brussels would save € 113 @.@ 8 million per year . In 2006 , there were allegations of irregularity in the charges made by the city of Strasbourg on buildings the Parliament rented , thus further harming the case for the Strasbourg seat . 
 Most MEPs prefer Brussels as a single base . A poll of MEPs found 89 % of the respondents wanting a single seat , and 81 % preferring Brussels . Another , more academic , survey found 68 % support . In July 2011 , an absolute majority of MEPs voted in favour of a single seat . In early 2011 , the Parliament voted to scrap one of the Strasbourg sessions by holding two within a single week . The mayor of Strasbourg officially reacted by stating " we will counter @-@ attack by <unk> the adversary 's strength to our own profit , as a judoka would do . " However , as Parliament 's seat is now fixed by the treaties , it can only be changed by the Council acting unanimously , meaning that France could veto any move . The former French President Nicolas Sarkozy has stated that the Strasbourg seat is " non @-@ negotiable " , and that France has no intention of surrendering the only EU Institution on French soil . Given France 's declared intention to veto any relocation to Brussels , some MEPs have advocated civil disobedience by refusing to take part in the monthly exodus to Strasbourg . 
 = The Texas Chain Saw Massacre = 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre is a 1974 American horror film , directed and produced by Tobe Hooper , who cowrote it with Kim Henkel . It stars Marilyn Burns , Paul A. <unk> , Edwin Neal , Jim Siedow and Gunnar Hansen , who respectively portray Sally Hardesty , Franklin Hardesty , the hitchhiker , the proprietor , and Leatherface , the main antagonist . The film follows a group of friends who fall victim to a family of cannibals while on their way to visit an old homestead . Although it was marketed as a true story to attract a wider audience and as a subtle commentary on the era 's political climate , its plot is entirely fictional ; however , the character of Leatherface and minor plot details were inspired by the crimes of real @-@ life murderer Ed Gein . 
 Hooper produced the film for less than $ 300 @,@ 000 and used a cast of relatively unknown actors drawn mainly from central Texas , where the film was shot . The limited budget forced Hooper to film for long hours seven days a week , so that he could finish as quickly as possible and reduce equipment rental costs . Due to the film 's violent content , Hooper struggled to find a distributor . Louis <unk> of Bryanston Pictures eventually purchased the distribution rights . Hooper limited the quantity of onscreen gore in hopes of securing a PG rating , but the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) rated it R. The film faced similar difficulties internationally . 
 Upon its October 1974 release , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was banned outright in several countries , and numerous theaters later stopped showing the film in response to complaints about its violence . While it initially drew a mixed reception from critics , it was enormously profitable , grossing over $ 30 million at the domestic box office . It has since received a positive reappraisal and gained a reputation as one of the best horror films in cinema history . It is credited with originating several elements common in the slasher genre , including the use of power tools as murder weapons and the characterization of the killer as a large , hulking , faceless figure . The popularity of the film led to a franchise that continued the story of Leatherface and his family through sequels , remakes , one prequel , comic books and video games . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Sally Hardesty ( Marilyn Burns ) and her paraplegic brother , Franklin ( Paul A. <unk> ) , travel with three friends , Jerry ( Allen Danziger ) , Kirk ( William Vail ) , and Pam ( Teri McMinn ) , to visit the grave of the <unk> ' grandfather to investigate reports of vandalism and grave robbing . Afterwards they decide to visit the old Hardesty family homestead . Along the way they pick up a hitchhiker ( Edwin Neal ) who talks about his family who worked at the old slaughterhouse . He borrows Franklin 's pocket @-@ knife and cuts himself , then takes a Polaroid picture of the others and demands money for it . When they refuse to pay , he burns the photo and slashes Franklin 's arm with a straight razor . The group forces him out of the van and drive on . They stop at a gas station to refuel , but the proprietor ( Jim Siedow ) tells them that the pumps are empty . 
 They continue toward the homestead , intending to return to the gas station once it has received a fuel delivery . When they arrive , Franklin tells Kirk and Pam about a local swimming @-@ hole and the couple head off to find it . They find the swimming @-@ hole dried up but hear a generator running in the distance . They stumble upon a nearby house . Kirk calls out , asking for gas , while Pam waits on a swing in the yard . After Kirk receives no answer , he enters through the unlocked door , whereupon Leatherface ( Gunnar Hansen ) appears and kills him with a hammer . Pam enters soon after and trips into a room filled with furniture made from human bones . She attempts to flee , but Leatherface catches her and impales her on a meathook , making her watch as he butchers Kirk with a chainsaw . Jerry heads out to look for Pam and Kirk at sunset . He finds the couple 's blanket outside the nearby house . He investigates and finds Pam , still alive , inside a freezer . Before he can react , Leatherface kills him and stuffs Pam back into the freezer . 
 With darkness falling , Sally and Franklin set out to find their friends . As they near the neighboring house and call out , Leatherface lunges from the darkness and kills Franklin with a chainsaw . Sally runs toward the house and finds the desiccated remains of an elderly couple in an upstairs room . She escapes from Leatherface by jumping through a second @-@ floor window and flees to the gas station . Leatherface disappears into the night . The proprietor calms her with offers of help , but then ties her up , gags her and forces her into his truck . He drives to the house , arriving at the same time as the hitchhiker , now revealed as Leatherface 's brother . When the pair bring Sally inside , the hitchhiker recognizes her and taunts her . 
 The men torment the bound and gagged Sally while Leatherface , now dressed as a woman , serves dinner . Leatherface and the hitchhiker bring Grandpa ( John Dugan ) , one of the desiccated bodies seen earlier , down from upstairs . He is revealed to be alive when he sucks blood from a cut in Sally 's finger . During the night they decide that Grandpa ( the best killer in the old slaughterhouse ) should kill Sally . He tries to hit her with a hammer , but is too weak . In the ensuing confusion , she breaks free , leaps through a window , and escapes to the road . Leatherface and the hitchhiker give chase , but the latter is run down and killed by a passing semi @-@ trailer truck . Armed with his chainsaw , Leatherface attacks the truck when the driver stops to help . The driver hits him in the face with a pipe wrench . Sally escapes in the back of a passing pickup truck as Leatherface dances maniacally in the road with his chainsaw . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The concept for The Texas Chain Saw Massacre arose in the early 1970s while Tobe Hooper was working as an assistant film director at the University of Texas at Austin and as a documentary cameraman . He had already developed a story involving the elements of isolation , the woods , and darkness . He credited the graphic coverage of violence by San Antonio news outlets as one inspiration for the film and based elements of the plot on serial killer Ed Gein in 1950s Wisconsin ; Gein inspired other horror films such as Psycho ( 1960 ) and The Silence of the Lambs ( 1991 ) . During development , Hooper used the working titles of <unk> and Leatherface . 
 Hooper has cited changes in the cultural and political landscape as central influences on the film . His intentional misinformation , that the " film you are about to see is true " , was a response to being " lied to by the government about things that were going on all over the world " , including Watergate , the 1973 oil crisis , and " the massacres and atrocities in the Vietnam War " . The " lack of sentimentality and the brutality of things " that Hooper noticed while watching the local news , whose graphic coverage was epitomized by " showing brains spilled all over the road " , led to his belief that " man was the real monster here , just wearing a different face , so I put a literal mask on the monster in my film " . The idea of using a chainsaw as the murder weapon came to Hooper while he was in the hardware section of a busy store , contemplating how to speed his way through the crowd . 
 Hooper and Kim Henkel cowrote the screenplay and formed Vortex , Inc. with Henkel as president and Hooper as vice president . They asked Bill Parsley , a friend of Hooper , to provide funding . Parsley formed a company named MAB , Inc. through which he invested $ 60 @,@ 000 in the production . In return , MAB owned 50 percent of the film and its profits . Production manager Ron Bozman told most of the cast and crew that he would have to defer part of their salaries until after it was sold to a distributor . Vortex made the idea more attractive by awarding them a share of its potential profits , ranging from 0 @.@ 25 to 6 percent , similar to mortgage points . The cast and crew were not informed that Vortex owned only 50 percent , which meant their points were worth half of the assumed value . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Many of the cast members at the time were relatively unknown actors — Texans who had played roles in commercials , television , and stage shows , as well as performers whom Hooper knew personally , such as Allen Danziger and Jim Siedow . Involvement in the film propelled some of them into the motion picture industry . The lead role of Sally was given to Marilyn Burns , who had appeared previously on stage and served on the film commission board at UT Austin while studying there . Teri McMinn was a student who worked with local theater companies , including the Dallas Theater Center . Henkel called McMinn to come in for a reading after he spotted her picture in the Austin American @-@ Statesman . For her last call @-@ back he requested that she wear short shorts , which proved to be the most comfortable of all the cast members ' costumes . 
 Icelandic @-@ American actor Gunnar Hansen was selected for the role of Leatherface . He regarded Leatherface as being mentally retarded and having never learned to speak properly . To research his character in preparation for his role , Hansen visited a special needs school and watched how the students moved and spoke . John Larroquette briefly served as narrator in the opening credits . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The primary filming location was an early 1900s farmhouse located on Quick Hill Road near Round Rock , Texas , where the La Frontera development is now located . The small budget and concerns over high @-@ cost equipment rentals meant the crew filmed seven days a week , up to 16 hours a day . The environment was humid and the cast and crew found conditions tough ; temperatures peaked at 110 ° F ( 43 ° C ) on July 26 . Hansen later recalled , " It was 95 , 100 degrees every day during filming . They wouldn 't wash my costume because they were worried that the laundry might lose it , or that it would change color . They didn 't have enough money for a second costume . So I wore that [ mask ] 12 to 16 hours a day , seven days a week , for a month . " 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was mainly shot using an Eclair NPR 16 mm camera with fine @-@ grain , low @-@ speed film that required four times more light than modern digital cameras . Most of the filming took place in the farmhouse , which was filled with furniture constructed from animal bones and a latex material used as upholstery to give the appearance of human skin . The house was not cooled , and there was little ventilation . The crew covered its walls with drops of animal blood obtained from a local slaughterhouse . Art director Robert Burns drove around the countryside and collected the remains of cattle and other animals in various stages of decomposition , with which he littered the floors of the house . 
 The special effects were simple and limited by the budget . The on @-@ screen blood was real in some cases , such as the scene in which Leatherface feeds " Grandpa " . The crew had difficulty getting the stage blood to come out of its tube , so instead Burns 's index finger was cut with a razor . Burns 's costume was so drenched with stage blood that it was " virtually solid " by the last day of shooting . The scene in which Leatherface decapitates Kirk with a chainsaw worried actor William Vail ( Kirk ) . After telling Vail to stay still lest he really be killed , Hansen brought the running chainsaw to within 3 inches ( 8 cm ) of Vail 's face . A real hammer was used for the climatic scene at the end ( although some takes also used a mock up ) although the actor playing Grandpa was aiming for the floor rather than his victims head . Still , the shoot was somewhat dangerous , with Hooper noting that at the wrap party all cast members had obtained some level of injury . Hooper stated that " everyone hated me by the end of the production " and that " it just took years for them to kind of cool off . " 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 The production exceeded its original $ 60 @,@ 000 budget during editing . Sources differ on the film 's final cost , offering figures between $ 93 @,@ 000 and $ 300 @,@ 000 . A film production group , Pie in the Sky , provided $ 23 @,@ 532 in exchange for 19 percent of Vortex . This left Henkel , Hooper and the rest of the cast and crew with a 40 @.@ 5 percent stake . Warren Skaaren , then head of the Texas Film Commission , helped secure the distribution deal with Bryanston Pictures . David Foster , producer of the 1982 horror film The Thing , arranged for a private screening for some of Bryanston Pictures ' West Coast executives , and received 1 @.@ 5 percent of Vortex 's profits and a deferred fee of $ 500 . 
 On August 28 , 1974 , Louis <unk> of Bryanston agreed to distribute the film worldwide , from which Bozman and Skaaren would receive $ 225 @,@ 000 and 35 percent of the profits . Years later Bozman stated , " We made a deal with the devil , [ sigh ] , and I guess that , in a way , we got what we deserved . " They signed the contract with Bryanston and after the investors recouped their money ( with interest ) — and after Skaaren , the lawyers , and the accountants were paid — only $ 8 @,@ 100 was left to be divided among the 20 cast and crew members . Eventually the producers sued Bryanston for failing to pay them their full percentage of the box office profits . A court judgment instructed Bryanston to pay the filmmakers $ 500 @,@ 000 , but by then the company had declared bankruptcy . In 1983 New Line Cinema acquired the distribution rights from Bryanston and gave the producers a larger share of the profits . 
 = = Release = = 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre premiered on October 1 , 1974 , in Austin , Texas , almost a year after filming concluded . It screened nationally in the United States as a Saturday afternoon matinée and its false marketing as a " true story " helped it attract a broad audience . For eight years after 1976 , it was annually reissued to first @-@ run theaters , promoted by full @-@ page ads . The film eventually grossed more than $ 30 million in the United States and Canada ( $ 14 @.@ 4 million in rentals ) , making it the 12th highest grossing film initially released in 1974 , despite its minuscule budget . Among independent films , it was overtaken in 1978 by John Carpenter 's Halloween , which grossed $ 47 million . 
 Hooper reportedly hoped that the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) would give the complete , uncut release print a " PG " rating due to its minimal amount of visible gore . Instead , it was originally rated " X " . After several minutes were cut , it was resubmitted to the MPAA and received an " R " rating . A distributor apparently restored the offending material , and at least one theater presented the full version under an " R " . In San Francisco , cinema @-@ goers walked out of theaters in disgust and , in February 1976 , two theaters in Ottawa , Canada were advised by local police to withdraw the film lest they face morality charges . 
 After its initial British release , including a one @-@ year theatrical run in London , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was initially banned on the advice of British Board of Film Classification ( BBFC ) Secretary Stephen Murphy , and subsequently by his successor , James Ferman . While the British ban was in force the word " chainsaw " itself was barred from movie titles , forcing imitators to rename their films . In 1998 , despite the BBFC ban , Camden London Borough Council granted the film a license . The following year the BBFC passed The Texas Chain Saw Massacre for release with an 18 certificate ( indicating that it should not be seen or purchased by a person under 18 ) , and it was broadcast a year later on Channel 4 . 
 The Australian Classification Board refused to classify the 83 @-@ minute version of the film in June 1975 ; the board similarly refused classification of a 77 @-@ minute print in December that year . In 1981 , an 83 @-@ minute version submitted by Greater Union Organization Film Distributors was again refused registration . It was later submitted by Filmways Australia and approved for an " R " rating in 1984 . It was banned for periods in many other countries , including Brazil , Chile , Finland , France , Iceland , Ireland , Norway , Singapore , Sweden and West Germany . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre received a mixed reaction upon its initial release . Linda Gross of the Los Angeles Times called it " despicable " and described Henkel and Hooper as more concerned with creating a realistic atmosphere than with its " plastic script " . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said it was " as violent and gruesome and blood @-@ soaked as the title promises " , yet praised its acting and technical execution . Patrick Taggart of the Austin American @-@ Statesman hailed it as the most important horror film since George A. Romero 's Night of the Living Dead ( 1968 ) . Variety found the picture to be well @-@ made , despite what it called the " heavy doses of gore " . John McCarty of Cinefantastique stated that the house featured in the film made the Bates motel " look positively pleasant by comparison " . Revisiting the film in his 1976 article " Fashions in Pornography " for Harper 's Magazine , Stephen Koch found its sadistic violence to be extreme and unimaginative . 
 Critics later frequently praised both the film 's aesthetic quality and its power . Observing that it managed to be " horrifying without being a bloodbath ( you 'll see more gore in a Steven Seagal film ) " , Bruce Westbrook of the Houston Chronicle called it " a backwoods masterpiece of fear and loathing " . TV Guide thought it was " intelligent " in its " bloodless depiction of violence " , while Anton <unk> felt the fact that it was banned in the United Kingdom was a tribute to its artistry . He pointed out how the quiet sense of foreboding at the beginning of the film grows , until the viewer experiences " a punishing assault on the senses " . In Hick Flicks : The Rise and Fall of Redneck Cinema , Scott Von <unk> commended its effective use of daylight shots , unusual among horror films , such as the sight of a corpse draped over a tombstone in the opening sequence . Mike Emery of The Austin Chronicle praised the film 's " subtle touches " — such as radio broadcasts heard in the background describing grisly murders around Texas — and said that what made it so dreadful was that it never strayed too far from potential reality . 
 It has often been described as one of the scariest films of all time . Rex Reed called it the most terrifying film he had ever seen . Empire described it as " the most purely horrifying horror movie ever made " and called it " never less than totally committed to scaring you witless " . Reminiscing about his first viewing of the film , horror director Wes Craven recalled wondering " what kind of <unk> <unk> " could have created such a thing . It is a work of " cataclysmic terror " , in the words of horror novelist Stephen King , who declared , " I would happily testify to its redeeming social merit in any court in the country . " Critic Robin Wood found it one of the few horror films to possess " the authentic quality of nightmare " . Based on 56 reviews published since 2000 , the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes reports that 88 % of critics gave it a positive review , with an average score of 7 @.@ 9 out of 10 . 
 = = = Cultural impact = = = 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre is considered one of the greatest — and most controversial — of horror films , and a major influence on the genre . In 1999 Richard Zoglin of Time commented that it had " set a new standard for slasher films " . The Times listed it as one of the 50 most controversial films of all time . Tony Magistrale believes the film paved the way for horror to be used as a vehicle for social commentary . Describing it as " cheap , grubby and out of control " , Mark Olsen of the Los Angeles Times declared that it " both defines and entirely supersedes the very notion of the exploitation picture " . In his book Dark Romance : Sexuality in the Horror Film , David Hogan called it " the most affecting gore thriller of all and , in a broader view , among the most effective horror films ever made ... the driving force of The Texas Chainsaw Massacre is something far more horrible than aberrant sexuality : total insanity . " According to Bill Nichols , it " achieves the force of authentic art , profoundly disturbing , intensely personal , yet at the same time far more than personal " . Leonard Wolf praised the film as " ... an exquisite work of art " and compared it to a Greek tragedy , noting the lack of onscreen violence . 
 Leatherface has gained a reputation as a significant character in the horror genre , responsible for establishing the use of conventional tools as murder weapons and the image of a large , silent killer devoid of personality . Christopher Null of Filmcritic.com said , " In our collective consciousness , Leatherface and his chainsaw have become as iconic as Freddy and his razors or Jason and his hockey mask . " Don Sumner called The Texas Chain Saw Massacre a classic that not only introduced a new villain to the horror pantheon but also influenced an entire generation of filmmakers . According to Rebecca Ascher @-@ Walsh of Entertainment Weekly , it laid the foundations for future horror franchises such as Halloween , The Evil Dead , and The Blair Witch Project . Ridley Scott cited it as an inspiration for his 1979 film Alien . French director Alexandre Aja credited it as an early influence on his career . Horror filmmaker and heavy metal musician Rob Zombie sees it as a major influence on his art , most notably his 2003 film House of 1000 Corpses . 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was selected for the 1975 Cannes Film Festival Directors ' Fortnight and London Film Festival . In 1976 , it won the Special Jury Prize at the <unk> Fantastic Film Festival in France . Entertainment Weekly ranked the film sixth on its 2003 list of " The Top 50 Cult Films " . In a 2005 Total Film poll , it was selected as the greatest horror film of all time . It was named among Time magazine 's top 25 horror films in 2007 . In 2008 the film ranked number 199 on Empire magazine 's list of " The 500 Greatest Movies of All Time " . Empire also ranked it 46th in its list of the 50 greatest independent films . In a 2010 Total Film poll , it was again selected as the greatest horror film ; the judging panel included veteran horror directors such as John Carpenter , Wes Craven , and George A. Romero . In 2010 , as well , The Guardian ranked it number 14 on its list of the top 25 horror films . The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was inducted into the Horror Hall of Fame in 1990 , with director Hooper accepting the award , and it is part of the permanent collection of New York City 's Museum of Modern Art . In 2012 , the film was named by critics in the British Film Institute 's Sight & Sound magazine as one of the 250 greatest films . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 The underlying themes of the film have been the subject of extensive critical discussion ; critics and scholars have interpreted it as a paradigmatic exploitation film in which female protagonists are subjected to brutal , sadistic violence . Stephen Prince comments that the horror is " born of the torment of the young woman subjected to imprisonment and abuse amid decaying arms ... and mobiles made of human bones and teeth . " As with many horror films , it focuses on the " final girl " trope — the heroine and inevitable lone survivor who somehow escapes the horror that befalls the other characters : Sally Hardesty is wounded and tortured , yet manages to survive with the help of a male truck driver . Critics argue that even in exploitation films in which the ratio of male and female deaths is roughly equal , the images that linger will be of the violence committed against the female characters . The specific case of The Texas Chain Saw Massacre provides support for this argument : three men are killed in quick fashion , but one woman is brutally slaughtered — hung on a meathook — and the surviving woman endures physical and mental torture . In 1977 , critic Mary Mackey described the meathook scene as probably the most brutal onscreen female death in any commercially distributed film . She placed it in a lineage of violent films that depict women as weak and incapable of protecting themselves . 
 In one study , a group of men were shown five films depicting differing levels of violence against women . On first viewing The Texas Chain Saw Massacre they experienced symptoms of depression and anxiety ; however , upon subsequent viewing they found the violence against women less offensive and more enjoyable . Another study , investigating gender @-@ specific perceptions of slasher films , involved 30 male and 30 female university students . One male participant described the screaming , especially Sally 's , as the " most freaky thing " in the film . 
 According to Jesse Stommel of Bright Lights Film Journal , the lack of explicit violence in the film forces viewers to question their own fascination with violence that they play a central role in imagining . Nonetheless — citing its feverish camera moves , repeated bursts of light , and auditory pandemonium — Stommel asserts that it involves the audience primarily on a sensory rather than an intellectual level . 
 Critic Christopher <unk> argues that since Alfred Hitchcock 's Psycho ( 1960 ) and The Birds ( 1963 ) , the American horror film has been defined by the questions it poses " about the fundamental validity of the American civilizing process " , concerns amplified during the 1970s by the " <unk> of authority in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate " . " If Psycho began an exploration of a new sense of absurdity in contemporary life , of the collapse of causality and the diseased underbelly of American Gothic " , he writes , The Texas Chain Saw Massacre " carries this exploration to a logical conclusion , addressing many of the issues of Hitchcock 's film while refusing comforting closure " . 
 Robin Wood characterizes Leatherface and his family as victims of industrial capitalism , their jobs as slaughterhouse workers having been rendered obsolete by technological advances . He states that the picture " brings to focus a spirit of negativity ... that seems to lie not far below the surface of the modern collective consciousness " . Naomi Merritt explores the film 's representation of " cannibalistic capitalism " in relation to Georges Bataille 's theory of taboo and transgression . She elaborates on Wood 's analysis , stating that the Sawyer family 's values " reflect , or correspond to , established and interdependent American institutions ... but their embodiment of these social units is perverted and transgressive . " 
 In Kim Newman 's view , Hooper 's presentation of the Sawyer family during the dinner scene parodies a typical American sitcom family : the gas station owner is the bread @-@ winning father figure ; the killer Leatherface is depicted as a bourgeois housewife ; the hitchhiker acts as the rebellious teenager . Isabel Cristina Pinedo , author of Recreational Terror : Women and the Pleasures of Horror Film Viewing , states , " The horror genre must keep terror and comedy in tension if it is to successfully tread the thin line that separates it from terrorism and parody ... this delicate balance is struck in The Texas Chainsaw Massacre in which the decaying corpse of Grandpa not only incorporates horrific and humorous effects , but actually uses one to exacerbate the other . " 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre has also been described as " the ultimate pro @-@ vegetarian film " due to its animal rights themes . In a video essay , film critic Rob Ager describes the irony in humans being slaughtered for meat , putting humans in the position of being slaughtered like farm animals . Director Tobe Hooper gave up meat while making the film , and said " In a way I thought the heart of the film was about meat ; it ’ s about the chain of life and killing sentient beings . " 
 = = Post @-@ release = = 
 The Texas Chain Saw Massacre has appeared on various home video formats . It was first released on videotape and CED in the 1980s by Wizard Video and Vestron Video . Just as the British Board of Film Classification had already banned the theatrical version , the BBFC banned the home version in 1984 , amid a moral panic surrounding " video nasties " . After the retirement of BBFC chief Ferman in 1999 , the board passed the film uncut on video ( as well as film ) with an 18 certificate , almost 25 years after the original release . The Texas Chain Saw Massacre was released on DVD in October 1998 in the United States , and in May 2000 in the United Kingdom . An initial Australian DVD release in 2001 was followed by a revised version six years later . Dark Sky Films released a two @-@ disc " ultimate " edition , featuring several interviews , restored audio and picture quality , and other extras including deleted scenes . Dark Sky Films released a Blu @-@ ray version on September 30 , 2008 . In March 2014 , Dark Sky announced the film had received a 4k restoration , and will be re @-@ released in June 2014 to celebrate the film 's 40th anniversary . The 4k restoration was screened in the Directors ' Fortnight section of the 2014 Cannes Film Festival . A Blu @-@ ray Disc of the 4k restoration was released on September 16 , 2014 . The collector 's edition was nominated for Best DVD / BD Special Edition Release at the Saturn Awards . 
 Shortly after The Texas Chain Saw Massacre established itself as a success on home video in 1982 , Wizard Video released a mass @-@ market video game adaptation for the Atari 2600 . In the game , the player assumes the role of Leatherface and attempts to murder trespassers while avoiding obstacles such as fences and cow skulls . As one of the first horror @-@ themed video games , The Texas Chainsaw Massacre caused controversy when it was first released due to its violent nature ; it sold poorly as a result , because many game stores refused to stock it . 
 The film was followed by two sequels , a remake , a film that straddles both those categories , and a prequel . The first sequel , The Texas Chainsaw Massacre 2 ( 1986 ) , was considerably more graphic and violent than the original and was banned in Australia for 20 years before it was released on DVD in a revised special edition in October 2006 . Leatherface : The Texas Chainsaw Massacre III ( 1990 ) was the second sequel to appear , though Hooper did not return to direct due to scheduling conflicts with another film , Spontaneous Combustion . Texas Chainsaw Massacre : The Next Generation , starring Renée Zellweger and Matthew McConaughey , was released in 1995 . While briefly acknowledging the events of the preceding two sequels , its plot makes it a virtual remake of the 1974 original . A straight remake , The Texas Chainsaw Massacre , was released by Platinum Dunes and New Line Cinema in 2003 . It was followed by a prequel , The Texas Chainsaw Massacre : The Beginning , in 2006 . A seventh film , Texas Chainsaw 3D , was released on January 4 , 2013 . It is a direct sequel to the original 1974 film , with no relation to the 2003 or 2006 films . 
 = = Archive = = 
 The Academy Film Archive houses the Texas Chain Saw Massacre Collection , which contains over 50 items in a collection representing many original elements of the film . 
 = The One with the Prom Video = 
 " The One with the Prom Video " is the fourteenth episode of the second season , and the 38th episode overall , of the American television situation comedy Friends , which first aired on NBC on February 1 , 1996 . The episode focuses on the main characters watching Monica ( Courteney Cox ) and Rachel ( Jennifer Aniston ) getting ready for their high school prom in the titular video . A subplot sees a now @-@ wealthy Joey ( Matt LeBlanc ) buying roommate Chandler ( Matthew Perry ) an unusual gift . 
 The episode was directed by James Burrows , written by Alexa Junge and guest @-@ stars Elliott Gould and Christina Pickles as Jack and Judy Geller , Michael Ray Bower as Monica 's date and Patrick Kerr as the restaurant manager . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Joey , now earning money , gives Chandler a gaudy gold bracelet as thanks for paying for head shots and food . Chandler mocks it when it costs him a date , upsetting Joey when he overhears . Chandler promises to never take it off again but immediately realizes he can 't find it . He buys a replacement , but the original is found shortly afterwards . He gives one to Joey , repairing their friendship . Ross ( David Schwimmer ) continues to seek forgiveness from Rachel after insulting her in a previous episode , but she tells him that they as a couple will never happen . Monica 's parents bring boxes of her possessions to her apartment , and she finds a video of her and Rachel getting ready for their senior prom . 
 The friends decide to watch the video , although Ross objects to everyone seeing the tape . On the video , Rachel 's date , Chip Matthews , has not arrived , and Monica refuses to go to the prom without her . Mrs. Geller convinces Ross to wear his father 's tuxedo and take Rachel to the prom himself . Ross reluctantly agrees , but by the time he is dressed and ready to go , Chip has arrived and the girls leave . The video ends with Ross looking disappointed and dejected . Rachel , touched by Ross 's gesture , gets up and kisses Ross , forgiving him for what happened between them . Monica later watches the video alone which features her and her father , Jack , dancing . The video then shows Monica and Ross 's parents in bed , which disgusts her . 
 = = Production = = 
 The producers had kept Ross and Rachel from being together throughout the first season , eventually bringing them together in the second season episode " The One Where Ross Finds Out " , only to split them up in the following episode . Writer Alexa Junge incorporated many of her own experiences into the script , in particular Phoebe 's line about Ross and Rachel being " lobsters " , something Junge 's husband once said . Aniston wore a false nose for the scenes in the video while Cox wore a " fat suit " . While a previous episode had already established Monica as being overweight as a child , this was the first on @-@ screen appearance of " Fat Monica " ( the fat suit made frequent return appearances ) . Rachel 's large nose was added because Junge believed that the characters " were so good @-@ looking , you wanted to feel they had some realness in their past " . 
 At first , Schwimmer did not want to wear the afro wig and mustache because he thought he would look like Gabe Kaplan in Welcome Back , Kotter ( a similarity referenced in the episode ) . He relented because it enabled him to " tap into a part of himself that was very vulnerable and shy " and incorporate it into his performance . An early script draft featured a scene in the prom video in which an episode of All My Children is on in the background . The scene was intended to feature the character " Bryce " , played by Gunther ( as revealed in " The One Where Eddie Won 't Go " ) . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1997 , TV Guide ranked this episode # 100 on their list of the " 100 Greatest Episodes of All Time " . 
 Entertainment Weekly rates the episode " A " , welcoming the return of Burrows as director and calling the prom video " witty character development disguised as a standard flashback . " The authors of Friends like Us : The Unofficial Guide to Friends write that it is " a watershed in the history of the show " and " It 's the sign of a good show that they can switch so effortlessly from comedy to pathos to romance in one short scene . " Robert Bianco wrote in USA Today in 2004 , " If any one outing can take credit for moving Friends from good to great , it 's Prom Video " and describes the resolution as an " ingenious , unexpected twist . " 
 The episode is popular among fans of the series . It appeared on one of the first region 1 " best of " DVD releases and is one of the two episodes to feature an audio commentary on the region 1 DVD release of the complete second season . In a poll conducted shortly before the series finale , " The One with the Prom Video " was voted the best episode of Friends , with 1 @.@ 6 million people polling on the Internet . The episode is the favorite of Schwimmer , who liked the comedic and emotional origins of the Ross / Rachel relationship , as well as the exchange between Monica and Chandler as she defends her weight on the video . 
 In 2014 , Gawker published a list of every episode of Friends ranked from # 236 through # 1 . " The One With The Prom Video " was ranked as the # 1 best episode on the list . 
 = Chiprovtsi = 
 Chiprovtsi ( Bulgarian : <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ͡ si ] ) is a small town in northwestern Bulgaria , administratively part of Montana Province . It lies on the shores of the river Ogosta in the western Balkan Mountains , very close to the Bulgarian @-@ Serbian border . A town of about 2 @,@ 000 inhabitants , Chiprovtsi is the administrative centre of Chiprovtsi Municipality that also covers nine nearby villages . 
 Chiprovtsi is thought to have been founded in the Late Middle Ages as a mining and <unk> centre . Attracting German ore miners who introduced Roman Catholicism to the area , the town grew in importance as a cultural , economic and religious centre of the Bulgarian Catholics and the entire Bulgarian northwest during the first few centuries of Ottoman rule . The apogee of this upsurge was the anti @-@ Ottoman Chiprovtsi Uprising of 1688 . After the suppression of the uprising , some of the town 's population fled to Habsburg @-@ ruled lands ; those unable to flee were killed or enslaved by the Ottomans . 
 Deserted for about 30 years , the town was repopulated by Eastern Orthodox Bulgarians , beginning in the 1720s . It was following this new settlement that Chiprovtsi became a major centre of the Bulgarian carpet industry . Other traditional industries have been stock breeding , agriculture and fur trade . Today , Chiprovtsi municipality experiences a declining population and above @-@ average unemployment . However , large @-@ scale investment in the extraction of the local fluorite deposits and the development of alternative tourism help to sustain the economy . 
 = = Name = = 
 According to linguist Ivan <unk> , Chiprovtsi 's original name was <unk> ( <unk> ) . The current form gradually emerged through a sound shift and a syncope . The name is of Slavic origin , but may be linked to the archaic Greek loanword <unk> ( <unk> , " garden " ) , a word also borrowed by Serbian . Some researchers derive the toponym from the personal name <unk> or <unk> , implying beauty and <unk> . Another popular hypothesis , although rejected by <unk> , links the name to Latin cuprum ( " copper " ) due to the numerous copper deposits and mines in the region in Ancient Roman times . 
 The name was first mentioned in a western source , namely a Latin document of 1565 , as <unk> . Similar forms such as <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> have been used throughout the 16th – 17th centuries . The attested Serbo @-@ Croatian pronunciation of the suffix / at ͡ s / as opposed to standard Bulgarian / <unk> ͡ s / is explained with the influence of the so @-@ called " Illyrian language " , a Dalmatian form of Croatian language used by the Franciscan clerics in the town in the 17th century . 
 The town has been conventionally divided into several neighbourhoods ( ma ( h ) ali ) ; most are named according to the profession and social status of their residents . In 1888 , D. <unk> recorded the existence of the <unk> or <unk> ( " <unk> ' " ) , <unk> ( " <unk> ' " ) , <unk> ( " Merchants ' " ) , <unk> ( " <unk> ' " ) , <unk> and Trap neighbourhoods . The existence of a <unk> ( Regio <unk> , " Saxon " ) neighbourhood was also attested until the 17th century . Another actively used pair of toponyms is <unk> <unk> ( " Lower Part " ) and <unk> <unk> ( " Upper Part " ) , referring to the town neighbourhoods closer to the river or the mountain respectively . 
 Chiprovtsi Point and Chiprovtsi Islets in Rugged Island in the South Shetland Islands , Antarctica are named after Chiprovtsi . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Chiprovtsi is situated in a small valley at the foot of the Chiprovtsi Mountain , a high northern branch of the western Balkan Mountains . The Chiprovtsi Mountain forms the border between Bulgaria and the neighbouring Serbia . It is 35 kilometres ( 22 mi ) long and features several peaks around 2 @,@ 000 metres ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) , including <unk> ( 2 @,@ 168 m or 7 @,@ 113 ft ) , <unk> Chuka ( 2 @,@ 011 m or 6 @,@ 598 ft ) , <unk> Chuka ( 1 @,@ 967 m or 6 @,@ 453 ft ) , <unk> ( 1 @,@ 964 m or 6 @,@ 444 ft ) , Tri <unk> ( 1 @,@ 938 m or 6 @,@ 358 ft ) and <unk> Glava ( 1 @,@ 936 m or 6 @,@ 352 ft ) . The Ogosta River , a right tributary of the Danube , originates from the Chiprovtsi Mountain and flows northeast through the Danubian Plain to join the Danube in Vratsa Province . Just northeast of the town is another mountain , <unk> Planina , a branch of the Fore @-@ Balkan Mountains . The region is rich in metal and mineral deposits . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 On 31 July 2005 , Chiprovtsi 's population was 2 @,@ 375 people — 1 @,@ 167 men and 1 @,@ 208 women . By June 2008 , the town 's population had declined to 2 @,@ 122 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Antiquity and Middle Ages = = = 
 It is known that the area around Chiprovtsi has been inhabited since the time of the Thracians and later the Roman Empire , when the local metal deposits were exploited . According to historian V. <unk> , the valley of the Ogosta was inhabited by Thracians since the early 1st millennium BC . According to ancient accounts , the area was populated by the Thracian tribe of the <unk> or a related group of Thracians . The Romans conquered what is today the Bulgarian northwest after 29 BC and consolidated their authority in the region under Emperor Trajan ( 98 – 117 ) . There are remains of Roman fortifications around Chiprovtsi , such as the Latin Fortress ruins in the Kula area , where coins dating to the reigns of Marcus Aurelius ( 161 – 180 ) and Commodus ( 180 – 192 ) have been unearthed , and the Big Ruins south of the town . The gold , silver , lead , copper and iron mines brought sizable revenue to the Romans , who took good care to protect these from barbarian attacks . 
 With the arrival of the Seven Slavic tribes and the Bulgars in the 6th – 7th century and the establishment of the First Bulgarian Empire in 680 in the former lands of the Eastern Roman Empire ( Byzantine Empire ) , the entire region was soon incorporated into the Bulgarian realm . After a period of renewed Byzantine rule in 1018 – 1185 , it was part of the Second Bulgarian Empire until its conquest by the Ottomans in the late 14th or early 15th century . 
 The presence of the German ore miners , known locally as <unk> ( <unk> , Saxons ) , cannot be accurately dated . Some researchers estimate their arrival in Chiprovtsi to be in the mid @-@ 14th century , the time of the last Bulgarian emperors , while others claim they reached the town during the early Ottoman rule of Bulgaria . Their exact number and place of origin are also vague , although the German miners were widely recruited as specialists in medieval Wallachia , Transylvania and Serbia . In Chiprovtsi , they are thought to have arrived as a single group of about 50 – 60 people with their families . They were probably recruited through special contracts and likely received some privileges compared to the native Bulgarian population . In Chiprovtsi 's mines , they served as technicians and overseers , contributing to the technological progress of mining in the region . They were , however , gradually assimilated by the local Bulgarians by the mid @-@ 15th century , as indicated by German names with Slavic suffixes in the population registers . The Germans left behind the name of one of the neighbourhoods , still known as the " Saxon " neighbourhood in the 17th century , and Roman Catholicism as the dominant religion in the town . 
 In the second half of the 14th century , a certain number of Bosnian Croats and Ragusan merchants arrived in Chiprovtsi and its surroundings , accompanied by some Franciscan clerics from Catholic Franciscan province of Silver Bosnia . According to the research of Croatian historian <unk> Belaj , the Catholic Franciscans had arrived from medieval Bosnia in western Bulgaria at the time of Bosnian vicar <unk> <unk> ( " Bartholomew of <unk> " ) , who himself originated from Italy , in 1366 . Among the <unk> settlers there were some noblemen as well . According to Belaj , these included members of the Parchevich family , the ancestral house of the <unk> family . 
 = = = Early Ottoman rule = = = 
 As the Ottomans subjugated the Balkans in the 14th – 15th centuries , they valued the Chiprovtsi mines for their military and civil needs and sought to renew the ore extraction that had been interrupted by warfare . Renewed exploitation of the local deposits is thought to have commenced by the late 15th century ; a note of 1479 mentions that the mines " in Bosnia , Herzegovina and other places " had been rented . 
 The town of Chiprovtsi and several of the surrounding villages were administratively organized as a has , or a private possession of the sultan 's royal family and later of the sultan 's mother . The special status of the area meant that the local Christians would not be subject to the usual discriminatory laws , but would have to pay an annual tribute of silver to the sultan . Later on , the estate was organized as a waqf , a land devoted for Muslim religious or charitable purposes . Chiprovtsi and the region were inhabited exclusively by Christians and they had the privilege to perform their rituals in public without discrimination . The only Turkish person in the town was the sultan 's representative and no Turks were allowed to settle there , as the local Bulgarians enjoyed self @-@ government to a certain degree and were administered by an elected council of eminent Bulgarian residents ( <unk> ) . A fragment of the area 's pre @-@ Ottoman Bulgarian administrative division may have also been preserved , as it is referred to under the Slavic name voivodeship in some documents . 
 By the 1520s , Chiprovtsi was still a minor centre of mining activity compared to other places in the empire . In that period , it brought a revenue of 47 @,@ 553 akçe , as compared to Kratovo 's 100 @,@ 000 and Srebrenica 's 477 @,@ 000 . The Catholic miners are known to have arrived by that time , as the Catholic Church of Saint Mary had been built around 1487 , but it was not until the years after the 1520s that Chiprovtsi attracted more colonists and turned into one of the Ottoman Empire 's leading mining centres . By 1528 , Chiprovtsi had a mint and was manufacturing silver coins . In 1585 , the miners were forced to work night and day and had to pay increased taxes , leading to protests and the danger that they may migrate . By the time , Chiprovtsi was already providing a revenue of 1 @,@ 400 @,@ 000 akçe , making it one of the empire 's prime mining and metalworking regions . 
 In the mid @-@ 16th century , Chiprovtsi began to attract the attention of Catholic officials from Rome . In 1565 , the archbishop of Antivari ( today Bar , Montenegro ) Ambrosius arrived in the town as an apostolic visitor . In 1592 – 1595 , the Bosnian Croat cleric Peter Solinat and a group of Franciscans established a Catholic mission in the town . In 1601 , Solinat was appointed bishop of Sofia with his seat in Chiprovtsi by Pope Clement VIII . He chose to reside in Chiprovtsi because Sofia 's Catholic population was limited to a handful of Ragusan merchant families . 
 = = = Cultural heyday = = = 
 Chiprovtsi 's development reached its apogee in the 17th century , when it became a bustling cultural , religious and merchant centre of that part of the Balkans . Named the " flower of Bulgaria " in that period , some have deemed the town 's prosperity the Balkans ' only participation in the Renaissance , along with that of Dalmatia . Many members of the local élite were educated in Rome , particularly at the Collegio <unk> and the Sapienza University . Gradually , the foreign Franciscans were replaced by locals and in the 1620s the Bulgarian Catholics formed a separate autonomous entity directly subordinate to the Pope , the Bulgarian Custody . Solinat was succeeded by a Bulgarian bishop , <unk> <unk> of Chiprovtsi , who was in turn followed by another local , Petar Bogdan <unk> , who travelled to Wallachia , Warsaw , Vienna , Rome and Ancona looking for funds and support for the community . In the 1640s , the Bulgarian Custody gave way to the Diocese of Marcianopolis presided by Petar Parchevich and the Diocese of <unk> headed by Filip <unk> and represented in Chiprovtsi by <unk> <unk> . The town and the surrounding areas were not entirely Catholic : a significant part of the population was Orthodox ; the Orthodox Chiprovtsi Monastery still exists today . 
 The evolution of Chiprovtsi from a mining town to a trade hub owes much to the settlement of merchants from the Republic of Ragusa ( today Dubrovnik , Croatia ) and the quality of the local metalworking , as well as the lack of permanent Ottoman presence and the privileges enjoyed by the population . By the mid @-@ 17th century , mining was in decline , as the silver deposits had been all but exhausted ( in 1666 there remained only 16 iron <unk> ) , forcing the population to seek a more profitable occupation . Since 1659 , the Ragusan merchants from <unk> altered their traditional route to Dubrovnik through Sofia in order to visit Chiprovtsi . The local residents produced and traded with leather , carpets , fabrics , clothes , remarkable gold and silver jewellery , metal tools , cattle , etc . Initially , the Chiprovtsi merchants would only visit Vidin , Pirot , Sofia and Vratsa . Later , however , they appeared at the markets in Istanbul , Thessaloniki , Bucharest , Odessa , Braşov , Sibiu , Belgrade , Buda and Pest , with a particularly strong presence in Wallachia and Transylvania , where they established permanent agencies and sizable companies in Târgovişte , Câmpulung and <unk> during the rule of Matei Basarab ( 1632 – 1654 ) . The international trade broadened the outlook of the locals and introduced the ideas of the age and the European culture of the time to the region . 
 A Catholic monastery was built during the time of Peter Solinat and developed as an educational centre through its school ; it was referred to as one of the most prestigious schools in the Bulgarian lands in that period . The school was partially foreign @-@ funded and provided education in grammar , arithmetic , logic and philosophy to 75 – 80 students . The teachers were often Bulgarian graduates of the Collegio <unk> in Rome and the languages of education were Latin , Bulgarian and " Illyrian " , a Croatian form written usually in the Latin alphabet but sometimes in Cyrillic . The school also had a library , one of the first in Bulgaria . Since the 1630s , the eminent writers and translators from Chiprovtsi , most notably Petar Bogdan <unk> and Petar Parchevich , formed the so @-@ called " Chiprovtsi Literary School " , issuing books about the history of Bulgaria , as well as on religious topics . 
 = = = Chiprovtsi Uprising = = = 
 As prosperous as the region was , it was not unharmed by the constant Ottoman – Habsburg wars and was often the target of Turkish , Tatar and Hungarian rebel raids . By the 1630s , the idea of an organized anti @-@ Ottoman revolt had reached the town of Chiprovtsi . In his 1650 account to the senate of the Republic of Venice Petar Parchevich described the long preparations for an armed struggle and the support @-@ seeking visits of his fellow townsmen to the kings of Poland and Austria . Since then , the inhabitants of Chiprovtsi waited for the suitable moment when they would be able to instigate an effective uprising and continued to co @-@ operate with the leaders of the European realms . 
 On 12 September 1683 , the Ottomans were routed by the forces of Europe at the Battle of Vienna . In early 1684 , Austria , Poland and Venice concluded an anti @-@ Ottoman pact ; they were joined by Russia in 1686 to form the Holy League . It was clear at that time that the decisive moment was near . The leaders of Chiprovtsi assessed that after the imminent capture of Belgrade by the League in 1688 their European allies would reach Sofia and end the Ottoman rule of Bulgaria . Thus , they revolted in the spring of 1688 . The reach of the uprising cannot be exactly determined , but scholars such as S. <unk> believe it included Chiprovtsi and the <unk> <unk> , <unk> and <unk> and thousands of Bulgarians from the entire Bulgarian northwest . Although the leaders were mostly Catholics , the bulk of the insurgents were Orthodox . It is known that the rebellion was led by over 200 voivodes of separate detachments . The insurgents were aided by six regiments of regular Habsburg army and artillery under General <unk> and managed to briefly capture the town of <unk> ( modern Montana ) , but were ultimately crushed by the Ottomans and their Hungarian ally Imre <unk> . On 18 – 19 October , the Ottomans stormed Chiprovtsi and retook it from the rebels , capturing over 2 @,@ 000 people . About 3 @,@ 000 natives of the area , guarded by the remaining insurrectionary units , managed to flee beyond the Danube . Most of those settled in the Habsburg @-@ ruled realms , founding a major Bulgarian colony in the Banat known as the " Banat Bulgarians " , as well as colonies in Deva and <unk> ( Vinţu de Jos ) in Transylvania and <unk> in modern Hungary . The town itself was plundered , burned down and deserted and its links to the West were largely severed . 
 = = = <unk> and modern times = = = 
 For several decades after the uprising , Chiprovtsi and the region remained desolate . In 1699 , the Ottomans attempted to settle 1 @,@ 238 anti @-@ Habsburg Hungarian rebels in those lands and provided them with 5 @-@ year tax exemptions , but this proved unsuccessful as in 1717 the same Hungarians were moved to the Rousse barracks and sent to fight at Niš . 
 Ultimately , the region was repopulated by Orthodox Bulgarians , beginning in the 1720s . In 1737 – 1738 , the sultan amnestied the rebels and permitted the return of the insurgents ' property in 1741 , though none of the former residents is known to have returned . In the 1720s – 1730s , Chiprovtsi had only 12 inhabited houses ; by the 1750s , those had reached 150 . The Orthodox Chiprovtsi Monastery had been reestablished in 1703 by a certain <unk> who took the ecclesiastical name of Zoticus . As the interrupted mining was apparently not continued after the uprising and the international trade links had been severed , the locals switched to cattle breeding , agriculture , fur trade and later carpet weaving as their main occupation . 
 The western traveller Ami Boué , who visited the town in 1836 – 1838 , reported that " mainly young girls , under shelters or in corridors , engage in carpet weaving . They earn only five francs a month and the payment was even lower before " . By 1868 , the annual production of carpets in Chiprovtsi had surpassed 14 @,@ 000 square metres . Following the Russo @-@ Turkish War in 1877 – 1878 , Chiprovtsi , along with all of northern Bulgaria and the region around Sofia , became part of the newly liberated Principality of Bulgaria , the predecessor of modern Bulgaria . In 1896 , almost 1 @,@ 400 women from Chiprovtsi and the region were engaged in carpet weaving . In 1920 , the locals founded the Manual Labour carpet @-@ weaving cooperative society , the first of its kind in the country . 
 In the 1950s , ore output was renewed in the region , briefly revitalizing Chiprovtsi through the influx of young and highly educated people . On 12 September 1968 , Chiprovtsi was officially proclaimed a town by the National Assembly of Bulgaria . In Socialist times , the town had a factory that produced AK @-@ 47 magazines and employed about 400 people . After the democratic changes in 1989 , mining was discontinued again due to a lack of funds , the factory was closed and the carpet industry has been in decline as it had lost its firm foreign markets . As a result , the town and the municipality have been experiencing a demographic crisis . 
 = = Governance , education and economy = = 
 The municipal government consists of a mayor ( <unk> ) , a deputy mayor and a secretary . Since 2007 , the municipality has been governed by <unk> Ivanov <unk> of Bulgarian Agrarian People 's Union " Aleksandar <unk> " who won the municipal elections with 1 @,@ 615 votes or 62 @.@ 67 % against <unk> Todorova Kostova of the Bulgarian Socialist Party who amassed 962 votes or 37 @.@ 33 % . Two villages in the municipality are eligible to elect their own mayor , <unk> and <unk> . 
 The municipal administration is divided into two branches , the common and specialized administration . The common administration is further divided into the " Information Services " and " Financial @-@ economical Activities and Handling of Property " departments ; the specialized administration includes the " Planning and Distribution of the Budget " and " Territorial and Village Planning and Building " departments . The municipality has no separate court or prosecutor 's office and is instead serviced by the Montana provincial court and office . The local police station is subordinate to the one in Montana . There is a Municipal Land Commission , part of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry , and a Municipal Social Service . The Municipal Land Commission takes care of land and forest distribution and the Municipal Social Service oversees financial aid and supports the disabled . 
 The town has a primary school ( grades 1 – 4 ) and a high school ( grades 4 – 12 ) ; both claim to be successors of the school founded in 1624 . The two schools service the entire municipality , as the six schools in the larger villages have been closed . In 1977 , the high school was visited by about 600 students ; the number slightly declined to 400 in 1989 . In 2008 , it was only visited by 142 children . Chiprovtsi 's kindergarten is the only one remaining in the municipality of formerly 15 . 
 The carpet ( kilim ) industry remains dominant in the town . Carpets have been crafted according to traditional designs , but in recent years it is up to the customers to decide the pattern of the carpet they have ordered . The production of a single 3 by 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 by 13 @.@ 1 ft ) carpet takes about 50 days ; primarily women engage in carpet weaving . Work is entirely manual and all used materials are natural ; the primary material is wool , coloured using plant or mineral dyes . The local carpets have been prized at exhibitions in London , Paris , Liège and Brussels . The municipality has also invested in the development of tourism and many private houses have been turned into small family hotels or guesthouses . In 2004 , 65 people were engaged in the tourism industry ; in the same year , the municipality was visited by 2 @,@ 350 tourists , of whom were 254 foreigners . In terms of economic indicators , the municipality ranks around the high average : it is 113th of 264 municipalities in Bulgaria by GDP per capita and 67th by Human Development Index . 
 In September 2008 , it was reported that one of the few fluorite deposits in Europe located near Chiprovtsi would be developed by a Bulgarian company that had leased the mine for 20 years . The company has invested BGN 14 @.@ 5 million and aims to extract 150 @,@ 000 tonnes of raw material and produce 50 @,@ 000 tonnes of pure fluorite a year . As of 2008 , the company employs 73 miners , all former workers in the closed local mines , and expects their number to reach 150 . 
 = = Culture and religion = = 
 The local Bulgarians traditionally belong to the ethnographic group of the <unk> and speak a transitional Bulgarian dialect , the <unk> dialect . Most of the population are adherents of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church . The municipality has 30 registered cultural monuments and 12 consecrated stone crosses , of which eight in Chiprovtsi . Such crosses are typical for the Bulgarian northwest and each is dedicated to a saint : they serve both demarcating and religious purposes . Most of the crosses are not dated , with the notable exceptions of Saint Demetrius — 1755 , Saints Peter and Paul — 1781 and Holy Mother of God — 1874 . 
 A notable cultural trait of Chiprovtsi shared with much of the region is the veneration of a family patron saint , named svetets ( " saint " ) and akin to Serbian <unk> . The practice exists since time immemorial and the family saint is thought to have been chosen by the taking of a random candle by an unaware person . The svetets is associated to the family house : when a daughter @-@ in @-@ law comes to live there , she accepts the family saint of the home , and when a family member or a foreign settler moves out or builds a new house , they adopt a new svetets . 
 Chiprovtsi has a museum of history that occupies two old @-@ style buildings and features four exhibitions . These present the domestic life from Antiquity through the Middle Ages and the 17th @-@ century heyday until today , as well as works of the Chiprovtsi goldsmithing and carpet industry . The town has an Eastern Orthodox church dedicated to the Ascension of Jesus ; the remains of the old Roman Catholic church of Saint Marty have also been preserved . The Chiprovtsi Monastery is situated outside the town ; there are ruins of several other Orthodox churches and another monastery . 
 The town has a community cultural centre ( chitalishte ) with branches in eight of the villages in the municipality . The chitalishte has a youth dancing group , a folk music group , a theatrical group , a folk ritual and customs reproduction group and other similar groups . The nine libraries of the Chiprovtsi chitalishte and its branches house 65 @,@ 975 volumes of books . 
 = SR West Country and Battle of Britain classes = 
 The SR West Country and Battle of Britain classes , collectively known as Light Pacifics or informally as Spam Cans , are air @-@ smoothed 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific steam locomotives designed for the Southern Railway by its Chief Mechanical Engineer Oliver Bulleid . Incorporating a number of new developments in British steam locomotive technology , they were amongst the first British designs to use welding in the construction process , and to use steel fireboxes , which meant that components could be more easily constructed under wartime austerity and post @-@ war economy . 
 They were designed to be lighter in weight than their sister locomotives , the Merchant Navy class , to permit use on a wider variety of routes , including in the south @-@ west of England and the Kent coast . They were a mixed @-@ traffic design , being equally adept at hauling passenger and freight trains , and were used on all types of services , frequently far below their capabilities . A total of 110 locomotives were constructed between 1945 and 1950 , named after West Country resorts or Royal Air Force ( RAF ) and other subjects associated with the Battle of Britain . 
 Due to problems with some of the new features , such as the Bulleid chain @-@ driven valve gear , sixty locomotives were rebuilt by British Railways during the late 1950s . This produced a design highly similar to the rebuilt Merchant Navy class . The classes operated until July 1967 , when the last steam locomotives on the Southern Region were withdrawn . Although most were scrapped , twenty locomotives found new homes on heritage railways in Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 The financial success enjoyed by the Southern Railway during the 1930s was based on the completion of its London suburban electrification scheme in 1929 and the subsequent electrification of the main lines to Brighton and the Sussex Coast and to Guildford and Portsmouth . Despite electrification plans , the Southern Railway 's less heavily used lines in the West Country beyond Salisbury did not merit the cost . Lines in Devon and Cornwall were meandering , heavily graded , and although with heavy summer holiday traffic were lightly used during the winter months . The seasonality of railway traffic meant that the West Country branches were worked by the ageing T9 class 4 @-@ 4 @-@ 0 and the versatile N class 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 , which could be better utilised on mixed @-@ traffic services elsewhere . As a result , an order was placed with Brighton railway works in April 1941 for twenty passenger locomotives of a type to be determined . 
 During 1943 , Bulleid began planning for the post @-@ war locomotive requirements of the railway and identified the need for a stop @-@ gap steam locomotive design for those main lines in South East England scheduled for electrification , had the Second World War not taken place . Although the new Merchant Navy class was available for the heaviest Continental expresses , the resumption of frequent passenger services over poorly maintained infrastructure , following the war , would require a lighter locomotive with wider route availability . 
 At the same time , there would be a continuing need for fast freight locomotives , capable of operating on both electrified and non @-@ electrified routes , without impeding the intensive use of the system by passenger trains . Suburban electrification used electric multiple units , which had no equivalent freight design . Although Bulleid built two prototype electric locomotives in 1941 , these were , as yet , unproven , and freight haulage would be undertaken by steam traction for the foreseeable future . 
 = = Design = = 
 The detailed design work for the new mixed @-@ traffic locomotives was undertaken at Brighton railway works where they were scheduled to be constructed . The earliest drawings were for a moderately sized 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 with similarities to the London and North Eastern Railway K4 class , which Bulleid had helped design for the West Highland Line when he was Nigel Gresley 's assistant . However , such a design would have been inadequate for the Kent Coast lines , which required a powerful 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 or 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 class . It is not clear why the design was subsequently enlarged to become a smaller version of the Merchant Navy class 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 as the likely traffic requirement did not warrant such lavish provision , but the incorporation of components from that class enabled standardisation during wartime production difficulties . 
 = = = Bulleid 's standard components = = = 
 Based on the mechanical experience gained from the Merchant Navy locomotives , Bulleid incorporated his chain @-@ driven valve gear into what became the new design . This now @-@ infamous component was unique in British locomotive design . It gained notoriety because it was difficult to access when things went wrong and , in tandem with the fast @-@ moving Bulleid steam reverser , could cause irregular valve movements . The entire system was in a sealed oil bath , another unique design , that provided constant lubrication to the moving parts . 
 The locomotive also carried a similar " air @-@ smoothed " casing to the Merchant Navy class . This was not regarded as streamlining by Bulleid , a fact demonstrated by the flat front end . Authorities differ as to the purpose of the casing . According to Creer it was intended to be an aid in cleaning the locomotive with carriage washers to reduce labour requirements during the post @-@ war period , whereas Bradley asserts that the intention was to lift the steam and exhaust gases away from the cab . As with the Merchant Navies , the class soon gained the nickname " Spam Cans " , due to the resemblance to the distinctive tin cans in which " SPAM " was sold . 
 The smokebox was an integral part of the air @-@ smoothed casing , being a sheet metal fabrication to the same profile as the firebox that acted as a former to maintain the shape of the casing . In between , the casing was supported by channel @-@ section steel crinolines ( <unk> used to maintain the shape ) attached to the frames . The smokebox housed the five @-@ nozzle Lemaître blastpipe arranged in a circle within a large @-@ diameter chimney . 
 As with the Merchant Navy class , electric lighting was provided on both locomotive and footplate , powered by a steam @-@ powered generator below the footplate . The gauges were lit by ultra @-@ violet light . This enabled clearer night @-@ time vision of the boiler steam pressure gauge and the brake pipe vacuum pressure gauge whilst eliminating dazzle , making it easier for the crew to see signals along the track . Close attention was paid to the ergonomics of the cab , which was designed with the controls required for operation grouped according to the needs of both driver and fireman , thus promoting safe operation . As an aid to the fireman , a treadle used steam pressure to open the firehole doors , where the coal is shovelled into the firebox . The footplate was entirely enclosed , improving crew working conditions in winter . Other refinements and innovations used on the Merchant Navy class included steam @-@ powered clasp brakes and the unusual 6 ft 2 in ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) Bulleid Firth Brown ( BFB ) wheels . 
 = = = Frames , boiler , cylinders and welded firebox = = = 
 To increase the route availability over the Merchant Navy class , weight @-@ saving came from the use of shorter frames . This reduced the wheelbase to 35 ft 6 in ( 10 @.@ 820 m ) , allowing the design to operate on routes where the Maunsell 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 0s were the largest permitted locomotives . The boiler was similar in length to the Merchant Navy version , retaining the 280 psi ( 1 @.@ 93 MPa ) operating pressure and riveted construction . The boiler was of slightly smaller diameter at the smokebox end , and the cylinders were smaller at 16 @.@ 375 in × 24 in ( 416 mm × 610 mm ) . 
 The inner and outer Belpaire firebox was smaller than the Merchant Navy class . These were constructed using welded steel as opposed to the riveting that was more common practice , making for cheaper construction and easier maintenance . Two welded steel <unk> syphons were implemented to improve water circulation between the boiler and the top of the firebox ( the " crown " ) . 
 = = = Tender = = = 
 Bulleid designed a reduced capacity tender based upon the Merchant Navy version . It could carry 4 @,@ 500 imp gal ( 20 @,@ 460 L ; 5 @,@ 400 US gal ) water and 5 @.@ 00 long tons ( 5 @.@ 1 t ) of coal on a six @-@ wheel underframe . It retained the BFB wheels and streamlining panels , or " raves " , that gave the top of the tender a similar cross @-@ sectional outline to carriages . As with the Merchant Navy class , the water tank was of welded sheet construction to save weight , and the tender was fitted with vacuum braking equipment of a clasp @-@ type similar to that on the locomotive . Four train @-@ brake vacuum reservoirs of cylindrical construction were grouped on the tank top , behind the coal space . 
 = = Construction = = 
 For construction history of the class , see : List of SR West Country and Battle of Britain class locomotives 
 The first batch of twenty locomotives was ordered in April 1941 , although the changes in design to the Light Pacific arrangement meant that production was delayed until late 1944 . Due to wartime contract work at Brighton works , the boilers were built under contract at the North British Locomotive Company . Before the first of the class had been delivered , the order was increased to thirty , with a second batch of ten ordered in September 1944 . Deliveries from Brighton works began in May 1945 with prototype No. <unk> Exeter , and proceeded at the rate of about two locomotives per month . The class was gradually run in on the Central Section until October 1945 , when they were successfully trialled on Plymouth and Kentish services . By the time the first fifteen had entered traffic a further order of fifteen was placed , with these entering service between June and October 1946 . From this batch onwards , traction was improved by the addition of steam sanding to the front driving wheel , with covers added to protect the motion from sand falling from the filler pipes . 
 A third batch of twenty @-@ five was ordered and designated the Battle of Britain class . These were identical to the West Country class and the new designation was purely concerned with giving the locomotives names that befitted their intended allocation to the Eastern Section . By the time of the nationalisation of British Railways in January 1948 , seventy Light Pacifics had been built at Brighton Works , with a fourth batch of twenty on order . There was a delay in production during the first three months of British Railways control but the last twenty ordered by the Southern Railway entered traffic between April 1948 and February 1949 . 
 In March 1949 , British Railways ordered a final 20 from Brighton works despite a pressing need for smaller tank locomotives . This imbalance was rectified by building forty @-@ one examples of the LMS Fairburn 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 4T for the Southern Region . Also at this time Brighton works staff were embroiled in the difficulties associated with Bulleid 's experimental and problematic Leader class . As a result , Brighton sought assistance from the other Southern Region works to complete this final order . Ashford works cut the frames and constructed the tenders , and Eastleigh works constructed six of the final batch of locomotives . 
 The completion of the final locomotive , No. 34110 66 Squadron , in January 1951 was delayed for several months pending consideration of proposals from British Railways management for a major modification to a standard two @-@ cylinder design without the chain @-@ driven valve gear . , but the locomotive entered service as Bulleid intended . 
 = = = Subsequent modifications = = = 
 The first six locomotives were initially fitted with plywood sheeting over the cab @-@ side windows as a wartime material @-@ saving measure , with No. <unk> Wadebridge the first to receive glass windows . Two of the front route indicator irons ( of which there are five ) were originally located on the smoke deflectors , which meant that the indicator discs stood proud of the casing . This necessitated a trial relocation to the smokebox door at the three and nine o 'clock positions on No. <unk> Lyme Regis , and fitted as standard from No. <unk> Axminster onwards . The batch constructed between June and October 1946 received a modified steam regulator and LMS @-@ style parallel buffer casings . 
 As with the Merchant Navy class , they were fitted with a new design of cab front spectacle plates from mid – 1947 due to poor forward visibility . The small windows on the front face of the cab were redesigned to an angled profile , giving improved visibility to the driver . This was a feature fitted to all Bulleid @-@ designed locomotives post @-@ nationalisation . They were introduced in Britain in 1934 with the Gresley @-@ designed Cock o ' the North . Over the next decade the revised design was fitted to existing members of the class . Another modification was the reduction of boiler pressure to 250 psi ( 1 @.@ 72 MPa ) to reduce maintenance costs . 
 The Southern Railway @-@ built batches had a narrow 8 ft 6 in ( 2 @.@ 591 m ) footplate due to the width @-@ restricted Hastings Line between Tonbridge and Hastings but these were never used on this duty and the cab was widened to 9 ft ( 2 @.@ 743 m ) on the British Railways batch . The tenders of Nos. <unk> – <unk> were fitted with <unk> ( " Traitement Integral Armand " ) chemical feed @-@ water equipment that precipitated scale @-@ forming constituents in the hard water of southern England into a non @-@ adhesive mud that could be cleared using a manual " blow @-@ down " valve . This equipment was retrospectively fitted to earlier members of the class . In 1948 the tender design was enlarged to provide a water capacity of 5 @,@ 500 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 25 @,@ 000 L ; 6 @,@ 610 US gal ) . 
 To ease maintenance and lubrication , panels of air @-@ smoothed casing ahead of the cylinders were removed from 1952 , and the front sanders were blanked off . This coincided with the removal of the tender " raves " on all but five locomotives , as they obstructed the packing of coal into the bunker and restricted the driver 's view when reversing . The resultant " cut @-@ down " tender included new , enclosed storage for fire @-@ irons and glass spectacle plates to protect the crew from flying coal dust when running tender @-@ first . 
 When the rebuilding programme ( see below ) was halted in 1961 , further modifications were made to the unrebuilt locomotives . The most notable was on No. <unk> Fighter Command , which was fitted with a <unk> ejector in 1962 on the grounds that a desired spark arrestor would " suffocate " an ordinary blastpipe . Following some adjustment , the ejector improved smoke deflection and fuel consumption , allowing it to steam well with low @-@ grade coal . As a consequence of the positive experience with No. <unk> , preserved No. 34092 City of Wells was similarly fitted in the mid @-@ 1980s . 
 = = Numbering and naming the locomotives = = 
 Bulleid employed the same idiosyncratic numbering scheme that he had used for the Merchant Navy class , beginning at No. <unk> and reaching No. <unk> at the time of nationalisation . His scheme was abolished by British Railways , which renumbered existing these <unk> @-@ <unk> and new locomotives <unk> @-@ 34110 . 
 The first 48 members of the class were named after places in the West Country served by its trains or close to its lines . This represented a publicity success due to many of the locomotives being able to visit their namesake areas . Many ' West Country ' locomotives sported an additional plaque with the coat of arms of the town or region the locomotive was named after . This plaque was mounted on the casing between the gunmetal locomotive nameplate and the West Country Class scroll , above the middle driving wheel . Several members of the class had only the nameplate and the " West Country Class " scroll , a gap being left where a crest would have been mounted . The background of the nameplate was usually painted red , though sometimes examples could be found in black if the locomotive works undertaking overhaul of the engine could not locate the correct colour paint . 
 Once it became clear that the locomotives would be used further afield than the West Country , a decision was made to name the remainder after RAF squadrons , airfields , commanders and aircraft that had participated in the Battle of Britain over Kent , Surrey and Sussex . ' Battle of Britain ' nameplates incorporated the name of the locomotive with the class name below , in a design that resembled the wings of an aircraft . This was painted Air Force blue , though other colours were sometimes substituted for the same reasons as above . An enamelled crest of the aircraft , personality or squadron was placed below the nameplate , in the same position as the West Country class equivalent . 
 The first locomotives constructed by British Railways were of the Battle of Britain class , but the naming policy reverted to the West Country for Nos. <unk> – <unk> . The final two locomotives were Battle of Britain class , No. <unk> Sir Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory and No. 34110 66 Squadron . The result of the delay in completing was that the squadron crest for 66 Squadron was never made , as the manufacturer had retired during the intervening period . Thus 66 Squadron was the only Battle of Britain class member not to have a crest . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The original intention was to base the first batch of locomotives at Exmouth Junction depot at Exeter for use on the West of England Main Line to Salisbury and Plymouth , and secondary lines to Barnstaple , Bude and other holiday resorts in Devon and Cornwall . By the winter of 1945 , there was a more pressing need for them on Kent Coast services . The class also began to be used on Continental Boat Trains to and from Dover and Folkestone once these were resumed in 1946 . Later batches were used on cross @-@ country services such as the Brighton to Bournemouth , Cardiff and Plymouth trains or the Somerset and Dorset Joint Railway trains from Bournemouth to Wells and Bath . 
 Because of the good route availability the locomotives could be used on non @-@ electrified lines between London and Brighton . These included the Oxted Line , and occasionally the Bluebell Line between East Grinstead and Lewes , where they were also used for freight and parcels traffic , and excursion trains over electrified lines . Thus the original intention for the West Country class locomotives to work in South West England and the Battle of Britain class in Kent , Hampshire , Sussex and Surrey was never operationally practical and both classes were to be found all over the network . The most important journey undertaken by a member of the class occurred on 30 January 1965 , when <unk> Winston Churchill hauled the funeral train of its namesake from Waterloo station to his final resting place , close to Blenheim Palace in Oxfordshire . 
 = = = Performance of the unrebuilt locomotives = = = 
 As with the Merchant Navy class , they could generate great power using mediocre quality fuel , due largely to Bulleid 's excellent boiler . They also ran smoothly at high speed , but they were also beset with the same technical problems of their larger sisters . These may be summarised as follows : 
 <unk> problems . The lighter loading on their driving axles meant that they were even more prone to <unk> than the Merchant Navy class , requiring very careful control when starting a heavy train . Once underway they were noted for their free running , excellent steam production and rapid turn of speed . 
 Maintenance problems . The chain @-@ driven valve gear proved to be expensive to maintain and subject to rapid wear . Leaks from the oil bath onto the wheels caused oil to splash onto the boiler lagging . Once saturated with oil , the lagging attracted coal dust and ash , which provided combustible material , and sparks from heavy braking would set the lagging on fire underneath the air @-@ smoothed casing . The fires were also attributed to oil overflowing from <unk> lubricators onto the wheels when stationary , to be flung upwards into the boiler lagging in service . In either case , the local fire brigade would be called to put the fire out , with cold water coming into contact with the hot boiler causing stress to the casings . Many photographs show an un @-@ rebuilt locomotive with warped casings , the result of a lagging fire . 
 High fuel consumption . This was highlighted during the 1948 locomotive exchanges undertaken by British Railways , and very apparent at Exmouth Junction shed where the Light Pacifics burned 47 @.@ 9 lb ( 21 @.@ 73 kg ) of coal per mile ( 13 @.@ 5 kg / km ) compared to 32 lb ( 14 @.@ 51 kg ) ( 9 @.@ 02 kg / km ) for the T9 class that they replaced . 
 Restricted driver visibility due to the air @-@ smoothed casing and soft steam exhaust from the multiple @-@ jet blastpipe . The exhaust problem was never adequately resolved , and smoke continued to beat down onto the casing while moving , obscuring the driver 's vision . There was much experimentation in order to resolve this problem , with varying degrees of success , and photographic evidence shows the many guises of this project . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 For the Lewisham rail crash , see the subsection below . 
 On 29 October 1959 , locomotive No. <unk> Seaton was hauling a passenger train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at St Denys , Hampshire . 
 On 20 February 1960 , locomotive No. <unk> 253 Squadron was hauling a freight when is overran signals at Hither Green and was derailed , falling down an embankment and onto its side . The tender was recovered on 24 February and the locomotive on 28 February . 
 On 12 December 1960 , locomotive No. <unk> Exmoor was hauling a passenger train that overran signals and was derailed by trap points at St Denys . Two people were injured . 
 On 11 April 1961 , locomotive No. <unk> Crewkerne was in a head @-@ on collision with an electric multiple unit at Waterloo station , London after the latter overran signals . One person was killed and fourteen were injured . 
 On 2 September 1961 , locomotive No. <unk> Ottery St Mary was derailed by trap points at Bournemouth Central , Hampshire . 
 On 7 March 2015 , locomotive No. 34067 Tangmere was hauling a charter train that overran a signal at Wooton Bassett , Wiltshire . The train 's operator , West Coast Railway Company was banned from running trains on the British railway network as a consequence of this incident . 
 = = = The Lewisham railway disaster = = = 
 Restricted driver visibility was mentioned in the report on the disastrous Lewisham rail crash on 4 December 1957 outside St John 's railway station , in which 90 people were killed and 173 injured . The driver of No. <unk> Spitfire had failed to see one yellow and one double @-@ yellow " caution " signal in foggy conditions and was travelling too fast to stop when he saw a red signal , and the train crashed into the back of a stationary local train . Members of the class were later fitted with Automatic Warning System equipment , a recommendation of the incident report ; fitting of trackside equipment was already underway , but with priority given to routes equipped with semaphore signals , not electric " colour @-@ light " signals as at Lewisham . 
 The report on the disaster indicated that with the signals concerned being on the right hand side of the train , it was necessary , because of the limited visibility from the left hand side of a steam locomotive , for either the fireman to observe those signals ( but with the driver being responsible for asking him to do so ) or for the driver to cross over the footplate from his left hand driving position to observe them from the other side . In the event neither happened and neither looked out for the aspect of the signals . The report ascribed blame to the driver , but recommended that the class be fitted with wider windscreens to improve visibility , noting that in fog with less than 80 yards ' visibility the three signals involved would not be visible at all from the driver 's side of the footplate ; however , it noted that even from a Schools class locomotive with its much smaller boiler , it would be unlikely that these signals could be seen from the driver 's side in the dense foggy conditions of the incident . The report did not suggest that poor lifting of smoke obstructed visibility . 
 = = Rebuilding = = 
 Due to the problems experienced with the class , and following the success of the rebuilt Merchant Navy class designed by R. G. Jarvis , British Railways ordered the rebuilding of sixty locomotives to a more conventional design at Eastleigh between 1957 and 1961 . The first locomotive to be rebuilt was No. <unk> Barnstaple , which adopted many features from the BR ' Standard ' locomotive classes . The casing was removed and replaced with conventional boiler cladding , boiler pressure reduced to 250 psi ( 1 @.@ 72 MPa ) and the chain @-@ driven valve gear was replaced with modified Walschaerts valve gear fitted both outside as well as between the frames . The rapid onset of the 1955 Modernisation Plan during the early 1960s meant that the remaining fifty locomotives were not rebuilt , and continued in as @-@ built condition until withdrawal . 
 = = = Performance of the rebuilt locomotives = = = 
 The rebuilding solved most of the maintenance problems whilst retaining the excellent features of the original design . Repair costs were reduced by up to 60 % , and coal consumption was reduced by up to 8 @.@ 4 % . However the Walschaerts valve gear made the rebuilds heavier and prone to hammerblow on the track , a complaint that was not evident with the original design . The increased weight reduced their route availability , meaning that they could not be used on certain routes available to un @-@ rebuilt examples , such as the line to Ilfracombe . 
 = = Withdrawal = = 
 The electrification of the Chatham Main Line to Dover and Ramsgate in 1959 deprived the class of some of its work , as did the transfer of the lines west of Salisbury to the Western Region on 30 December 1962 . This resulted in the withdrawal of several unrebuilt locomotives stabled at Exmouth Junction shed in June 1963 . By the end of the year ten had been withdrawn , including the 12 ‑ year @-@ old No. 34110 66 Squadron , having travelled only 600 @,@ 000 miles . Most of the unrebuilt locomotives were withdrawn over the next three years but seven survived until 1967 and the end of steam on the Southern Region . Many rebuilt locomotives were withdrawn soon after their rebuilding . The first was No. <unk> Eddystone in May 1964 , having run only 287 @,@ 000 miles since rebuilding . Other early withdrawals included No. <unk> Sir Trafford Leigh @-@ Mallory which had only travelled 162 @,@ 000 miles in the three and a half years since its rebuilding . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 For location details and current status of the preserved locomotives , see : List of West Country and Battle of Britain class locomotives . 
 Had it not been for Woodham Brothers ' scrapyard in Barry , South Wales , no rebuilt Light Pacifics would have been preserved . Twenty still exist in varying states of preservation , ten in original condition and ten rebuilds with 11 being named after West country locations and the remaining 9 being named after RAF Squadrons or <unk> including Prime Minister Winston Churchill . The class has proved to be useful for preservation societies due to its good route availability and ample power , with some having returned to the main line to haul special trains . It is not certain that all of the preserved locomotives will be restored to working order due to the very poor condition some of them were in when purchased and the increasing cost of materials . 
 Other relics of both classes that have survived are nameplates , which were removed towards the end of steam on the British Railways Southern Region in the 1960s . As a result , many exist in private collections , and several have been seen at auction , selling for several thousands of pounds . 
 Just 3 members of the class are yet to run in preservation and of the 17 which have operated in preservation , 5 have operated on the mainline : <unk> Bodmin , <unk> Taw Valley , <unk> Braunton , 34067 Tangmere & 34092 City of Wells . <unk> & 34067 currently have valid mainline certificates . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 = = = Southern Railway = = = 
 Livery was Southern Railway malachite green with " Sunshine yellow " horizontal lining . A circular cast brass plate with a red background on the smokebox door featured the word " Southern " and the date of manufacture . Bulleid advocated a continental style of numbering , basing this upon his experiences at the French branch of Westinghouse Electric before the First World War , and his tenure in the Railway Operating Division ( <unk> ) during that conflict . The Southern Railway number adapted the UIC classification system where " 2 " and " 1 " refer to the number of un @-@ powered leading and trailing axles respectively , and " C " refers to the number of driving axles , in this case three . However , since " 21C " was the prefix already used by the Merchant Navy class , the suffix " 1 " was added ; these locomotives carried numbers that started " 21C1 " followed by the individual two @-@ digit identifier . 
 = = = British Railways = = = 
 Initial livery after nationalisation in 1948 was British Railways malachite green and " Sunshine yellow " lining and lettering , with British Railways on the tender . No. <unk> Sir Eustace Missenden , Southern Railway was given commemorative malachite green livery that included green @-@ painted wheels with yellow rims and the early British Railways crest on the tender . The Bulleid numbering system was temporarily retained on the first seventy locomotives with the addition of an " s " prefix ( e.g. <unk> ) . The classes were given several power classifications in their careers , beginning with <unk> ( Mixed Traffic ) in 1949 . In December 1953 they were reclassified <unk> <unk> , the " A " denoting brake power when used on unfitted ( non @-@ vacuum braked ) goods trains . The rebuilt locomotives retained this classification until all received the classification of <unk> between November 1957 and November 1961 . 
 The locomotives were turned out in British Railways Brunswick green livery with orange and black lining with the British Railways crest on the tender side , after their first overhaul under new ownership . This was unlike the Merchant Navy class , which was initially turned out in British Railways experimental express passenger blue livery . By this stage , the Southern Railway @-@ built locomotives were re @-@ liveried and renumbered from <unk> – <unk> . The rebuilt locomotives were also in British Railways Brunswick green with orange and black lining , and crest on the tender side , whilst the nameplates were placed on a custom @-@ made mounting on the running plate due to the absence of a flat surface . 
 Some of the locomotives had additional embellishments . No. <unk> Royal Observer Corps was presented with an ROC long @-@ service medal in July 1961 . The ceremony took place at Waterloo Station , and included Commandant ROC Air Commodore Wight @-@ Boycott . The cab side was given a representation of the medal and its ribbon , which was displayed until the engine was withdrawn from service and scrapped in the late 1960s . The original nameplate and crest were recovered and displayed in the entrance hall of ROC Headquarters at RAF Bentley Priory until 1996 when they were transferred to the RAF Museum at Hendon . Another locomotive that featured a second crest was 34067 Tangmere , which was given the airfield 's crest for the cab side , as it did not feature on the nameplate crest . 
 = = Operational assessment = = 
 The class in both unrebuilt and rebuilt forms has been the subject of divergent opinions . The use of welded steel construction and the various innovations that had not previously been seen in British locomotive design meant that the class earned Bulleid the title " Last Giant of Steam " . The constant concern for ease of maintenance and utility had not previously been seen on locomotives , whilst their efficient boilers represented the ultimate in British steam technology , the hallmark of a successful design . Their light axle @-@ loading also meant widespread use over the Southern network , and they were capable of fast running . 
 Despite these successes , the number of innovations introduced at the same time made the class unreliable and difficult to maintain . A great deal of money was wasted on resolving the problems of a class designed for duties that could have been undertaken by cheaper 2 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 or 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 0 mixed @-@ traffic locomotives . Likewise , more Light Pacifics were built than were needed , frequently undertaking tasks that would usually befit a much smaller locomotive . A curious but common sight west of Exeter during the winter months was a Light Pacific hauling a local stopping service with a single carriage to destinations as diverse as Padstow and Wadebridge . Finally , too much money was spent on the expensive rebuilding programme when dieselisation and modernisation meant the locomotives would have very limited lives in their new guise . 
 = = Models = = 
 Kitmaster produced an unpowered polystyrene injection @-@ moulded kit for 00 gauge from 1960 . In late 1962 , the brand was sold to Airfix , which resumed production in 1968 . The moulds later passed to Dapol , which continues to produce the kit . Hornby manufactures ready @-@ to @-@ run rebuilt and un @-@ rebuilt examples of the class and caters for all the major detail variations . Graham Farish produces ready @-@ to @-@ run models in N gauge , and Dapol has announced its intention to produce models in N gauge , slated for release in May 2012 . Hornby <unk> produced <unk> metal " rebuilt " West Countries in the 1960s , and those became <unk> @-@ Wrenn , and ultimately Wrenn Railways . Wrenn produced air @-@ smoothed versions and rebuilt versions , right through to their demise ( and subsequent sale to Dapol ) in the early 1990s . 
 = The Boat Race 1868 = 
 The 25th Boat Race between crews from the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge took place on the River Thames on 4 April 1868 . Oxford won by six lengths in a time of 20 minutes and 56 seconds , taking the overall record to 15 – 10 in their favour . Oxford cox Charles Tottenham became the first person in the history of the event to win five Boat Races , and Cambridge saw their first non @-@ British rower compete . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . Oxford went into the race as reigning champions , having defeated Cambridge by half a length in the previous year 's race and led overall with fourteen wins to Cambridge 's ten . 
 In February 1868 , former Cambridge Blue Hon J. H. Gordon was found fatally wounded in his room from an accidentally self @-@ inflicted gun discharge . This resulted in Cambridge University Boat Club president John Still requesting that the usual challenge , which had been sent to Oxford in the Lent term , be rescinded . According to MacMichael , the response was " very unsympathetic " in tone and therefore the challenge stood and was accepted : the universities would race . 
 Cambridge were coached for a week each by John Bourke ( who had rowed in the unsuccessful crews of the 1866 and 1867 races ) and the former boat club president William Griffiths ( who had represented the Light Blues three times between the 1865 and 1867 races ) . Thomas Selby Egan coached the Cantabrigians for the three weeks preceding the race . Oxford were coached by E. F. Henley ( who rowed in 1865 and 1866 ) , the former Oxford University Boat Club president G. Morrison , R. W. Risley ( who rowed four times between the 1857 and 1860 races ) and Walter Bradford Woodgate ( who rowed in the 1862 and 1863 races . The race was umpired by Joseph William Chitty who had rowed for Oxford twice in 1849 ( in the March and December races ) and the 1852 race , while the starter was Edward Searle and the finishing judge was John Phelps . Despite the weeks of training , Cambridge did not arrive at Putney in a " state in which a University crew is expected to be . " Conversely , according to Oxford 's Frank Willan , the Dark Blues " made great progress during the last week " and " came to the post eventually very fit . " 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crewed weighed an average of 11 st 11 @.@ 875 lb ( 75 @.@ 1 kg ) , just 0 @.@ 25 pounds ( 0 @.@ 1 kg ) more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained four returning Blues , including cox Charles Tottenham who was competing in his fifth consecutive Boat Race , and Frank Willan who had rowed in the Dark Blues ' successful races the previous two years . The Cambridge crew included two rowers with Boat Race experience : William Anderson and John Still , the latter making his third Boat Race appearance . The Light Blue cox , Thomas Warner , was the first registered non @-@ British competitor to represent the university , having studied at Melbourne Church of England Grammar School in Australia before becoming an alumnus of Trinity Hall . 
 = = Race = = 
 Around 11am , Oxford departed from the London Rowing Club boathouse , while Cambridge left from Leander Club in order to head to the start . Cambridge had won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . As a result of a number of boats moored on the north bank of the river , the tide which would have assisted the Light Blues was substantially blocked . Cambridge made a good start , leading by half a length by the London Rowing Club boathouse . Oxford responded , and passing Leander , they had reduced the deficit to one third of a length . Rowing past Craven Cottage , the Dark Blues were marginally ahead , despite a push from Cambridge . Despite questionable steering in conditions described as having " prevailing haze " , Oxford maintained a lead of around half a length by the Crab Tree pub . 
 The Dark Blues had extended their lead to a length by the soap works before shooting Hammersmith Bridge two lengths ahead . Although river traffic diverted the Cambridge boat , they remained in contention , two lengths behind Oxford . At Barnes Bridge , the Dark Blues were a further length ahead , and continued to extend their lead until the flag @-@ boat , which they passed six lengths ahead in a time of 20 minutes 56 seconds . Oxford 's victory , their eighth in a row , took their overall lead to 15 – 10 in the event . Willan paid tribute to his cox : " In conclusion , I must again testify to the splendid steering of Tottenham , who for the fifth and I am sorry to say for the last time has contributed mainly to our victory over Cambridge . " 
 = Health Care ( The Office ) = 
 " Health Care " is the third episode of the first season of the American comedy television series The Office , and the show 's third episode overall . Written by Paul Lieberstein , who also acts in the show as Toby Flenderson , and directed by Ken Whittingham , the episode first aired in the United States on April 5 , 2005 on NBC . 
 In this episode , Michael ( Steve Carell ) is tasked with choosing a new and inexpensive health care plan . He immediately hands it off to enthusiastic volunteer Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) . Dwight ruthlessly cuts nearly all benefits in the new plan , angering the rest of the office staff . Meanwhile , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim ( John Krasinski ) make up fake diseases , much to Dwight 's chagrin . In an attempt to appease them , Michael promises the entire office a surprise and then spends the rest of the day scrambling to come through with his promise . The employees wait for Michael 's surprise , which he awkwardly never delivers . 
 Jenna Fischer later called " Health Care " her favorite season one episode . During one particular scene , Rainn Wilson kept improvising new fake diseases . The laughter that resulted in his ad @-@ libs was not scripted , as they were in fact the cast 's genuine reaction to Wilson 's fake diseases . The episode received a 2 @.@ 9 / 7 in the Nielsen ratings among people aged 18 – 49 garnered 5 @.@ 8 million viewers overall . In addition , the episode retained 100 % of its lead @-@ in 18 @-@ 49 audience and ranked , along with the other first @-@ season episodes of The Office , as NBC 's highest @-@ rated Tuesday night program since February 1 , 2005 . The episode received positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Jan ( Melora Hardin ) tasks Michael ( Steve Carell ) with choosing a healthcare plan for the employees in the office , but as Michael finds it too difficult a task to accomplish , he delegates the authority to Dwight , who makes an enormous mess of it . He requires the entire office to write down their medical conditions , prompting Jim and Pam to invent diseases such as “ hot dog fingers ” and “ Count <unk> ” out of thin air , the result being that Dwight cuts benefits , adds an enormous deductible , and inadvertently mocks accountant Kevin Malone for having anal fissures . 
 Meanwhile , Michael feigns a busy work day by searching for a surprise for the office workers after such a frustrating day , including an Atlantic City @-@ type getaway , a ride down a coalminer ’ s elevator , and ice cream sandwiches , ultimately unable to come up with anything and further alienating everyone in the process . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Health Care " marked the first episode written by writer / actor Paul Lieberstein , who would go on to write several other episodes . It also marked the first episode directed by Ken Whittingham , who would go on to direct several other episodes . 
 Jenna Fischer stated that " Health Care " was her favorite episode of season one . Fischer went on to say that " We laughed a lot while making this episode . Particularly during the scene where Dwight confronts everyone in the office about who has been writing fake diseases on their health forms . Rainn Wilson kept improvising new fake diseases , and we didn 't know what he would say next . " Fischer notes that several of the scenes that involved laughing were not scripted and were in fact the casts genuine reaction to Wilson 's fake diseases . The episode was rebroadcast on March 29 , 2007 as part of an " Human resources Nightmares " marathon hosted by Paul Lieberstein . Lieberstein 's character Toby Flenderson is the Human Resources Representative for the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the Dunder Mifflin Paper Company , where The Office is set . " Health Care " was one of two first season episodes , the other being " Hot Girl " , to not contain commentary by members of the cast and crew on the season DVD . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Health Care " premiered on NBC on April 5 , 2005 . The episode received a 2 @.@ 9 / 7 in the Nielsen ratings among people aged 18 – 49 , meaning that 2 @.@ 9 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds viewed the episode and seven percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching TV viewed it . The episode garnered 5 @.@ 8 million viewers overall . The episode , airing after Scrubs , retained 100 % of its lead @-@ in 18 – 49 audience . In addition , " Health Care , " along with the other first season episodes of The Office helped NBC score its highest @-@ rated Tuesday night slot since February 1 , 2005 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Critical reception to " Health Care " was largely positive . Erik Adams of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B + " , and felt that the episode helped to expand upon Dwight 's character , noting that " the pieces are falling into place " for Dwight to become the show 's breakout character . Furthermore , he applauded the fact that the episode was based on an episode of the original BBC series , but that it did not create an exact copy , but rather used the concept as a template to create something new and original . 
 In a review by DVD Verdict , Mike Pinsky stated that " Turning the third episode over to such a character , when Michael passes off responsibility for picking a corporate health care plan to Dwight , is meant to draw laughs out of his megalomania . But it just is not that funny . " Travis Fickett from IGN wrote positively of the episode , giving it a 7 @.@ 9 / 10 " good " rating . He noted that " there 's something Stephen King about Dwight that creates an underlying layer of menace " and that the episode is " an early incarnation of the [ The Office 's ] early days , its original " paradigm " – and arguably its strongest . " IGN later placed Jim and Pam 's prank of creating fake diseases as ninth in its " Top Ten Moments from The Office " . Television Without Pity awarded the episode an A rating . 
 = Hey Ya ! = 
 " Hey Ya ! " is a song written and produced by André 3000 for his 2003 album The Love Below , part of the hip hop duo OutKast 's double album Speakerboxxx / The Love Below . " Hey Ya ! " takes influence from funk , rap and rock music . Its music video features a live performance by a band , all eight of whose members are played by André 3000 , that mimicks the Beatles ' 1964 performance on The Ed Sullivan Show . The song received praise from contemporary music critics , and won the award for Best Urban / Alternative Performance at the 46th Grammy Awards . His version of the song has also appeared on the soundtrack of Flight of the Phoenix ( 2004 ) , 
 Along with " The Way You Move " , recorded by OutKast 's other member Big Boi , " Hey Ya ! " was released by LaFace Records as one of the album 's two lead singles . It became a commercial success , reaching the top five of most of the charts it entered , and topping the Billboard Hot 100 and the ARIA Singles Chart , among others : in 2009 , Billboard named it as the 20th most successful song of the 2000s decade in the United States . 
 The song popularized the phrase " shake it like a Polaroid picture " , and the Polaroid Corporation used the song to revitalize the public 's perception of its products . 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 André 3000 wrote " Hey Ya ! " in 2000 , but began work on recording it in December 2002 at Stankonia Studios in Atlanta , Georgia . He used an acoustic guitar for accompaniment , inspired by bands such as the Ramones , the Buzzcocks , The Hives , and the Smiths . 
 Having already visualized most of the song , he recorded the introduction , the first verse , and the hook . André began recording the vocals during this time , doing several dozen takes . He returned to work on the song several evenings later , with session musician Kevin Kendricks performing the bassline on a synthesizer . 
 Months later , André 3000 worked with Pete Novak at the Larrabee Sound Studios in Los Angeles . André improvised the lyrics based on a screenplay he had written . They experimented with various sound effects , including singing through a vocoder , and did 30 to 40 takes for each line . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Hey Ya ! " is a song in G major . Each cadential six @-@ measure phrase is constructed using a change of meter on the fourth measure and uses a I – IV – V – VI chord progression . G major and C major chords are played for one and two 4 / 4 measures respectively . André 3000 then uses a deceptive cadence after a 2 / 4 measure of the dominant D major chord , leading into two 4 / 4 measures of an E minor chord . The song moves at a tempo of 160 beats per minute , and André 's vocal range spans more than an octave and a half , from B3 to G5 . 
 The song opens with three pick up beats as André 3000 counts " one , two , three , oh " and then leads into the first verse . The lyrics begin to describe the protagonist 's concerns and doubts about a romantic relationship . He wonders if they are staying together just " for tradition " , as in the lines " But does she really wanna [ mess around ] / But can 't stand to see me / Walk out the door ? " André 3000 commented , " I think it 's more important to be happy than to meet up to ... the world 's expectations of what a relationship should be . So this is a celebration of how men and women relate to each other in the 2000s " . The song then leads into the chorus , which consists of the line " Hey ya ! " repeated eight times , accompanied by a synthesizer performing the bassline . 
 During the second verse , the protagonist gets cold feet and wonders what the purpose of continuing the relationship is , pondering the question , " If they say nothing is forever ... then what makes love the exception ? " After repeating the chorus , the song leads into a call and response section . André 3000 jokes , " What 's cooler than being cool ? " , and the " fellas ' " response , an overdubbed version of his vocals , is " Ice cold " , a reference to one of André Benjamin 's stage names . He then calls to the " ladies " , whose response is overdubbed from vocals by <unk> <unk> , who was an assistant to the audio engineer . 
 The song 's breakdown coined the phrase " shake it like a Polaroid picture " , a reference to an erroneous technique used by some photographers to expedite instant film . Early versions of the film needed to be dried , and shaking the picture helped it to dry faster . The breakdown also <unk> singer Beyoncé and actress Lucy Liu . The song closes by repeating the chorus and gradually fading out . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Hey Ya ! " received universal acclaim from music critics and fans alike . PopMatters described the track as " brilliantly rousing " and " spazzy with electrifying multiplicity " . Entertainment Weekly highlighted it as the catchiest song on the double album , and Stylus Magazine identified it as one of the best songs in OutKast 's history . " Hey Ya ! " topped the 2003 Pazz & Jop list , a survey of several hundred music critics conducted by Robert Christgau , with 322 mentions , beating runner @-@ up Beyoncé Knowles ' " Crazy in Love " by 119 . It was listed at number 15 on Blender 's 2005 list of " The 500 Greatest Songs Since You Were Born " , and Pitchfork Media included it in its collection of The Pitchfork 500 . 
 The song 's unusual arrangement drew comparisons to artists from a variety of genres . Pitchfork referred to it as the apex of the album and added that it successfully mixed Flaming Lips @-@ style instrumentation with the energy of Prince 's 1983 single " Little Red Corvette " . 
 Subsequently , Pitchfork Media gave it the number two slot in its " The Top 100 Singles of 2000 – 2004 " feature in January 2005 , bested only by OutKast 's own " B.O.B. " . Blender described it as a mix of soul music by Ike Turner and new wave music by Devo and later as an " electro / folk @-@ rock / funk / power pop / hip @-@ hop / neo @-@ soul / kitchen sink rave @-@ up " . Rolling Stone compared André 3000 's vocals to those of " an indie @-@ rock Little Richard " and the backing arrangement to The Beatles ' 1969 album Abbey Road , later ranking it at number 182 in their list of 500 Greatest Songs of All Time and ranking it at number four on their 2011 list of the " 100 Best Songs of the Aughts " . 
 New York also likened it to The Beatles and found it to be one of the best singles of 2003 . AllMusic described it as an " incandescent " mix of electro , funk , and soul music . NME likened trying to classify the song as " akin to trying to lasso water " and described it as " a monumental <unk> between the Camberwick Green brass band , a cruise @-@ ship cabaret act , a cartoon gospel choir and a sucker MC hiccuping ' Shake it like a polaroid pic @-@ <unk> ! ' backed up by the cast of an amateur production of The Wizard of Oz . Sort of . " 
 In 2011 , they placed it at number three on its list of the " 150 Best Tracks of the Past 15 Years " . In 2013 , the sports website <unk> named it the best song of the millennium after a March @-@ Madness style bracket of 64 songs . The music video of the same name was likewise well received by critics , who regarded it as a contemporary piece of post @-@ industrial performance art . In 2014 , NME ranked the song at # 18 on their list of the 500 greatest songs of all time . 
 = = Sales and impact = = 
 " Hey Ya ! " was successful in North America , first charting on the week ending October 18 , 2003 at # 57 on the Billboard Hot 100 , three weeks after " The Way You Move " debuted ; which was at # 25 at the time . It topped the Hot 100 for nine weeks , from December 13 , 2003 to February 7 , 2004 . The digital sales topped the Billboard Hot Digital Tracks for 17 consecutive weeks . 
 The song performed well in urban contemporary markets , topping the Rhythmic Top 40 chart and reaching number nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks . It was also successful in mainstream music , topping the Top 40 Mainstream and Top 40 Tracks and reaching number 13 on the Adult Top 40 . 
 Due to the song being influenced from funk and rock , the indie rock music origins allowed it to hit the alternative charts peaking at a moderately successful number 16 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart and due to the song 's number 1 success on the pop charts , it led to be played often on modern rock radio stations despite only hitting number 16 . 
 In September 2005 , the Recording Industry Association of America certified the single platinum for shipping one million copies . At the 46th Grammy Awards , the song won Best Urban / Alternative Performance and was nominated for Record of the Year , but lost to Coldplay 's " Clocks " . 
 The song also performed well in Europe . In the United Kingdom , it debuted at number six on the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number three after 12 weeks , remaining on the chart for a total of 21 weeks . " Hey Ya ! " topped the Norwegian singles chart for seven weeks , and it reached the top in Sweden for the first week of 2004 . It performed well across the continent , reaching the top ten in Austria , Finland , France , Germany , Ireland , and Switzerland . 
 " Hey Ya ! " debuted at number 17 on Australia 's ARIA Singles Chart , and later topped the chart for two consecutive weeks . The song remained on the chart for 16 weeks and was certified double platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association . The song charted at number 61 for the 2003 end of year chart and was listed at number 15 on the 2004 chart and number five on the 2004 urban chart . It was also successful in New Zealand , reaching number two and staying on the RIANZ Singles Chart for 23 weeks . 
 The lyric " shake it like a Polaroid picture " , along with the song 's commercial success , helped to revitalize the Polaroid Corporation . Because current Polaroid film is sealed behind a clear plastic window , casually waving the picture has no effect on the film 's development . <unk> shaking the film may actually distort the image by causing the film to separate prematurely and creating blobs in the final image . Nevertheless , Polaroid sought to capitalize on the allusion , hiring Ryan Berger of the Euro RSCG advertising agency . Polaroid sponsored parties for OutKast , where Euro RSCG distributed Polaroid cameras . 
 OutKast made a deal to hold Polaroid cameras during some of its performances . Polaroid does not release sales figures , but its public image , previously in decline with the growing popularity of digital cameras , was bolstered by the song . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The song 's music video , directed by Bryan Barber , is based on The Beatles ' landmark appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show on February 9 , 1964 , but sets the action in London . The beginning and end of the video blend with those of " The Way You Move " so that the two can be watched in either order , and a " The Way You Move / Hey Ya ! " video combining both clips with a bridging sequence was released on the OutKast : The Videos DVD . 
 After listening to the song , Barber was inspired to create a video around the Beatles ' appearance on Sullivan 's show based on the song 's musical structure , but André 3000 had never seen this footage . Barber showed him the footage to André 3000 and came up with the idea of reversing the British Invasion , by having the American band The Love Below becoming popular on a British television program . The music video was filmed in two days in August 2003 on a sound stage at Universal Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 The cast consisted of over 100 girls . Each of André 3000 's parts was shot several times from different angles , and he performed the song 23 times during the course of filming . Because releasing " Hey Ya ! " as a single was a last @-@ minute decision , André did not have time to choreograph the parts , and all of the dancing was improvised . Ice Cold 3000 's sequences were the first filmed , resulting in the character 's energetic performance , and Johnny Vulture 's were the last , so André , exhausted from the previous takes , sat on a stool for those sequences . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 In the video , André 3000 plays all eight members of The Love Below : keyboardist Benjamin Andre , bassist Possum Jenkins , vocalist Ice Cold 3000 , drummer Dookie Blasingame , three backing vocalists The Love Haters , and guitarist Johnny Vulture . 
 The video opens with the band 's manager Antwan ( Big Boi ) talking to Ice Cold 3000 and Dookie Blasingame backstage . Meanwhile , the television presenter , portrayed by Ryan Phillippe ( another version featured an energetic Phillippe ) , tries to calm a crowd of screaming girls on a show being broadcast live in black @-@ and @-@ white . The band performs while the girls in the audience scream loudly ; one girl is carried off by security after rushing the stage , and another faints . 
 A family is shown dancing to the broadcast at home . When André 3000 instructs to " shake it like a Polaroid picture " , some of the girls begin taking pictures and shaking them . Ice Cold 3000 dances with one of the girls on stage , and the video closes with several friends of the band watching and discussing the performance . 
 = = = Performance = = = 
 The video debuted on MTV 's Total Request Live on September 5 , 2003 at number ten . It topped the countdown for 19 days and retired at number eight on November 24 , having spent 50 days on the program . At the 2004 MTV Video Music Awards , the video won four awards for Video of the Year , Best Hip @-@ Hop Video , Best Special Effects , and Best Art Direction . 
 It was also nominated for Best Direction but lost to Jay @-@ Z 's " 99 Problems " . " Hey Ya ! " was nominated for Best Short Form Music Video at the 46th Grammy Awards , but it lost to Johnny Cash 's cover of Nine Inch Nails ' " Hurt " . In Canada , the video topped MuchMusic 's Countdown for the week beginning January 30 , 2004 , and it won the award for Best International Video by a group at the 2004 MuchMusic Video Awards . In 2006 , Stylus Magazine listed it at number 72 on its " Top 100 Music Videos of All Time " , comparing André 3000 's dancing to James Brown 's performances in the early 1970s . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 The rock influences of " Hey Ya ! " have allowed many other artists to release cover versions of the song . In 2006 , Mat Weddle , frontman of the unsigned folk band Obadiah Parker , performed an acoustic cover of the song at a local open mike night , and a friend of his posted a video of the performance on YouTube , which quickly became virally popular online . Inspired by slowcore band Red House Painters , Weddle 's version moves at a much slower tempo backed by a rhythmic guitar strum and converts the breakdown into a " staccato chime " . The cover received international airplay and spawned many other copycat acoustic versions . 
 In 2015 , Postmodern Jukebox released a Scott Bradlee arrangement of " Hey Ya ! " with a big band tempo and 1960s feel . Featuring Sara <unk> on lead vocals , the song , and video , caught the attention of Billboard magazine , Time magazine online , and the New York Daily News 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The credits for " Hey Ya ! " are adapted from the liner notes of <unk> / The Love Below . 
 Recording 
 Recorded at : Stankonia Studios and Tree Sound Studios in Atlanta , Georgia ; Larrabee Sound Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 Personnel 
 André 3000 – vocals , guitars , keyboards , production , audio programming 
 Kevin Kendricks – keyboards 
 John Frye – recording engineer 
 Pete Novak – recording engineer 
 Robert Hannon – recording engineer 
 Mike Nicholson – recording engineer 
 Josh <unk> – assistant recording engineer 
 Warren Bletcher – assistant recording engineer 
 Jared Robbins – assistant recording engineer 
 <unk> <unk> – assistant recording engineer , additional vocals 
 Neal Pogue – audio mixer 
 Greg Price – assistant audio mixer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Better in Time = 
 " Better in Time " is a pop and R & B song performed by British singer Leona Lewis . It was written by J. R. Rotem and Andrea Martin , and was produced by Rotem . It is featured on Lewis 's debut album Spirit ( 2007 ) . " Better in Time " was released on 10 March 2008 as Lewis 's third single in the United Kingdom , as a double A @-@ side with " Footprints in the Sand " , and " You Bring Me Down " as B @-@ side . It was Lewis 's second international single following her hit " Bleeding Love " ( 2007 ) . Lyrically , " Better in Time " tells the story of a girl who cannot forget her ex @-@ partner , and who knows that " it will all get better in time " . 
 Lewis promoted the song on several live television programmes , such as Good Morning America , Live with Regis and Kelly , and on the 2008 American Music Awards , and it was included on the set list of her debut concert tour The Labyrinth ( 2010 ) . The music video was filmed by Sophie Muller at Hampton Court House School , London in February 2008 . On it , Lewis is shown performing in front of several photographic set @-@ ups , and shows what goes on behind the scenes of them . Receiving generally positive reviews by music critics , it was nominated at the Brit Awards in the category " Best British Single " . " Better in Time " reached number two in the national music charts of the United Kingdom and Germany , as well as the top ten in several countries , including Australia , Canada , Ireland , Italy and New Zealand . The single was certified gold in Australia , Denmark and Germany , and silver in the UK . 
 = = Composition and release = = 
 " Better in Time " is a pop and R & B song set in common time composed in a moderate tempo of eighty beats per minute , in the key of G flat major with a vocal range from the tone of C4 to the note of B5 . The song has a sequence of G – Bm – Em – G / D – C as its chord progression . Lyrically the song talks about someone who cannot forget her ex @-@ partner , and at the end the protagonist knows that " it will all get better in time " . Andrea Martin and J. R. Rotem wrote the song , and Rotem composed and produced it . On 29 January 2008 , Lewis announced on her website that " Better in Time " , along with " Footprints in the Sand " , would be released as a double A @-@ side single on 10 March 2010 , as her third single in the United Kingdom , with 2008 Sport Relief , a biennial charity organised by Comic Relief and BBC Sport , selecting " Footprints in the Sand " as their official single . It was also her second international single . A new remix of the song was created for the single release . The double A @-@ side was released with another song , " You Bring Me Down " , as a B @-@ side . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Better in Time " received generally positive reviews from music critics . In his review of the album , Chung Ah @-@ young of The Korea Times described the single as " one of the best tracks [ on the album ] with impressive piano sounds harmonized with [ Lewis ] powerful vocals " . Alex Fletcher from Digital Spy gave a mixed review to the double A @-@ side . He called the single a " placid affair " with " its plinky @-@ <unk> piano and R & B groove resting uncomfortably next to Lewis 's creamy vocal style " . The BBC 's reviewer Fraser McAlpine gave " Better in Time " three stars our of five commenting that " The tune 's quite nice , fairly hummable without ever actually going anywhere and despite the floaty , Mariah @-@ esque qualities of Leona 's vocals , it never goes completely mental in the throat @-@ breakdancing department " . 
 Chuck Taylor of Billboard gave a positive review , stating that the song is of " equal caliber to its predecessor [ " Bleeding Love " ] , with a one @-@ listen hook , elegant chug @-@ along melody , a lyric about healing and Lewis ' unquestionably emotive vocal versatility " . Sarah Rodman of The Boston Globe called it a " ' love takes time ' rumination " , and along with another song of the album ( " I Will Be " ) , described it as " predictable " . Sean Fennessey for Vibe noted that the track " is the best thing [ on the album ] , is mannered and takes nearly three minutes to get off the ground " . It ranked at number four on the " 10 Best Singles of 2008 " list by American magazine Entertainment Weekly . " Better in Time " was nominated at the 2009 BRIT Awards in the category of Best British Single , and later the song was included on the awards ' compilation album . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The double A @-@ side " Better in Time " and " Footprints in the Sand " debuted at number 74 on the UK Singles Chart on 1 March 2008 ; rising 36 places , it debuted in the top 40 the following week , at number 38 . On its fourth week , the song reached its peak position at number two , selling 40 @,@ 476 copies and being beaten to the number one spot by Duffy 's " Mercy " . With this it became the third single by Lewis to reach the top five in the country . " Better in Time " and " Footprints in the Sand " was certified as silver by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) . In the Australian charts , " Better in Time " debuted at number 32 on 27 April 2008 , reaching the top ten two weeks later , her second single to achieve this feat . On 25 May 2008 the single reached its peak position , at number six , and remained within the top fifty for eighteen weeks . The song was later certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . It debuted at number 34 on New Zealand 's RIANZ Chart on 17 March 2008 , eventually reaching number nine after five weeks , and by its seventh week had climbed to number six , thereby becoming her second consecutive top ten hit in the country . " Better in Time " and " Footprints in the Sand " debuted in the German charts on 16 June 2008 at number five . Although it fell out the top ten the following week , it managed to reach the top five in the issue ending 27 July 2010 , and rose to its peak position , at number two , in subsequent days . " Better in Time " entered the German chart on 22 February 2009 at number seventy @-@ nine , where it stayed for three weeks . It achieved a gold certification by the Bundesverband Musikindustrie ( BVMI ) . In Denmark " Better in Time " entered the charts at number twenty @-@ nine on 9 May 2008 , and managed to rise twenty @-@ three places in the next two weeks . On 6 June 2008 the single reached its peak position , number three . Next week , it fell out two places , but it retook its peak the following issue , and the song continued in this position for three weeks . 
 " Better in Time " and " Footprints in the Sand " debuted and peaked at number eight on the European Hot 100 Singles in the issue ending 29 March 2008 , becoming the highest debut of the week . Moreover , " Better in Time " was also a success in the chart , the single eventually reached number seven on the chart in the week ending 2 August 2008 . In Switzerland , the single entered at number thirteen , becoming the highest release of the week . On 27 July 2008 , its ninth week , it reached its peak position at number five , becoming Lewis 's second top five in the country . It managed to stay within the top ten for eleven weeks and it was last seen in the chart on 22 March 2009 , forty @-@ two weeks after its debut . In the week ending 26 April 2008 , " Better in Time " debuted at number sixty @-@ two on the Billboard Hot 100 , in the same week that her previous single , " Bleeding Love " , topped the chart . Next week it dropped out of the chart but later re @-@ entered the Hot 100 at number seventy @-@ five , becoming the best comeback of the week . The song reached its peak position at number eleven on its fourteenth week , where it stayed for another week . In other charts of the United States , " Better in Time " peaked at number four on the Adult Top 40 , ninety @-@ nine on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , three at the Mainstream Top 40 , and at number four on the Adult Contemporary chart , where it spent fifty @-@ two weeks on the chart . The single became the seventeenth best @-@ selling single of 2008 in Austria , as well as the twenty @-@ second in Germany and Switzerland , the thirty @-@ sixth in New Zealand , the thirty @-@ seventh in the UK , the fifty @-@ fifth of Australia , the sixty @-@ fourth in the Netherlands , and the seventy @-@ second in Flanders , a region in Belgium . 
 = = Music video and promotion = = 
 The music video was filmed at Hampton Court House School in London by the British director Sophie Muller in February 2008 , and was released at the end of the same month . The video is inspired by fashion design , with Lewis performing in front of " unrelated photographic set @-@ ups " , and shows what goes on behind the scenes . In some parts of the video Lewis is shown with a horse . 
 Lewis first performed the song live on the television programme Dancing on Ice on 9 March 2008 . Lewis also performed both sides of the single on BBC One 's Sport Relief on 14 March 2008 , Good Morning America on 4 April 2008 , and on the Jimmy Kimmel Live ! show along with " Bleeding Love " . On 3 September 2008 Lewis performed the song on Live with Regis and Kelly , and on 1 October 2008 on the season finale of America 's Got Talent . The song was featured in the 90210 episode " Lucky Strike " , originally aired on 9 September 2008 . On 24 November 2008 , Lewis performed the song at the 2008 American Music Awards . In May 2010 , the song was added to the setlist of her The Labyrinth tour , performed as the fourth song of the show . " Better in Time " was included on the tour 's live album and Blu @-@ ray The Labyrinth Tour Live from The O2 , released on 29 November 2010 . In 2011 , Lewis performed a reggae version of the song at BBC Radio 1 segment Live Lounge , where she mashed up the single with " Man Down " , a song by Rihanna . It is also one of thirty @-@ eight songs included on the benefit album Songs for Japan , a compilation album released in response to the aftermath of the 2011 earthquake and tsunami in Tōhoku , Japan ) , released on 25 March 2011 . " Better in Time " was used in the American television series Pretty Little Liars , for the second season finale " <unk> " , in the masquerade ball scene . In 2013 , Lewis performed the song along with " Man Down " during her Glassheart Tour . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = O ewiges Feuer , o Ursprung der Liebe , BWV 34 = 
 O ewiges Feuer , o Ursprung der Liebe ( O eternal fire , o source of love ) , BWV 34 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach . He composed it in Leipzig in for Pentecost Sunday , based on an earlier wedding cantata , BWV 34a , beginning with the same line . Bach led the first performance on 1 June 1727 . 
 An unknown librettist adapted the text of three movements from the wedding cantata and added two recitatives . A central contemplative aria for alto , accompanied by two flutes and muted strings , is framed by recitatives , while the two outer movements are performed by the chorus and a festive Baroque instrumental ensemble of three trumpets , timpani , two oboes , strings and continuo . The last movement quotes the conclusion of Psalm 128 , " Friede über Israel " ( Peace upon Israel ) . The themes of eternal fire , love , dwelling together and peace suit both occasions , wedding and Pentecost . 
 = = History and text = = 
 Bach adapted three movements of an earlier wedding cantata , O ewiges Feuer , o Ursprung der Liebe , BWV 34a , as movements 1 , 3 and 5 of a cantata for Pentecost Sunday , adding two recitatives . The prescribed readings for the day are taken from the Acts of the Apostles , on the Holy Spirit ( Acts 2 : 1 – 13 ) , and from the Gospel of John , in which Jesus announces the Spirit who will teach , in his Farewell Discourse ( John 14 : 23 – 31 ) . The workload of the composer and his musicians was high for Christmas , Easter and Pentecost , because in Leipzig they were all celebrated for three days . 
 The texts are of unknown authorship . The beginning of the text of the wedding cantata could be kept unchanged , because the image of the flames and the spirit of love suit the Pentecostal events as well as a wedding : the author had only to replace the reference to " <unk> Paar " ( united couple ) with a reference to the gospel . Movement 5 quotes the conclusion of Psalm 128 , " Friede über Israel " ( Peace upon Israel , Psalms 128 : 6 ) . This quote was already part of movement 4 of the wedding cantata , which quotes in movement 3 verses 4 – 6a from the same psalm . 
 Bach led the first performance on 1 June 1727 in the Nikolaikirche . The Bach scholar Klaus Hofmann notes that a printed libretto for the congregation was recently found in the Russian National Library in St. Petersburg , containing the texts for the three feast days of Pentecost and Trinity of 1727 . Until then the work had been dated much later , such as 1746 when a revival took place for which performance material exists . As the music of the 1727 version is lost , the timing of Bach 's revisions to the wedding cantata is not known . It is likely that he revised it further in the 1740s because he wrote a new score . 
 = = Structure and scoring = = 
 Bach structured the cantata in five movements , with two choral movements framing a sequence of recitative – aria – recitative . Bach scored the work for three vocal soloists ( alto , tenor , bass ) , a four @-@ part choir and a Baroque instrumental ensemble of three trumpets ( Tr ) , timpani ( Ti ) , two flauti traversi ( Ft ) , two oboes ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . The Bach scholar Christoph Wolff describes the " large @-@ scale instrumental scoring " as " suited to the festive occasion " . 
 In the following table of the movements , the scoring follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The continuo , playing throughout , is not shown . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = 1 = = = 
 The opening chorus , " O ewiges Feuer , o Ursprung der Liebe " ( O eternal fire , o source of love ) , illustrates two contrasting subjects , " ewig " ( eternal ) and " Feuer " ( fire ) . While " ewig " appears as long notes , held for more than one measure , the flames ( or tongues ) of the fire are set in " lively figuration from the strings and agile coloraturas from the voices " . The instrumental ritornello comprises a sustained trumpet entry , active strings , and " flickering " oboes , drums , and trumpets . Unlike in most da capo movements , this ritornello appears only at the beginning and end . The basses enter first , " holding a top D for most of five bars to symbolise the ' eternal ' , the other three parts <unk> with ' fiery ' embellishments " , as John Eliot Gardiner notes . The middle section develops these themes in minor keys , in " dance @-@ like vocal pairings " , before the ritornello returns one more time to reprise the first section . 
 = = = 2 = = = 
 A tenor recitative , " Herr , unsre Herzen halten dir dein Wort der Wahrheit für " ( Lord , our hearts keep Your word of truth fast ) , adopts an authoritative tone , is in minor mode , and begins with a bass pedal . It expands the concept of God abiding with his people , as outlined in the gospel . 
 = = = 3 = = = 
 An alto aria , " Wohl euch , ihr <unk> Seelen , die Gott zur <unk> <unk> " ( It is well for you , you chosen souls , whom God has designated for his dwelling ) , conveys images of contentment by incorporating a lilting <unk> @-@ like rhythm , with an obbligato melody played by muted violins and flutes in octaves and tenths . It is accompanied by a tonic pedal in the continuo . The aria is in adapted ternary form . The pastoral character suited the original text , " Wohl euch , ihr <unk> <unk> " ( It is well for you , you chosen sheep ) , which alludes to the bridegroom , a pastor or " shepherd of souls " . Gardiner notes " the tender sensuousness of the pastoral writing , the pairings of thirds and sixths , the blending of flutes and muted strings and the satisfying textures and calm enchantment disturbed only momentarily by modulation " , and considers that the piece had possibly some " deeper personal significance " . 
 = = = 4 = = = 
 The bass recitative , " <unk> sich Gott die <unk> <unk> , die er mit Heil <unk> " ( If God chooses the holy dwellings that He inhabits with salvation ) , is quite similar in character to the tenor recitative . The last two measures form an introduction to the closing movement . 
 = = = 5 = = = 
 The closing chorus , " Friede über Israel " ( Peace upon Israel ) , opens with a solemn rendering of the psalm text , marked Adagio . The violins and oboes first play an ascending figure . Gardiner notes that the section is " reminiscent of and equivalent in grandeur to the opening <unk> to the B minor Mass " . The slow music on the psalm text is contrasted by a " spirited and very secular @-@ sounding march , setting " <unk> den <unk> <unk> " ( Thank the exalted wondrous hands ) . Both sections appear first as instrumental and are then repeated by the chorus . Hofmann notes that this music is reminiscent of Bach 's works for the Köthen court , composed for Leopold , Prince of Anhalt @-@ Köthen . Gardiner concludes : 
 There is an extended stretch of thrilling orchestra writing before the choir returns to the ‘ Peace upon Israel ’ theme , this time within the Allegro pulse , with a final shout of joy from the sopranos on a top B bringing this irresistible Whit Sunday cantata to a glorious conclusion . 
 = = Selected recordings = = 
 The selection is taken from the listing on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . 
 J.S. Bach : Cantatas BWV 34 & BWV 56 – Jonathan Sternberg , Wiener Kammerchor , Wiener <unk> . Bach Guild / Artemis Classics 1950 . 
 J.S. Bach : Cantatas BWV 187 & BWV 34 – <unk> Hellmann , Kantorei & Kammerorchester of <unk> Mainz . Cantate 1958 . 
 Les Grandes <unk> de J.S. Bach Vol . 8 – Fritz Werner , Heinrich @-@ Schütz @-@ Chor Heilbronn , Pforzheim Chamber Orchestra . Erato 1961 . 
 Die Bach Kantate Vol . 36 – Helmuth Rilling , Gächinger Kantorei , Bach @-@ Collegium Stuttgart . Hänssler 1972 . 
 J.S. Bach : Das Kantatenwerk – Sacred Cantatas Vol . 2 – Nikolaus Harnoncourt , Wiener <unk> , Chorus <unk> ( Chorus Master : Hans <unk> ) , Concentus Musicus Wien . Teldec 1973 . 
 Bach Cantatas Vol . 3 – Ascension Day , Whitsun , Trinity – Karl Richter , Münchener Bach @-@ Chor , Münchener Bach @-@ Orchester . Archiv Produktion 1975 . 
 J.S. Bach : Cantatas BWV 11 & BWV 34 – Philip Ledger , King 's College Choir Cambridge , English Chamber Orchestra . HMV 1981 . 
 Bach : Cantatas 34 , 50 , 147 – Harry Christophers , The Sixteen . Collins Classics 1990 . 
 J.S. Bach : Whitsun Cantatas – John Eliot Gardiner , Monteverdi Choir , English Baroque Soloists . Archiv Produktion 1999 . 
 J.S. Bach : Kantaten – Alt . : Karl @-@ Friedrich Beringer , <unk> Knabenchor , Deutsche Kammer @-@ <unk> Berlin . Rondeau Production 1999 . 
 Bach Cantatas Vol . 26 : Long Melford – John Eliot Gardiner , Monteverdi Choir , English Baroque Soloists . Soli Deo Gloria 2000 . 
 Bach Edition Vol . 21 – Cantatas Vol . 12 – Pieter Jan Leusink , Holland Boys Choir , Netherlands Bach Collegium . Brilliant Classics 2000 . 
 J.S. Bach : Complete Cantatas Vol . 21 – Ton Koopman , Amsterdam Baroque Orchestra & Choir . Antoine Marchand 2001 . 
 J.S. Bach : The Ascension Oratorio and Two Festive Cantatas – Greg <unk> , Bach Choir of Bethlehem , The Bach Festival Orchestra . Dorian Recordings 2001 . 
 <unk> zum Bachfest Leipzig 2005 " Bach und die <unk> ” – Georg Christoph Biller , Thomanerchor , Akademie für Alte Musik Berlin , Matthias Rexroth , Martin <unk> , Matthias <unk> , MDR Figaro 2005 
 Thomanerchor Leipzig – Das <unk> mit Bach , Vol . 7 : <unk> · Pentecost – Cantatas BWV 34 , 74 , 172 – Georg Christoph Biller , Thomanerchor , <unk> Leipzig . Rondeau Production 2007 
 J.S. Bach : Kantate <unk> 34 « O ewiges Feuer , O Ursprung der Liebe » – Rudolf Lutz , <unk> der Schola Seconda Pratica , Schola Seconda Pratica . Gallus Media 2009 . 
 = .sj = 
 .sj is the Internet country code top @-@ level domain ( ccTLD ) reserved for the designation Svalbard and Jan Mayen . The domain name registry is Norid , but .sj is not open for registration . The issuing of the domain was based on the ISO 3166 designation of Svalbard and Jan Mayen , which consists of two separately administrated integrated territories of Norway : the Arctic archipelago Svalbard and the nearly uninhabited volcanic island Jan Mayen . .sj was designated on 21 August 1997 , at the same time as Bouvet Island was allocated .bv. Both were placed under the .no registry Norid , which is also the sponsor . Norwegian policy states that .no is sufficient for those institutions connected to both Svalbard and Jan Mayen , and therefore the domain is not open to registration . It is Norwegian policy not to commercialize domain resources , so there are no plans to sell .sj. Should the domain later come into use , it will be under regulation of the Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority and follow the same policy as .no. There are two second @-@ level domains reserved for the two areas : <unk> and jan @-@ <unk> , but other web addresses are also used . 
 = = History = = 
 Svalbard and Jan Mayen are two integrated territories of Norway with special status ( unincorporated area ) . The Svalbard Treaty grants Norway full sovereignty of Svalbard , but the archipelago holds special status as among other things a free economic zone and is not part of the European Economic Area and the Schengen Area . Jan Mayen is a nearly unpopulated volcanic island in the Atlantic Ocean and is a fully integrated part of Norway . During the establishment of the ISO 3166 codes , it was proposed that Svalbard have its own code , but the Norwegian authorities chose to also include Jan Mayen in the area . Following the ISO codes , .sj was allocated on 21 August 1997 , at the same time .bv was allocated . 
 In June 2015 , Norwegian computer scientist Håkon Wium Lie and the Socialist Left Party proposed using the .sj domain , along with .bv , as online free havens . The proposal aims at protecting both the Norwegian authorities and foreign dissidents from surveillance . 
 = = Policy = = 
 Management of .sj lies with the Trondheim @-@ based Norid , which is also the domain name registry for .no and the unused .bv. Norid is a limited company owned by Uninett , which is again owned by the Norwegian Ministry of Education and Research . The legal right to manage the domains is two @-@ fold , based both on an agreement with the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority ( IANA ) and regulations under the Telecommunication Act which is supervised by the Lillesand @-@ based Norwegian Post and Telecommunications Authority . 
 The policy for use of .sj is regulated by the Regulation Concerning Domain Names Under Norwegian Country Code Top @-@ level Domains , also known as the Domain Regulation . This regulation also regulates Norway 's other two ccTLDs , .bv and .no. Should .sj later come unto use , the same rules and procedures currently regarding .no would be used for .sj. The domain remains reserved for potential future use . Sale of the two unused ccTLDs has not been an item to consider for policymakers , as commercialization of the domain resources is in direct contradiction to Norwegian policy . 
 = Hurricane Caroline = 
 Hurricane Caroline was one of two tropical cyclones to affect northern Mexico during the 1975 Atlantic hurricane season . The third named storm and second hurricane of the season , Caroline developed on August 24 north of the Dominican Republic . The system crossed Cuba and briefly degenerated into a tropical wave due to land interaction . However , upon emergence into the western Caribbean Sea , it was once again designated as a tropical depression after a well @-@ defined circulation was observed on satellite imagery . Moving towards the west @-@ northwest , the cyclone clipped the northern portion of the Yucatán Peninsula before entering the Gulf of Mexico . Caroline was upgraded to a tropical storm on August 29 in the central Gulf of Mexico before rapid intensification began . Early on August 31 , Caroline reached its peak intensity with winds of 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) , before landfall south of Brownsville , Texas with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) shortly thereafter . After moving inland , Caroline quickly weakened and dissipated over the mountainous terrain of northeastern Mexico on September 1 . There were only two deaths from Caroline , both indirect . However , there was heavy rainfall in southern Texas and Mexico , including almost 12 in ( 300 mm ) at Port Isabel . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa on August 15 and rapidly moved westward at 17 mph ( 28 km / h ) along the Intertropical Convergence Zone ( ITCZ ) . On August 18 , the system turned northeast away from the ITCZ and slowed down by the time it was 600 miles ( 965 km ) northeast of Puerto Rico . On August 22 and 23 , the system changed course for the second time as it turned to the southwest . By noon on August 24 , satellite imagery showed the disturbance establishing a closed area of circulation with winds reaching 25 mph ( 40 km / h ) and the barometric pressure falling to 1 @,@ 011 millibars ( 29 @.@ 9 inHg ) . The disturbance then became Tropical Depression Five as it neared northeastern Cuba and southeastern Bahamas . It crossed Cuba where it momentarily weakened back to a tropical wave . The cyclone then regained tropical depression status on August 27 as it continued westward into the Gulf of Mexico . 
 After brushing the northeastern tip of the Yucatán Peninsula , Tropical Depression Five continued to move west at 8 mph ( 13 km / h ) as the storm entered an area favorable for intensification . On August 29 , the tropical system strengthened to a tropical storm and was named Caroline by the National Hurricane Center . By that time the storm was only 400 miles ( 640 km ) east @-@ southeast of Brownsville , Texas . Caroline 's forward speed slowed down to 5 mph ( 8 km / h ) while intensifying and on the same day , Caroline was upgraded to hurricane status . Before making landfall , two hurricane hunter aircraft 's flew into Caroline 's center on August 30 , where data collected from the aircraft showed a barometric pressure reading of 987 millibars ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) and winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . Six hours later the hurricane rapidly intensified , with winds reaching 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) and the pressure dropping to 973 millibars ( 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) . The pressure then fell to 963 millibars ( 28 @.@ 4 inHg ) before the storm made landfall 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of Brownsville on August 31 . Caroline rapidly weakened to a tropical depression twelve hours after landfall and dissipated on September 1 over northeastern Mexico . 
 = = = Experiments = = = 
 Two National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration ( NOAA ) Research planes conducted experiments into Caroline . The experiments were to study and measure the wind velocity and the environment inside and around the eye as well as the boundary layer of the hurricane . The results of the experiments concluded that Caroline had a higher dissipation rate than normal hurricanes , with the dissipating rate averaging at 30 % . This conclusion suggested that energy in a hurricane dissipating internally above the surface layer is two times higher than energy dissipating at the surface . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Caroline brushed the southeastern Bahamas and made landfall in eastern Cuba as a tropical depression though its effects , if any , are unknown . 
 The National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch for coastal sections of south Texas and northern Mexico on August 30 . Small water craft were also advised of the deteriorating conditions . In Texas , local officials in Cameron County opened storm shelters . Relief and clean up organizations were notified of the upcoming threat while several local oil rigs evacuated personnel . In addition , relief squads from the American Red Cross moved to South Texas in case the storm made landfall . Neil Frank , the director of the National Hurricane Center advised campers along the beaches to evacuate , stating that " he doesn 't want them trapped " . 
 Due to Caroline ’ s compact size , sustained winds only reached 48 mph ( 78 km / h ) in Brownsville , Texas . The storm also dropped heavy rain the southern portion of the state , as much as 11 @.@ 93 in ( 302 mm ) in Port Isabel . In Brownsville , Caroline broke a record for most rainfall within a 24 @-@ hour period during the month of August . The rainfall caused minor flooding . This helped end a prolonged drought in the Rio Grande Valley . It canceled most of the Labor Day holiday season for South Padre Island , one of the busiest weekends for tourism on the island . Caroline also produced storm tides 1 – 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 3 @-@ 1 @.@ 2 m ) above normal along coastal sections of southern Texas . Overall damage in southern Texas was minor , and there were two indirect fatalities due to drowning incidents in Galveston . 
 In Mexico , coastal residents evacuated to storm shelters south of Tampico . Elsewhere , 300 residents were evacuated to storm shelters in Soto la Marina 55 miles ( 88 km ) from Santa Rosa . In northeast Mexico , 150 residents evacuated to shelters in San Fernando , 85 miles ( 137 km ) south of Brownsville . The storm produced 10 feet ( 3 m ) storm tides to coastal sections of Mexico and 5 @-@ 10 in ( 127 – 254 mm ) of rain to inland areas . The rainfalls caused moderate flooding which caused 1 @,@ 000 people to evacuate and left moderate damage to homes and businesses . The rains broke an eight @-@ month drought that was affecting inland areas of northern Mexico that was affecting the area 's corn production . Along the coast , several small villages sustained significant damage from the hurricane 's storm surge . 
 = Birmingham City F.C. = 
 Birmingham City Football Club ( / <unk> ˈsɪti / , locally / <unk> / ) is a professional association football club based in the city of Birmingham , England . Formed in 1875 as Small Heath Alliance , they became Small Heath in 1888 , then Birmingham in 1905 , finally becoming Birmingham City in 1943 . They compete in the Football League Championship , the second tier of league football in England . 
 As Small Heath , they played in the Football Alliance before becoming founder members and first ever champions of the Football League Second Division . The most successful period in their history was in the 1950s and early 1960s . They achieved their highest finishing position of sixth in the First Division in the 1955 – 56 season and reached the 1956 FA Cup Final , progressed to the final of the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup in 1960 and 1961 , and won their first major trophy , the League Cup , in 1963 , beating Aston Villa 3 – 1 on aggregate . They won the latter competition for the second time in 2011 . They have played in the top tier of English football for the majority of their history . Their longest period spent outside the top division , between 1986 and 2002 , included two brief spells in the third tier of the English League , during which time they twice won the Football League Trophy . 
 St Andrew 's has been their home ground since 1906 . They have a long @-@ standing and fierce rivalry with Aston Villa , their nearest neighbours , with whom they play the Second City derby . The club 's nickname is Blues , due to the colour of their kit , and their fans are known as <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Birmingham City were founded as Small Heath Alliance in 1875 , and from 1877 played their home games at Muntz Street . The club turned professional in 1885 , and three years later became the first football club to become a limited company with a board of directors , under the name of Small Heath F.C. Ltd . From the 1889 – 90 season they played in the Football Alliance , which ran alongside the Football League . In 1892 , Small Heath , along with the other Alliance teams , were invited to join the newly formed Football League Second Division . They finished as champions , but failed to win promotion via the test match system ; the following season promotion to the First Division was secured after a second @-@ place finish and test match victory over Darwen . The club adopted the name Birmingham Football Club in 1905 , and moved into their new home , St Andrew 's Ground , the following year . Matters on the field failed to live up to their surroundings . Birmingham were relegated in 1908 , obliged to apply for re @-@ election two years later , and remained in the Second Division until after the First World War . 
 Frank Womack 's captaincy and the creativity of Scottish international playmaker Johnny Crosbie contributed much to Birmingham winning their second Division Two title in 1920 – 21 . Womack went on to make 515 appearances , a club record for an outfielder , over a twenty @-@ year career . 1920 also saw the debut of the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Joe Bradford , who went on to score a club record 267 goals in 445 games , and won 12 caps for England . In 1931 , manager Leslie Knighton led the club to their first FA Cup Final , which they lost 2 – 1 to Second Division club West Bromwich Albion . Though Birmingham remained in the top flight for 18 seasons , they struggled in the league , with much reliance placed on England goalkeeper Harry Hibbs to make up for the lack of goals , Bradford excepted , at the other end . They were finally relegated in 1939 , the last full season before the Football League was abandoned for the duration of the Second World War . 
 The name Birmingham City F.C. was adopted in 1943 . Under Harry Storer , appointed manager in 1945 , the club won the Football League South wartime league and reached the semifinal of the first post @-@ war FA Cup . Two years later they won their third Second Division title , conceding only 24 goals in the 42 @-@ game season . Storer 's successor Bob Brocklebank , though unable to stave off relegation in 1950 , brought in players who made a major contribution to the club 's successes of the next decade . When Arthur Turner took over as manager in November 1954 , he made them play closer to their potential , and a 5 – 1 win on the last day of the 1954 – 55 season confirmed them as champions . In their first season back in the First Division , Birmingham achieved their highest league finish of sixth place . They also reached the FA Cup final , losing 3 – 1 to Manchester City in the game notable for City 's goalkeeper Bert Trautmann playing the last 20 minutes with a broken bone in his neck . The following season the club lost in the FA Cup semifinal for the third time since the war , this time beaten 2 – 0 by Manchester United 's " Busby Babes " . 
 Birmingham became the first English club side to take part in European competition when they played their first group game in the inaugural Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup competition on 15 May 1956 ; they went on to reach the semifinal where they drew 4 – 4 on aggregate with Barcelona , losing the replay 2 – 1 . They were also the first English club side to reach a European final , losing 4 – 1 on aggregate to Barcelona in the 1960 Fairs Cup final and 4 – 2 to A.S. Roma the following year . In the 1961 semifinal they beat Internazionale home and away ; no other English club won a competitive game in the San Siro until Arsenal managed it more than 40 years later . Gil Merrick 's side saved their best form for cup competitions . Though opponents in the 1963 League Cup final , local rivals Aston Villa , were pre @-@ match favourites , Birmingham raised their game and won 3 – 1 on aggregate to lift their first major trophy . In 1965 , after ten years in the top flight , they returned to the Second Division . 
 Businessman Clifford Coombs took over as chairman in 1965 , luring Stan Cullis out of retirement to manage the club . Cullis 's team played attractive football which took them to the semifinals of the League Cup in 1967 and the FA Cup in 1968 , but league football needed a different approach . Successor Freddie Goodwin produced a team playing skilful , aggressive football that won promotion as well as reaching an FA Cup semifinal . Two years later , the club raised money by selling Bob Latchford to Everton for a British record fee of £ 350 @,@ 000 , but without his goals the team struggled . Sir Alf Ramsey briefly managed the club before Jim Smith took over in 1978 . With relegation a certainty , the club sold Trevor Francis to Nottingham Forest , making him the first player transferred for a fee of £ 1 million ; Francis had scored a total of 133 goals in 329 appearances over his nine years at Birmingham . Smith took Birmingham straight back to the First Division , but a poor start to the 1981 – 82 season saw him replaced by Ron Saunders , who had just resigned from league champions Aston Villa . Saunders ' team struggled to score goals and in 1984 they were relegated . They bounced back up , but the last home game of the 1984 – 85 promotion season , against Leeds United , was marred by rioting , culminating in the death of a boy when a wall collapsed on him . This was on the same day as the Bradford City stadium fire , and the events at St Andrew 's formed part of the remit of Mr Justice Popplewell 's inquiry into safety at sports grounds . The club lacked stability both on and off the field . Saunders quit after FA Cup defeat to non @-@ League team Altrincham , staff were laid off , the training ground was sold , and by 1989 Birmingham were in the Third Division for the first time in their history . 
 In April 1989 the Kumar brothers , owners of a clothing chain , bought the club . A rapid turnover of managers , the absence of promised investment , and a threatened mass refusal of players to renew contracts was relieved only by a victorious trip to Wembley in the Associate Members Cup . Terry Cooper delivered promotion , but the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International ( BCCI ) put the Kumars ' businesses into receivership ; in November 1992 BCCI 's liquidator put up for sale their 84 % holding in the football club . The club continued in administration for four months , until publisher David Sullivan bought it for £ 700 @,@ 000 , installed the then 23 @-@ year @-@ old Karren Brady as managing director and allowed Cooper money for signings . On the last day of the season , the team avoided relegation back to the third tier , but after a poor start to the 1993 – 94 season Cooper was replaced by Barry Fry . The change did not prevent relegation , but Fry 's first full season brought promotion back to the second tier as champions , and victory in the Football League Trophy at Wembley , beating Carlisle United with a Paul Tait golden goal , completed the " lower @-@ league Double " . After one more year , Fry was sacked to make way for the return of Trevor Francis . 
 Francis introduced players with top @-@ level experience such as Manchester United skipper Steve Bruce . In his second season the club narrowly missed out on a play @-@ off position , followed by three years of play @-@ off semifinal defeats . They also reached the 2001 League Cup final against Liverpool at Cardiff 's Millennium Stadium . Birmingham equalised in the last minute of normal time , but the match went to a penalty shootout which Liverpool won . By October 2001 , lack of progress had made Francis 's position untenable . After a 6 – 0 League Cup defeat to Manchester City , he left by mutual consent , replaced two months later by Steve Bruce . Bruce shook up a stale team , taking them from mid @-@ table into the play @-@ offs where they beat Norwich City on penalties to win promotion to the Premier League . 
 Motivated by the inspirational Christophe Dugarry , Birmingham 's first top @-@ flight season for 16 years finished in mid @-@ table . Loan signing Mikael Forssell 's 17 league goals helped Birmingham to a top @-@ half finish in 2003 – 04 , though performances and results tailed off badly towards the end of the season . First @-@ team coach Mark Bowen was sacked and replaced by Eric Black , international players were signed , but an injury to Forssell left the 2004 – 05 team struggling for goals . More transfer window loan signings ensured another mid @-@ table finish . Only two months later , chairman David Gold said it was time to " start talking about being as good as anyone outside the top three or four " with " the best squad of players for 25 years " . Injuries , lack of form , and a lack of investment during the transfer window saw them relegated before the last game of a season whose lowlight was a 0 – 7 FA Cup defeat to Liverpool . Jermaine Pennant and Emile Heskey left for record fees , many more were released , but Bruce retained the confidence of the board . His amended recruitment strategy , combining young " hungry " players with free @-@ transfer experience and shrewd exploitation of the loan market , brought automatic promotion at the end of a season which had included calls for his head . 
 In July 2007 , Hong Kong @-@ based businessman Carson Yeung bought 29 @.@ 9 % of shares in the club , making him the biggest single shareholder , with a view to taking full control in the future . Uncertain as to his future under possible new owners , Bruce left in mid @-@ season to become manager of Premier League rivals Wigan Athletic . His successor , Scotland national team manager Alex McLeish , was unable to stave off relegation , but achieved promotion back to the Premier League at the first attempt , and a ninth @-@ place finish , their best for 51 years , the following season . In 2011 , they combined a second victory in the League Cup , defeating favourites Arsenal 2 – 1 with goals from Nikola Žigić and Obafemi Martins and securing qualification for the Europa League , with relegation back to the second tier . McLeish resigned in June 2011 to join Aston Villa . Successor Chris Hughton narrowly failed to reach the knockout rounds of the Europa League and the playoff final before , with the club in financial turmoil and under a transfer embargo , leaving for Norwich City in June 2012 . Under Lee Clark , Birmingham twice retained their divisional status , albeit through Paul <unk> 's 93rd @-@ minute goal in the last match of 2013 – 14 to avoid relegation on goal difference . After a continuation of the poor form from the previous season , Clark was sacked in October 2014 , to be replaced by Burton Albion manager and former Birmingham player Gary Rowett . 
 = = Colours and badge = = 
 The Small Heath Alliance members decided among themselves that their colours would be blue ; in the early days , they wore whatever blue shirt they had . Their first uniform kit was a dark blue shirt with a white sash and white shorts . Several variations on a blue theme were tried ; the one that stuck was the royal blue shirt with a white " V " , adopted during the First World War and retained until the late 1920s . Though the design changed , the royal blue remained . In 1971 they adopted the " penguin " strip – royal blue with a broad white central front panel – which lasted five years . Since then they have generally worn plain , nominally royal blue shirts , though the actual shade used has varied . Shorts have been either blue or white , and socks usually blue , white or a combination . White , yellow , red and black , on their own or in combination , have been the most frequently used colours for the away kit . 
 There have been aberrations . The 1992 kit , sponsored by Triton Showers , was made of a blue material covered with multicoloured splashes which resembled a shower curtain . Birmingham have only worn stripes on their home shirt once ; in 1999 they wore a blue shirt with a front central panel in narrow blue and white stripes , a design similar to the Tesco supermarket carrier bag of the time . 
 When the club changed their name from Small Heath to Birmingham in 1905 they adopted the city 's coat of arms as their crest , although this was not always worn on the shirts . The 1970s " penguin " shirt carried the letters " <unk> " intertwined at the centre of the chest . The Sports Argus newspaper ran a competition in 1972 to design a new badge for the club . The winning entry , a line @-@ drawn globe and ball , with ribbon carrying the club name and date of foundation , in plain blue and white , was adopted by the club but not worn on playing shirts until 1976 . An experiment was made in the early 1990s with colouring in the globe and ball , but the club soon reverted to the plain version . 
 For the 2016 – 17 season , the home kit is all blue , apart from white trim on the sleeves and three white stripes down the sides and round the sock tops . The away kit is all red , apart from white trim at the neck and under the sleeve and three white stripes on the shoulders , shorts and sock tops . The kits , supplied by Adidas in this first season of a four @-@ year deal , bear the logo of online bookmaker <unk> , the club 's principal sponsor . 
 Sponsors ' names or logos have appeared on the shirts since 1982 . Tables of shirt sponsors and kit suppliers appear below . 
 = = Stadiums = = 
 Small Heath Alliance played their first home games on waste ground off Arthur Street , Bordesley Green . As interest grew , they moved to a fenced @-@ off field in Ladypool Road , Sparkbrook , where admission could be charged . A year later , they moved again , to a field adjoining Muntz Street , Small Heath , near the main Coventry Road , with a capacity of about 10 @,@ 000 . The Muntz Street ground was adequate for 1880s friendly matches , and the capacity was gradually raised to around 30 @,@ 000 , but when several thousand spectators scaled walls and broke down turnstiles to get into a First Division match against Aston Villa , it became clear that it could no longer cope with the demand . 
 Director Harry Morris identified a site for a new ground in Bordesley Green , some three @-@ quarters of a mile ( 1 km ) from Muntz Street towards the city centre . The site was where a brickworks once operated ; the land sloped steeply down to stagnant pools , yet the stadium was constructed in under twelve months from land clearance to opening ceremony on Boxing Day 1906 . Heavy snow nearly prevented the opening ; volunteers had to clear pitch and terraces before the match , a goalless draw against Middlesbrough , could go ahead . The ground is reputed to have been cursed by gypsies evicted from the site ; although gypsies are known to have camped nearby , there is no contemporary evidence for their eviction by the club . 
 The original capacity of St Andrew 's was reported as 75 @,@ 000 , with 4 @,@ 000 seats in the Main Stand and space for 22 @,@ 000 under cover . By 1938 the official capacity was 68 @,@ 000 , and February 1939 saw the attendance record set at the fifth round FA Cup tie against Everton , variously recorded as 66 @,@ 844 or 67 @,@ 341 . On the outbreak of the Second World War , the Chief Constable ordered the ground 's closure because of the danger from air raids ; it was the only ground to be thus closed , and was only re @-@ opened after the matter was raised in Parliament . It was badly damaged during the Birmingham Blitz : the Railway End and the Kop as a result of bombing , while the Main Stand burnt down when a fireman mistook petrol for water . 
 The replacement Main Stand used a propped cantilever roof design , which meant fewer pillars to block spectators ' view of the pitch . Floodlights were installed in 1956 , and officially switched on for a friendly match against Borussia Dortmund in 1957 . By the early 1960s a stand had been built at the Railway End to the same design as the Main Stand , roofs had been put on the Kop and Tilton Road End , and the ground capacity was down to about 55 @,@ 000 . 
 Resulting from the 1986 Popplewell Report into the safety of sports grounds and the later Taylor Report , the capacity of St Andrew 's was set at 28 @,@ 235 for safety reasons , but it was accepted that the stadium had to be brought up to modern all @-@ seated standards . After the last home game of the 1993 – 94 season , the Kop and Tilton Road terraces were demolished – fans took home a significant proportion as souvenirs – to be replaced at the start of the new season by a 7 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Tilton Road Stand , continuing round the corner into the 9 @,@ 500 @-@ seat Kop which opened two months later . The 8 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Railway Stand followed in 1999 ; ten years later , this was renamed the Gil Merrick Stand , in honour of the club 's appearance record @-@ holder and former manager – but the Main Stand has still to be modernised . In 2013 , the club website listed the stadium capacity as 30 @,@ 016 . 
 In 2004 a proposal was put forward to build a " sports village " comprising a new 55 @,@ 000 capacity stadium for the club , to be known as the City of Birmingham Stadium , other sports and leisure facilities , and a super casino . The project would be jointly financed by Birmingham City Council , Birmingham City F.C. ( via the proceeds of the sale of St Andrew 's ) and the casino group Las Vegas Sands . The feasibility of the plan depended on the government issuing a licence for a super casino , and Birmingham being chosen as the venue , but this did not happen . The club have planning permission to redevelop the Main Stand , but club and council have continued to seek alternative sources of funding for the City of Birmingham Stadium project . 
 In 2013 , the Birmingham City Supporters ' Trust 's application for listing St Andrew 's as an Asset of Community Value ( ACV ) – a building or other land whose main use " furthers the social wellbeing or social interests of the local community " and where it is realistic to believe it could do so in the future . – under the Localism Act 2011 was approved by Birmingham City Council . This requires any proposed sale to be notified to the Council , and provides for a six @-@ month moratorium on that sale to allow the Trust and other community groups to submit their own bid . 
 = = Supporters = = 
 Birmingham fans consider their main rivals to be Aston Villa , their nearest neighbours geographically , with whom they contest the Second City derby . Lesser rivalries exist with fellow West Midlands clubs Wolverhampton Wanderers and West Bromwich Albion . According to a 2003 Football Fans Census survey , Aston Villa fans thought of Birmingham City as their main rivals , though this was not always the case . 
 Birmingham 's supporters are generally referred to as " <unk> " in the media and by the fans themselves ; the name is also used in a derogatory manner by fans of other clubs . A piece of public sculpture in the form of a ten @-@ times @-@ life @-@ size head lying on a mound near the St Andrew 's ground , <unk> <unk> 's Sleeping Iron Giant , has been repeatedly defaced with blue paint on its nose . Between 1994 and 1997 the club mascot took the form of a blue nose , though it is now a dog called Beau Brummie , a play on the name Beau <unk> and Brummie , the slang word for a person from Birmingham . 
 A number of supporters ' clubs are affiliated to the football club , both in England and abroad . An action group was formed in 1991 to protest against chairman <unk> Kumar , the club blamed an internet petition for the collapse of the purchase of player Lee Bowyer in 2005 , and antipathy towards the board provoked hostile chanting and a pitch invasion after the last match of the 2007 – 08 season , but when the club was in financial difficulties , supporters contributed to schemes which funded the purchase of players Brian Roberts in 1984 and Paul Peschisolido in 1992 . A supporters ' trust was formed under the auspices of Supporters Direct in 2012 . 
 There have been several fanzines published by supporters . Made in Brum , first issued in 2000 , was the only one regularly on sale in 2013 . The Zulu began some years earlier and ran for at least 16 seasons . The hooligan firm associated with the club , the Zulus , were unusual in that they had multi @-@ racial membership at a time when many such firms had associations with racist or right @-@ wing groups . 
 The fans ' anthem , an adaptation of Harry Lauder 's Keep right on to the end of the road , was adopted during the 1956 FA Cup campaign . The Times ' football correspondent described in his Cup Final preview how 
 the Birmingham clans swept their side along to Wembley – the first side ever to reach a final without once playing at home – on the wings of the song " Keep right on to the end of the road " . 
 Player Alex Govan is credited with popularising the song , by singing it on the coach on the way to the quarter final and when he revealed in an interview that it was his favourite . 
 In the build @-@ up to the 1956 FA Cup semi @-@ final with Sunderland I was interviewed by the press and happened to let slip that my favourite song was Harry Lauder 's old music hall number " Keep Right on to the End of the Road " . I thought no more about it , but when the third goal went in at Hillsborough the Blues fans all started singing it . It was the proudest moment of my life . 
 = = Ownership = = 
 Small Heath F.C. became a limited company in 1888 ; its first share issue was to the value of £ 650 . The board was made up of local businessmen and dignitaries until 1965 , when the club was sold to Clifford Coombs . By the mid @-@ 1980s the club was in financial trouble . Control passed from the Coombs family to former Walsall F.C. chairman Ken Wheldon , who cut costs , made redundancies , and sold off assets , including the club 's training ground . Still unable to make the club pay , Wheldon sold it to the Kumar brothers , owners of a clothing chain . Debt was still increasing when matters came to a head ; the collapse of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International ( BCCI ) put the Kumars ' businesses into receivership . The club continued in administration for four months until Sport Newspapers ' proprietor David Sullivan bought the Kumars ' 84 % holding for £ 700 @,@ 000 from BCCI 's liquidator in March 1993 . Birmingham City plc , of which the football club was a wholly owned subsidiary , was floated on the Alternative Investment Market ( AIM ) in 1997 with an issue of 15 million new shares , raising £ 7 @.@ 5 million of new investment . It made a pre @-@ tax profit of £ <unk> in the year ending 31 August 2008 . 
 In July 2007 , Hong Kong businessman Carson Yeung , via the Hong Kong Stock Exchange ( <unk> ) -listed company <unk> International Holdings Limited ( <unk> ) , bought 29 @.@ 9 % of the plc from its directors . Although his intention to take full control of the club initially came to nothing . <unk> completed the purchase in October 2009 at a total cost of £ <unk> , re @-@ registered the club as a private company , and renamed the holding company Birmingham International Holdings ( BIH ) . 
 Trading in BIH shares was suspended in June 2011 after Yeung 's arrest on charges of money @-@ laundering . Publication of financial results was repeatedly delayed , which led the Football League to impose a transfer embargo , and offers for the club were entertained from 2012 onwards . After Yeung resigned his positions with both club and company in early 2014 , share trading resumed , and following his conviction , efforts intensified to dispose of the club , which had to be done piecemeal in order to retain BIH 's share listing . 
 Going into 2015 , the Football League made public their concerns over Yeung 's attempts to impose his choice of directors on the <unk> board despite his conviction disqualifying him from exerting influence over a club . Relationships became increasingly factional , as illustrated by the failure of three directors , including the club 's de facto chief executive Panos <unk> , to gain re @-@ election , followed the next day by their reinstatement . On 17 February , the board voluntarily appointed receivers from accountants Ernst & Young to take over management of the company . Their statement stressed that no winding @-@ up petition had been issued and the company was not in liquidation . 
 In June 2015 , the receivers granted a two @-@ year exclusivity period to their preferred bidder , the British Virgin Islands @-@ registered investment vehicle Trillion Trophy Asia ( TTA ) , wholly owned by Chinese businessman Paul Suen Cho Hung . After striking deals with the previous major shareholders such that legal action against them would be dropped in return for their agreement not to obstruct any transfer of ownership , the receivers released a document in June 2016 setting out a timescale for the company restructure , share <unk> and takeover , to be completed by the end of October . It confirmed that Suen would hold 60 @.@ 78 % of BIH shares and the Yeung faction no more than 14 % , and that the company would not be sold on within two years . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Birmingham City 's honours include the following : 
 Second Division / Division One / The Championship ( level 2 ) 
 Champions : 1892 – 93 , 1920 – 21 , 1947 – 48 , 1954 – 55 
 Runners @-@ up : 1893 – 94 , 1900 – 01 , 1902 – 03 , 1971 – 72 , 1984 – 85 , 2006 – 07 , 2008 – 09 
 Play @-@ off winners : 2001 – 02 
 Third Division / Division Two ( level 3 ) 
 Champions : 1994 – 95 
 Runners @-@ up : 1991 – 92 
 FA Cup 
 Runners @-@ up : 1931 , 1956 
 League Cup 
 Winners : 1963 , 2011 
 Runners @-@ up : 2001 
 Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup 
 Runners @-@ up : 1960 , 1961 
 Associate Members Cup / Football League Trophy 
 Winners : 1991 , 1995 
 Birmingham Senior Cup 
 Winners : 1905 
 In pre @-@ league days , County Cups were second only to the FA Cup in importance as first @-@ team competitions . Small Heath first entered the Birmingham Senior Cup in 1878 – 79 – ten years before the foundation of the Football League – and won for the first time in 1905 , defeating West Bromwich Albion 7 – 2 in the final . Its importance declined with the increase in League fixtures , and from 1905 – 06 onwards , Birmingham fielded teams containing reserve @-@ team players . 
 Football League South ( wartime ) 
 Champions : 1945 – 46 
 Preparatory to the Football League resuming in 1946 – 47 , the First and Second Division clubs from the last pre @-@ war season were divided geographically between the Leagues North and South for 1945 – 46 . Going into the last day of the season , Aston Villa were top of League South but had finished their programme two points ( one win ) ahead of the chasers but with a worse goal average . Charlton Athletic were second , above Birmingham by 0 @.@ 002 of a goal . While Charlton could only draw at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers , Birmingham won away at Luton Town , so claimed the title by 0 @.@ 3 of a goal . 
 = = Statistics and records = = 
 Frank Womack holds the record for Birmingham league appearances , having played 491 matches between 1908 and 1928 , closely followed by Gil Merrick with 485 between 1946 and 1959 . If all senior competitions are included , Merrick has 551 , less closely followed by Womack 's 515 which is the record for an outfield player . The player who won most international caps while at the club is Maik Taylor with 58 for Northern Ireland . 
 The goalscoring record is held by Joe Bradford , with 249 league goals , 267 altogether , scored between 1920 and 1935 ; no other player comes close . Walter Abbott holds the records for the most goals scored in a season , in 1898 – 99 , with 34 league goals in the Second Division and 42 goals in total . 
 The club 's widest victory margin in the league was 12 – 0 , a scoreline which they achieved once in the Football Alliance , against Nottingham Forest in 1899 , and twice in the Second Division , against Walsall Town Swifts in 1892 and Doncaster Rovers in 1903 . They have lost a league match by an eight @-@ goal margin on eight occasions : twice in the Football Alliance and five times in the First Division , all away from home , and once at home , beaten 8 – 0 by AFC Bournemouth in the Championship in 2014 . Their record FA Cup win was 10 – 0 against Druids in the fourth qualifying round of the 1899 competition ; their record FA Cup defeat was 7 – 0 at home to Liverpool in the 2006 quarter final . 
 Birmingham 's home attendance record was set at the fifth @-@ round FA Cup tie against Everton on 11 February 1939 . It is variously recorded as 66 @,@ 844 or 67 @,@ 341 . According to the club website , the highest transfer fee received for a Birmingham player is £ 6 @.@ 5 million from Liverpool for Jermaine Pennant in August 2006 , while the most expensive player bought was Emile Heskey , who joined from Liverpool in May 2004 for a fee of £ <unk> 
 = = Players = = 
 = = = Current squad = = = 
 Where a player has not declared an international allegiance , nation is determined by place of birth . Squad correct as of 26 July 2016 . 
 Squad numbers apply to the 2015 – 16 season . 
 = = = Reserves and Academy = = = 
 = = = Birmingham City Ladies = = = 
 Birmingham City Ladies Football Club was formed in 1968 . The first team worked their way through the leagues until promoted to the FA Women 's Premier League in 2002 . After Birmingham City F.C. withdrew financial support in 2005 , the club were only able to continue because of a personal donation . They re @-@ affiliated with Birmingham City in 2010 , were founder members of the FA WSL the following year , and won the FA Women 's Cup in 2012 . 
 = = Club officials = = 
 Owner : Birmingham International Holdings Ltd 
 Birmingham City F.C. board of directors 
 As of 11 August 2015 
 Director : Panos <unk> 
 Director : Shui Cheong Ma 
 Coaching staff 
 As of 15 May 2015 
 Manager : Gary Rowett 
 Assistant manager : Kevin Summerfield 
 First team coach : Mark Sale 
 Goalkeeping coach : Kevin Poole 
 Senior professional development coach : Richard Beale 
 Head of performance : Darren Robinson 
 Head of sports science : Dave Carolan 
 Head of analysis : Joe <unk> 
 = = Notable managers = = 
 Gil Merrick was the first Birmingham manager to win a major trophy , the League Cup in 1963 . Merrick also led the club to the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup final in 1961 , following Pat Beasley who had done the same in 1960 . Leslie Knighton took the club to the final of the FA Cup in 1931 ; Arthur Turner did likewise in 1956 , as well as taking charge of the club 's highest league finish , sixth place in the 1955 – 56 First Division . Birmingham reached the 2001 Football League Cup Final under Trevor Francis , whose successor as permanent manager , Steve Bruce , twice achieved promotion to the Premier League . Birmingham won the League Cup for the second time under Alex McLeish in 2011 . The 1966 World Cup @-@ winning manager , Sir Alf Ramsey , took charge of the club briefly in 1977 . 
 = Tupelo Honey = 
 Tupelo Honey is the fifth studio album by Northern Irish singer @-@ songwriter Van Morrison . It was released in October 1971 by Warner Bros. Records . Morrison had written all of the songs on the album in Woodstock , New York , before his move to Marin County , California , except for " You 're My Woman " , which he wrote during the recording sessions . Recording began at the beginning of the second quarter of 1971 at the Wally Heider Studios , San Francisco . Morrison moved to the Columbia Studios in May 1971 to complete the album . 
 The namesake for the album and its title track is a varietal honey produced from the flowers of the tupelo tree found in the Southeastern United States . The album features various musical genres , most prominently country , but also R & B , soul , folk @-@ rock and blue @-@ eyed soul . The lyrics echo the domestic bliss portrayed on the album cover ; they largely describe and celebrate the rural surroundings of Woodstock and Morrison 's family life with then @-@ wife Janet " Planet " Rigsbee . 
 Tupelo Honey received most of its success in America ; it charted at number 27 on the Billboard charts and in 1977 it was certified gold by the RIAA . It failed to reach any of the European or other world @-@ wide charts . The album yielded two hit singles , the hymn @-@ like title track , as well as the R & B @-@ flavored " Wild Night " . The third released single , " ( Straight to Your Heart ) Like a Cannonball " , was less successful and did not enter the Billboard Hot 100 . The album received mostly positive reviews from music critics at the time of its release , but Morrison 's biographers were less favorable towards it in later years . 
 = = Background = = 
 Prior to the Tupelo Honey recording sessions , Morrison had recorded demo tracks in Woodstock for an upcoming country @-@ and @-@ western album . Some of the tracks planned for this album would appear on Tupelo Honey , but other more traditional country songs like " The Wild Side of Life " , " Crying Time " and " Banks of the Ohio " were later deleted . Morrison decided to move from Woodstock when the lease on his house expired and the landlord wanted to move back in . He explained to Richard Williams in Melody Maker that the release of the documentary film , Woodstock , in 1970 had altered the quaint character of the community : " Everybody and his uncle started showing up at the bus station , and that was the complete opposite of what it was supposed to be . " In April 1971 , before he began recording on the planned album , Morrison and his family moved to Marin County , California , where his wife Janet Planet had family living close by . Morrison 's guitarist at the time , John Platania , told biographer Steve Turner that Morrison " didn 't want to leave , but Janet wanted to move out West . He was manipulated into going . " The Morrisons ' new home was in a rural setting situated on a hillside close to San Francisco amid redwood trees . With the move , Morrison abandoned the idea of a full country album and exchanged some of the intended material for songs he had written earlier . 
 At this point in time , Morrison was under pressure by Warner Bros. Records to produce chart singles and two albums within a year . His previous album , His Band and the Street Choir , had been released in November 1970 . In an interview with journalist Sean O 'Hagan in 1990 , he described this period as being in contrast to the laid back atmosphere pictured on the album cover : " When I went to the West Coast these people [ the musicians he had been working with in Woodstock ] weren 't that available so I had to virtually put a completely new band together overnight to do [ Tupelo Honey ] . So it was a very tough period . I didn 't want to change my band but if I wanted to get into the studio I had to ring up and get somebody . That was the predicament I was in . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 Due to the location of the recording sessions of Tupelo Honey , having moved from New York to California , the only musicians from Morrison 's previous band that could work with him were saxophonist Jack Schroer and his wife Ellen ( who contributed backing vocals ) . However two of the three percussionists on the album had recorded with him in the past ; Connie Kay contributed drums to Astral Weeks and Gary Mallaber played drums and vibraphone on Moondance . On this album , Kay played drum kit on four songs and new recruit Rick Shlosser was used for the remaining tracks , while Mallaber played percussion and vibraphone . Biographer Howard DeWitt was convinced that Morrison 's music benefited from his move to California , as he comments that " the musical explosion in Marin County also added a great deal to Van 's music . In particular , Ronnie Montrose 's guitar work made Tupelo Honey a rock classic . " Mark Jordan and John McFee made up the rest of the rhythm section . Although not credited on the album , Pat Craig also played keyboards on several of the tracks . The remaining members of the horn section were Bruce Royston and " Boots " Houston on flutes and Luis Gasca on trumpet . The band was augmented by producer Ted Templeman who contributed organ to the title track . 
 The first recording sessions took place in the spring of 1971 at the Wally Heider Studios in San Francisco and continued for three weeks . Only four of the songs recorded were chosen for Tupelo Honey : " Wild Night " ; " Moonshine Whiskey " ; " I Wanna Roo You " and " Like a Cannonball " . Rick Shlosser and John McFee played on these tracks , but were dropped from the second sessions . Engineer Stephen <unk> remembered that " We 'd get the band rehearsed , then Ted Templeman would go to the hotel , pick up Van ... We did one or two takes , he 'd go back to the hotel and the band would go on to the next tune . " 
 Morrison relocated in the late spring of 1971 to the Columbia Studios , San Francisco to record a second session of tracks for the album . This time Morrison rehearsed the songs before recording began , which helped to make the sessions run more smoothly . " You 're My Woman " was recorded a few days after the other songs , with Rick Shlosser back playing drums . 
 The vocals on the album were always live after rehearsing each song five or six times , according to saxophonist and flautist " Boots " Houston , who further commented that when Morrison and the band went into the studio : " we would then just play a whole set straight through without repeating anything . We would have played maybe twenty songs and Van would go back and cut out the songs he didn 't want . The only time we 'd go back would be to overdub backing vocals or horns . " Ted Templeman remarked that he had to go through three engineers during the recording of the album , due to Morrison 's " ability as a musician , arranger and producer " : " When he 's got something together , he wants to put it down right away with no overdubbing ... I 've had to change engineers who couldn 't keep up with him . " 
 = = Composition and themes = = 
 The rural setting in Marin County furnished the backdrop for the domestic bliss expressed on the album cover and the songs ' lyrics contained harmonious references to the " good life at home " . In an interview given to New Spotlight magazine at the time , Morrison 's wife , Janet Planet referred to Morrison 's dislike of socializing at this time : " Really he is a recluse . He is quiet . We never go anywhere . We don 't go to parties . We never go out . We have an incredibly quiet life and going on the road is the only excitement we have . " Although Morrison said that the songs on the album " had been hanging around for awhile [ sic ? ] " and according to biographer Steve Turner they were written in Woodstock , musician Ronnie Montrose recalled that Morrison wrote one of the tunes , " You 're My Woman " , while sitting at the piano during the recording sessions in California . 
 The album opens with " Wild Night " , a hybrid of R & B , soul and country music influences , which utilizes a moderate 4 / 4 time signature and features the lead guitar playing of Ronnie Montrose . The song 's intro was created , according to Montrose , when " One afternoon I was messing around with what is now the intro on the record , [ Van ] stopped me and ... said ' ... that thing you just played ... that 's the intro , don 't forget it ' " . This guitar driven intro in Clinton Heylin 's opinion made it one of Morrison 's most memorable singles . " Wild Night " , which has been described by biographer Ken Brooks as " a great start to the album " , was first recorded after the Astral Weeks sessions in Autumn 1968 and was re @-@ recorded numerous times before its eventual release on Tupelo Honey . Morrison recalled during an interview that the song was originally " a much slower number , but when we got to fooling around with it in the studio , we ended up doing it in a faster tempo . " 
 " ( Straight to You Heart ) Like a Cannonball " combines a moderately swung 3 / 4 time waltz with blue @-@ eyed soul . The song boasts a cheery guitar riff accompanied by acoustic guitars and flutes . Lyrically the song praises nature as an easy solution to the stresses of life , referring possibly to both Woodstock and Marin . 
 " Old Old Woodstock " is a tribute to Morrison 's previous life in upstate New York . The theme of domestic bliss is encapsulated in this song , as it shows a strong sensitivity towards children and family life . Howard Dewitt comments that " It is a moving and compelling look at a satisfying period in Van 's life . " Musically the song contains the music genres jazz and folk . Janet Planet served as the inspiration for the song and also performed backing vocals on the recording . 
 Jon Landau describes " Starting a New Life " as " both the simplest and lyrically the most significant cut on the album as Van spells out with perfect clarity the statement of Tupelo Honey : it expresses his need to take stock of himself , to see how far he has come , to record the support of those who have helped him get there , and together with them to ' start a new life . ' " 
 The last song that was recorded for the album was " You 're My Woman " . This slow , blues influenced ballad was influenced by Janet Planet . As perhaps a last @-@ minute decision Morrison added this song to the album in place of " Listen to the Lion " , just before it was released . The recording of " Listen to the Lion " was released a year later on Saint Dominic 's Preview . 
 The title song , " Tupelo Honey " , is a classic love ballad in a vein established with " Crazy Love " from the album Moondance . The two songs both have the same melody , chord progression and are in 4 / 4 time . Uncut reviewer David Cavanagh wrote that : " On an album where the vocals are exultant to say the least , this song sees Morrison use larynx , diaphragm , teeth and tongue to find new ways of enunciating the lines ' she 's as sweet as Tupelo honey ' and ' she 's all right with me ' , seemingly in ever @-@ increasing adoration . " Bob Dylan ( who performed the song with Morrison during a concert tour in the 1990s ) once remarked that " ' Tupelo Honey ' has always existed and that Morrison was merely the vessel and the earthly vehicle for it " . Greil Marcus called the song " a kind of odyssey " evoking Elvis Presley ( whose hometown was Tupelo , Mississippi ) , and " the most gorgeous number on the album " that " was too good not to be true . " 
 " I Wanna Roo You ( Scottish Derivative ) " is a country @-@ flavored waltz , that prominently features John McFee 's steel guitar and Ronnie Montrose 's mandolin . The " Scottish Derivative " subtitle refers to the word " roo " featured in the song , which is a Scottish slang word for " woo " . 
 " When the Evening Sun Goes Down " is described by Erik Hage as a " hootenanny flavored " tune driven by " barrel @-@ house <unk> @-@ tonk piano " . Like " Wild Night " , it was first recorded in Autumn 1968 and on various other recording sessions by Morrison before its release on Tupelo Honey . An alternative take of the song was featured as the B @-@ side of the " Wild Night " single . 
 The final song , " Moonshine Whiskey " , has been compared musically to the likes of The Band , ( earlier in 1971 Morrison had worked with The Band in Woodstock ) . The song fluctuates between a slow 6 / 8 and fast a 4 / 4 time throughout . During the coda it accelerates to an abrupt ending . " Moonshine Whiskey " combines country rock and soul in a song that Morrison once spoke of as having been written for " Janis Joplin or something . " ( Joplin lived in Woodstock around the same time as Morrison . ) There is also a comic element to the song with Morrison imitating fish blowing bubbles . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The title of the album derives from the varietal honey produced from the flowers of the tupelo tree found predominantly in Florida . 
 The photos on the album were taken by Michael <unk> , a friend of Morrison 's then wife Janet Planet , in the town of Fairfax . The original LP was released in a gatefold sleeve . The cover photograph showed Planet , riding bareback on a horse , with Morrison walking alongside . The gatefold and back cover photographs showed Morrison perched upon the fence of the horse 's paddock , with his wife standing to his right and a black @-@ and @-@ white kitten on the fence to his left . This rural setting depicting a bygone era was in vogue on album covers at the time as rock artists moved from cities to rural communities . The Band , <unk> and Grateful Dead had similar themes on album covers in 1969 and 1970 . Morrison later complained of the cover , explaining that , " The picture was taken at a stable and I didn 't live there . We just went there and took the picture and split . A lot of people seem to think that album covers are your life or something . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Release = = = 
 Tupelo Honey was first released on LP in October 1971 on Warner Bros. Records . The album reached number 27 on the Billboard 200 , which was the highest position reached in the US by any of Morrison 's albums at that point . However it failed to reach any of the charts across Europe . By the middle of 1974 Tupelo Honey had sold well over 350 @,@ 000 copies ( 50 @,@ 000 more than Moondance ) , and in 1977 it was certified gold by the RIAA . 
 Three singles were released from the album . The first , " Wild Night " , with a rare alternative take on " When That Evening Sun Goes Down " as the B @-@ side , proved popular enough to reach number 28 on the US Billboard Hot 100 . The single fared slightly better in The Netherlands , peaking at number 24 . " Tupelo Honey " reached number 47 on the US singles chart , with the B @-@ side " Starting a New Life " . " ( Straight to Your Heart ) Like a Cannonball " , with " Old Old Woodstock " as the B @-@ side , was the third single from the album and only reached number 119 , just outside the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The album was reissued on CD in 1990 by Polydor Records . Another CD reissue was released in 1997 by Polydor and Mercury Records . The 29 January 2008 reissued and remastered version of the album , released on CD , contains an alternative take of " Wild Night " and a reworked cover version of the traditional song " Down by the Riverside " . It was also reissued on vinyl , but without the bonus tracks . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Tupelo Honey was well received by critics upon the album 's release . Jon Landau wrote in Rolling Stone : " Tupelo Honey is in one sense but another example of the artist making increased use of the album as the unit of communication as opposed to merely the song or the cut . Everything on it is perfectly integrated . " ZigZag magazine reviewer John Tobler , who also reviewed the album just after its release , gave the album high praise , saying " If all music were as good as this , there wouldn 't be any reason to make any more , because this is the real thing . " Critic Dave Marsh called it " the perfect album for Van : he does everything ... so incredibly well . There isn 't a bad cut on it , of that I 'm really sure . " Critic Robert Christgau voiced reservations in his praise of the album , writing that it was " almost as rich in cute tunes as The Shirelles ' Greatest Hits , but I worry that domestic bliss with Janet Planet has been softening Van 's noodle more than the joy of cooking requires . " Tupelo Honey was later ranked the fourth best album of the year in the Village Voice 's first annual Pazz & Jop Critics Poll . 
 Morrison 's biographers were less impressed by the album . Johnny Rogan commented : " Tupelo Honey was no masterpiece but it was a considerable improvement upon His Band and the Street Choir . At a time when the rock élite were seduced by the lovelorn laments and steel guitars of country rock , Morrison emerged with a work that offered a soulful romantic veneer without lapsing into banal sentimentality . " Erik Hage held the opinion that by this time Morrison had become famous enough to be insulated from constructive criticism , resulting in some of the love songs to Janet Planet on the album containing : " obvious lyrical platitudes ( truly some of his worst poetry since the revenge songs for Bang Records ) and less @-@ than @-@ inspired arrangements . " 
 = = = Morrison 's response = = = 
 Morrison said afterwards that he " wasn 't very happy " with it . " It consisted of songs that were left over from before and that they 'd finally gotten around to using . It wasn 't really fresh . It was a whole bunch of songs that had been hanging around for a while . I was really trying to make a country and western album . " He commented further that he seldom listened to it and had a bad taste in his mouth for both Street Choir and Tupelo Honey . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 In 2009 , music journalist Erik Hage wrote that Tupelo Honey " has become one of Morrison 's most likeable albums , but the very elements that make it appealing to many — the homey feeling , the personal odes to married life — also make it a complacent album for an artist who had been pushing forward and challenging boundaries for the past few years . " 
 Morrison was expected to tour to promote the album , but at this time he had developed a phobia about performing that was especially problematic when appearing before large audiences . John Platania was playing in concerts with Morrison and spoke of noticing his confidence ebbing away : " There were many times when he literally had to be coaxed on stage . His motto was ' The show does not have to go on ' . He would create the choice of whether he would go on stage or not . " Morrison announced before an impending performance at a larger venue that he was retiring from performing live . After regaining his confidence by making regular and informal performances at a small club near his home , he began to tour coast @-@ to @-@ coast again in 1972 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Van Morrison , unless otherwise noted . 
 Side one 
 " Wild Night " – 3 : 33 
 " ( Straight to Your Heart ) Like a Cannonball " – 3 : 43 
 " Old Old Woodstock " – 4 : 17 
 " Starting a New Life " – 2 : 10 
 " You 're My Woman " – 6 : 44 
 Side two 
 " Tupelo Honey " – 6 : 54 
 " I Wanna Roo You ( Scottish Derivative ) " – 3 : 27 
 " When That Evening Sun Goes Down " – 3 : 06 
 " Moonshine Whiskey " – 6 : 48 
 Bonus tracks ( 2008 CD reissue ) 
 " Wild Night " - 5 : 37 ( alternative take ) 
 " Down by the Riverside " - 3 : 54 ( traditional ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Musicians 
 Van Morrison - rhythm guitar , harmonica , vocals , backing vocals 
 Ronnie Montrose - electric and acoustic guitars , mandolin , backing vocals 
 Bill Church - bass 
 Rick Shlosser - drums 
 Connie Kay - drums on " Starting a New Life " , " Tupelo Honey " , " When That Evening Sun Goes Down " and " Old Old Woodstock " 
 Jack Schroer - alto , tenor and baritone saxophones 
 Mark Jordan - piano , electric piano 
 Gary Mallaber - percussion , vibraphone 
 John McFee - pedal steel guitar 
 Ted Templeman - organ on " Tupelo Honey " 
 Bruce Royston - flute 
 Luis Gasca - trumpet 
 " Boots " Houston - flute , backing vocals 
 Ellen Schroer - backing vocals 
 Janet Planet - backing vocals 
 Production 
 Producers : Van Morrison , Ted Templeman 
 Engineers : Stephen <unk> , David Brown , Doc Storch 
 Remixing : Lee <unk> , Donn <unk> 
 <unk> : Ian Cooper 
 Art direction : Ed Thrasher 
 Photography : Michael <unk> 
 Horn arrangements : Van Morrison , Jack Schroer 
 Flute arrangements : " Boots " Houston on " Like a Cannonball " , Bruce Royston on " Tupelo Honey " 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Album = = = 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = Having Fun with Elvis on Stage = 
 Having Fun with Elvis on Stage is a 1974 spoken word concert album by Elvis Presley . The album consists entirely of byplay and banter by Presley from between songs during a live concert — primarily jokes , with the songs themselves removed from the recording . The album was created as a ploy by Presley 's manager , Colonel Tom Parker , to self @-@ release an Elvis Presley album through his own label , Boxcar Records , that would not consist of content that contractually belonged to RCA Records . Having Fun with Elvis on Stage was first distributed at Elvis Presley concerts , but RCA would later package and distribute it . 
 Having Fun with Elvis on Stage has been considered to be Presley 's worst album ; critics felt that the compilation of banter was incoherent , and lacked context due to the removal of the songs that his remarks related to . In their 1991 book , Jimmy Guterman and Owen O 'Donnell named Having Fun with Elvis on Stage the worst rock and roll album of all time , duly noting its lack of actual " rock and roll " . 
 Presley himself disapproved of the album , and it was withdrawn at his request . Despite this , Having Fun with Elvis on Stage reached number 130 on the Billboard 200 , peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot Country LPs , and spawned bootleg copies along with a fan @-@ made sequel . 
 = = Content and release = = 
 The album is unique among Elvis Presley 's recordings as it does not contain any actual songs ; it consists entirely of byplay recorded between numbers . Presley is frequently heard humming or singing " Well ... " , which during the actual performances led into songs that have been edited out of the recording . Much of the album consists of him making jokes , although the recording is devoid of any context . Despite the randomness of the audio , from 8 : 01 – 11 : 55 on side A , Presley is captured speaking autobiographically about his early life and his career aspirations before becoming a singer , and his early appearance on The Steve Allen Show . 
 The album was the idea of Colonel Tom Parker , Presley 's manager . Parker wished to release an Elvis Presley album through Boxcar Records — a company that he formed to manage Presley 's commercial rights , so that he could profit directly from it . However , since Presley was signed to RCA Records , any recordings made would legally belong to RCA . To circumvent this restriction , Parker compiled audio of Presley talking — material over which RCA could not claim rights . 
 Initially , the record was only sold at Presley 's concerts . However , the album was later packaged and marketed by RCA as a legitimate concert album , with the only warning for the buyer being the subtitle " A Talking Album Only " on the back cover . Presley is credited on the back sleeve as the album 's executive producer . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Having Fun with Elvis on Stage has been described as the worst album of Elvis Presley 's career . Critics felt that the album 's material was spliced in a manner lacking any continuity and nearly devoid of comprehensibility , let alone humor . Mark Deming of AllMusic states that " some have called Having Fun with Elvis on Stage thoroughly unlistenable , but actually it 's worse than that ; hearing it is like witnessing an auto wreck that somehow plowed into a carnival freak show , leaving onlookers at once too horrified and too baffled to turn away . " Nick Greene , a writer for Mental Floss , felt that the material presented on the record is " so incoherent , you don 't really get an idea of his stage presence , despite the fact that all the audio comes from his shows . " Rock critics Jimmy Guterman and Owen O 'Donnell , writing in their 1991 book The Worst Rock and Roll Records of All Time , named it the worst rock album ever , although one could easily note the lack of " rock and roll " in the record . 
 The album peaked at number 130 on the main Billboard album chart , and peaked at number 9 on the Billboard Hot Country LPs chart . At the request of Presley , the album was eventually discontinued . However , bootlegs of the album are popular , and an anonymous person created a Having Fun With Elvis on Stage , Part Two record that has been circulated . The original album remains unavailable on CD , but it has been reissued as a series of three 10 " records in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Side A – 18 : 06 
 Side B – 19 : 00 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Elvis Presley – vocals 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = The Raven = 
 " The Raven " is a narrative poem by American writer Edgar Allan Poe . First published in January 1845 , the poem is often noted for its musicality , stylized language , and supernatural atmosphere . It tells of a talking raven 's mysterious visit to a distraught lover , tracing the man 's slow fall into madness . The lover , often identified as being a student , is lamenting the loss of his love , Lenore . Sitting on a bust of Pallas , the raven seems to further instigate his distress with its constant repetition of the word " Nevermore " . The poem makes use of a number of folk , mythological , religious , and classical references . 
 Poe claimed to have written the poem very logically and methodically , intending to create a poem that would appeal to both critical and popular tastes , as he explained in his 1846 follow @-@ up essay , " The Philosophy of Composition " . The poem was inspired in part by a talking raven in the novel Barnaby Rudge : A Tale of the Riots of ' Eighty by Charles Dickens . Poe borrows the complex rhythm and meter of Elizabeth Barrett 's poem " Lady Geraldine 's Courtship " , and makes use of internal rhyme as well as alliteration throughout . 
 " The Raven " was first attributed to Poe in print in the New York Evening Mirror on January 29 , 1845 . Its publication made Poe widely popular in his lifetime , although it did not bring him much financial success . The poem was soon reprinted , parodied , and illustrated . Critical opinion is divided as to the poem 's literary status , but it nevertheless remains one of the most famous poems ever written . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 " The Raven " follows an unnamed narrator on a dreary night in December who sits reading " forgotten lore " by a dying fire as a way to forget the death of his beloved Lenore . A " tapping at [ his ] chamber door " reveals nothing , but excites his soul to " burning " . The tapping is repeated , slightly louder , and he realizes it is coming from his window . When he goes to investigate , a raven flutters into his chamber . Paying no attention to the man , the raven perches on a bust of Pallas above the door . 
 Amused by the raven 's comically serious disposition , the man asks that the bird tell him its name . The raven 's only answer is " Nevermore " . The narrator is surprised that the raven can talk , though at this point it has said nothing further . The narrator remarks to himself that his " friend " the raven will soon fly out of his life , just as " other friends have flown before " along with his previous hopes . As if answering , the raven responds again with " Nevermore " . The narrator reasons that the bird learned the word " Nevermore " from some " unhappy master " and that it is the only word it knows . 
 Even so , the narrator pulls his chair directly in front of the raven , determined to learn more about it . He thinks for a moment in silence , and his mind wanders back to his lost Lenore . He thinks the air grows denser and feels the presence of angels , and wonders if God is sending him a sign that he is to forget Lenore . The bird again replies in the negative , suggesting that he can never be free of his memories . The narrator becomes angry , calling the raven a " thing of evil " and a " prophet " . Finally , he asks the raven whether he will be reunited with Lenore in Heaven . When the raven responds with its typical " Nevermore " , he is enraged , and , calling it a liar , commands the bird to return to the " Plutonian shore " — but it does not move . Presumably at the time of the poem 's recitation by the narrator , the raven " still is sitting " on the bust of Pallas . The narrator 's final admission is that his soul is trapped beneath the raven 's shadow and shall be lifted " Nevermore " . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 Poe wrote the poem as a narrative , without intentionally creating an allegory or falling into didacticism . The main theme of the poem is one of undying devotion . The narrator experiences a perverse conflict between desire to forget and desire to remember . He seems to get some pleasure from focusing on loss . The narrator assumes that the word " Nevermore " is the raven 's " only stock and store " , and , yet , he continues to ask it questions , knowing what the answer will be . His questions , then , are purposely self @-@ deprecating and further incite his feelings of loss . Poe leaves it unclear if the raven actually knows what it is saying or if it really intends to cause a reaction in the poem 's narrator . The narrator begins as " weak and weary , " becomes regretful and grief @-@ stricken , before passing into a frenzy and , finally , madness . Christopher F. S. <unk> suggests the poem is a type of elegiac <unk> , an ancient Greek and Roman poetic form consisting of the lament of an excluded , locked @-@ out lover at the sealed door of his beloved . 
 = = = Allusions = = = 
 Poe says that the narrator is a young scholar . Though this is not explicitly stated in the poem , it is mentioned in " The Philosophy of Composition " . It is also suggested by the narrator reading books of " lore " as well as by the bust of Pallas Athena , Greek goddess of wisdom . 
 He is reading in the late night hours from " many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore " . Similar to the studies suggested in Poe 's short story " Ligeia " , this lore may be about the occult or black magic . This is also emphasized in the author 's choice to set the poem in December , a month which is traditionally associated with the forces of darkness . The use of the raven — the " devil bird " — also suggests this . This devil image is emphasized by the narrator 's belief that the raven is " from the Night 's Plutonian shore " , or a messenger from the afterlife , referring to Pluto , the Roman god of the underworld ( also known as Dis Pater in Roman mythology ) . A direct allusion to Satan also appears : " Whether <unk> sent , or tempest tossed thee here ashore ... " 
 Poe chose a raven as the central symbol in the story because he wanted a " non @-@ reasoning " creature capable of speech . He decided on a raven , which he considered " equally capable of speech " as a parrot , because it matched the intended tone of the poem . Poe said the raven is meant to symbolize " <unk> and Never @-@ ending Remembrance " . He was also inspired by Grip , the raven in Barnaby Rudge : A Tale of the Riots of ' Eighty by Charles Dickens . One scene in particular bears a resemblance to " The Raven " : at the end of the fifth chapter of Dickens 's novel , Grip makes a noise and someone says , " What was that – him tapping at the door ? " The response is , " ' Tis someone knocking softly at the shutter . " Dickens 's raven could speak many words and had many comic turns , including the popping of a champagne cork , but Poe emphasized the bird 's more dramatic qualities . Poe had written a review of Barnaby Rudge for Graham 's Magazine saying , among other things , that the raven should have served a more symbolic , prophetic purpose . The similarity did not go unnoticed : James Russell Lowell in his A Fable for Critics wrote the verse , " Here comes Poe with his raven , like Barnaby Rudge / Three @-@ fifths of him genius and two @-@ fifths sheer fudge . " The Free Library of Philadelphia has on display a taxidermied raven that is reputed to be the very one that Dickens owned and that helped inspire Poe 's poem . 
 Poe may also have been drawing upon various references to ravens in mythology and folklore . In Norse mythology , Odin possessed two ravens named Huginn and Muninn , representing thought and memory . According to Hebrew folklore , Noah sends a white raven to check conditions while on the ark . It learns that the floodwaters are beginning to dissipate , but it does not immediately return with the news . It is punished by being turned black and being forced to feed on carrion forever . In Ovid 's Metamorphoses , a raven also begins as white before Apollo punishes it by turning it black for delivering a message of a lover 's unfaithfulness . The raven 's role as a messenger in Poe 's poem may draw from those stories . 
 <unk> , a drug mentioned in Homer 's Odyssey , erases memories ; the narrator wonders aloud whether he could receive " respite " this way : " Let me <unk> this kind <unk> and forget this lost Lenore ! " Poe also mentions the Balm of Gilead , a reference to the Book of Jeremiah ( 8 : 22 ) in the Bible : " Is there no balm in Gilead ; is there no physician there ? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered ? " In that context , the Balm of Gilead is a resin used for medicinal purposes ( suggesting , perhaps , that the narrator needs to be healed after the loss of Lenore ) . He also refers to " <unk> " , another word for the Garden of Eden , though Poe uses it to ask if Lenore has been accepted into Heaven . 
 = = = Poetic structure = = = 
 The poem is made up of 18 stanzas of six lines each . Generally , the meter is trochaic octameter – eight trochaic feet per line , each foot having one stressed syllable followed by one unstressed syllable . The first line , for example ( with / representing stressed syllables and x representing unstressed ) : 
 Poe , however , claimed the poem was a combination of octameter <unk> , <unk> catalectic , and tetrameter catalectic . The rhyme scheme is <unk> , or AA , B , CC , CB , B , B when accounting for internal rhyme . In every stanza , the ' B ' lines rhyme with the word ' nevermore ' and are catalectic , placing extra emphasis on the final syllable . The poem also makes heavy use of alliteration ( " Doubting , dreaming dreams ... " ) . 20th @-@ century American poet Daniel Hoffman suggested that the poem 's structure and meter is so formulaic that it is artificial , though its mesmeric quality overrides that . 
 Poe based the structure of " The Raven " on the complicated rhyme and rhythm of Elizabeth Barrett 's poem " Lady Geraldine 's Courtship " . Poe had reviewed Barrett 's work in the January 1845 issue of the Broadway Journal and said that " her poetic inspiration is the highest – we can conceive of nothing more august . Her sense of Art is pure in itself . " As is typical with Poe , his review also criticizes her lack of originality and what he considers the repetitive nature of some of her poetry . About " Lady Geraldine 's Courtship " , he said " I have never read a poem combining so much of the fiercest passion with so much of the most delicate imagination . " 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Poe first brought " The Raven " to his friend and former employer George Rex Graham of Graham 's Magazine in Philadelphia . Graham declined the poem , which may not have been in its final version , though he gave Poe $ 15 as charity . Poe then sold the poem to The American Review , which paid him $ 9 for it , and printed " The Raven " in its February 1845 issue under the pseudonym " Quarles " , a reference to the English poet Francis Quarles . The poem 's first publication with Poe 's name was in the Evening Mirror on January 29 , 1845 , as an " advance copy " . Nathaniel Parker Willis , editor of the Mirror , introduced it as " unsurpassed in English poetry for subtle conception , masterly ingenuity of versification , and consistent , sustaining of imaginative lift ... It will stick to the memory of everybody who reads it . " Following this publication the poem appeared in periodicals across the United States , including the New York Tribune ( February 4 , 1845 ) , Broadway Journal ( vol . 1 , February 8 , 1845 ) , Southern Literary Messenger ( vol . 11 , March 1845 ) , Literary Emporium ( vol . 2 , December 1845 ) , Saturday Courier , 16 ( July 25 , 1846 ) , and the Richmond Examiner ( September 25 , 1849 ) . It has also appeared in numerous anthologies , starting with Poets and Poetry of America edited by Rufus Wilmot Griswold in 1847 . 
 The immediate success of " The Raven " prompted Wiley and Putnam to publish a collection of Poe 's prose called Tales in June 1845 ; it was his first book in five years . They also published a collection of his poetry called The Raven and Other Poems on November 19 by Wiley and Putnam which included a dedication to Barrett as " the Noblest of her Sex " . The small volume , his first book of poetry in 14 years , was 100 pages and sold for 31 cents . In addition to the title poem , it included " The Valley of Unrest " , " Bridal Ballad " , " The City in the Sea " , " Eulalie " , " The Conqueror Worm " , " The Haunted Palace " and eleven others . In the preface , Poe referred to them as " trifles " which had been altered without his permission as they made " the rounds of the press " . 
 = = = Illustrators = = = 
 Later publications of " The Raven " included artwork by well @-@ known illustrators . Notably , in 1858 " The Raven " appeared in a British Poe anthology with illustrations by John Tenniel , the Alice in Wonderland illustrator ( The Poetical Works of Edgar Allan Poe : With Original Memoir , London : Sampson Low ) . " The Raven " was published independently with lavish woodcuts by Gustave Doré in 1884 ( New York : Harper & Brothers ) . Doré died before its publication . In 1875 , a French edition with English and French text , Le Corbeau , was published with lithographs by Édouard Manet and translation by the Symbolist Stéphane Mallarmé . Many 20th @-@ century artists and contemporary illustrators created artworks and illustrations based on " The Raven " , including Edmund Dulac , István <unk> , and Ryan Price . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Poe capitalized on the success of " The Raven " by following it up with his essay " The Philosophy of Composition " ( 1846 ) , in which he detailed the poem 's creation . His description of its writing is probably exaggerated , though the essay serves as an important overview of Poe 's literary theory . He explains that every component of the poem is based on logic : the raven enters the chamber to avoid a storm ( the " midnight dreary " in the " bleak December " ) , and its perch on a pallid white bust was to create visual contrast against the dark black bird . No aspect of the poem was an accident , he claims , but is based on total control by the author . Even the term " Nevermore " , he says , is used because of the effect created by the long vowel sounds ( though Poe may have been inspired to use the word by the works of Lord Byron or Henry Wadsworth Longfellow ) . Poe had experimented with the long o sound throughout many other poems : " no more " in " Silence " , " evermore " in " The Conqueror Worm " . The topic itself , Poe says , was chosen because " the death ... of a beautiful woman is unquestionably the most poetical topic in the world . " Told from " the lips ... of a bereaved lover " is best suited to achieve the desired effect . Beyond the poetics of it , the lost Lenore may have been inspired by events in Poe 's own life as well , either to the early loss of his mother , Eliza Poe , or the long illness endured by his wife , Virginia . Ultimately , Poe considered " The Raven " an experiment to " suit at once the popular and critical taste " , accessible to both the mainstream and high literary worlds . It is unknown how long Poe worked on " The Raven " ; speculation ranges from a single day to ten years . Poe recited a poem believed to be an early version with an alternate ending of " The Raven " in 1843 in Saratoga , New York . An early draft may have featured an owl . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 In part due to its dual printing , " The Raven " made Edgar Allan Poe a household name almost immediately , and turned Poe into a national celebrity . Readers began to identify poem with poet , earning Poe the nickname " The Raven " . The poem was soon widely reprinted , imitated , and parodied . Though it made Poe popular in his day , it did not bring him significant financial success . As he later lamented , " I have made no money . I am as poor now as ever I was in my life — except in hope , which is by no means bankable " . 
 The New World said , " Everyone reads the Poem and praises it ... justly , we think , for it seems to us full of originality and power . " The Pennsylvania Inquirer reprinted it with the heading " A Beautiful Poem " . Elizabeth Barrett wrote to Poe , " Your ' Raven ' has produced a sensation , a fit o ' horror , here in England . Some of my friends are taken by the fear of it and some by the music . I hear of persons haunted by ' Nevermore ' . " Poe 's popularity resulted in invitations to recite " The Raven " and to lecture – in public and at private social gatherings . At one literary salon , a guest noted , " to hear [ Poe ] repeat the Raven ... is an event in one 's life . " It was recalled by someone who experienced it , " He would turn down the lamps till the room was almost dark , then standing in the center of the apartment he would recite ... in the most melodious of voices ... So marvelous was his power as a reader that the auditors would be afraid to draw breath lest the enchanted spell be broken . " Parodies sprung up especially in Boston , New York , and Philadelphia and included " The Craven " by " Poh ! " , " The Gazelle " , " The <unk> " , and " The Turkey " . One parody , " The Pole @-@ Cat " , caught the attention of Andrew Johnston , a lawyer who sent it on to Abraham Lincoln . Though Lincoln admitted he had " several hearty laughs " , he had not , at that point read " The Raven " . However , Lincoln eventually read and memorized the poem . 
 " The Raven " was praised by fellow writers William Gilmore Simms and Margaret Fuller , though it was denounced by William Butler Yeats , who called it " insincere and vulgar ... its execution a rhythmical trick " . Transcendentalist Ralph Waldo Emerson said , " I see nothing in it . " A critic for the Southern Quarterly Review wrote in July 1848 that the poem was ruined by " a wild and unbridled extravagance " and that minor things like a tapping at the door and a fluttering curtain would only affect " a child who had been frightened to the verge of idiocy by terrible ghost stories " . An anonymous writer going by the pseudonym " <unk> " suggested in the Evening Mirror that " The Raven " was plagiarized from a poem called " The Bird of the Dream " by an unnamed author . The writer showed 18 similarities between the poems and was made as a response to Poe 's accusations of plagiarism against Henry Wadsworth Longfellow . It has been suggested <unk> was really Cornelius Conway Felton , if not Poe himself . After Poe 's death , his friend Thomas Holley Chivers said " The Raven " was plagiarized from one of his poems . In particular , he claimed to have been the inspiration for the meter of the poem as well as the refrain " nevermore " . 
 " The Raven " has influenced many modern works , including Vladimir Nabokov 's Lolita in 1955 , Bernard Malamud 's " The <unk> " in 1963 and Ray Bradbury 's " The Parrot Who Knew Papa " in 1976 . The process by which Poe composed " The Raven " influenced a number of French authors and composers , such as Charles Baudelaire and Maurice Ravel , and it has been suggested that Ravel 's Boléro may have been deeply influenced by " The Philosophy of Composition . " The poem is additionally referenced throughout popular culture in films , television , music , and video games . 
 = Jodrell Bank Observatory = 
 The Jodrell Bank Observatory ( originally the Jodrell Bank Experimental Station , then the Nuffield Radio Astronomy Laboratories from 1966 to 1999 ; / <unk> / ) is a British observatory that hosts a number of radio telescopes , and is part of the Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics at the University of Manchester . The observatory was established in 1945 by Sir Bernard Lovell , a radio astronomer at the University of Manchester who wanted to investigate cosmic rays after his work on radar during the Second World War . It has since played an important role in the research of meteors , quasars , pulsars , masers and gravitational lenses , and was heavily involved with the tracking of space probes at the start of the Space Age . The managing director of the observatory is Professor Simon <unk> . 
 The main telescope at the observatory is the Lovell Telescope , which is the third largest steerable radio telescope in the world . There are three other active telescopes located at the observatory ; the Mark II , as well as 42 ft ( 13 m ) and 7 m diameter radio telescopes . Jodrell Bank Observatory is also the base of the Multi @-@ Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network ( MERLIN ) , a National Facility run by the University of Manchester on behalf of the Science and Technology Facilities Council . 
 The site of the observatory , which includes the Jodrell Bank Visitor Centre and an arboretum , is located in the civil parish of Lower Withington ( the rest being in Goostrey civil parish ) , near Goostrey and Holmes Chapel , Cheshire , North West England . It is reached from the <unk> . An excellent view of the telescope can be seen by travelling by train , as the main line between Manchester and Crewe passes right by the site , with Goostrey station being only a short distance away . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Jodrell Bank was first used for academic purposes in 1939 when the University of Manchester 's Department of Botany purchased three fields at the site from the Leighs . The name of the site came from a nearby ground rise called Jodrell Bank , which was named after William <unk> and whose descendants , the Leighs , lived at the mansion that is now Terra Nova School nearby . The site was extended in 1952 by the purchase of a farm from a local farmer , George Massey . The new land included the site upon which the Lovell Telescope was sited . 
 The first use of the site for astrophysics was in 1945 , when Bernard Lovell wished to use some equipment left over from World War II , including a gun laying radar , to investigate cosmic rays . The equipment he was using was a GL II radar system working at a wavelength of 4 @.@ 2 m , provided by J. S. Hey . He originally intended to use the equipment in Manchester ; however , electrical interference from the trams that then ran down Oxford Road prevented him from doing so . Consequently , he moved the equipment to Jodrell Bank , 25 miles ( 40 km ) south of the city , on 10 December 1945 . Lovell 's main topic of research at the time were transient radio echoes , which he confirmed were from ionized meteor trails by October 1946 . The first staff were Alf Dean and Frank Foden and meteors were observed by the naked eye while Lovell observed the electromagnetic signal on the equipment . Coincidentally , the first time he turned the radar on at Jodrell Bank – 14 December 1945 – the <unk> meteor shower was at a maximum . 
 Over the next few years , he accumulated more ex @-@ military radio hardware , including a portable cabin , commonly known as a " Park Royal " in the military ( see Park Royal Vehicles ) . The first permanent building on the site was located near to this cabin , and was named after it . 
 Today , Jodrell Bank is primarily used for investigating radio waves from the planets and stars . 
 = = Searchlight telescope = = 
 A searchlight was loaned to Jodrell Bank in 1946 by the Army ; a broadside array was constructed on the mount of this searchlight by J. Clegg , consisting of a number of Yagi antennas . This was first used for astronomical observations in October 1946 . 
 On 9 and 10 October 1946 , the telescope was used to observe the ionisation in the atmosphere caused by meteors in the <unk> meteor shower . When the antenna was turned by 90 degrees at the maximum of the shower , the number of detections dropped to the background level , proving that the transient signals detected by radar were indeed from meteors . Shortly after this , the telescope was used to determine the radiant points for meteors . This was possible as the echo rate is at a minimum at the radiant point , and a maximum at 90 degrees to it . The telescope , as well as other receivers on the site , was also used to study auroral streamers that were visible at the site in early August 1947 . 
 = = Transit Telescope = = 
 The Transit Telescope was a 218 ft ( 66 m ) parabolic reflecting aerial built at Jodrell Bank in 1947 . At the time , it was the largest radio telescope in the world . It consisted of a wire mesh suspended from a ring of 24 ft ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) scaffold poles , which focussed radio signals to a focal point 126 ft ( 38 m ) above the ground . The telescope mainly looked directly upwards , but the direction of the beam could be changed by small amounts by tilting the mast to change the position of the focal point . The focal mast was originally going to be wood , but this was changed to a steel mast before construction was complete . The telescope was replaced by the fully steerable 250 ft ( 76 m ) Lovell Telescope , and the Mark II telescope was subsequently built on the same location . 
 The telescope was able to map a ± 15 @-@ degree strip around the zenith at 72 and 160 MHz , with a resolution at 160 MHz of 1 degree . It was used to discover radio noise from the Great Nebula in Andromeda — the first definite detection of an extragalactic radio source — and the remains of Tycho 's Supernova in the radio frequency ; at the time it had not been discovered by optical astronomy . 
 = = Lovell Telescope = = 
 The " Mark I " telescope , now known as the Lovell Telescope , was the largest steerable dish radio telescope in the world , 76 @.@ 2 metres ( 250 ft ) in diameter , when it was completed in 1957 ; it is now the third largest , after the Green Bank telescope in West Virginia and the <unk> telescope in Germany . Part of the gun turret mechanisms from the battleships HMS Revenge and HMS Royal Sovereign were reused in the motor system for the telescope . The telescope became operational in mid @-@ 1957 , just in time for the launch of Sputnik 1 , the world 's first artificial satellite . The telescope was the only one in the world able to track Sputnik 's booster rocket by radar ; first locating it just before midnight on 12 October 1957 . 
 In the following years , the telescope was used to track a variety of space probes . Between 11 March and 12 June 1960 , it tracked the Pioneer 5 probe . The telescope was also used to send commands to the probe , including the one to separate the probe from its carrier rocket and the ones to turn on the more powerful transmitter when the probe was eight million miles away . It also received data from the probe , being the only telescope in the world capable of doing so at the time . In February 1966 , Jodrell Bank was asked by the Soviet Union to track the USSR unmanned moon lander Luna 9 and recorded on its facsimile transmission of photographs from the moon 's surface . The photos were sent to the British press and published before the Soviets themselves had made the photos public . 
 In 1969 , the Soviet Union 's Luna 15 was also tracked . A recording of the moment when Jodrell Bank 's scientists observed the mission was released on 3 July 2009 . 
 With the personal support of Sir Bernard Lovell , the telescope also tracked Russian satellites . Satellite and space probe observations were shared with the US Department of Defense satellite tracking research and development activity at Project Space Track . 
 Despite the publicity surrounding the telescope 's tracking of space probes , this only took up a fraction of its observing time , with the remainder used for scientific observations . These include using radar to measure the distance to the Moon and to Venus ; observations of astrophysical masers around star @-@ forming regions and giant stars ; observations of pulsars ( including the discovery of millisecond pulsars and the first pulsar in a globular cluster ) ; observations of quasars and gravitational lenses ( including the detection of the first gravitational lens and the first <unk> ring ) . The telescope has also been used for SETI observations . 
 = = Mark II and III telescopes = = 
 The Mark II is an elliptical radio telescope , with a major axis 38 @.@ 1 metres ( 125 ft ) and a minor axis of 25 @.@ 4 metres ( 83 ft ) . It was constructed in 1964 . Aside from operating as a standalone telescope , it has also been used as an interferometer with the Lovell Telescope , and is now primarily used as part of MERLIN ( see below ) . 
 The Mark III telescope was the same size as the Mark II , but was constructed to be transportable . However , it was never moved , and remained at its original site in Wardle , near Nantwich , where it was used as part of MERLIN . It was built in 1966 , and was decommissioned in 1996 . 
 = = Mark IV , V and VA telescopes = = 
 The Mark IV , V and VA telescopes were three proposals that were put forward in the 1960s through to the 1980s to build an even larger radio telescope than the Lovell . The Mark IV would have been a 1 @,@ 000 feet ( 300 m ) diameter standalone telescope , built as a national project . The Mark V would have been a 400 feet ( 120 m ) moveable telescope . The original concept of this telescope had it located on a 3 / 4 @-@ mile long railway line adjoining Jodrell Bank , however concerns about the future levels of interference meant that a site in Wales would have been used ( the preferred site was near <unk> ) . Several design proposals were put forward , one by Husband and Co . , the other by Freeman Fox , who had designed the Parkes Observatory telescope . The Mark VA followed on from the Mark V , but with a smaller dish of 375 feet ( 114 m ) and a design using prestressed concrete , similar to the Mark II ( the previous two designs more closely resembled the Lovell telescope ) . 
 None of the three telescopes was constructed , although several design studies were carried out and some scale models were made . This was partly due to the changing political climate over the time ( the period was from a Labour Party government under Harold Wilson to a Conservative Party one under Margaret Thatcher ) , and partly to the financial constraints of astronomical research in the UK at the time . Also , at a vital time , it became necessary to upgrade the Lovell Telescope to the Mark IA , which subsequently overran in terms of cost . 
 = = Other single dishes = = 
 A 50 ft ( 15 m ) alt @-@ azimuth dish was constructed at the observatory in 1964 . In addition to astronomical research , it was used to track the Zond 1 , Zond 2 , Ranger 6 and Ranger 7 space probes , and also Apollo 11 . The 50 ft telescope was demolished in 1982 , when it was replaced with a more accurate telescope named the " 42 ft " following an accident that irreparably damaged the 50 ft telescope 's surface . The 42 ft ( 12 @.@ 8 m ) dish is mainly used for observations of pulsars , and is normally continually monitoring the Crab Pulsar . 
 At the same time as the 42 ft was installed , a smaller dish called the " 7 m " ( actually 6 @.@ 4 m , or 21 ft , in diameter ) was installed and is now used for undergraduate teaching . Both the 42 ft and 7 m telescopes were originally used at the Woomera Rocket Testing Range in Australia . The 7 m was originally constructed in 1970 by Marconi Company . 
 A Polar Axis telescope was built at Jodrell Bank in 1962 . This had a circular 50 ft ( 15 @.@ 2 m ) dish on a polar mount , and was mostly used for moon radar experiments . It has since been decommissioned . There has also been an optical telescope at the observatory ; an 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) reflecting optical telescope was donated to the observatory in 1951 . However , this telescope was not used much , and was in turn donated to the Salford Astronomical Society around 1971 . 
 = = MERLIN = = 
 The Multi @-@ Element Radio Linked Interferometer Network ( MERLIN ) is an array of radio telescopes spread across England and the Welsh borders . The array is run from Jodrell Bank on behalf of the Science and Technology Facilities Council as a National Facility . The array consists of up to seven radio telescopes and includes the Lovell Telescope , Mark II , Cambridge , <unk> , Knockin , <unk> , and <unk> ( previously known as Tabley ) . The longest baseline is therefore 217 kilometres ( 135 mi ) and MERLIN can operate at frequencies between 151 MHz and 24 GHz . At a wavelength of 6 cm ( 5 GHz frequency ) , MERLIN has a resolution of 50 milliarcseconds which is comparable to that of the HST at optical wavelengths . 
 = = Very Long Baseline Interferometry = = 
 Jodrell Bank has been involved with Very Long Baseline Interferometry ( VLBI ) since the late 1960s ; the Lovell telescope took part in the first transatlantic interferometer experiment in 1968 , with other telescopes being those at Algonquin and Penticton in Canada . The Lovell Telescope and the Mark II telescopes are regularly used for VLBI with telescopes across Europe ( the European VLBI Network ) , giving a resolution of around 0 @.@ 001 arcseconds . 
 = = Square Kilometre Array = = 
