 In April 2011 , Jodrell Bank was named as the location of the control centre for the planned Square Kilometre Array , or SKA Project Office ( SPO ) . The SKA is being planned by a collaboration of 20 countries and when completed it is intended to be the most powerful radio telescope ever built . In April 2015 it was further announced that Jodrell Bank would be the permanent home of the SKA headquarters for the period of operation expected for the telescope ( over 50 years ) . 
 = = Research = = 
 The Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics , of which the Observatory is a part , is one of the largest astrophysics research groups in the UK . About half of the research of the group is in the area of radio astronomy — including research into pulsars , the Cosmic Microwave Background Radiation , gravitational lenses , active galaxies and astrophysical masers . The group also carries out research at different wavelengths , looking into star formation and evolution , planetary nebulae and astrochemistry . 
 The first director of Jodrell Bank was Bernard Lovell , who established the observatory in 1945 . He was succeeded in 1980 by Sir Francis Graham @-@ Smith , followed by Professor Rod Davies around 1990 and Professor Andrew Lyne in 1999 . Professor Phil Diamond took over the role on 1 October 2006 , at the time when the Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics was formed . Prof Ralph Spencer was Acting Director during 2009 and 2010 . In October 2010 , Prof. Albert Zijlstra became Director of the Jodrell Bank Centre for Astrophysics . Professor Lucio <unk> was the Director of the Observatory from Oct 2010 to Oct 2011 when Prof Simon <unk> became its managing director . 
 There is an active development programme researching and constructing telescope receivers and instrumentation . The observatory has been involved in the construction of several Cosmic Microwave Background experiments , including the Tenerife Experiment , which ran from the 1980s to 2000 , and the amplifiers and <unk> for the Very Small Array . It has also constructed the front @-@ end modules of the 30 and 44 GHz receivers for the Planck spacecraft . Receivers were also designed at Jodrell Bank for the Parkes Telescope in Australia . 
 = = Visitor facilities , and events = = 
 The original visitors ' centre , opened on 19 April 1971 by the Duke of Devonshire , attracted around 120 @,@ 000 visitors per year . It covered the history of Jodrell Bank and had a 3D theatre hosting simulated trips to Mars . 
 Due to an asbestos @-@ related concern for the safety of the buildings , that visitor 's centre ( including the planetarium ) was mostly demolished in 2003 leaving a remnant of its far end ; a large marquee was set up in its grounds . A new science centre was being planned at the time . Those rebuilding plans were shelved when Victoria University of Manchester and UMIST merged to become the University of Manchester in 2004 , leaving the interim centre , which received around 70 @,@ 000 visitors a year . 
 In October 2010 , the old visitor centre closed and work on a new visitor centre started . The new Jodrell Bank Discovery Centre opened on Monday 11 April 2011 . It includes a new entrance building , the Planet Pavilion , a new Space Pavilion for exhibitions and events , and a glass @-@ walled cafe with a view of the Lovell Telescope and an outdoor dining area , an education space , and landscaping of the gardens including a new Galaxy Maze . A large orrery was installed in 2013 . 
 As well as being open to the public every day , the discovery centre also organises various public outreach events , including public lectures , star parties , and " ask an astronomer " sessions . 
 There is a path ( not a whole circle ) around the Lovell telescope , approximately 20 m from the telescope 's outer railway . Along the path are some information boards explaining how the telescope works and the research that is done with it . 
 The 35 acres ( 140 @,@ 000 m2 ) Jodrell Bank Arboretum , created in 1972 , houses the UK 's national collections of crab apple Malus and mountain ash Sorbus species , and the Heather Society 's Calluna collection . The arboretum also features a small scale model of the solar system , the scale being approximately 1 : 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . As part of the <unk> project , at Jodrell Bank is also the Sun in a 1 : 15 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 scale model of the solar system covering Britain . 
 On 7 July 2010 , it was announced that the observatory was being considered as an applicant for the 2011 United Kingdom Tentative List for World Heritage Site status . It was announced on 22 March 2011 that it was on the shortlist to be put forward by the UK government . 
 In July 2011 the visitor centre and observatory hosted " Jodrell Bank Live " – a rock concert with bands including The Flaming Lips , British Sea Power , Wave Machines , OK GO and Alice Gold . 
 On 23 July 2012 Elbow performed live at the Observatory and filmed a documentary of the event and the facility which was released as a live CD / DVD of the concert . 
 On 31 August 2013 Jodrell Bank hosted a concert performed by the Halle Orchestra to commemorate what would have been Lovell 's 100th birthday . As well as a number of operatic performances during the day , the evening Halle performance saw numbers such as themes from Star Trek , Star Wars and Doctor Who amongst others . The main Lovell telescope was rotated to face the onlooking crowd and used as a huge projection screen showing various animated planetary effects . During the interval the ' screen ' was used to show a history of Lovell 's work and Jodrell Bank itself . 
 There is an astronomy podcast from the observatory , named The <unk> . The BBC television programme <unk> Live is hosted in the control room of the observatory . The programme has had four series , in January 2011 , 2012 , 2013 and 2014 . 
 = = Threat of closure = = 
 On 3 March 2008 , it was reported that Britain 's Science and Technology Facilities Council ( STFC ) , faced with an £ 80 million shortfall in its budget , was considering withdrawing its planned £ 2 @.@ 7 million annual funding of Jodrell Bank 's e @-@ MERLIN project . The project , which aims to replace the microwave links between Jodrell Bank and a number of other radio telescopes with high @-@ bandwidth fibre @-@ optic cables , greatly increasing the sensitivity of observations , is seen as critical to the survival of the establishment in its present form . Sir Bernard Lovell was quoted as saying " It will be a disaster … The fate of the Jodrell Bank telescope is bound up with the fate of e @-@ MERLIN . I don 't think the establishment can survive if the e @-@ MERLIN funding is cut " . 
 On Monday 14 April 2008 , Cheshire 's 106 @.@ 9 Silk FM unveiled to its listeners their own campaign song to save Jodrell Bank , entitled " The Jodrell Bank Song " and sung by a group dubbed " The Astronomers " . Along with the song , the Silk FM team also produced a music video filmed in front of the iconic Lovell telescope . Silk FM released the song for download from Monday 21 April 2008 . All proceeds went towards saving Jodrell Bank . 
 On 9 July 2008 , it was reported that , following an independent review , the STFC had reversed its initial position and would after all guarantee funding of £ 2 @.@ 5 million annually for three years . 
 = = Fictional references = = 
 Jodrell Bank has been mentioned in several popular works of fiction , including Doctor Who ( Remembrance of the Daleks , The Poison Sky , The Eleventh Hour ) . It was intended to be a filming location for Logopolis ( Tom Baker 's final Doctor Who serial ) but budget restrictions prevented this and another location with a superimposed model of a radio telescope was used instead . It was also mentioned in The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy ( as well as The Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy film ) , The Creeping Terror and Meteor . Jodrell Bank also featured heavily in the music video to Electric Light Orchestra 's 1983 single Secret Messages . The <unk> Sprout song Technique ( from debut album Swoon ) opens with the line " Her husband works at Jodrell Bank / He 's home late in the morning " . 
 The Observatory is the site of several episodes in the novel <unk> , by Alan Garner ( 2012 ) , and the central character , Colin <unk> , is an astrophysicist on its staff . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Adams , Douglas ( 1986 ) . Hitchhiker 's Guide to the Galaxy — A Trilogy in Four Parts . Pan Books . ISBN 0 @-@ 330 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Gunn , A. G. ( 2005 ) . " Jodrell Bank and the Meteor Velocity Controversy " . In The New Astronomy : Opening the Electromagnetic Window and Expanding Our View of Planet Earth , Volume 334 of the Astrophysics and Space Science Library . Part 3 , pages 107 – 118 . Springer <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1007 / 1 @-@ 4020 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 _ 7 
 Lovell , Bernard ( 1968 ) . Story of Jodrell Bank . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 Lovell , Bernard ( 1973 ) . Out of the Zenith : Jodrell Bank , 1957 – 70 . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 . 
 Lovell , Bernard ( 1985 ) . The Jodrell Bank Telescopes . Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Lovell , Bernard ( 1990 ) . Astronomer by Chance . London : Macmillan . ISBN 0 @-@ 333 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Piper , Roger ( 1972 ) [ 1965 ] . The Story of Jodrell Bank ( Carousel ed . ) . London : Carousel . ISBN 0 @-@ 552 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 Pullan , Brian ; <unk> , Michele ( 2000 ) . A history of the University of Manchester 1951 – 1973 . Manchester University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 7190 @-@ <unk> @-@ 5 . 
 = = = Journal articles = = = 
 Palmer , H. P. ; B. Rowson ( 1968 ) . " The Jodrell Bank Mark III Radio Telescope " . Nature 217 ( <unk> ) : 21 – 22 . Bibcode : <unk> ... <unk> doi : 10 @.@ 1038 / <unk> . 
 = Treehouse of Horror II = 
 " Treehouse of Horror II " ( originally known as " The Simpsons Halloween Special II " ) is the seventh episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 31 , 1991 ( Halloween 1991 ) . It is the second annual Treehouse of Horror episode , consisting of three self @-@ contained segments , told as dreams of Lisa , Bart and Homer . In the first segment , which was inspired by W. W. Jacobs 's short story The Monkey 's Paw and The New Twilight Zone episode " A Small Talent for War " , Homer buys a Monkey 's Paw that has the power to grant wishes , although all of the wishes backfire . In the second part , which parodies the Twilight Zone episode " It 's a Good Life " , Bart is omnipotent , and turns Homer into a jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ box , resulting in the two spending more time together . In the final segment , Mr. Burns attempts to use Homer 's brain to power a giant robotic laborer . 
 The episode was written by Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Jeff Martin , George Meyer , Sam Simon and John Swartzwelder while Jim Reardon was the director . The episode is presented in a similar format to the previous season 's " Treehouse of Horror " and contains several similarities to the previous episode , such as Marge 's opening warning , the tombstones in the opening credits and the appearance of the alien characters Kang and Kodos . " Treehouse of Horror II " was the first episode that employed the " scary names " idea , in which many of the credits have unusual names . The episode contains numerous parodies and references to horror and science fiction works , including The Twilight Zone , Frankenstein , Bride of Frankenstein , The Thing with Two Heads and Invasion of the Body Snatchers . 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network , the episode had a 12 @.@ 1 Nielsen rating and finished the week ranked 39th . The episode received positive reviews , and in 2006 , IGN listed the third story as the eighth best Treehouse of Horror segment . The episode was nominated for two Primetime Emmy Awards : Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or a Special and Alf Clausen for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , Homer is watching the news on Halloween night while eating candy , which ends up being taken by Jimbo and Kearney after they threaten to egg his house . Marge and the kids return home after trick @-@ or @-@ treating with a big haul of candy . Despite warnings from Marge that eating the candy will cause nightmares , Homer , Lisa , and Bart eat from the large candy pile . That night , all three try to sleep , and Lisa is the first to have a nightmare . 
 = = = Lisa 's Nightmare = = = 
 In the first of three segments , the Simpsons visit Morocco ( which Homer mistakes for Monaco ) . Homer purchases a severed monkey 's hand that will grant four wishes , despite the vendor 's warning that the wisher will meet with grave misfortune . Back in Springfield , the family argues in how to use the wishes . Despite Marge 's warning to heed the advice of the vendor in not using any of them , Maggie is granted that first wish : a new pacifier . Next , Bart wishes for the Simpsons to be rich and famous . His wish is granted , but the people quickly tire of the family 's annoying antics , cheesy merchandise and celebrity treatment . Horrified by these wasteful wishes , Lisa wishes for world peace and Homer is furious . While all countries declare peace and destroy their weapons , the aliens Kang and Kodos realize the human race is " ripe for the plucking " and , armed only with a slingshot and a club , enslave the Earth . At the house , Homer blames Lisa and deems her own wishes to be selfish . She defends herself , claiming that Bart and Maggie 's own wishes were also selfish as well and felt that hers was the only selfless one . Soon , Marge catches the people who are angry with the Simpsons and calls for a temporary truce in the family . Determined to make a wish that cannot be twisted , she begs Homer to do the right thing and use the last wish to get rid of the aliens . Much to her dismay , Homer refuses and demands a turkey sandwich , but the turkey turns out to be a little too dry . With all of the wishes used , he goes to throw out the paw , but his neighbor Ned Flanders asks about it . Hoping to see Flanders suffer , Homer gladly hands the paw over . Ned 's first wish is to " Get rid of those awful aliens , " which is accomplished when Moe chases after Kodos with a board with a nail sticking out of it , then brings the aliens back to the flying saucer . Kodos laments their failed invasion , but Kang assures him that humanity is doomed : they will end up in an arms race creating increasingly bigger boards and bigger nails , which will ultimately " cause the human race to create a board with a nail in it so big to doom mankind . " Everyone celebrates and after Flanders wishes to " spruce up the ol ' homestead , " his house is converted into an opulent castle , making Homer jealous . Lisa wakes up from her nightmare and begs Bart to keep her company . Bart sleepily complies after Lisa gives him a candy necklace . Bart then has a nightmare . 
 = = = Bart 's Nightmare = = = 
 In the second segment , Springfield is held in a grip of terror by Bart , who has omnipotent powers . Bart turns whoever is not happy with his rule into another being , and even history is changed to suit Bart 's pleasure . When Homer refuses to turn off a football game so that Bart can watch " The Krusty the Clown Show " ( which has been running for 346 consecutive hours ) , Bart transports him into the football stadium in place of the ball for a field goal kick . As Homer creeps back into the house , trying to surprise Bart with a blow to the back of the head , Bart transforms him into a jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ box . Marge suggests that the two see Dr. Marvin Monroe . The doctor says that Bart is desperate for paternal attention from Homer and suggests that the two spend more time together . Despite being a jack @-@ in @-@ the @-@ box , Homer spends quality time with Bart , and they soon become a normal , loving family . Bart turns Homer back into a human and the two share a warm family moment , causing Bart to wake up screaming . Bart and Lisa wake Homer and Marge and beg them to let them sleep in their bed . As the two crawl into bed , Homer laments that he has to go to work in a few hours and dozes off , becoming the last one in the episode to have a nightmare . 
 = = = Homer 's Nightmare = = = 
 In the third segment , Mr. Burns fires Homer for his laziness and incompetence . Looking for work , Homer answers a classified ad to become a grave digger . Meanwhile , Burns is nearing the completion of his giant robotic laborer , which he hopes will eventually replace weak @-@ bodied human workers . The only remaining step is to implant a human brain into the machine 's body . Searching a graveyard the following night , Burns mistakes Homer , snoring in an open grave , for a newly buried corpse and , despite signs that Homer may still be alive , removes Homer 's brain with an ice cream scoop and places it in the robot . However , Robo @-@ Homer is just as lazy and incompetent as he was as a human , using his x @-@ ray vision to locate donuts . Burns declares the experiment a failure and , after restoring the brain to Homer 's still @-@ living body , kicks the robot , which topples over and crushes Burns . Afterward , he tells Smithers to get some surgical tools and ether . 
 Homer wakes up screaming after Bart bites him . While going to the bathroom , Homer finds Mr. Burns 's head grafted on his shoulder , Burns revealing that due to the fact his own body was crushed , Burns 's head was instead surgically placed onto Homer 's neck . Homer , in a stage of denial repeatedly mumbles that it is all a dream , and Mr. Burns sarcastically reassures him , " Oh that 's right , it 's all a dream ... or is it ? " and laughs maniacally . 
 In a faux sneak preview for the next episode , Lisa reminds Homer that her class is hosting an " all you can eat " spaghetti dinner while Burns reminds him that they have a reception for Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands that same night . This causes Homer to remark how he hates having two heads . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Treehouse of Horror II " , the second edition of the Treehouse of Horror series of episodes , was written by Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Jeff Martin , George Meyer , Sam Simon , and John Swartzwelder . Jim Reardon was the director . The episode is presented in a similar format to the previous season 's " Treehouse of Horror " , and contains several similarities to the previous episode , such as Marge 's opening warning , the tombstones in the opening credits and the appearance of the alien characters Kang and Kodos . " Treehouse of Horror II " was the first episode that employed the " scary names " idea , in which many of the names in the opening and closing credits have unusual nicknames . The idea came from Al Jean , who was inspired by old issues of EC Comics . Although the names quickly became more silly than scary , there has been a wide variety of special credits . For example , the director 's name is given as Jim " Rondo " Reardon , a reference to his idol , Rondo Hatton . The " scary names " became such a burden to write that they were cut for " Treehouse of Horror XII " and " Treehouse of Horror XIII " , but after hearing complaints from the fans , Jean decided to bring them back . The alien characters Kang and Kodos had been introduced in the previous year . There was a debate about whether to include them in all Halloween specials after the episode ; eventually , the writers agreed to make it a tradition . 
 During the beginning of the segment " The Monkey 's Paw " , Hank Azaria faked some Arabic . Usually , the writers get inspiration for the Halloween specials from old horror stories , but recently , the writers tried to conceive of their own stories instead of creating more parodies . Also , when the Moroccan salesman tries to warn Homer Simpson , saying " You 'll be sorry " , the animators forgot to move his lips . They only realized their error after the broadcast , so they decided not to change it . While writing the segment , Sam Simon , one of the writers , wanted the fingers to go down in such an order so they would eventually have the middle finger sticking up . Once the animation would have been complete , however , they could not have gone through ; Fox would have refused to air the episode . They had considered the alternative of deliberately blurring the middle finger themselves , but decided that Fox would have also refused . For this episode , there were a lot of loop lines ; for instance , the ending to " The Monkey 's Paw " was added to the last second . As a result of the loop , they still retained Flanders 's old house next to his newly created castle . In order to make the episode fill the time needed , the animators often extended the laughing time for Kang and Kodos . 
 The second segment is based on The Twilight Zone television series episode " It 's a Good Life " . That episode had also inspired the third segment of Twilight Zone : The Movie , which starred Nancy Cartwright in her debut feature film role . The segment parodies the narration of The Twilight Zone , and the producers were pleased with Harry Shearer 's portrayal of Rod Serling . In addition , though it took a long time , the design of the monster version of Snowball II by Rich was greatly enjoyed by the producers , who thought it looked " just hideous , just right " . Bart 's prank call to Moe was thought of by John Swartzwelder , one of the writers ; however , Hank Azaria detested the line . According to George Meyer , the animation for when Bart sits up , screaming , was extremely tough , especially to make the <unk> natural . 
 In the third segment , Burns and Smithers go down to the lab during Homer 's nightmare . The animators decided to make the animation a bit more impressive , and decided to do the concave and convex images of Burns and Smithers . Even though it was tough and took up more time , the producers felt that it was a necessary tour @-@ de @-@ force . Originally , Homer 's robotic voice was done post @-@ animation in order to avoid stress on the voice actor . One of the writers who created the Davy Crockett joke thought it was so funny that he actually mimicked the actions of Mr. Burns putting on Homer 's brain in the writing room ; the producers thought that it was hilarious , so they decided to add it into the episode . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the opening sequence of the episode , the Peanuts gang scurry by as trick @-@ or @-@ treaters , à la It 's the Great Pumpkin , Charlie Brown . Marge 's hair in the opening segment recalls Elsa Lanchester 's character in Bride of Frankenstein . The plot of Lisa 's nightmare is a reference to W. W. Jacobs 's short story The Monkey 's Paw , and The New Twilight Zone episode " A Small Talent for War " . Near the beginning of the segment , Moroccan soldiers stop and search the Simpsons , finding souvenirs taped to Homer 's body which he was attempting to smuggle out of the country . This is a reference to the opening drug @-@ smuggling scene of the film Midnight Express . A billboard advertisement with Bart saying " Get a <unk> , Man ! " can be seen . This was a reference to Bart 's popular slogan " Don 't have a cow , man ! " 
 The plot of Bart 's nightmare is a parody of The Twilight Zone episode " It 's a Good Life " , which was remade as part of Twilight Zone : The Movie . Jasper 's transformation into a dog is a reference to the 1978 remake of Invasion of the Body Snatchers . The scene in which Homer goes out with Bart during Bart 's nightmare to spend time with the boy , as well as the music accompanying the scene , parody an old anti @-@ smoking public service announcement , while the church layout was taken from a Norman Rockwell painting . 
 Homer 's nightmare is based on much of the film Frankenstein , and the end references The Thing with Two Heads . While Mr. Burns scoops out Homer 's brain , he hums the tune of " If I Only Had a Brain " which is sung by the Scarecrow in The Wizard of Oz . Burns also calls the robot that had Homer 's brain a " clinking , clattering <unk> of <unk> cogs and camshafts " , similar to the Wizard 's line to the Tin Man : " You clinking , clanking , clattering collection of <unk> junk ! " In Homer 's nightmare , The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson is broadcast on a TV . When Mr. Burns puts on Homer 's brain , he says " Look at me ! I 'm Davy Crockett " , a reference to Crockett 's popular image as a <unk> who wore a hat of raccoon fur . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original airing on the Fox Network , the episode had a 12 @.@ 1 Nielsen rating and was viewed in approximately 11 @.@ 14 million homes . It finished the week ranked 39th . It was the highest rated show on Fox the week it aired , tied with In Living Color . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood praised the episode as " A marked improvement on the first , uneven Hallowe 'en special . All three tales succeed , with Bart 's nightmare of gaining awesome powers being perhaps the most successful " . Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict lauded the episode for having " wonderfully wild moments " , especially " the parody of The Twilight Zone 's ' It 's a Good Life , ' with Bart in the place of Billy <unk> 's omnipresent monster " . He gave the episode a score of 90 out of 100 a possible score . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson critiqued the episode as " not so hot their first couple of years " , though he admitted that " the 1991 incarnation does top the original from 1990 " . However , he thought that " None of the three stories stands out as particularly excellent , though the monkey ’ s paw one probably works the best . Chalk up this episode as a decent Halloween set " . He thought the best quote was “ Damn it Smithers , this isn ’ t rocket science . It ’ s brain surgery ! " 
 In 2006 , IGN published a list of the top ten Treehouse of Horror segments , and they placed the third segment at number eight . They wrote , " ' Treehouse of Horror II ' contained three quality segments , but [ the third ] was easily the best . Featuring a story reminiscent to Frankenstein , this episode made us laugh from beginning to end with Homer 's crazy antics . [ ... ] The humor that is derived from the multiple movie and literary parodies was enough to leave a last impression on us as an audience — and who doesn 't like a robot whose primary function is to find donuts ? " Writing for the Star Tribune , Neal Justin rated the episode as the one of his ten favorite episodes , writing , " The annual Halloween specials glow because all the rules are thrown out , never with more ingenuity than in this second installment . " The episode 's reference to Midnight Express was named the 18th greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . 
 The episode was nominated for two Primetime Emmy Awards : Outstanding Individual Achievement in Sound Mixing for a Comedy Series or a Special and Alf Clausen for Outstanding Music Composition for a Series . 
 = Malmö Stadion = 
 Malmö Stadion , often known simply as Stadion before the construction of Swedbank Stadion between 2007 and 2009 , is a multi @-@ purpose stadium in Malmö , Sweden . As of 2015 , it is the home of association football club IFK Malmö , presently of Division 4 , and athletics club MAI . The stadium served as the home ground for Malmö FF , an association football team in Sweden 's top flight , Allsvenskan , from its opening in 1958 until 2009 , when the club moved to the newly constructed Swedbank Stadion , built beside Malmö Stadion , in 2009 . Malmö FF still use the stadium for training purposes and youth matches . Besides being used for sports , the stadium has also hosted various concerts and other events . The ground 's record attendance , 30 @,@ 953 , was set in the very first match played at the ground , a 1958 FIFA World Cup match between Argentina and West Germany . 
 Malmö Stadion was originally built for the 1958 FIFA World Cup , during which it was the venue for four matches . It replaced Malmö IP as Malmö 's main sports stadium , where IFK Malmö , MAI and Malmö FF had been based since the early 20th century . It also hosted three matches during the 1992 UEFA European Football Championship . The stadium today holds 26 @,@ 500 spectators when in its sporting configuration , with 14 @,@ 000 fans seated and 12 @,@ 500 standing . For concerts , the ground can hold up to 40 @,@ 000 people depending on the location of the stage . On 2 February 2015 Malmö Stad took the decision to approve the demolition of the stadium for redevelopment of the area . Malmö Stad has previously decided that a new public swimming arena is to be built on the site in the near future . As of February 2015 it is still not known when the demolition process will begin . 
 = = History = = 
 Plans to build a new stadium in Malmö originated in 1943 , when local officials deemed Malmö IP to be too small for major events . However , the city council could not agree where to build the new stadium , and the matter was dropped for the time being . It was not until Sweden was chosen to host the 1958 FIFA World Cup that the question resurfaced . The location of the stadium was a main subject of discussion : some suggested a suburban location in <unk> , while others thought that the stadium should be located in central Malmö , near the neighbourhood of <unk> . Proponents of a central location ultimately won the day ; the site was confirmed in 1954 . 
 The plans were agreed upon in 1956 , and building started on 5 June that year , when the chairman of the city 's sports committee turned the first sod . The ground officially opened about two years later , on 28 May 1958 . At the time of the stadium 's inauguration , it held 31 @,@ 000 spectators . It was designed by architects Sten Samuelsson and Fritz <unk> , who also designed another of the World Cup stadiums , Ullevi in the city of Gothenburg ; as a result , the two grounds share many architectural features . During the World Cup , the stadium hosted three matches : West Germany vs Argentina in Group 1 , which was the inaugural match of the stadium ; West Germany vs Northern Ireland , also in Group 1 ; Northern Ireland vs Czechoslovakia , in the Group 1 play @-@ off ; and , finally , West Germany vs Yugoslavia in the quarter @-@ final round . 
 During the 1992 UEFA European Football Championship ( commonly called Euro 1992 ) , Malmö Stadion hosted three matches in Group 1 , which comprised the national teams of Sweden , Denmark , England and France . None of the matches played in Malmö involved Sweden , however , as the host nation played all of their matches at Råsunda , a stadium in the capital city Stockholm . 
 Malmö Allmänna <unk> ( MAI ) , the largest athletics club in Malmö , have used the stadium for training purposes and outdoor competition since the stadium 's inauguration in 1958 . MAI organises its own international athletic competition , the MAI Gala , which has been held since the 1930s . It was originally hosted at Malmö IP , but moved to Malmö Stadion after its construction . Some notable athletes who have competed in the gala are Marion Jones , Maurice Greene , Sergej Bubka and Kajsa <unk> . 
 Malmö Stadion served as the home ground of association football club Malmö FF between 1958 and 2008 . The team moved to the stadium on its opening in 1958 , leaving its original home ground at Malmö IP to do so . The first Malmö FF match at the new ground was played on 8 August 1958 ; in an Allsvenskan fixture , Malmö FF took on their cross @-@ town rivals , IFK Malmö , who had also moved to the stadium from Malmö IP . Played in front of 17 @,@ 368 fans , the game ended with a 4 – 4 draw . IFK were relegated from Allsvenskan in 1962 , and have not returned to the first tier since , but the club continues to play at Malmö Stadion nonetheless . Malmö FF experienced an average attendance of around 13 @,@ 000 for the first ten years at the stadium ; average crowds then dropped to below 10 @,@ 000 by the end of the 1970s . By the 1990s , attendances were at an all @-@ time low , with less than 5 @,@ 000 people on average coming to Malmö FF matches . The club therefore let Malmö Stadion for the newly renovated Malmö IP in 1999 , IFK Malmö followed in August the same year . By this time IFK Malmö were playing in Division 2 , then the third tier in the Swedish league system . During their seasons in Allsvenskan , IFK Malmö had attracted an average attendance of around 10 @,@ 000 spectators between 1957 – 58 and 1962 . IFK Malmö 's attendance at Malmö Stadion reached its peak during the 1960 season when the club finished as runners @-@ up in Allsvenskan and attracted 12 @,@ 787 spectators on average to the stadium . The attendance had decreased to around 1 @,@ 000 spectators per match in 1999 when the club had dropped in the league . 
 Malmö FF 's move to Malmö IP occurred during the second half of the 1999 Allsvenskan . It soon became apparent to the club that Malmö IP was too small , and lacked the safety facilities that Malmö Stadion offered . When Malmö FF were relegated to the second tier of Swedish football at the end of the 1999 season , the club board decided to move the team back to Malmö Stadion before the next season started . IFK Malmö , however stayed at Malmö IP . After Malmö FF were promoted back to Allsvenskan after one season in the second division , Superettan , the average attendance began to rise . Malmö FF 's average crowd during the 2001 Allsvenskan season was 11 @,@ 315 ; it was the first time since the 1970s that the club had drawn an average crowd of more than 10 @,@ 000 spectators . Average attendances then increased year on year as Malmö FF experienced a successful period . In the 2004 Allsvenskan season , as Malmö FF won their first Swedish championship since 1988 , the team also set a new club record for attendances over a season , with an average of 20 @,@ 061 spectators watching Malmö FF matches . Around this time , both club and fans began to feel that Malmö Stadion had served it purpose , as the ageing stadium began to deteriorate . Some fans also expressed their discontent with the distance between the pitch and the stands , necessitated by the running tracks surrounding the playing area . 
 Malmö Stad , the city council , announced on 25 April 2005 its intention to either help the club renovate Malmö Stadion , or build a new stadium in the same area . Four days later , five different scenarios were laid out by the municipality : the first proposed the construction of an entirely new , football @-@ specific stadium to the south of Malmö Stadion , while the second suggested the demolition of Malmö Stadion , and the erection of a new ground for football and athletics on the same site . The third , fourth , and fifth ideas all proposed the building of two stadiums , one for football and one for athletics , on various local plots . The municipality chose the first option on 3 December 2005 : the new football ground would be built south of Malmö Stadion , with a capacity of 20 @,@ 000 to 25 @,@ 000 , on a 399 million kronor budget . Malmö Stadion , meanwhile , would be renovated into an athletics stadium for 50 million kronor . Swedbank Stadion was completed in 2009 . As of 2012 , no renovation has been done on Malmö Stadion . 
 Malmö FF left Malmö Stadion at the end of the 2008 Allsvenskan season . The last Allsvenskan match played at the stadium was the team 's final game of the season , against GIF Sundsvall on 9 November 2008 . The match was won 6 – 0 by Malmö FF , who wore a special kit designed to honour the legacy of the stadium . Malmö FF still uses the stadium for training purposes and youth matches . IFK Malmö returned to Malmö Stadion for the 2009 season . The move was done in protest against Malmö Stad 's decision to lay out an artificial turf at Malmö IP . Since returning to Malmö Stadion , IFK Malmö 's average attendance has been around 100 – 200 spectators per match . The team currently plays in Division 4 , the sixth tier of Swedish football . 
 In June 2011 , Malmö Stad decided that a new public swimming arena is to be built in the same area as the stadium in the near future . This leaves the stadium 's future clouded in uncertainty . Recent occurrences have indicated that Malmö Stadion might continue to be used as an athletics arena , as MAI intends to revive the MAI Gala . In November 2012 , MAI lobbied to attract 100 metres Olympic champion Usain Bolt to the stadium for the proposed MAI Gala in August 2014 . MAI are also working towards hosting the European Athletics Junior Championships in 2015 , and have written to the European Athletic Association to express their interest . On 31 January 2015 new reports suggested that the city council had reached an agreement that Malmö Stadion is to be demolished . The decision to approve the demolition of the stadium was taken on 2 February 2015 . As of February 2015 it is still unknown when the demolition process will start and what will become of the area . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 Malmö Stadion has an overall capacity of 26 @,@ 500 spectators for sports , of which 14 @,@ 000 are standing spectators . When hosting concerts , the stadium can host 25 @,@ 000 spectators when the stage is on either long side of the stadium , or up to 40 @,@ 000 when it is placed in front of either short side . It comprises two main stands on each of the long sides of the pitch : the Southern Stand and the Northern Stand , both of which have two tiers . The lower tier of the Northern Stand is terraced , and was the only tier of the stand until the upper , seated tier was built in 1992 . The short sides of the pitch feature two minor terracing sections , respectively named the Eastern Stand and the Western Stand . When Malmö FF were based at the ground , the Northern Stand terracing was the section with the most season ticket holders , while the Eastern Stand was the section used to house away fans . 
 The stadium features a 100 by 65 metres ( 328 ft × 213 ft ) association football pitch , and eight all @-@ weather running tracks , which surround the pitch . The tracks are certified for national and international athletic competitions . Also available at the stadium are areas on each short side of the pitch for the high jump , javelin throw , pole vault and shot put events . In front of the Southern Stand there are pits for long jump and triple jump . When the stadium is used for association football , two dugouts are placed at the edge of the pitch in front of the Southern Stand . Behind the two dugouts , on the other side of the running tracks , is the entrance and exit to the players ' changing rooms , which are located in the Southern Stand . There are a total of 12 changing rooms inside the stand , as well as facilities for referees and media . There are reserved seats for officials and media in the Southern Stand . In the respective corridors behind the Southern and Northern Stands , as well as in the open area between the Northern and Western Stands , there are several vendors selling snacks , light meals , and beverages . The entrances to the stadium are located along the Southern and Northern Stands . A ticket office , formerly used for selling the tickets for Malmö FF home matches , is connected with the Southern Stand . 
 = = International football = = 
 = = = 1958 FIFA World Cup = = = 
 The following 1958 FIFA World Cup matches were held at Malmö Stadion : 
 = = = UEFA Euro 1992 = = = 
 The following UEFA Euro 1992 matches were held at Malmö Stadion : 
 = = = Sweden matches = = = 
 The stadium has also hosted several matches played by the Sweden national team . This is a list of all competitive matches played by Sweden at Malmö Stadion : 
 = = Other uses = = 
 On 15 September 1961 , the stadium was used for Motorcycle speedway when it was chosen as the host for the Speedway World Championship Final . The event , the first of its kind not to be staged at Wembley Stadium in England , was won by Swedish rider and defending champion Ove Fundin who won the third of his five Individual World Championships . It would prove to be the only World Final staged at Malmö Stadion . From 1964 , World Final 's held in Sweden were run at the Ullevi Stadium in Göteborg . 
 Malmö also hosted other World Championship Motorcycle speedway meetings . In 1967 it hosted the Final of the Speedway World Team Cup . The host nation Sweden won their 5th WTC title with riders <unk> Nordin , Bengt Jansson , <unk> <unk> and Ove Fundin . They defeated Poland , Great Britain and the Soviet Union . In 1970 Malmö hosted the Speedway World Pairs Championship which was won by New Zealand riders Ivan Mauger and Ronnie Moore . The Kiwis defeated Sweden ( Ove Fundin and Bengt Jansson ) , and England who were represented by brothers Nigel and Eric <unk> . 1970 was the final time the stadium was used for World Championship speedway . Mauger would go on to break Ove Fundin 's record of 5 World Championships by winning the title on 6 occasions . Sweden later regained a share of the record when Tony <unk> would win 6 World Championships between 1994 and 2005 . 
 The use of Malmö Stadion for concerts has increased since the construction of Swedbank Stadion and Malmö FF 's departure . Since 2007 , several known artists such as Ozzy Osbourne , Elton John , Dolly Parton , The Eagles , Kiss , and Rod Stewart have performed at the stadium . Due to the climate in Sweden and the lack of a retractable roof at the ground , all of these concerts have been held during the European summer , between June – August . The main stage has been placed either facing the Southern Stand , or along one of the short sides of the stadium . The pitch has been covered up with wooden floorboards during the performances to minimize the damage done to the grass . Many spectators complained about the less than impressive sound quality at both the Elton John and Dolly Parton concerts , citing the stadiums layout as unsuitable for this kind of concert . 
 = = Records = = 
 The ground 's present attendance record was set during the 1958 World Cup , when 30 @,@ 953 spectators saw the first game ever played at the stadium , the Group 1 match between Argentina and West Germany . The match ended 3 – 1 in West Germany 's favour . The record crowd for a Malmö FF match played at the ground was set on 24 September 1967 , when 29 @,@ 328 attended the Allsvenskan match between Malmö FF and Scanian rivals Helsingborgs IF . Helsingborg won the match 2 – 1 . IFK Malmö 's record attendance was set on 10 September 1969 in a Division 2 Scanian derby fixture against Helsingborgs IF which attracted 25 @,@ 624 spectators to the stadium , the match ended 1 – 0 in Helsingborg 's favour . 
 Malmö FF 's average attendance at Malmö Stadion initially lay steady at around 15 @,@ 000 per season from the mid @-@ 1960s to the early 1970s , before decreasing to around 10 @,@ 000 spectators per season for the remainder of that decades . During the 1980s and the 1990s , attendances decreased even further down to an average of around 5 @,@ 000 fans per season ; the general interest in Swedish football was also very low at the time . Attendance took a sharp turn upwards during the 2001 season , Malmö FF 's first season back in Allsvenskan after a season in Superettan . Average crowds then increased annually , and reached their peak during the 2004 season , when Malmö FF reached an all @-@ time record average attendance of 20 @,@ 061 . Attendances afterwards decreased each year , and were down to a seasonal average of 11 @,@ 182 by the time of Malmö FF 's final season at the ground . Only 6 @,@ 580 attended Malmö FF 's last Allsvenskan match at the stadium , on 9 November 2008 . 
 IFK Malmö played five Allsvenskan seasons at Malmö Stadion between 1957 – 58 and 1962 before being relegated to Division 2 . The average attendance during these years stayed around 10 @,@ 000 fans , reaching its peak at 12 @,@ 787 spectators in average during the 1960 Allsvenskan season when IFK Malmö finished as runners @-@ up . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 Just like the neighbouring Swedbank Stadion , Malmö Stadion is currently served by Malmö bus lines 3 , 5 , 6 and 34 , all of which stop in the vicinity of the two stadiums . Local transit authority <unk> also operates dedicated match @-@ day buses , branded as line 84 , which run from different areas of Malmö when Malmö FF play home matches at Swedbank Stadion . Due to the central location of the two stadiums within the city , parking space is limited , and spectators are advised to use public transportation , particularly for more prominent matches at Swedbank Stadion . This does not apply to matchdays for IFK Malmö , as not so many fans are drawn for that club 's games . Malmö Stadion is also near the underground railway station <unk> , which opened in December 2010 as a part of Citytunneln . The station is served by Pågatåg and Öresund Trains , and is reachable non @-@ stop from many parts of the Öresund Region . 
 The closest parking location to Malmö Stadion is " P @-@ huset Stadion " , a parking garage with 440 parking spaces , which was purpose @-@ built for Swedbank Stadion . The garage opened in September 2009 . It is located 100 metres ( 330 ft ) from Swedbank Stadion , just beside Malmö FF 's training ground . There are also various other local parking spaces , and a large number of bicycle stands surrounding the western edge of Swedbank Stadion . 
 = Manipuri pony = 
 The Manipuri pony is a breed of pony developed in India . Experts disagree on its exact origin , although they do agree that it is an ancient breed , possibly developed from either the Tibetan pony or a cross between the Mongolian Wild Horse and the Arabian . First mentioned in written chronicles in 1584 , Manipuri ponies were used as cavalry horses throughout the 17th and 18th centuries . In the late 19th and early 20th centuries , they were in demand by the British for use as polo ponies . Breed numbers have dwindled , however , mainly due to exports , and today the population is very low . In 2007 , a genetic study was conducted on the Manipuri and four other Indian equine breeds . The Manipuri was shown to be genetically close to three other Indian pony breeds , but genetically more distant from the Marwari , the sole Indian horse breed in the study . The Manipuri pony was originally bred for polo and military usage , and today is bred mainly for playing polo and racing , although it is also in demand for military transport use . 
 = = Breed characteristics = = 
 The Manipuri breed has a light head with a straight profile , set on a well @-@ formed neck , somewhat pronounced withers , a deep chest and sloping shoulders . The croup is sloping , the legs sturdy and the hooves well @-@ proportioned . The breed 's overall appearance is elegant , an inheritance from their Arabian ancestors . Manipuri ponies generally stand 11 to 13 hands ( 44 to 52 inches , 112 to 132 cm ) high . They are often bay in color , but can also be pinto , gray and chestnut . Because of the short height of the ponies , riders use shortened mallets while playing polo . The Manipuri pony resembles , and is distantly related to , the Burmese Pony and the Indonesian Batak and Sumba ponies . 
 In 2007 , a study was published that examined genetic variation among five Indian equine breeds — the Manipuri , Marwari , Spiti , Bhutia , and <unk> . Based on analysis of microsatellite DNA , the Manipuri was found to have the greatest genetic distance from the Marwari , and a much closer genetic distance to the other three breeds . The distance from the Marwari was not only genetic , but seen in physical characteristics , particularly height and environmental adaptability . The physical differences were attributed to differing ancestries : the Marwari horse is closely associated with the Arabian , while the four other breeds are thought to have descended at least in part from the Tibetan pony . None of the breeds in the study were found to be closely genetically associated with the Thoroughbred . 
 = = History = = 
 Sources disagree as to the exact origins of the Manipuri pony , although all agree that it was derived from ancient stock . One source gives the ancestors of the pony as Tibetan ponies brought into India over a thousand years ago , while another states their origins to be a cross between the Mongolian Wild Horse and the Arabian , brought to India by invading Tartar tribes , who also brought the equestrian game of polo . Manipuri ponies have been bred for centuries in the Manipur area of northeast India . The first written mention of the breed dates to a brief statement in the 1584 Manipur Royal Chronicle . By the early 1600s , the breed was mentioned frequently in Manipur literature . They were often used as cavalry horses , and were ridden by <unk> warriors . Manipuri ponies played a major part in the cavalry commanded by <unk> <unk> , whose horsemen terrorized upper Burma throughout the early 1700s and in 1738 were used during his Sack of Sagaing . Between 1859 and 1916 , Manipuri ponies were extremely desired by the British for playing polo , and there were further infusions of Arabian blood in the 19th century , as British administrators and military officers sought to upgrade their polo ponies . The height of polo horses was initially restricted to 13 hands ( 52 inches , 132 cm ) , based on the average height of the Manipuri , and although this restriction was later relaxed to 14 hands ( 56 inches , 142 cm ) and then removed altogether , demand for <unk> was so high that the area was drained of them . At one point during this period , the export of ponies from Manipur was banned to allow the breed time to increase in number to a viable level . <unk> were also used to transport British troops into Burma throughout World War II . 
 In 1977 , the Manipur Horse Riding and Polo Association was established to promote the Manipuri pony breed and the game of polo . In recent years , breed numbers have decreased , and estimates place the breed at somewhere between 2 @,@ 300 and 1 @,@ 000 in population in the 21st century . Population numbers continue to dwindle in part due to high numbers of ponies being smuggled into Myanmar ( Burma ) , where the breed is in demand , after either having been purchased or stolen from their Indian owners . In 2005 , a heritage park was begun by the Manipur Horse Riding and Polo Association with the goal of preventing the extinction of the breed and promoting them to tourists . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Polo was introduced into the area of Manipur state as early as the seventh century , and Manipuri ponies were one of the first breeds used in the game . The British learned of polo during the 19th century while watching it played on Manipuri ponies in India . The breed is still used for polo today in India , but other breeds are more popular in Europe and America . Manipuri ponies are often also used to play <unk> <unk> , a version of polo believed to be close to what was originally played when the sport was invented . <unk> <unk> is more demanding than modern polo , as ponies are used for the entire match instead of being changed between periods . Manipuri ponies are also used for racing . During their early history , they were in demand as cavalry horses , and men that rode these ponies were thought well @-@ mounted . They continue to be in demand for military uses . 
 = Hurricane Able ( 1950 ) = 
 Hurricane Able was the first named tropical cyclone in the Atlantic hurricane database , and was also the first of six major hurricanes in the 1950 Atlantic hurricane season . Its development was confirmed on August 12 by the Hurricane Hunters , which is a group that intentionally flies into a hurricane for observations . Hurricane Able initially threatened to strike the Bahamas , but instead turned to the northwest and later to the northeast . As it neared the Outer Banks , Able reached peak winds of 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) , equivalent to a modern @-@ day Category 3 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale . After brushing those islands and Cape Cod , Able moved ashore on Nova Scotia as a minimal hurricane . It later crossed Newfoundland and dissipated on August 24 . 
 The hurricane prompted standard precautions in the Bahamas and Florida , although it did not affect the region . In North Carolina , winds and waves brushed the coast , while around New York City , heavy rainfall caused some flooding . Along Cape Cod and Nantucket , Able produced winds up to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) and high waves , and across New England there were nine traffic fatalities . The hurricane killed 2 people in Canada and caused over $ 1 million in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The beginning of the 1950 Atlantic hurricane season was considered " remarkably quiet " by the U.S. Weather Bureau , with no noteworthy activity until early August . A Hurricane Hunters flight into an easterly wave on August 12 indicated a developing tropical storm east of the Lesser Antilles ; it was later given the name " Able " , which is the first name in the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet . It moved steadily northwestward and reached hurricane status on August 14 , as it passed to the north of the Leeward Islands . The next day , Hurricane Able turned to the west and west @-@ southwest , due to a high pressure system to its north . On August 17 it attained major hurricane status , and by early on August 18 reconnaissance aircraft measured winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) , though Atlantic hurricane reanalysis later determined that those winds were unrepresentative of the intensity . At the time , the storm was 350 miles ( 565 km ) in diameter . 
 Able was expected to continue to the west toward the Bahamas and Florida . It was the strongest hurricane to threaten the <unk> capital , Nassau , since a hurricane in 1929 . The hurricane turned to the northwest , however , sparing the Bahamas from the strongest winds . On August 19 , Able turned to the north , and attained its peak intensity of 125 mph ( 201 km / h ) while doing so ; shortly before peak intensity , aircraft measured a central pressure of 953 millibars ( 28 @.@ 14 inHg ) , the lowest in the life of the storm . The next day Able accelerated to the northeast , after passing just offshore Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . Having maintained peak winds for 12 hours , Hurricane Able began to weaken on August 20 , and early the next day it moved quickly by Cape Cod . It produced winds of hurricane force in Nova Scotia before it moved ashore on August 21 near Goodwood with winds of 75 mph ( 121 km / h ) . Subsequently it deteriorated into an extratropical cyclone , and Able crossed Newfoundland before dissipating early on August 24 in the far northern Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 When Hurricane Able was expected to move through the Bahamas , people executed standard preparations such as securing windows and bringing ships to harbor . One cruise liner diverted its route from the Bahamas toward New York . In Florida , the U.S. Air Force made preliminary plans to move planes . Ultimately , the hurricane spared the region . Further north , the United States Weather Bureau issued northeast storm warnings from Morehead City , North Carolina to the Eastern Shore of Virginia . There , the hurricane ended up bringing light winds and rough waves . Moderate precipitation occurred along the North Carolina coast . In southern New England , Able dropped 3 – 5 inches ( 75 – 125 mm ) of rainfall , with a peak of 6 @.@ 89 inches ( 175 mm ) in Beechwood , Massachusetts . Flooding was reported in portions of New York City . The resulting slick roads from the rains caused nine traffic fatalities across New England . The storm produced 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) gusts in Nantucket and Cape Cod , along with high tides and waves . Offshore , the waves damaged a freighter headed for Florida . 
 In Nova Scotia , Able produced hurricane force winds , the only land along its path to receive such winds ; a gust of 99 mph ( 160 km / h ) was reported in Halifax . The hurricane also dropped heavy rainfall , including over 4 @.@ 92 inches ( 125 mm ) in Annapolis Valley . Initially there were three fishing boats missing throughout the region , although two later returned to harbor . By August 22 , the third was still missing over the Grand Banks , which prompted a rescue team to search for the boat . Many other boats crashed against the coast , and two children died when their raft capsized . Two bridges and several roadways were washed out or flooded , and in Charlottetown , Prince Edward Island , floodwaters left roadways impassable . On land , Able produced heavy damage estimated at over $ 1 million ( CAD ) , half of which in Annapolis Valley , and split between crops , communications , and fishing industries . 
 From 1950 through 1952 , names from the Joint Army / Navy Phonetic Alphabet were first used for storms in the North Atlantic . Able is the first name in the alphabet , and as such , Hurricane Able in 1950 was the first name officially to be used for an Atlantic hurricane . It was also the first of eight major hurricanes in the 1950 Atlantic hurricane season , which as of 2010 is still the record for the most major hurricanes in a season . 
 = Hey Baby ( No Doubt song ) = 
 " Hey Baby " is a song written by Gwen Stefani , Tony Kanal , Tom Dumont , and Bounty Killer for American rock band No Doubt 's fifth studio album , Rock Steady ( 2001 ) . The song is heavily influenced by the Jamaican dancehall music present at No Doubt 's post @-@ show parties and tour bus lounges of their Return of Saturn tour . Its lyrics describe the debauchery with groupies at these parties . 
 The song received positive reviews from music critics , although its dancehall influences had a mixed reception . It was released as the album 's lead single in October 2001 . The single was commercially successful and peaked at number five on the Billboard Hot 100 . At the 45th Grammy Awards , it won the Grammy Award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 " Hey Baby " was one of the first songs written for Rock Steady . The song begins with instrumentals programmed with producer Philip Steir at Toast Studios in San Francisco , California . They experimented with ray gun @-@ like electronic effects and sounds that guitarist Tom Dumont compared to Star Wars music . Notably , the intro is reminiscent of the beginning of the song Jungle Love by the Steve Miller Band . The lyrics and melodies were recorded at a session at Dumont 's home studio in Los Angeles weeks later . While the band was working on the album in Kingston , Jamaica during March 2001 , producers Sly & Robbie left the percussion and Gwen Stefani 's original vocal . The band asked about adding a guest appearance on the song , so Sly & Robbie recommended and added a toast from Bounty Killer . 
 Like the song 's dancehall style , the lyrics depict the band 's post @-@ show parties from touring in support of Return of Saturn . The song details female groupies who attended the parties to hook up with the male band members . Stefani commented that " if you 're talented and you 're up there , girls want to make out with you . " Bassist Tony Kanal described it as " a very PG version " of the licentiousness that took place while touring . The song also touches on Rock Steady 's overall theme of Stefani 's impatience in her long @-@ distance relationship with then @-@ boyfriend Gavin Rossdale ( whom she eventually married in 2002 ) , as she sits " sipping on chamomile / watching boys and girls and their sex appeal " . 
 = = Music and structure = = 
 " Hey Baby " is a ragga song composed in the key of E minor . It is written in common time and moves at a moderate tempo of 90 beats per minute . The song focuses on programming and lacks live instrumentation . As a result , the band needed four keyboard rigs to recreate the track 's sound for live performances , including a Roland AX @-@ 1 and an E @-@ mu Proteus 2000 . Stefani 's vocal range spans over two octaves in the song , from D3 to E5 . 
 The song opens with an introduction consisting of a sustained measure of electronic effects followed by two lines from the chorus . In each two @-@ measure line during the first half of the verses , Stefani descends the scale while the keyboard plays the off @-@ beats of the first measure and the electric bass opens the line with a two @-@ note bassline . During the second half of the verses , Stefani 's vocals are overdubbed , and the instrumentation becomes more frequent . Each of the two verses is followed by the chorus , where overdubbing is used on Stefani 's vocals to produce first inversion and normal form E minor chords . Bounty Killer then toasts the bridge , and after a brief section sung by Stefani , the song closes by repeating the chorus twice . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Hey Baby " generally received positive reviews from music critics . LAUNCHcast 's Lisa Oliver described the song as a mix of " <unk> " and ragga that " bursts with Batman punches . " Colleen Delaney of Stylus Magazine was unimpressed by the lyrics ' double entendres and noted that the toast and " deep , booming production save this song from being thin " but that it remained " inane and unengaging " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine found the song a return to the band 's roots , and that it finds No Doubt " sunnier ( and tighter ) than ever " as a result . Entertainment Weekly included " Hey Baby " in a list of the band 's top five songs . About.com ranked the song number three in a list of the top five singles from Stefani 's career , with the band and as a solo artist , for her " simultaneously sounding like she understands the hippest of contemporary pop ( the Bounty Killer guest rap doesn 't hurt ) while having the wisdom of an adult several years out of high school . " The song was listed at number thirty @-@ eight on the 2002 Pazz & Jop list , a survey of several hundred music critics conducted by Robert Christgau . 
 The band 's endeavor in dancehall music received mixed reviews . AllMusic reviewer Stephen Thomas Erlewine viewed the toast as a mistake , and Blender 's Rupert Howe found the foray into dancehall misguided , leaving Bounty Killer sounding bored . Alex Needham wrote for the NME that the song was a strong example of " white reggae " but that many listeners may not be able to tolerate the genre itself . For Entertainment Weekly , David Browne described the chorus as " big , bustling , and irresistible " and its hip hop influence as kicky . In the BBC review of The Singles 1992 @-@ 2003 , Ruth Mitchell wrote that the chorus was addictive and chiming and that the song had a " catchy dancehall groove " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Hey Baby " was chosen as the lead single from Rock Steady to represent the band 's more " upbeat and confident " attitude for the album . It was commercially successful in the United States and enticed a younger audience to No Doubt . The song debuted at number thirty @-@ six on the Billboard Hot 100 , remaining on the chart for half a year . In its third week , the song became the band 's highest charting single , eventually peaking at number five for two consecutive weeks , later broken when " Underneath It All " reached number three . It was successful in the mainstream music market , topping the Top 40 Mainstream and reaching the top ten on the Top 40 Tracks and Adult Top 40 . The song had significant crossover success and reached number five on the Rhythmic Top 40 chart . At the 2003 Grammy Awards , the song won the award for Best Pop Performance by a Duo or Group with Vocal , and No Doubt performed a medley of " Underneath It All " and " Hella Good " at the show . 
 The song had similar success in Europe , reaching number five on the Eurochart Hot 100 Singles . In the United Kingdom , " Hey Baby " debuted at number two on the UK Singles Chart but was unable to top the chart . It reached the top ten in Denmark , Finland , Germany , Greece , and Norway and the top twenty in Austria , Belgium , Ireland , Italy , the Netherlands , Sweden , and Switzerland . 
 In Australia , " Hey Baby " debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at number twenty @-@ eight and peaked four weeks later at number seven . It was listed at number thirty @-@ seven on the 2002 end of year chart . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , it reached number two , under Shakira 's " Whenever , Wherever " , for two non @-@ consecutive weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's music video , directed by Dave Meyers , follows the theme of the lyrics . It shows the band on a tour bus , stopping at a party at Club <unk> . The members separate when three girls approach the male band members . Kanal has his picture taken with several women , paying for it by taking money that drummer Adrian Young earns by hanging from gymnastics rings naked . Dumont defeats a woman , portrayed by Sonya Eddy , in an endurance drinking game , and Stefani dances , eventually joining Bounty Killer on stage . There are intercut scenes of the band members on a red and black background , a black and white houndstooth background , and standing on top of the phrases " NO <unk> " , " ROCK <unk> " , and " <unk> <unk> " in red and white . 
 The video was filmed in three days in Boyle Heights , Los Angeles . The scenes were designed to recreate the parties that the band attended while recording Rock Steady in Jamaica . Young 's scene was based on an actual event , where he won US $ 200 on a dare to hang upside down and naked on the rings at a club in New York . Dumont 's scene , filmed at Casa Mexicana , is inspired by a similar scene from the 1981 Indiana Jones film Raiders of the Lost Ark . 
 Young 's full frontal on the rings , shown during Bounty Killer 's line " The way you rock your hips , you know that it amaze me , " was controversial . Bounty Killer 's rival Beenie Man stated that " the video portray Bounty as a gay . That is a Jamaican artist , and that can 't <unk> in a dancehall , no way . " Bounty Killer cancelled his performances with No Doubt because of the incident , stating that " they did not understand because they are from America and they accept gay people … If Jamaica is upset , I ain 't going to accept no success that my culture is not proud of . " 
 The video debuted at number ten on MTV 's Total Request Live , peaking at number three , and topped VH1 's Top 20 Countdown for three weeks . The video won the MTV Video Music Awards for Best Pop Video and Best Group Video in 2002 . In Canada , it reached number eight on MuchMusic 's Countdown for two consecutive weeks and remained on the countdown for nine weeks . The video was nominated for Best International Group Video at the 2002 MuchMusic Video Awards but lost to Korn 's " Here to Stay " . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from Rock Steady booklet : 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Osiris myth = 
 The Osiris myth is the most elaborate and influential story in ancient Egyptian mythology . It concerns the murder of the god Osiris , a primeval king of Egypt , and its consequences . Osiris 's murderer , his brother Set , usurps his throne . Meanwhile , Osiris 's wife Isis restores her husband 's body , allowing him to posthumously conceive a son with her . The remainder of the story focuses on Horus , the product of the union of Isis and Osiris , who is at first a vulnerable child protected by his mother and then becomes Set 's rival for the throne . Their often violent conflict ends with Horus 's triumph , which restores order to Egypt after Set 's unrighteous reign and completes the process of Osiris 's resurrection . The myth , with its complex symbolism , is integral to the Egyptian conceptions of kingship and succession , conflict between order and disorder , and especially death and the afterlife . It also expresses the essential character of each of the four deities at its center , and many elements of their worship in ancient Egyptian religion were derived from the myth . 
 The Osiris myth reached its basic form in or before the 24th century BCE . Many of its elements originated in religious ideas , but the struggle between Horus and Set may have been partly inspired by a regional conflict in Egypt 's early history or prehistory . Scholars have tried to discern the exact nature of the events that gave rise to the story , but they have reached no definitive conclusions . 
 Parts of the myth appear in a wide variety of Egyptian texts , from funerary texts and magical spells to short stories . The story is , therefore , more detailed and more cohesive than any other ancient Egyptian myth . Yet no Egyptian source gives a full account of the myth , and the sources vary widely in their versions of events . Greek and Roman writings , particularly De <unk> et <unk> by Plutarch , provide more information but may not always accurately reflect Egyptian beliefs . Through these writings , the Osiris myth persisted after knowledge of most ancient Egyptian beliefs was lost , and it is still well known today . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Death and resurrection of Osiris = = = 
 At the start of the story , Osiris rules Egypt , having inherited the kingship from his ancestors in a lineage stretching back to the creator of the world , Ra or Atum . His queen is Isis , who , along with Osiris and his murderer Set , is one of the children of the earth god Geb and the sky goddess Nut . Little information about the reign of Osiris appears in Egyptian sources ; the focus is on his death and the events that follow . Osiris is connected with life @-@ giving power , righteous kingship , and the rule of maat , the ideal natural order whose maintenance was a fundamental goal in ancient Egyptian culture . Set is closely associated with violence and chaos . Therefore , the slaying of Osiris symbolizes the struggle between order and disorder , and the disruption of life by death . 
 Some versions of the myth provide Set 's motive for killing Osiris . According to a spell in the Pyramid Texts , Set is taking revenge for a kick Osiris gave him , whereas in a Late Period text , Set 's grievance is that Osiris had sex with Nephthys , who is Set 's consort and the fourth child of Geb and Nut . The murder itself is frequently alluded to , but never clearly described . The Egyptians believed that written words had the power to affect reality , so they avoided writing directly about profoundly negative events such as Osiris 's death . Sometimes they denied his death altogether , even though the bulk of the traditions about him make it clear that he has been murdered . In some cases the texts suggest that Set takes the form of a wild animal , such as a crocodile or bull , to slay Osiris ; in others they imply that Osiris 's corpse is thrown in the water or that he is drowned . This latter tradition is the origin of the Egyptian belief that people who had drowned in the Nile were sacred . Even the identity of the victim is changeable in texts , as it is sometimes the god <unk> , an elder form of Horus , who is murdered by Set and then avenged by another form of Horus , who is <unk> 's son by Isis . 
 By the end of the New Kingdom , a tradition had developed that Set had cut Osiris 's body into pieces and scattered them across Egypt . Cult centers of Osiris all over the country claimed that the corpse , or particular pieces of it , were found near them . The dismembered parts could be said to number as many as forty @-@ two , each piece being equated with one of the forty @-@ two nomes , or provinces , in Egypt . Thus , the god of kingship becomes the embodiment of his kingdom . 
 Osiris 's death is followed either by an interregnum or by a period in which Set assumes the kingship . Meanwhile , Isis searches for her husband 's body with the aid of Nephthys . When searching for or mourning Osiris , the two goddesses are often likened to falcons or kites , possibly because kites travel far in search of carrion , because the Egyptians associated their plaintive calls with cries of grief , or because of the goddesses ' connection with Horus , who is often represented as a falcon . In the New Kingdom , when Osiris 's death and renewal came to be associated with the annual flooding of the Nile that fertilized Egypt , the waters of the Nile were equated with Isis 's tears of mourning , or with Osiris 's bodily fluids . Osiris thus represented the life @-@ giving divine power that was present in the river 's water and in the plants that grew after the flood . 
 The goddesses find and restore Osiris 's body , often with the help of other deities , including Thoth , a deity credited with great magical and healing powers , and Anubis , the god of embalming and funerary rites . Osiris becomes the first mummy , and the gods ' efforts to restore his body are the mythological basis for Egyptian embalming practices , which sought to prevent and reverse the decay that follows death . This part of the story is often extended with episodes in which Set or his followers try to damage the corpse , and Isis and her allies must protect it . Once Osiris is made whole , Isis conceives his son and rightful heir , Horus . One ambiguous spell in the Coffin Texts may indicate that Isis is impregnated by a flash of lightning , while in other sources , Isis , still in bird form , fans breath and life into Osiris 's body with her wings and copulates with him . Osiris 's revival is apparently not permanent , and after this point in the story he is only mentioned as the ruler of the Duat , the distant and mysterious realm of the dead . Although he lives on only in the Duat , he and the kingship he stands for will , in a sense , be reborn in his son . 
 The cohesive account by Plutarch , which deals mainly with this portion of the myth , differs in many respects from the known Egyptian sources . Set — whom Plutarch , using Greek names for many of the Egyptian deities , refers to as " Typhon " — conspires against Osiris seventy @-@ two unspecified accomplices , as well as a queen from Ethiopia ( Nubia ) . Set has an elaborate chest made to fit Osiris 's exact measurements and then , at a banquet , declares that he will give the chest as a gift to whoever fits inside it . The guests , in turn , lie inside the coffin , but none fit inside except Osiris . When he lies down in the chest , Set and his accomplices slam the cover shut , seal it , and throw it into the Nile . With Osiris 's corpse inside , the chest floats out into the sea , arriving at the city of Byblos , where a tree grows around it . The king of Byblos has the tree cut down and made into a pillar for his palace , still with the chest inside . Isis must remove the chest from within the tree in order to retrieve her husband 's body . Having taken the chest , she leaves the tree in Byblos , where it becomes an object of worship for the locals . This episode , which is not known from Egyptian sources , gives an etiological explanation for a cult of Isis and Osiris that existed in Byblos in Plutarch 's time and possibly as early as the New Kingdom . 
 Plutarch also states that Set steals and dismembers the corpse only after Isis has retrieved it . Isis then finds and buries each piece of her husband 's body , with the exception of the penis , which she has to reconstruct with magic , because the original was eaten by fish in the river . According to Plutarch , this is the reason the Egyptians had a taboo against eating fish . In Egyptian accounts , however , the penis of Osiris is found intact , and the only close parallel with this part of Plutarch 's story is in " The Tale of Two Brothers " , a folk tale from the New Kingdom with similarities to the Osiris myth . 
 A final difference in Plutarch 's account is Horus 's birth . The form of Horus that avenges his father has been conceived and born before Osiris 's death . It is a premature and weak second child , Harpocrates , who is born from Osiris 's posthumous union with Isis . Here , two of the separate forms of Horus that exist in Egyptian tradition have been given distinct positions within Plutarch 's version of the myth . 
 = = = Birth and childhood of Horus = = = 
 In Egyptian accounts , the pregnant Isis hides from Set , to whom the unborn child is a threat , in a thicket of papyrus in the Nile Delta . This place is called <unk> @-@ <unk> , meaning " papyrus thicket of the king of Lower Egypt " in Egyptian . Greek writers call this place <unk> and indicate that it is near the city of <unk> , but in the myth , the physical location is less important than its nature as an iconic place of seclusion and safety . The thicket 's special status is indicated by its frequent depiction in Egyptian art ; for most events in Egyptian mythology , the backdrop is minimally described or illustrated . In this thicket , Isis gives birth to Horus and raises him , and hence it is also called the " nest of Horus " . The image of Isis nursing her child is a very common motif in Egyptian art . 
 There are texts in which Isis travels in the wider world . She moves among ordinary humans who are unaware of her identity , and she even appeals to these people for help . This is another unusual circumstance , for in Egyptian myth , gods and humans are normally separate . As in the first phase of the myth , she often has the aid of other deities , who protect her son in her absence . According to one magical spell , seven minor scorpion deities travel with and guard Isis as she seeks help for Horus . They even take revenge on a wealthy woman who has refused to help Isis by stinging the woman 's son , making it necessary for Isis to heal the blameless child . This story conveys a moral message that the poor can be more virtuous than the wealthy and illustrates Isis 's fair and compassionate nature . 
 In this stage of the myth , Horus is a vulnerable child beset by dangers . The magical texts that use Horus 's childhood as the basis for their healing spells give him different ailments , from scorpion stings to simple <unk> , adapting the tradition to fit the malady that each spell was intended to treat . Most commonly , the child god has been bitten by a snake , reflecting the Egyptians ' fear of snakebite and the resulting poison . Some texts indicate that these hostile creatures are agents of Set . Isis may use her own magical powers to save her child , or she may plead with or threaten deities such as Ra or Geb , so they will cure him . As she is the archetypal mourner in the first portion of the story , so during Horus 's childhood she is the ideal devoted mother . Through the magical healing texts , her efforts to heal her son are extended to cure any patient . 
 = = = Conflict of Horus and Set = = = 
 The next phase of the myth begins when the adult Horus challenges Set for the throne of Egypt . The contest between them is often violent but is also described as a legal judgment before the Ennead , an assembled group of Egyptian deities , to decide who should inherit the kingship . The judge in this trial may be Geb , who , as the father of Osiris and Set , held the throne before they did , or it may be the creator gods Ra or Atum , the originators of kingship . Other deities also take important roles : Thoth frequently acts as a conciliator in the dispute or as an assistant to the divine judge , and in " Contendings " , Isis uses her cunning and magical power to aid her son . 
 The rivalry of Horus and Set is portrayed in two contrasting ways . Both perspectives appear as early as the Pyramid Texts , the earliest source of the myth . In some spells from these texts , Horus is the son of Osiris and nephew of Set , and the murder of Osiris is the major impetus for the conflict . The other tradition depicts Horus and Set as brothers . This incongruity persists in many of the subsequent sources , where the two gods may be called brothers or uncle and nephew at different points in the same text . 
 The divine struggle involves many episodes . " Contendings " describes the two gods appealing to various other deities to arbitrate the dispute and competing in different types of contests , such as racing in boats or fighting each other in the form of hippopotami , to determine a victor . In this account , Horus repeatedly defeats Set and is supported by most of the other deities . Yet the dispute drags on for eighty years , largely because the judge , the creator god , favors Set . In late ritual texts , the conflict is characterized as a great battle involving the two deities ' assembled followers . The strife in the divine realm extends beyond the two combatants . At one point Isis attempts to harpoon Set as he is locked in combat with her son , but she strikes Horus instead , who then cuts off her head in a fit of rage . Thoth replaces Isis 's head with that of a cow ; the story gives a mythical origin for the cow @-@ horn headdress that Isis commonly wears . 
 In a key episode in the conflict , Set sexually abuses Horus . Set 's violation is partly meant to degrade his rival , but it also involves homosexual desire , in keeping with one of Set 's major characteristics , his forceful and indiscriminate sexuality . In the earliest account of this episode , in a fragmentary Middle Kingdom papyrus , the sexual encounter begins when Set asks to have sex with Horus , who agrees on the condition that Set will give Horus some of his strength . The encounter puts Horus in danger , because in Egyptian tradition semen is a potent and dangerous substance , akin to poison . According to some texts , Set 's semen enters Horus 's body and makes him ill , but in " Contendings " , Horus thwarts Set by catching Set 's semen in his hands . Isis retaliates by putting Horus 's semen on lettuce @-@ leaves that Set eats . Set 's defeat becomes apparent when this semen appears on his forehead as a golden disk . He has been impregnated with his rival 's seed and as a result " gives birth " to the disk . In " Contendings " , Thoth takes the disk and places it on his own head ; in earlier accounts , it is Thoth who is produced by this anomalous birth . 
 Another important episode concerns mutilations that the combatants inflict upon each other : Horus injures or steals Set 's testicles and Set damages or tears out one , or occasionally both , of Horus 's eyes . Sometimes the eye is torn into pieces . Set 's mutilation signifies a loss of virility and strength . The removal of Horus 's eye is even more important , for this stolen Eye of Horus represents a wide variety of concepts in Egyptian religion . One of Horus 's major roles is as a sky deity , and for this reason his right eye was said to be the sun and his left eye the moon . The theft or destruction of the Eye of Horus is therefore equated with the darkening of the moon in the course of its cycle of phases , or during eclipses . Horus may take back his lost Eye , or other deities , including Isis , Thoth , and Hathor , may retrieve or heal it for him . The Egyptologist Herman te Velde argues that the tradition about the lost testicles is a late variation on Set 's loss of semen to Horus , and that the moon @-@ like disk that emerges from Set 's head after his impregnation is the Eye of Horus . If so , the episodes of mutilation and sexual abuse would form a single story , in which Set assaults Horus and loses semen to him , Horus retaliates and impregnates Set , and Set comes into possession of Horus 's Eye when it appears on Set 's head . Because Thoth is a moon deity in addition to his other functions , it would make sense , according to te Velde , for Thoth to emerge in the form of the Eye and step in to mediate between the feuding deities . 
 In any case , the restoration of the Eye of Horus to wholeness represents the return of the moon to full brightness , the return of the kingship to Horus , and many other aspects of maat . Sometimes the restoration of Horus 's eye is accompanied by the restoration of Set 's testicles , so that both gods are made whole near the conclusion of their feud . 
 = = = Resolution = = = 
 As with so many other parts of the myth , the resolution is complex and varied . Often , Horus and Set divide the realm between them . This division can be equated with any of several fundamental dualities that the Egyptians saw in their world . Horus may receive the fertile lands around the Nile , the core of Egyptian civilization , in which case Set takes the barren desert or the foreign lands that are associated with it ; Horus may rule the earth while Set dwells in the sky ; and each god may take one of the two traditional halves of the country , Upper and Lower Egypt , in which case either god may be connected with either region . Yet in the Memphite Theology , Geb , as judge , first <unk> the realm between the claimants and then reverses himself , awarding sole control to Horus . In this peaceable union , Horus and Set are reconciled , and the dualities that they represent have been resolved into a united whole . Through this resolution , order is restored after the tumultuous conflict . 
 A different view of the myth 's end focuses on Horus 's sole triumph . In this version , Set is not reconciled with his rival , but utterly defeated , and sometimes he is exiled from Egypt or even destroyed . His defeat and humiliation is more pronounced in sources from later periods of Egyptian history , when he was increasingly equated with disorder and evil , and the Egyptians no longer saw him as an integral part of natural order . 
 With great celebration among the gods , Horus takes the throne , and Egypt at last has a rightful king . The divine decision that Set is in the wrong corrects the injustice created by Osiris 's murder and completes the process of his restoration after death . Sometimes Set is made to carry Osiris 's body to its tomb as part of his punishment . The new king performs funerary rites for his father and gives food offerings to sustain him — often including the Eye of Horus , which in this instance represents life and plenty . According to some sources , only through these acts can Osiris be fully enlivened in the afterlife and take his place as king of the dead , paralleling his son 's role as king of the living . Thereafter , Osiris is deeply involved with natural cycles of death and renewal , such as the annual growth of crops , that parallel his own resurrection . 
 = = Origins = = 
 As the Osiris myth first appears in the Pyramid Texts , most of its essential features must have taken shape sometime before the texts were written down . The distinct segments of the story — Osiris 's death and restoration , Horus 's childhood , and Horus 's conflict with Set — may originally have been independent mythic episodes . If so , they must have begun to coalesce into a single story by the time of the Pyramid Texts , which loosely connect those segments . In any case , the myth was inspired by a variety of influences . Much of the story is based in religious ideas and the general nature of Egyptian society : the divine nature of kingship , the succession from one king to another , the struggle to maintain maat , and the effort to overcome death . For instance , the lamentations of Isis and Nephthys for their dead brother may represent an early tradition of ritualized mourning . 
 There are , however , important points of disagreement . The origins of Osiris are much debated , and the basis for the myth of his death is also somewhat uncertain . One influential hypothesis was given by the anthropologist James Frazer , who in 1906 said that Osiris , like other " dying and rising gods " across the ancient Near East , began as a personification of vegetation . His death and restoration , therefore , were based on the yearly death and re @-@ growth of plants . Many Egyptologists adopted this explanation . But in the late 20th century , J. Gwyn Griffiths , who extensively studied Osiris and his mythology , argued that Osiris originated as a divine ruler of the dead , and his connection with vegetation was a secondary development . Meanwhile , scholars of comparative religion have criticized the overarching concept of " dying and rising gods " , or at least Frazer 's assumption that all these gods closely fit the same pattern . More recently , the Egyptologist Rosalie David maintains that Osiris originally " personified the annual rebirth of the trees and plants after the [ Nile ] inundation . " 
 Another continuing debate concerns the opposition of Horus and Set , which Egyptologists have often tried to connect with political events early in Egypt 's history or prehistory . The cases in which the combatants divide the kingdom , and the frequent association of the paired Horus and Set with the union of Upper and Lower Egypt , suggest that the two deities represent some kind of division within the country . Egyptian tradition and archaeological evidence indicate that Egypt was united at the beginning of its history when an Upper Egyptian kingdom , in the south , conquered Lower Egypt in the north . The Upper Egyptian rulers called themselves " followers of Horus " , and Horus became the patron god of the unified nation and its kings . Yet Horus and Set cannot be easily equated with the two halves of the country . Both deities had several cult centers in each region , and Horus is often associated with Lower Egypt and Set with Upper Egypt . One of the better @-@ known explanations for these discrepancies was proposed by Kurt <unk> in 1930 . He argued that Osiris was originally the human ruler of a unified Egypt in prehistoric times , before a rebellion of Upper Egyptian Set @-@ worshippers . The Lower Egyptian followers of Horus then forcibly reunified the land , inspiring the myth of Horus 's triumph , before Upper Egypt , now led by Horus worshippers , became prominent again at the start of the Early Dynastic Period . 
 In the late 20th century , Griffiths focused on the inconsistent portrayal of Horus and Set as brothers and as uncle and nephew . He argued that , in the early stages of Egyptian mythology , the struggle between Horus and Set as siblings and equals was originally separate from the murder of Osiris . The two stories were joined into the single Osiris myth sometime before the writing of the Pyramid Texts . With this merging , the genealogy of the deities involved and the characterization of the Horus – Set conflict were altered so that Horus is the son and heir avenging Osiris 's death . Traces of the independent traditions remained in the conflicting characterizations of the combatants ' relationship and in texts unrelated to the Osiris myth , which make Horus the son of the goddess Nut or the goddess Hathor rather than of Isis and Osiris . Griffiths therefore rejected the possibility that Osiris 's murder was rooted in historical events . This hypothesis has been accepted by more recent scholars such as Jan Assmann and George Hart . 
 Griffiths sought a historical origin for the Horus – Set rivalry , and he posited two distinct predynastic <unk> of Egypt by Horus worshippers , similar to <unk> 's theory , to account for it . Yet the issue remains unresolved , partly because other political associations for Horus and Set complicate the picture further . Before even Upper Egypt had a single ruler , two of its major cities were Nekhen , in the far south , and Naqada , many miles to the north . The rulers of Nekhen , where Horus was the patron deity , are generally believed to have unified Upper Egypt , including Naqada , under their sway . Set was associated with Naqada , so it is possible that the divine conflict dimly reflects an enmity between the cities in the distant past . Much later , at the end of the Second Dynasty ( c . 2890 – 2686 BCE ) , King Peribsen used the Set animal in writing his serekh @-@ name , in place of the traditional falcon hieroglyph representing Horus . His successor Khasekhemwy used both Horus and Set in the writing of his serekh . This evidence has prompted conjecture that the Second Dynasty saw a clash between the followers of the Horus @-@ king and the worshippers of Set led by Peribsen . Khasekhemwy 's use of the two animal symbols would then represent the reconciliation of the two factions , as does the resolution of the myth . 
 Noting the uncertainty surrounding these events , Herman te Velde argues that the historical roots of the conflict are too obscure to be very useful in understanding the myth and are not as significant as its religious meaning . He says that " the origin of the myth of Horus and Seth is lost in the mists of the religious traditions of prehistory . " 
 = = Influence = = 
 The effect of the Osiris myth on Egyptian culture was greater and more widespread than that of any other myth . In literature , the myth was not only the basis for a retelling such as " Contendings " ; it also provided the basis for more distantly related stories . " The Tale of Two Brothers " , a folk tale with human protagonists , includes elements similar to the myth of Osiris . One character 's penis is eaten by a fish , and he later dies and is resurrected . Another story , " The Tale of Truth and Falsehood " , adapts the conflict of Horus and Set into an allegory , in which the characters are direct personifications of truth and lies rather than deities associated with those concepts . 
 = = = Osiris and funerary ritual = = = 
 From at least the time of the Pyramid Texts , kings hoped that after their deaths they could emulate Osiris 's restoration to life and his rule over the realm of the dead . By the early Middle Kingdom ( c . 2055 – 1650 BCE ) , non @-@ royal Egyptians believed that they , too , could overcome death as Osiris had , by worshipping him and receiving the funerary rites that were partly based on his myth . Osiris thus became Egypt 's most important afterlife deity . The myth also influenced the notion , which grew prominent in the New Kingdom , that only virtuous people could reach the afterlife . As the assembled deities judged Osiris and Horus to be in the right , undoing the injustice of Osiris 's death , so a deceased soul had to be judged righteous in order for his or her death to be undone . As ruler of the land of the dead and as a god connected with maat , Osiris became the judge in this posthumous trial , offering life after death to those who followed his example . New Kingdom funerary texts such as the Amduat and the Book of Gates liken Ra himself to a deceased soul . In them , he travels through the Duat and unites with Osiris to be reborn at dawn . Thus , Osiris was not only believed to enable rebirth for the dead ; he renewed the sun , the source of life and maat , and thus renewed the world itself . 
 As the importance of Osiris grew , so did his popularity . By late in the Middle Kingdom , the centuries @-@ old tomb of the First Dynasty ruler Djer , near Osiris 's main center of worship in the city of Abydos , was seen as Osiris 's tomb . Accordingly , it became a major focus of Osiris worship . For the next 1 @,@ 500 years , an annual festival procession traveled from Osiris 's main temple to the tomb site . Kings and commoners from across Egypt built chapels , which served as cenotaphs , near the processional route . In doing so they sought to strengthen their connection with Osiris in the afterlife . 
 Another major funerary festival , a national event spread over several days in the month of Khoiak in the Egyptian calendar , became linked with Osiris during the Middle Kingdom . During Khoiak the <unk> pillar , an emblem of Osiris , was ritually raised into an upright position , symbolizing Osiris 's restoration . By Ptolemaic times ( 305 – 30 BCE ) , Khoiak also included the planting of seeds in an " Osiris bed " , a mummy @-@ shaped bed of soil , connecting the resurrection of Osiris with the seasonal growth of plants . 
 = = = Horus , the Eye of Horus , and kingship = = = 
 The myth 's religious importance extended beyond the funerary sphere . Mortuary offerings , in which family members or hired priests presented food to the deceased , were logically linked with the mythological offering of the Eye of Horus to Osiris . By analogy , this episode of the myth was eventually equated with other interactions between a human and a being in the divine realm . In temple offering rituals , the officiating priest took on the role of Horus , the gifts to the deity became the Eye of Horus , and whichever deity received these gifts was momentarily equated with Osiris . 
 The myth influenced popular religion as well . One example is the magical healing spells based on Horus 's childhood . Another is the use of the Eye of Horus as a protective emblem in personal apotropaic amulets . Its mythological restoration made it appropriate for this purpose , as a general symbol of well @-@ being . 
 The ideology surrounding the living king was also affected by the Osiris myth . The Egyptians envisioned the events of the Osiris myth as taking place sometime in Egypt 's dim prehistory , and Osiris , Horus , and their divine predecessors were included in Egyptian lists of past kings such as the Turin Royal Canon . Horus , as a primeval king and as the personification of kingship , was regarded as the predecessor and exemplar for all Egyptian rulers . His assumption of his father 's throne and pious actions to sustain his spirit in the afterlife were the model for all pharaonic successions to emulate . Each new king was believed to renew maat after the death of the preceding king , just as Horus had done . In royal coronations , rituals alluded to Osiris 's burial , and hymns celebrated the new king 's accession as the equivalent of Horus 's own . 
 = = = Set = = = 
 The Osiris myth contributed to the frequent characterization of Set as a disruptive , enemy god . Although other elements of Egyptian tradition credit Set with positive traits , in the Osiris myth the sinister aspects of his character predominate . He and Horus were often juxtaposed in art to represent opposite principles , such as good and evil , intellect and instinct , and the different regions of the world that they rule in the myth . Egyptian wisdom texts contrast the character of the ideal person with the opposite type — the calm and sensible " Silent One " and the impulsive , disruptive " Hothead " — and one description of these two characters calls them the Horus @-@ type and the Set @-@ type . Yet the two gods were often treated as part of a harmonious whole . In some local cults they were worshipped together ; in art they were often shown tying together the emblems of Upper and Lower Egypt to symbolize the unity of the nation ; and in funerary texts they appear as a single deity with the heads of Horus and Set , apparently representing the mysterious , all @-@ encompassing nature of the Duat . 
 Overall Set was viewed with ambivalence , until during the first millennium BCE he came to be seen as a totally malevolent deity . This transformation was prompted more by his association with foreign lands than by the Osiris myth . Nevertheless , in these late times , the widespread temple rituals involving the ceremonial annihilation of Set were often connected with the myth . 
 = = = Isis , Nephthys , and the Greco @-@ Roman world = = = 
 Both Isis and Nephthys were seen as protectors of the dead in the afterlife because of their protection and restoration of Osiris 's body . The motif of Isis and Nephthys protecting Osiris or the mummy of the deceased person was very common in funerary art . Khoiak celebrations made reference to , and may have ritually reenacted , Isis 's and Nephthys 's mourning , restoration , and revival of their murdered brother . As Horus 's mother , Isis was also the mother of every king according to royal ideology , and kings were said to have nursed at her breast as a symbol of their divine legitimacy . Her appeal to the general populace was based in her protective character , as exemplified by the magical healing spells . In the Late Period , she was credited with ever greater magical power , and her maternal devotion was believed to extend to everyone . By Roman times she had become the most important goddess in Egypt . The image of the goddess holding her child was used prominently in her worship — for example , in panel paintings that were used in household shrines dedicated to her . Isis 's iconography in these paintings closely resembles and may have influenced the earliest Christian icons of Mary holding Jesus . 
 In the late centuries BCE , the worship of Isis spread from Egypt across the Mediterranean world , and she became one of the most popular deities in the region . Although this new , multicultural form of Isis absorbed characteristics from many other deities , her original mythological nature as a wife and mother was key to her appeal . Horus and Osiris , being central figures in her story , spread along with her . The Greek and Roman cult of Isis developed a series of initiation rites dedicated to Isis and Osiris , based on earlier Greco @-@ Roman mystery rites but colored by Egyptian afterlife beliefs . The initiate went through an experience that simulated descent into the underworld . Elements of this ritual resemble Osiris 's merging with the sun in Egyptian funerary texts . Isis 's Greek and Roman devotees , like the Egyptians , believed that she protected the dead in the afterlife as she had done for Osiris , and they said that undergoing the initiation guaranteed to them a blessed afterlife . It was to a Greek priestess of Isis that Plutarch wrote his account of the myth of Osiris . 
 Through the work of classical writers such as Plutarch , knowledge of the Osiris myth was preserved even after the middle of the first millennium AD , when Egyptian religion ceased to exist and knowledge of the writing systems that were originally used to record the myth were lost . The myth remained a major part of Western impressions of ancient Egypt . In modern times , when understanding of Egyptian beliefs is informed by the original Egyptian sources , the story continues to influence and inspire new ideas , from works of fiction to scholarly speculation and new religious movements . 
 = Tropical Storm Beryl ( 2000 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Beryl made landfall just south of the United States – Mexico border in mid @-@ August 2000 , causing minimal damage . The second named storm of the 2000 Atlantic hurricane season , Beryl originated from a tropical wave near the African coastline . Tracking westward , the wave failed to organize substantially until entering the Bay of Campeche , at which time it developed into a tropical storm . Beryl rapidly deepened while in the Gulf of Mexico , and it initially was forecast to strengthen to a hurricane under favorable conditions for development . Instead , Beryl remained at moderate tropical storm intensity and failed to intensify any further . It made landfall in the Mexican state of Tamaulipas as a weak tropical storm with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) on August 15 and dissipated over mountainous terrain shortly thereafter . One death was reported in Mexico due to drowning . Otherwise , no significant damage was reported associated with Beryl , as it affected a sparsely populated area of Mexico . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave emerged from the African coast with a closed circulation on August 3 . It tracked westward across the tropical waters of the Atlantic Ocean and broke into two distinct parts , the northern portion eventually became Hurricane Alberto . The southern portion continued to track westward into the Caribbean Sea , while producing little or no deep convection . The wave reached Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula on August 12 , and only then did deep convection redevelop , mostly due to diurnal heating . The wave emerged over the Bay of Campeche early on August 13 as a large area of low pressure . The wave was upgraded to Tropical Depression Five later that day , based on satellite intensity estimates and an observation from an Air Force Reserve reconnaissance aircraft . Six hours after developing , the depression was forecast to strengthen into a hurricane early on August 16 due to the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico and little wind shear to inhibit development . 
 The tropical depression traveled to the northwest across the southwest Gulf of Mexico . It strengthened rapidly , and there was evidence of deep convection as it passed over warm waters . It was upgraded to Tropical Storm Beryl late on August 14 with surface winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , based on reconnaissance aircraft observation . Six hours later , the storm accelerated to near 9 mph ( 15 km / h ) , meaning that landfall would happen sooner than expected , preventing the time for Beryl to strengthen to a hurricane . However , Beryl failed to undergo significant intensification as was forecast , as it maintained an intensity of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . The lack of intensification could be due to moderate wind shear and entrainment over the Gulf of Mexico . Tropical Storm Beryl continued to track to the northwest toward the Rio Grande Valley area in the southern portion of the U.S. state of Texas . The storm made landfall early on August 15 along the Mexican coast about 105 mi ( 165 km ) south of Brownsville , Texas , 35 mi ( 55 km ) north La Pesca , Tamaulipas and about 115 mi ( 185 km ) north of Tampico . Beryl was downgraded to a tropical depression about five hours after landfall . The Brownsville radar showed that the circulation center of the storm became elongated parallel to the mountain ranges of northeastern Mexico , so the system was no longer declared a tropical depression late on August 15 , while located near Monterrey . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The National Hurricane Center began issuing hurricane warnings early on August 14 , anticipating that Beryl would reach hurricane strength . The warnings were issued along the Texas coast from Baffin Bay to the United States – Mexico border . The Government of Mexico issued hurricane warnings from the borderline south to La Pesca . The hurricane warnings issued stretched for 230 miles ( 370 km ) along the coast . Mexico also issued a tropical storm warning south of La Pesca to Tampico . A storm surge of 2 to 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m to 1 @.@ 5 m ) was expected along the coast near and to the north of Beryl ’ s center . Rainfall between 5 and 10 inches ( 125 to 250 mm ) were also expected . Thousands of residents in coastal areas of southern Texas and northern Mexico were asked to pay attention to the hurricane warnings and to move towards higher ground . The National Weather Service warned the cities of Cameron and Kenedy , and Willacy County in southern Texas that severe flooding is the deadliest threat associated with the storm . In low @-@ lying rural areas near the mouth of the Rio Grande , an estimated 20 @,@ 000 residents were urged to seek shelter , as the inadequate drainage in these areas make them in danger to severe flooding . The National Weather Service also warned of possible tornadoes forming when associated with thunderstorms and tropical storm generated winds . Authorities in southern Texas filled 20 @,@ 000 sandbags along the shores , and closed government offices . Residents nailed plywood on windows , parks were temporarily closed , and documents were transferred to waterproof storage areas . 
 The warnings remained in effect for twelve hours , then they were discontinued north of Port Mansfield in Texas . The hurricane warning was downgraded to a tropical storm warning in all areas between Port Mansfield southwards to Tampico . It was predicted the rains from Beryl could produce dangerous flash floods and mudslides over the mountainous areas of Mexico . When Beryl made landfall early on August 15 , all warnings were discontinued in Texas . All warnings issued in the Government of Mexico were discontinued six hours later when Beryl was downgraded to a tropical depression . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Beryl made landfall in a sparsely populated region of northeast Mexico , so no official reports of tropical storm force winds were recorded . Moisture from Beryl brought 0 @.@ 8 in ( 20 @.@ 1 mm ) of rain in Corpus Christi , Texas and 0 @.@ 5 in ( 13 @.@ 7 mm ) in Brownsville , Texas in a 48 @-@ hour period between August 14 and August 16 . The highest winds from these stations were no more than 28 mph ( 46 km / h ) . Cloud cover and rainfall resulted with cool high temperatures in southern Texas . Brownsville had a high temperature of 84 ˚ F ( 28 @.@ 9 ˚ C ) on August 15 . This broke the record for the coolest maximum temperature in Brownsville for August 15 ; the previous record was 85 ˚ F ( 29 @.@ 4 ˚ C ) set in 1881 . 
 In Mexico a rainfall total of 6 @.@ 3 in ( 160 mm ) within a period of 24 hours was measured in San Gabriel , Tamaulipas . Residents from two low @-@ lying fishing villages were evacuated from the state of Tamaulipas and taken to extemporaneous shelters at schools and a sports complex . One drowning death was reported in northeast Mexico , caused by the extensive flooding from Beryl 's heavy rains . Officials declared fifteen municipalities in Tamaulipas a disaster area . The total damage in Mexico was estimated to be $ 254 @,@ 000 ( 2000 MXN , $ 27 @,@ 400 2000 USD , $ 34 @,@ 000 2008 USD ) . 
 = Reservoir Dogs = 
 Reservoir Dogs is a 1992 American crime thriller film that depicts the events before and after a botched diamond heist . The film was the feature @-@ length debut of director and writer Quentin Tarantino , and stars Harvey Keitel , Michael Madsen , Steve Buscemi , Chris Penn , Lawrence Tierney and Tim Roth . Tarantino and criminal @-@ turned @-@ author Edward Bunker have minor roles . It incorporates many themes that have become Tarantino 's hallmarks — violent crime , pop culture references , profanity , and nonlinear storytelling . 
 The film has become a classic of independent film and a cult hit . It was named " Greatest Independent Film of all Time " by Empire magazine . Reservoir Dogs was generally well received , and the cast was praised by many critics . Although it was not given much promotion upon release , the film became a modest success in the United States after grossing $ 2 @,@ 832 @,@ 029 , recouping its $ 1 @.@ 2 million budget . The film was more successful in the United Kingdom , grossing nearly £ 6 @.@ 5 million , and it achieved higher popularity after the success of Tarantino 's next film , Pulp Fiction ( 1994 ) . A soundtrack was released featuring songs used in the film , which are mostly from the 1970s . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Eight men eat breakfast at a Los Angeles diner before their planned diamond heist . Six of them use aliases : Mr. Blonde , Mr. Blue , Mr. Brown , Mr. Orange , Mr. Pink , and Mr. White . The others are mob boss Joe Cabot , the organizer of the heist , and his son and underboss , " Nice Guy " Eddie Cabot . 
 After the heist , White drives Orange to the rendezvous , an empty warehouse . Orange is bleeding profusely from a gunshot wound . Pink arrives , agitated ; he believes the job was a setup and that the police had the diamond store staked out . White tells Pink that Brown was killed while escaping and that Blue is presumed dead . They discuss Blonde , who murdered several civilians during the heist ; White is angry that Joe , an old friend , employed such a " psychopath " . Pink reveals that he escaped with the diamonds and hid them in a secure location . They argue over whether to take the unconscious Orange to a hospital . 
 Blonde arrives and tells them to wait for Eddie . He reveals he has taken a police officer , Marvin Nash , hostage in his trunk ; they beat Nash in an attempt to discover the informant . Eddie arrives and orders Pink and White to help him retrieve the diamonds and dispose of the hijacked vehicles , while Blonde stays with Nash and Orange . Alone with Blonde , Nash denies knowledge of a setup . Blonde is uninterested and tortures Nash for his own amusement , severing his ear with a straight razor . He douses him with gasoline , but before he can ignite it , Orange shoots him dead . Orange tells Nash he is an undercover police officer and that police are coming . 
 Eddie , Pink , and White return to the warehouse to find Blonde dead . Orange claims that Blonde was going to kill them and take the diamonds . Eddie shoots Nash dead and rejects Orange 's story , saying that Blonde was a loyal friend . Joe arrives and reveals that Blue is dead . He accuses Orange of being the informant and is about to execute him , but White pulls a gun on him ; Eddie in turn takes aim at White , creating a Mexican standoff . All men fire ; Joe and Eddie are killed and White and Orange are wounded . 
 Pink takes the diamonds and flees the warehouse as police arrive ; yelling and gunshots sound outside . White crawls to Orange and cradles him . Orange apologizes , confessing that he is a police officer . Devastated , White puts his gun to Orange 's head . The police storm the warehouse , demanding that White drop the gun . Gunshots sound and White collapses . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Harvey Keitel as Mr. White ( Larry Dimmick ) 
 Tim Roth as Mr. Orange ( Det . Freddie <unk> ) 
 Michael Madsen as Mr. Blonde ( Vic Vega ) 
 Steve Buscemi as Mr. Pink 
 Chris Penn as " Nice Guy " Eddie Cabot 
 Lawrence Tierney as Joe Cabot 
 Kirk Baltz as Marvin Nash 
 Quentin Tarantino as Mr. Brown 
 Randy Brooks as <unk> 
 Edward Bunker as Mr. Blue 
 = = Production = = 
 Quentin Tarantino had been working at Video Archives , a video store in Manhattan Beach , California , and originally planned to shoot the film with his friends on a budget of $ 30 @,@ 000 in a 16 mm black @-@ and @-@ white format , with producer Lawrence Bender playing a police officer chasing Mr. Pink . Bender gave the script to his acting teacher , whose wife gave the script to Harvey Keitel . Keitel liked it enough to sign as a co @-@ producer so Tarantino and Bender would have an easier job finding funding ; with his assistance , they raised $ 1 @.@ 5 million . Keitel also paid for Tarantino and Bender to host casting sessions in New York , where the duo found Steve Buscemi , Michael Madsen , and Tim Roth . 
 Reservoir Dogs was , according to Tarantino , influenced by Stanley Kubrick 's The Killing . Tarantino said : " I didn 't go out of my way to do a rip @-@ off of The Killing , but I did think of it as my " Killing , " my take on that kind of heist movie . " The film 's plot was suggested by the 1952 film Kansas City Confidential . Additionally , Joseph H. Lewis 's 1955 film The Big Combo inspired the scene where a cop is tortured in a chair . Tarantino has denied that he plagiarized with Reservoir Dogs and instead said that he does homages . Having the main characters named after colors ( Mr. Pink , White , Brown , etc . ) was first seen in the 1974 film The Taking of Pelham One Two Three . The film also contains key elements similar to those found in Ringo Lam 's 1987 film City on Fire . 
 Of his decision to not show the heist itself , Tarantino has said that the reason was initially budgetary but that he had always liked the idea of not showing it and stuck with that idea in order to make the details of the heist ambiguous . He has said that the technique allows for the realization that the film is " about other things " ; a similar plot outline that appears in the stage play Glengarry Glen Ross and its film adaptation in which the mentioned robbery is never shown on camera . Tarantino has compared this to the work of a novelist , and has said that he wanted the film to be about something that is not seen and that he wanted it to " play with a real @-@ time clock as opposed to a movie clock ticking " . 
 The title for the film came from a patron at the Video Archives . While working there , Tarantino would often recommend little @-@ known titles to customers , and when he suggested Au revoir les enfants , the patron misheard it as " reservoir dogs " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Reservoir Dogs premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 1992 . It became the festival 's most talked @-@ about film , and was subsequently picked up for distribution by Miramax Films . After being shown at several other film festivals , including in Cannes , Sitges and Toronto , Reservoir Dogs opened in the United States in 19 theaters with a first week total of $ 147 @,@ 839 . It was expanded to 61 theaters and totaled $ 2 @,@ 832 @,@ 029 at the domestic box office . The film grossed more than double that in the United Kingdom , where it was banned from home video release until 1995 . During the period of unavailability on home video , the film was re @-@ released in UK cinemas in June 1994 . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Reservoir Dogs is regarded as an important and influential milestone of independent filmmaking . It has inspired many independent films and is considered important in the development of independent cinema . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes retrospectively gives the film a 90 % based on reviews from 62 critics , and Metacritic carries an average rating of 78 / 100 , based on 23 reviews . Empire magazine named it the " Greatest Independent Film " ever made . 
 At the film 's release at the Sundance Film Festival , film critic Jami Bernard of the New York Daily News compared the effect of Reservoir Dogs to that of the 1895 film L <unk> d 'un Train en Gare de la <unk> , whereby audiences putatively observed a moving train approaching the camera and scrambled . Bernard said that Reservoir Dogs had a similar effect and people were not ready for it . Vincent Canby of The New York Times enjoyed the cast and the usage of non @-@ linear storytelling . He similarly complimented Tarantino 's directing and liked the fact that he did not often use close @-@ ups in the film . Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times also enjoyed the film and the acting , particularly that of Buscemi , Tierney and Madsen , and said " Tarantino 's palpable enthusiasm , his unapologetic passion for what he 's created , reinvigorates this venerable plot and , mayhem aside , makes it involving for longer than you might suspect . " Critic James Berardinelli was of a similar opinion ; he complimented both the cast and Tarantino 's dialogue writing abilities . Hal Hinson of The Washington Post was also enthusiastic about the cast , complimenting the film on its " deadpan sense of humor " . 
 Roger Ebert was less enthusiastic ; he felt that the script could have been better and said that the film " feels like it 's going to be terrific " , but Tarantino 's script does not have much curiosity about the characters . He also stated that " [ Tarantino ] has an idea , and trusts the idea to drive the plot . " Ebert gave the film two and a half stars out of four and said that while he enjoyed it and that it was a very good film from a talented director , " I liked what I saw , but I wanted more . " Ebert 's biggest praise was the acting in the film . 
 The film has received substantial criticism for its strong violence and language . One scene that viewers found particularly unnerving was the ear @-@ cutting scene ; Madsen himself reportedly had great difficulty finishing it , especially after Kirk Baltz ad @-@ libbed the desperate plea " I 've got a little kid at home . " Many people walked out during the film . During a screening at Sitges Film Festival , fifteen people walked out , including horror film director Wes Craven and special makeup effects artist Rick Baker . Baker later told Tarantino to take the walkout as a " compliment " and explained that he found the violence unnerving because of its heightened sense of realism . Tarantino commented about it at the time : " It happens at every single screening . For some people the violence , or the rudeness of the language , is a mountain they can 't climb . That 's OK . It 's not their cup of tea . But I am affecting them . I wanted that scene to be disturbing . " 
 = = = Critical analysis = = = 
 Reservoir Dogs has often been seen as a prominent film in terms of on @-@ screen violence . J.P. Telotte compared Reservoir Dogs to classic caper noir films and points out the irony in its ending scenes . Mark Irwin also made the connection between Reservoir Dogs and classic American noir . Caroline <unk> called Reservoir Dogs a " feudal epic " and paralleled the color pseudonyms to color names of medieval knights . 
 Critics have observed parallels between Reservoir Dogs and other films . For its nonlinear storyline , Reservoir Dogs has often been compared to Rashomon . Critic John Hartl compared the ear @-@ cutting scene to the shower murder scene in Psycho and Tarantino to David Lynch . He furthermore explored parallels between Reservoir Dogs and Glengarry Glen Ross . Todd McCarthy , who called the film " undeniably impressive " , was of the opinion that it was influenced by Mean Streets , Goodfellas and The Killing . After this film , Tarantino himself was also compared to Martin Scorsese , Sam Peckinpah , John Singleton , Gus Van Sant , and Abel Ferrara . 
 A frequently cited comparison has been to Tarantino 's second and more successful film Pulp Fiction , especially since the majority of audiences saw Reservoir Dogs after the success of Pulp Fiction . Comparisons have been made regarding the black humor in both the films , the theme of accidents , and more concretely , the style of dialogue and narrative style that Tarantino incorporates into both films . Specifically the relationship between whites and blacks plays a big part in the films — though underplayed in Reservoir Dogs . Stanley Crouch of The New York Times compared the way the white criminals speak of black people in Reservoir Dogs to the way they are spoken of in Scorsese 's Mean Streets and Goodfellas . Crouch observed the way black people are looked down upon in Reservoir Dogs , but also the way that the criminals accuse each other of " verbally imitating " black men and the characters ' apparent sexual attraction to black actress Pam Grier . 
 In February 2012 , as part of an ongoing series of live dramatic readings of film scripts being staged with the Los Angeles County Museum of Art ( LACMA ) , director Jason Reitman cast black actors in the originally white cast : Laurence Fishburne as Mr. White ; Terrence Howard as Mr. Blonde ; Anthony Mackie as Mr. Pink ; Cuba Gooding Jr. as Mr. Orange ; Chi McBride as Joe Cabot ; Anthony Anderson as Nice Guy Eddie ( Joe Cabot 's son ) ; Common as both Mr. Brown and Officer Nash ( the torture victim of Mr. Blonde ) , and Patton Oswalt as <unk> ( the mentor cop who was originally played by a black actor in the film ) . Critic Elvis Mitchell suggested that Reitman 's version of the script was taking the source material back to its roots since the characters " all sound like black dudes . " 
 In an interview featured in the 2011 documentary I Am <unk> , psychologist Robert D. Hare reports that Keitel 's character Mr. White and Madsen 's Mr. Blonde illustrate the differences between the mental health diagnoses of <unk> and psychopathy . Mr. White is a sociopath , a professional criminal who nonetheless has some loyalty and standards of conduct ; he takes no pleasure in violence but regards the use of force as an occasional necessity in his vocation . In contrast , Mr. Blonde enjoys torturing the captured police officer ; Mr. White explicitly describes Mr. Blonde as a " psychopath " and condemns his reckless shooting of civilians . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The film was screened out of competition at the 1992 Cannes Film Festival . It won the Critic 's Award at the 4th <unk> International Fantastic Film Festival in February 1993 which Tarantino attended . The film was also nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics . Steve Buscemi won the 1992 Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Male . 
 American Film Institute Lists 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Thrills – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Heroes and Villains : 
 “ Mr. Blonde ” ( Vic Vega ) – Nominated Villain 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Songs : 
 Stuck in the Middle with You – Nominated 
 AFI 's 100 Years ... 100 Movie Quotes : 
 " Are you gonna bark all day , little doggie , or are you gonna bite ? " – Nominated 
 AFI 's 10 Top 10 – Nominated Gangster Film 
 Reservoir Dogs ranks at No. 97 in Empire magazine 's list of the 500 Greatest Films of All Time . 
 = = Home media = = 
 In the United Kingdom , the release of VHS rental video was delayed until 1995 due to the British Board of Film Classification initially refusing the film a home video certificate ( UK releases are required to be certified separately for theatrical release and for viewing at home ) . The latter is a requirement by law due to the Video Recordings Act 1984 . Following the UK VHS release approval , Polygram released a " Mr Blonde Deluxe Edition " , which included an interview with Tarantino and several memorabilia associated with the character Mr. Blonde , such as sunglasses and a chrome toothpick holder . 
 Region 1 DVDs of Reservoir Dogs have been released multiple times . The first release was a single two @-@ sided disc from LIVE Entertainment , released in June 1997 and featuring both pan @-@ and @-@ scan and letterbox versions of the film . Five years later , Artisan Entertainment ( who changed their name from LIVE Entertainment in the interim ) released a two @-@ disc 10th anniversary edition featuring multiple covers color @-@ coded to match the nicknames of five of the characters ( Pink , White , Orange , Blonde and Brown ) and a disc of bonus features such as interviews with the cast and crew . 
 For the film 's 15th anniversary , Lionsgate ( which had purchased Artisan in the interim ) produced a two @-@ disc anniversary edition with a remastered 16 : 9 transfer and a new supplement , but not all of the extra features from the 10th Anniversary edition . In particular , interviews with the cast and crew were removed , and a new 48 @-@ minute @-@ long feature called " Tributes and Dedications " was included . The packaging for the 15th anniversary edition is fancier : the discs are enclosed in a large matchbook , and the matchbook is in a thin aluminum case made to resemble a gas can . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The Reservoir Dogs : Original Motion Picture Soundtrack was the first soundtrack for a Quentin Tarantino film and set the structure his later soundtracks would follow . This includes the extensive use of snippets of dialogue from the film . The soundtrack has selections of songs from the 1960s to ' 80s . Only the group Bedlam recorded original songs for the film . Reasoning that the film takes place over a weekend , Tarantino decided to set it to a fictional radio station ' K @-@ Billy ' ( presumably <unk> ) ' s show " K @-@ Billy 's Super Sounds of the Seventies Weekend " , a themed weekend show of broadcasts of songs from the seventies . The radio station played a prominent role in the film . The DJ for the radio was chosen to be Steven Wright , a comedian known for his deadpan delivery of jokes . 
 An unusual feature of the soundtrack was the choice of songs ; Tarantino has said that he feels the music to be a counterpoint to the on @-@ screen violence and action . He also stated that he wished for the film to have a 1950s feel while using ' 70s music . A prominent instance of this is the torture scene to the tune of " Stuck in the Middle with You " . 
 Bedlam was a 1990s rock group from Nashville fronted by Jay Joyce , who were signed to MCA Records . Their album Into the Coals was released in 1992 . Further members were Chris Feinstein ( bass ) and Doug Lancio . " Magic Carpet Ride " is a cover of the 1968 Steppenwolf song . " Harvest Moon " is written by Jay Joyce . 
 Sandy Rogers ' " Fool for Love " initially was title song to Robert Altman 's 1985 film Fool for Love . 
 Track listing 
 " And Now Little Green Bag ... " – dialogue extract performed by Steven Wright ( 0 : 15 ) 
 " Little Green Bag " – The George Baker Selection ( 3 : 15 ) 
 " Rock Flock of Five " – dialogue extract performed by Steven Wright ( 0 : 11 ) 
 " Hooked on a Feeling " – Blue Swede ( 2 : 53 ) 
 " <unk> " – dialogue extract performed by Steven Wright ( 0 : 34 ) 
 " I Gotcha " – Joe Tex ( 2 : 27 ) 
 " Magic Carpet Ride " – Bedlam ( 5 : 10 ) 
 " Madonna Speech " – dialogue extract performed by Quentin Tarantino , Edward Bunker , Lawrence Tierney , Steve Buscemi , and Harvey Keitel ( 0 : 59 ) 
 " Fool for Love " by Sandy Rogers ( 3 : 25 ) 
 " Super Sounds " – dialogue extract performed by Steven Wright ( 0 : 19 ) 
 " Stuck in the Middle with You " – Stealers Wheel ( 3 : 23 ) 
 " Harvest Moon " – Bedlam ( 2 : 38 ) 
 " Let 's Get a Taco " – dialogue extract performed by Harvey Keitel and Tim Roth ( 1 : 02 ) 
 " Keep on Truckin ' " – dialogue extract performed by Steven Wright ( 0 : 16 ) 
 " Coconut " – Harry Nilsson ( 3 : 50 ) 
 " Home of Rock " – dialogue extract performed by Steven Wright ( 0 : 05 ) 
 = = Video game = = 
 A video game based on the film was released in 2006 for PC , Xbox , and PlayStation 2 . However , the game does not feature the likeness of any of the actors with the exception of Michael Madsen . GameSpot called it " an out and out failure " . It caused controversy for its amount of violence and was banned in Australia and New Zealand . 
 = = Remake = = 
 <unk> , a Bollywood film released in 2002 , is a remake of Reservoir Dogs . The film 's central plot is based on Tarantino 's film , and also borrows plot points from The Usual Suspects and Heat . Tarantino has been quoted as saying that <unk> is his favorite among the many rip @-@ offs of his film . 
 = Z. Marcas = 
 Z. Marcas is a novelette by French author Honoré de Balzac first published in 1840 . Set in contemporary Paris , it describes the rise and fall of a brilliant political strategist who is abandoned by the politicians he helps into power . Destitute and forgotten , he befriends a pair of students who live next door to him in a boarding @-@ house . The story follows their many discussions about the political situation in France . 
 Balzac was inspired to write the story after he spotted the name " Z. Marcas " on a sign for a tailor 's shop in Paris . It was published in July 1840 , in the Revue Parisienne , a magazine he had founded that year . One year later it appeared in a collection from various authors under the title La Mort d 'un <unk> ( " The Death of an Ambitious Man " ) . Balzac later placed it in the Scènes de la vie politique section of his vast novel sequence La Comédie humaine . 
 Although Z. Marcas features characters from other Balzac stories and elements of literary realism – both hallmarks of Balzac 's style – it is remembered primarily for its political themes . Balzac , a legitimist , believed that France 's lack of bold leadership had led to mediocrity and ruin , and that men of quality were being ignored or worse . He maintained that the youth of France were in danger of being abandoned by the government , and predicted unrest in the years to come . 
 The story also explores Balzac 's conviction that a person 's name is a powerful indicator of his or her destiny , an idea he drew from the work of Laurence Sterne . The title character , with his keen intellect , is based on Balzac 's conception of himself : a visionary genius who fails to achieve his true potential because of less talented individuals with more social power . 
 = = Background = = 
 Honoré de Balzac was drawn to a diversity of interests throughout his life , from business to politics . After studying the law for three years , he wrote a number of potboiler novels under various pseudonyms . He also lost large sums of borrowed money in the publishing trade , attempting to capitalize on cheap editions of classical works . By 1828 he owed his mother 50 @,@ 000 francs . 
 Although his views on politics were always changing , Balzac was primarily a legitimist who supported the House of Bourbon and believed that the July Revolution of 1830 had left France without strong leadership . In 1832 he declared his intent to run for the Chamber of Deputies in the French Parliament . A variety of problems prevented his actual candidacy , but he mounted a serious campaign which was met mostly with ridicule by the press . Referring to Balzac 's breakthrough 1831 novel La Peau de chagrin ( " The Wild Ass 's Skin " ) , the newspaper Le Figaro mused : " This is the first time anyone has been seen caressing the voters with an ass 's skin . " Although he later showed renewed interest in public office , he mostly expressed his political views through writing . 
 In July 1840 he attempted to fuse his desire to make money with his politics by founding a magazine called the Revue Parisienne , funded by his friend Armand <unk> . Having already worked in the publishing industry , Balzac believed he had learned all there was to know about the trade . " [ T ] hat gigantic machine known as journalism " , he wrote , " is as simple as a roasting spit turned by a poodle . " Balzac planned to publish his own fiction in the Revue Parisienne , in part to challenge the popularity of the roman @-@ feuilleton serial format . <unk> , however , stopped funding the project in September , after only three issues , and Balzac 's final foray into the world of publishing came to an end . 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 In the summer of 1840 , Balzac had a discussion with his friend Léon Gozlan about the power of a person 's name . In his comic essay Balzac en <unk> , Gozlan recounted his associate 's insistence : " On est <unk> là @-@ haut avant de l 'être <unk> @-@ bas . C 'est un mystère <unk> il ne <unk> pas d <unk> , pour le <unk> , les petites <unk> de nos petits <unk> . " ( " We are named up there [ in heaven ] before being named down here . It 's a mystery to which it 's not suitable to apply , for the sake of understanding , the little rules of our slight reasoning . " ) 
 Balzac insisted to Gozlan that by searching through the streets of Paris , they would find a name suitable for a character he had imagined , a political genius thwarted by the mediocrity of the time . They finally came upon a tailor 's sign that enraptured Balzac , bearing the name Z. Marcas . He believed that the name suggested " l 'esprit je ne sais quoi de fatal " ( " some mysterious fatality " ) , and chose it for his story 's protagonist . He wrote the 30 @-@ page story soon afterwards . 
 Balzac published Z. Marcas in the first issue of the Revue Parisienne , 25 July 1840 . It was republished a year later under the title La Mort d 'un <unk> ( " The Death of an Ambitious Man " ) , in a collection from various authors called Le Fruit <unk> ( " Forbidden Fruit " ) . Shortly before his death , Balzac placed the story in the Scènes de la vie politique section of his collection La Comédie humaine . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The story is told from the point of view of a first @-@ person narrator , about whom little is revealed before the final pages . Before the story itself , an extended meditation appears on the nature of human names , and that of Z. Marcas specifically : 
 <unk> ! <unk> @-@ vous à vous @-@ même ce nom composé de deux <unk> , n 'y <unk> @-@ vous pas une <unk> <unk> ? Ne vous <unk> @-@ t @-@ il pas que l 'homme qui le porte <unk> être <unk> ? <unk> <unk> et sauvage , ce nom a <unk> le droit d <unk> à la <unk> ; il est bien composé , il se <unk> <unk> , il a cette <unk> <unk> pour les noms <unk> ... Ne <unk> @-@ vous pas dans la construction du Z une allure <unk> ? ne figure @-@ t @-@ elle pas le zigzag <unk> et <unk> d 'une vie <unk> ? 
 <unk> ! say this two @-@ <unk> name again and again ; do you not feel as if it had some sinister meaning ? Does it not seem to you that its owner must be doomed to martyrdom ? Though foreign , savage , the name has a right to be handed down to posterity ; it is well constructed , easily pronounced , and has the brevity that <unk> a famous name ... Do you not discern in that letter Z an adverse influence ? Does it not prefigure the wayward and fantastic progress of a storm @-@ tossed life ? 
 The narrator , Charles , lives with his friend Juste in a large boarding @-@ house populated almost entirely with students like themselves ( Charles is studying law and Juste medicine ) . The sole exception is their middle @-@ aged neighbor , Z. Marcas , of whom they see only momentary glimpses in the hall . They learn that he is a copyist , and living on an extremely small salary . When the students find themselves lacking the funds for tobacco , Marcas offers them some of his own . They become friends , and he tells them the story of his political career . 
 Recognizing at an early age that he had an incisive mind for politics , Marcas had allied himself with an unnamed man of some fame who lacked wisdom and insight . They became a team , with the other man serving as the public face and Marcas as the advisor . Once his associate had ascended into office , however , he abandoned Marcas , then hired and abandoned him again . Marcas was left poor and unknown , resigned to duplicate the writing of others for very little pay . 
 Eventually his politician friend seeks his help for a third time . Marcas is dismissive , but the students convince him to give the process one last chance . After three months , Marcas appears at the boarding house again , sick and exhausted . The politician never visits Marcas , who soon dies . The students are the only mourners at his funeral , and – disheartened by the tragedy – leave France . 
 = = Characters = = 
 In addition to his distinctive name , Z. Marcas has a remarkable appearance which his neighbors notice immediately . The story 's first line refers to his " <unk> " ( " striking " ) appearance . As usual in his later work , Balzac describes Marcas by relating him to an animal : " L <unk> de Marcas était le lion . Ses cheveux <unk> à une <unk> , son nez était court , <unk> , large et <unk> au bout comme celui d 'un lion , il avait le front <unk> comme celui d 'un lion par un <unk> puissant , <unk> en deux lobes <unk> . " ( " The animal for Marcas was the lion . His hair was like a mane , his nose was short and flat ; broad and dented at the tip like a lion 's ; his brow , like a lion 's , was strongly marked with a deep median furrow , dividing two powerful bosses . " ) 
 Marcas appears to be destined for greatness ; he is described as having tremendous spirit , sound but speedy judgment , and comprehensive knowledge of public manners . His gaze has " une puissance " ( " a power " ) , which he tries not to use , since it has brought him nothing but misery in the past . Despite these innate proficiencies , however , the political genius living in the students ' midst requires their aid to dress himself when official company comes to call . 
 The character of Z. Marcas nonetheless represents a fiery drive to succeed in the world of politics , an acute mind seeking to do good in the public sphere . One critic calls him " ambition in its pure state " . Like other persons of genius in La Comédie humaine , Marcas is seen as a reflection of Balzac 's own ego and desire . Like Marcas , the author dreamed of fame and positive influence ; as Balzac believed himself to be , the character is dismissed and manipulated by mediocre minds . Even their work habits – toiling at their desks throughout the night – are similar . 
 = = = Recurring characters = = = 
 Balzac began using characters from earlier works in his 1835 novel Le Père Goriot , and made the technique a hallmark of his fiction . In the case of Z. Marcas , the narrator – Charles Rabourdin , whose identity is only revealed at the end of the story – is in fact the son of a central character from Balzac 's 1837 tale La Femme supérieure . The title character of that story is married to Xavier Rabourdin , who is unjustly ignored for a promotion to the head of his civil service department . At the end of the La Femme supérieure , Rabourdin pledges to his wife that they will enjoy success in the world of business . His son 's poverty in Z. Marcas is evidence of his failure . 
 Charles Rabourdin 's interactions with Marcas echo the difficulties he saw in his father 's government career . As critic Herbert J. Hunt notes , Marcas " represents in the political sphere what Rabourdin represents in the administrative sphere " . Allan H. Pasco echoes this point : " Charles has had the lesson of futility from two tutors : his father and Marcas . Outstanding men have no future in politics , in the administration , or in business – at least not in France . " 
 Balzac 's use of recurring characters provides unparalleled depth and characterization for his readers . " This technique " , insists critic Mary Susan McCarthy , " not only furnished him with a unifying principle but also offers the reader a network of relationships through which to unite the many separate stories and novels in which the characters appear , forming the fictional universe that is La Comédie humaine . " Some readers , however , are intimidated by the depth created by these interdependent stories , and feel deprived of important context for the characters . Detective novelist Arthur Conan Doyle said that he never tried to read Balzac , because he " did not know where to begin " . 
 Z. Marcas himself appears in one other Balzac story , Un prince de la bohème , which the author revised twice before it appeared in its final form . In the 1846 edition , the character of Marcel has been changed to Marcas ; but this may have been a printer 's error . As Anthony Pugh explains : " This detail is inexplicable ; the principal character of Z. Marcas , who does not otherwise appear outside his own story , seems a very unlikely candidate for the role . Could it be a misprint ? " 
 = = Style = = 
 Balzac was known for his use of realism , including exquisite detail when describing people and locations . His fanaticism about the name Z. Marcas is cited as an example of the author 's " zeal " for " close local color " . Balzac 's belief in the connection between one 's name and one 's destiny is brought to the fore ; the pattern demonstrated in Z. Marcas reflects many in the larger collection of Balzac 's work . As critic Charles <unk> puts it : " The creator of a universe so tied up with inner rhythms and resounding with so many echoes does not hesitate to imply that the germs of a character 's failure can be found in the physical qualities of his name . " This idea came to Balzac from Laurence Sterne , as he acknowledged in his 1841 story Ursule <unk> : " [ N ] e <unk> @-@ on pas <unk> avec Sterne l <unk> puissance des noms , qui <unk> <unk> et <unk> <unk> les caractères ? " ( " Should we not agree with Sterne in recognizing the occult power in names , which sometimes mock and sometimes define the characters of their possessors ? " ) 
 Z. Marcas includes many other examples of realist detail as well . The students live in shabby environs , furnished by " qu 'un <unk> <unk> en <unk> " ( " only a scrap of thin carpet " ) . They share " une blonde <unk> de <unk> <unk> " ( " a tawny twig of Turkish tobacco " ) with their neighbor , and the three discuss political personalities drawn directly from recent history , including William Pitt the Elder and the Voltigeurs . Still , realist detail is not commonly in the foreground of commentary about Z. Marcas . As Hunt explains , it is mostly remembered " as a vehicle for a characteristic <unk> whimsy " . 
 = = Politics and society = = 
 Z. Marcas is best known for its reflection of Balzac 's political views , specifically the neglect of talent and ability in a sea of republican mediocrity ; and the abandonment of young people by older generations . Pasco suggests : " ' Z. Marcas ' has then become , not the story of one particular , political failure , not the story of a young man of potential who abandons France for <unk> , but the story of France herself , wasting away and thus losing her greatest resource – her youth . " 
 Balzac believed that the July Monarchy had brought a wave of poor leadership , and that people of quality and integrity were scorned in the name of cronyism . Marcas , a prime example of such a man , is doomed to fail in the government of Louis @-@ Philippe . Those in power were blind to the valuable minds being lost in their midst , as the students discover early in the story : " nous <unk> <unk> de la <unk> <unk> du <unk> pour tout ce qui <unk> à l <unk> , à la pensée , à la <unk> " ( " we were amazed at the brutal indifference of the authorities to everything connected with intellect , thought , and poetry " ) . Marcas ' personal woes – and his tales of life within the corridors of power – strongly reinforce this view . 
 Through Marcas , Balzac claimed that young people in France were being ignored by government officials , and predicted an uprising : 
 La jeunesse <unk> comme la <unk> d 'une machine à <unk> . La jeunesse n 'a pas d <unk> en France , elle y <unk> une avalanche de <unk> <unk> , d <unk> <unk> et <unk> , elle se marie peu , les familles ne <unk> que faire de leurs enfants ; quel sera le bruit qui <unk> ces masses , je ne sais ; mais <unk> se <unk> dans l 'état de choses <unk> et le <unk> . 
 Youth will explode like the boiler of a steam @-@ engine . Youth has no outlet in France ; it is gathering an avalanche of underrated capabilities , of legitimate and restless ambitions ; young men are not marrying now ; families cannot tell what to do with their children . What will the thunderclap be that will shake down these masses ? I know not , but they will crash down into the midst of things , and overthrow everything . 
 As Graham Robb indicates in his 1994 biography , Balzac 's words were an accurate prediction of the 1848 Revolution . Public opposition to the monarchy exploded in February of that year , Louis @-@ Philippe was forced to abdicate , and the Second Republic was founded . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Although Balzac 's Revue Parisienne lasted only three issues , Z. Marcas has remained a moderately popular story . Hunt notes that it has " only subsidiary value " , but biographer André Maurois calls it " an admirable tale " . Robb notes that Z. Marcas was an important herald of political realities to come , and provided a warning to the political class of the time . 
 As critic Félicien Marceau points out , however , the greatest value of Z Marcas may have been for the author himself . 
 [ T ] he story has somewhat the appearance of those drawings by Leonardo da Vinci consisting of twenty or thirty feet or hands , perfectly drawn in themselves , but whose raison d 'être lies rather in the fact that they will enable the artist to address himself later on to much vaster compositions , in which such hands and feet will assume their true placement and importance . We shall find the traits gathered together in the character of Marcas — though more scattered , mingled with others , scaled down to less overwhelming proportions — in [ Eugène de ] Rastignac or [ Henri de ] <unk> , whose characters are less of a piece but more true to life . Marcas , on the other hand , is less a character than a moral example . 
 = Europa ( moon ) = 
 Europa / <unk> / ( Jupiter II ) , is the sixth @-@ closest moon of Jupiter , and the smallest of its four Galilean satellites , and the sixth @-@ largest moon in the Solar System . Europa was discovered in 1610 by Galileo Galilei and was named after Europa , mother of King Minos of Crete , who became one of Zeus ' lovers . In addition to Earth @-@ bound telescope observations , Europa has been examined by a succession of space probe flybys , the first occurring in the early 1970s . 
 Slightly smaller than the Moon , Europa is primarily made of silicate rock and has a water @-@ ice crust and probably an iron – nickel core . It has a tenuous atmosphere composed primarily of oxygen . Its surface is striated by cracks and streaks , whereas craters are relatively rare . It has the smoothest surface of any known solid object in the Solar System . The apparent youth and smoothness of the surface have led to the hypothesis that a water ocean exists beneath it , which could conceivably serve as an abode for extraterrestrial life . This hypothesis proposes that heat from tidal flexing causes the ocean to remain liquid and drives geological activity similar to plate tectonics . On 8 September 2014 , NASA reported finding evidence supporting earlier suggestions of plate tectonics in Europa 's thick ice shell — the first sign of such geological activity on a world other than Earth . On 12 May 2015 , scientists announced that sea salt from a subsurface ocean may be coating some geological features on Europa , suggesting that the ocean is interacting with the seafloor . This may be important in determining if Europa could be habitable for life . 
 In December 2013 , NASA reported the detection of " clay @-@ like minerals " ( specifically , phyllosilicates ) on the icy crust of Europa . In addition , the Hubble Space Telescope detected water vapor plumes similar to those observed on Saturn 's moon Enceladus , which are thought to be caused by erupting cryogeysers . 
 The Galileo mission , launched in 1989 , provided the bulk of current data on Europa . No spacecraft has yet landed on Europa , but its intriguing characteristics have led to several ambitious exploration proposals . The European Space Agency 's Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer ( JUICE ) is a mission to Ganymede that is due to launch in 2022 , but it will conduct two flybys of Europa . NASA 's planned Europa Multiple @-@ Flyby Mission will be launched in the mid @-@ 2020s . 
 = = Discovery and naming = = 
 Europa , along with Jupiter 's three other large moons , Io , Ganymede , and Callisto , were discovered by Galileo Galilei on 8 January 1610 , and possibly independently by Simon Marius . The first reported observation of Io and Europa was made by Galileo Galilei on 7 January 1610 using a 20 × <unk> refracting telescope at the University of Padua . However , in that observation , Galileo could not separate Io and Europa due to the low magnification of his telescope , so that the two were recorded as a single point of light . The following day , 8 January 1610 ( used as the discovery date for Europa by the IAU ) , Io and Europa were seen for the first time as separate bodies during Galileo 's observations of the Jupiter system . 
 Europa is named after Europa , daughter of the king of Tyre , a Phoenician noblewoman in Greek mythology . Like all the Galilean satellites , Europa is named after a lover of Zeus , the Greek counterpart of Jupiter . Europa was courted by Zeus and became the queen of Crete . The naming scheme was suggested by Simon Marius , who discovered the four satellites independently . Marius attributed the proposal to Johannes Kepler . 
 The names fell out of favor for a considerable time and were not revived in general use until the mid @-@ 20th century . In much of the earlier astronomical literature , Europa is simply referred to by its Roman numeral designation as Jupiter II ( a system also introduced by Galileo ) or as the " second satellite of Jupiter " . In 1892 , the discovery of Amalthea , whose orbit lay closer to Jupiter than those of the Galilean moons , pushed Europa to the third position . The Voyager probes discovered three more inner satellites in 1979 , so Europa is now considered Jupiter 's sixth satellite , though it is still sometimes referred to as Jupiter II . 
 = = Orbit and rotation = = 
 Europa orbits Jupiter in just over three and a half days , with an orbital radius of about 670 @,@ 900 km . With an eccentricity of only 0 @.@ 009 , the orbit itself is nearly circular , and the orbital inclination relative to Jupiter 's equatorial plane is small , at 0 @.@ 470 ° . Like its fellow Galilean satellites , Europa is tidally locked to Jupiter , with one hemisphere of Europa constantly facing Jupiter . Because of this , there is a sub @-@ Jovian point on Europa 's surface , from which Jupiter would appear to hang directly overhead . Europa 's prime meridian is the line intersecting this point . Research suggests the tidal locking may not be full , as a non @-@ synchronous rotation has been proposed : Europa spins faster than it orbits , or at least did so in the past . This suggests an asymmetry in internal mass distribution and that a layer of subsurface liquid separates the icy crust from the rocky interior . 
 The slight eccentricity of Europa 's orbit , maintained by the gravitational disturbances from the other <unk> , causes Europa 's sub @-@ Jovian point to oscillate around a mean position . As Europa comes slightly nearer to Jupiter , Jupiter 's gravitational attraction increases , causing Europa to elongate towards and away from it . As Europa moves slightly away from Jupiter , Jupiter 's gravitational force decreases , causing Europa to relax back into a more spherical shape , and creating tides in its ocean . The orbital eccentricity of Europa is continuously pumped by its mean @-@ motion resonance with Io . Thus , the tidal flexing <unk> Europa 's interior and gives it a source of heat , possibly allowing its ocean to stay liquid while driving subsurface geological processes . The ultimate source of this energy is Jupiter 's rotation , which is tapped by Io through the tides it raises on Jupiter and is transferred to Europa and Ganymede by the orbital resonance . 
 Scientists analyzing the unique cracks lining Europa found evidence showing that it likely spun around a tilted axis at some point in time . If correct , this would explain many of Europa 's features . Europa 's immense network of crisscrossing cracks serves as a record of the stresses caused by massive tides in its global ocean . Europa 's tilt could influence calculations of how much of its history is recorded in its frozen shell , how much heat is generated by tides in its ocean , and even how long the ocean has been liquid . Its ice layer must stretch to accommodate these changes . When there is too much stress , it cracks . A tilt in Europa 's axis could suggest that its cracks may be much more recent than previously thought . The reason is that the direction of the spin pole may change by as much as a few degrees per day , completing one precession period over several months . A tilt also could affect the estimates of the age of Europa 's ocean . Tidal forces are thought to generate the heat that keeps Europa 's ocean liquid , and a tilt in the spin axis means that more heat is generated by tidal forces . This heat helps the ocean to remain liquid longer . Scientists did not specify when the tilt would have occurred and measurements have not been made of the tilt of Europa 's axis . 
 = = Physical characteristics = = 
 Europa is slightly smaller than the Moon . At just over 3 @,@ 100 kilometres ( 1 @,@ 900 mi ) in diameter , it is the sixth @-@ largest moon and fifteenth @-@ largest object in the Solar System . Though by a wide margin the least massive of the Galilean satellites , it is nonetheless more massive than all known moons in the Solar System smaller than itself combined . Its bulk density suggests that it is similar in composition to the terrestrial planets , being primarily composed of silicate rock . 
 = = = Internal structure = = = 
 It is estimated that Europa has an outer layer of water around 100 km ( 62 mi ) thick ; a part frozen as its crust , and a part as a liquid ocean underneath the ice . Recent magnetic @-@ field data from the Galileo orbiter showed that Europa has an induced magnetic field through interaction with Jupiter 's , which suggests the presence of a subsurface conductive layer . This layer is likely a salty liquid @-@ water ocean . Portions of the crust are estimated to have undergone a rotation of nearly 80 ° , nearly flipping over ( see true polar wander ) , which would be unlikely if the ice were solidly attached to the mantle . Europa probably contains a metallic iron core . 
 = = = Surface features = = = 
 Europa is one of the smoothest objects in the Solar System , due to the lack of large @-@ scale features , such as mountains or craters . However ; on a smaller scale , Europa 's equator has been theorized to be covered in 10 @-@ metre tall icy spikes called <unk> , which are caused by the effect of direct overhead sunlight on the equator , melting vertical cracks . The prominent markings crisscrossing Europa appear to mainly be albedo features that emphasize low topography . There are few craters on Europa , because its surface is tectonically too active and therefore young . Europa 's icy crust has an albedo ( light reflectivity ) of 0 @.@ 64 , one of the highest of all moons . This indicates a young and active surface , based on estimates of the frequency of cometary bombardment that Europa likely experiences , the surface is about 20 to 180 million years old . There is currently no full scientific consensus among the sometimes contradictory explanations for the surface features of Europa . 
 The radiation level at the surface of Europa is equivalent to a dose of about 5400 mSv ( 540 rem ) per day , an amount of radiation that would cause severe illness or death in human beings exposed for a single day . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Europa 's most striking surface features are a series of dark streaks crisscrossing the entire globe , called lineae ( English : lines ) . Close examination shows that the edges of Europa 's crust on either side of the cracks have moved relative to each other . The larger bands are more than 20 km ( 12 mi ) across , often with dark , diffuse outer edges , regular striations , and a central band of lighter material . The most likely hypothesis states that the lineae on Europa may have been produced by a series of eruptions of warm ice as the Europan crust spread open to expose warmer layers beneath . The effect would have been similar to that seen in Earth 's oceanic ridges . These various fractures are thought to have been caused in large part by the tidal flexing exerted by Jupiter . Because Europa is tidally locked to Jupiter , and therefore always maintains the same approximate orientation towards Jupiter , the stress patterns should form a distinctive and predictable pattern . However , only the youngest of Europa 's fractures conform to the predicted pattern ; other fractures appear to occur at increasingly different orientations the older they are . This could be explained if Europa 's surface rotates slightly faster than its interior , an effect that is possible due to the subsurface ocean mechanically decoupling Europa 's surface from its rocky mantle and the effects of Jupiter 's gravity tugging on Europa 's outer ice crust . Comparisons of Voyager and Galileo spacecraft photos serve to put an upper limit on this hypothetical slippage . The full revolution of the outer rigid shell relative to the interior of Europa occurs over a minimum of 12 @,@ 000 years . Studies of Voyager and Galileo images have revealed evidence of subduction on Europa 's surface , suggesting that , just as the cracks are analogous to ocean ridges , so plates of icy crust analogous to tectonic plates on Earth are recycled into the molten interior . Together , the evidence for crustal spreading at bands and convergence at other sites marks the first evidence for plate tectonics on any world other than Earth . 
 = = = = Other geological features = = = = 
 Other features present on Europa are circular and elliptical lenticulae ( Latin for " freckles " ) . Many are domes , some are pits and some are smooth , dark spots . Others have a jumbled or rough texture . The dome tops look like pieces of the older plains around them , suggesting that the domes formed when the plains were pushed up from below . 
 One hypothesis states that these lenticulae were formed by diapirs of warm ice rising up through the colder ice of the outer crust , much like magma chambers in Earth 's crust . The smooth , dark spots could be formed by meltwater released when the warm ice breaks through the surface . The rough , jumbled lenticulae ( called regions of " chaos " ; for example , <unk> Chaos ) would then be formed from many small fragments of crust , embedded in hummocky , dark material , appearing like icebergs in a frozen sea . 
 An alternative hypothesis suggest that lenticulae are actually small areas of chaos and that the claimed pits , spots and domes are artefacts resulting from over @-@ interpretation of early , low @-@ resolution Galileo images . The implication is that the ice is too thin to support the convective <unk> model of feature formation . 
 In November 2011 , a team of researchers from the University of Texas at Austin and elsewhere presented evidence in the journal Nature suggesting that many " chaos terrain " features on Europa sit atop vast lakes of liquid water . These lakes would be entirely encased in Europa 's icy outer shell and distinct from a liquid ocean thought to exist farther down beneath the ice shell . Full confirmation of the lakes ' existence will require a space mission designed to probe the ice shell either physically or indirectly , for example , using radar . 
 = = = Subsurface ocean = = = 
 Scientists ' consensus is that a layer of liquid water exists beneath Europa 's surface , and that heat from tidal flexing allows the subsurface ocean to remain liquid . Europa 's surface temperature averages about 110 K ( − 160 ° C ; − 260 ° F ) at the equator and only 50 K ( − 220 ° C ; − 370 ° F ) at the poles , keeping Europa 's icy crust as hard as granite . The first hints of a subsurface ocean came from theoretical considerations of tidal heating ( a consequence of Europa 's slightly eccentric orbit and orbital resonance with the other Galilean moons ) . Galileo imaging team members argue for the existence of a subsurface ocean from analysis of Voyager and Galileo images . The most dramatic example is " chaos terrain " , a common feature on Europa 's surface that some interpret as a region where the subsurface ocean has melted through the icy crust . This interpretation is controversial . Most geologists who have studied Europa favor what is commonly called the " thick ice " model , in which the ocean has rarely , if ever , directly interacted with the present surface . The best evidence for the thick @-@ ice model is a study of Europa 's large craters . The largest impact structures are surrounded by concentric rings and appear to be filled with relatively flat , fresh ice ; based on this and on the calculated amount of heat generated by Europan tides , it is estimated that the outer crust of solid ice is approximately 10 – 30 km ( 6 – 19 mi ) thick , including a ductile " warm ice " layer , which could mean that the liquid ocean underneath may be about 100 km ( 60 mi ) deep . This leads to a volume of Europa 's oceans of 3 × 1018 m3 , between two or three times the volume of Earth 's oceans . 
 The thin @-@ ice model suggests that Europa 's ice shell may be only a few kilometers thick . However , most planetary scientists conclude that this model considers only those topmost layers of Europa 's crust that behave <unk> when affected by Jupiter 's tides . One example is flexure analysis , in which Europa 's crust is modeled as a plane or sphere weighted and flexed by a heavy load . Models such as this suggest the outer elastic portion of the ice crust could be as thin as 200 metres ( 660 ft ) . If the ice shell of Europa is really only a few kilometers thick , this " thin ice " model would mean that regular contact of the liquid interior with the surface could occur through open ridges , causing the formation of areas of chaotic terrain . 
 = = = = Composition = = = = 
 The Galileo orbiter found that Europa has a weak magnetic moment , which is induced by the varying part of the Jovian magnetic field . The field strength at the magnetic equator ( about 120 nT ) created by this magnetic moment is about one @-@ sixth the strength of Ganymede 's field and six times the value of Callisto 's . The existence of the induced moment requires a layer of a highly electrically conductive material in Europa 's interior . The most plausible candidate for this role is a large subsurface ocean of liquid saltwater . 
 Since the Voyager spacecraft flew past Europa in 1979 , scientists have worked to understand the composition of the reddish @-@ brown material that coats fractures and other geologically youthful features on Europa 's surface . Spectrographic evidence suggests that the dark , reddish streaks and features on Europa 's surface may be rich in salts such as magnesium sulfate , deposited by evaporating water that emerged from within . Sulfuric acid hydrate is another possible explanation for the contaminant observed spectroscopically . In either case , because these materials are colorless or white when pure , some other material must also be present to account for the reddish color , and sulfur compounds are suspected . 
 = = = = Plumes = = = = 
 The Hubble Space Telescope captured an image of Europa in 2012 that was interpreted to be a plume of water vapour erupting from near its south pole . The image suggests the plume may be 200 km ( 120 mi ) high , or more than 20 times the height of Mt . Everest . However , follow @-@ up observations of Europa have revealed no plume emanating from the moon . It has been suggested that if they exist , they are episodic and likely to appear when Europa is at its farthest point from Jupiter , in agreement with tidal force modeling predictions . The tidal forces are about 1 @,@ 000 times stronger than the Moon 's effect on Earth . The only other moon in the Solar System exhibiting water vapor plumes is Enceladus . The estimated eruption rate at Europa is about 7000 kg / s compared to about 200 kg / s for the plumes of Enceladus . 
 = = = Atmosphere = = = 
 Observations with the Goddard High Resolution Spectrograph of the Hubble Space Telescope , first described in 1995 , revealed that Europa has a thin atmosphere composed mostly of molecular oxygen ( O2 ) . The surface pressure of Europa 's atmosphere is 0 @.@ 1 μPa , or 10 − 12 times that of the Earth . In 1997 , the Galileo spacecraft confirmed the presence of a tenuous ionosphere ( an upper @-@ atmospheric layer of charged particles ) around Europa created by solar radiation and energetic particles from Jupiter 's magnetosphere , providing evidence of an atmosphere . 
 Unlike the oxygen in Earth 's atmosphere , Europa 's is not of biological origin . The surface @-@ bounded atmosphere forms through radiolysis , the dissociation of molecules through radiation . Solar ultraviolet radiation and charged particles ( ions and electrons ) from the Jovian magnetospheric environment collide with Europa 's icy surface , splitting water into oxygen and hydrogen constituents . These chemical components are then adsorbed and " sputtered " into the atmosphere . The same radiation also creates collisional ejections of these products from the surface , and the balance of these two processes forms an atmosphere . Molecular oxygen is the densest component of the atmosphere because it has a long lifetime ; after returning to the surface , it does not stick ( freeze ) like a water or hydrogen peroxide molecule but rather <unk> from the surface and starts another ballistic arc . Molecular hydrogen never reaches the surface , as it is light enough to escape Europa 's surface gravity . 
 Observations of the surface have revealed that some of the molecular oxygen produced by radiolysis is not ejected from the surface . Because the surface may interact with the subsurface ocean ( considering the geological discussion above ) , this molecular oxygen may make its way to the ocean , where it could aid in biological processes . One estimate suggests that , given the turnover rate inferred from the apparent ~ 0 @.@ 5 Gyr maximum age of Europa 's surface ice , subduction of <unk> generated oxidizing species might well lead to oceanic free oxygen concentrations that are comparable to those in terrestrial deep oceans . 
 The molecular hydrogen that escapes Europa 's gravity , along with atomic and molecular oxygen , forms a gas torus in the vicinity of Europa 's orbit around Jupiter . This " neutral cloud " has been detected by both the Cassini and Galileo spacecraft , and has a greater content ( number of atoms and molecules ) than the neutral cloud surrounding Jupiter 's inner moon Io . Models predict that almost every atom or molecule in Europa 's torus is eventually ionized , thus providing a source to Jupiter 's magnetospheric plasma . 
 = = Exploration = = 
 Exploration of Europa began with the Jupiter flybys of Pioneer 10 and 11 in 1973 and 1974 respectively . The first closeup photos were of low resolution compared to later missions . The two Voyager probes traveled through the Jovian system in 1979 , providing more @-@ detailed images of Europa 's icy surface . The images caused many scientists to speculate about the possibility of a liquid ocean underneath . Starting in 1995 , the Galileo <unk> orbited Jupiter for eight years , until 2003 , and provided the most detailed examination of the Galilean moons to date . It included the " Galileo Europa Mission " and " Galileo Millennium Mission " , with numerous close flybys of Europa . In 2007 , New Horizons imaged Europa , as it flew by the Jovian system while on its way to Pluto . 
 = = = Future missions = = = 
 <unk> regarding extraterrestrial life have ensured a high profile for Europa and have led to steady lobbying for future missions . The aims of these missions have ranged from examining Europa 's chemical composition to searching for extraterrestrial life in its hypothesized subsurface oceans . Robotic missions to Europa need to endure the high radiation environment around itself and Jupiter . Europa receives about 5 @.@ 40 Sv of radiation per day . 
 In 2011 , a Europa mission was recommended by the U.S. Planetary Science Decadal Survey . In response , NASA commissioned Europa lander concept studies in 2011 , along with concepts for a Europa flyby ( Europa Clipper ) , and a Europa orbiter . The orbiter element option concentrates on the " ocean " science , while the multiple @-@ flyby element ( Clipper ) concentrates on the chemistry and energy science . On 13 January 2014 , the House Appropriations Committee announced a new bipartisan bill that includes $ 80 million funding to continue the Europa mission concept studies . 
 Europa Multiple @-@ Flyby Mission — In July 2013 an updated concept for a flyby Europa mission called Europa Clipper was presented by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) and the Applied Physics Laboratory ( APL ) . In May 2015 , NASA officially announced that it had accepted the Europa Clipper mission , and revealed the instruments it will use . The aim of Europa Clipper is to explore Europa in order to investigate its habitability , and to aid selecting sites for a future lander . The Europa Clipper would not orbit Europa , but instead orbit Jupiter and conduct 45 low @-@ altitude flybys of Europa during its envisioned mission . The probe would carry an ice @-@ penetrating radar , short @-@ wave infrared spectrometer , topographical imager , and an <unk> and neutral @-@ mass spectrometer . 
 In 2012 , Jupiter Icy Moon Explorer ( JUICE ) was selected by the European Space Agency ( ESA ) as a planned mission . That mission includes 2 flybys of Europa , but is more focused on Ganymede . 
 = = = Old proposals = = = 
 In the early 2000s , Jupiter Europa Orbiter led by NASA and the Jupiter Ganymede Orbiter led by the ESA were proposed together as an Outer Planet Flagship Mission to Jupiter 's icy moons , and called Europa Jupiter System Mission with a planned launch in 2020 . In 2009 it was given priority over Titan Saturn System Mission . At that time , there was competition from other proposals . Japan proposed Jupiter Magnetospheric Orbiter . 
 Jovian Europa Orbiter was an ESA Cosmic Vision concept study from 2007 . Another concept was Ice Clipper , which would have used an impactor similar to the Deep Impact mission — it would make a controlled crash into the surface of Europa , generating a plume of debris that would then be collected by a small spacecraft flying through the plume . 
 Jupiter Icy Moons Orbiter ( JIMO ) was a partially developed fission @-@ powered spacecraft with ion thrusters that was cancelled in 2006 . It was part of Project Prometheus . The Europa Lander Mission proposed a small nuclear @-@ powered Europa lander for JIMO . It would travel with the orbiter , which would also function as a communication relay to Earth . 
 Europa Orbiter — Its objective would be to characterize the extent of the ocean and its relation to the deeper interior . Instrument payload could include a radio subsystem , laser altimeter , magnetometer , Langmuir probe , and a mapping camera . 
 Europa Lander — It would investigate Europa 's habitability and assess its <unk> potential by confirming the existence and determining the characteristics of water within and below Europa 's icy shell . 
 The Europa Orbiter received a go @-@ ahead in 1999 but was canceled in 2002 . This orbiter featured a special radar that would allow it to scan below the surface . 
 More ambitious ideas have been put forward including an impactor in combination with a thermal drill to search for biosignatures that might be frozen in the shallow subsurface . 
 Another proposal put forward in 2001 calls for a large nuclear @-@ powered " melt probe " ( <unk> ) that would melt through the ice until it reached an ocean below . Once it reached the water , it would deploy an autonomous underwater vehicle ( <unk> ) that would gather information and send it back to Earth . Both the <unk> and the <unk> would have to undergo some form of extreme sterilization to prevent detection of Earth organisms instead of native life and to prevent contamination of the subsurface ocean . This proposed mission has not yet reached a serious planning stage . 
 = = Potential habitability = = 
 Europa has emerged as one of the most likely locations in the Solar System for potential habitability . Life could exist in its under @-@ ice ocean , perhaps in an environment similar to Earth 's deep @-@ ocean hydrothermal vents . Even if Europa lacks volcanic hydrothermal activity , a 2016 NASA study found that Earth @-@ like levels of hydrogen and oxygen could be produced through processes related to serpentinization and ice @-@ derived oxidants , which do not directly involve volcanism . On 12 May 2015 , scientists announced that sea salt from a subsurface ocean may likely be coating some geological features on Europa , suggesting that the ocean is interacting with the seafloor . This may be important in determining if Europa could be habitable for life , according to the scientists . So far , there is no evidence that life exists on Europa , but the likely presence of liquid water in contact with Europa 's rocky mantle has spurred calls to send a probe there . 
 The energy provided by tidal flexing drives active geological processes within Europa 's interior , just as they do to a far more obvious degree on its sister moon Io . Although Europa , like the Earth , may possess an internal energy source from radioactive decay , the energy generated by tidal flexing would be several orders of magnitude greater than any radiological source . However , the energy from tidal flexing could never support an ecosystem in Europa 's ocean as large and diverse as the photosynthesis @-@ based ecosystem on Earth 's surface . Life on Europa could exist clustered around hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor , or below the ocean floor , where <unk> are known to inhabit on Earth . Alternatively , it could exist clinging to the lower surface of Europa 's ice layer , much like algae and bacteria in Earth 's polar regions , or float freely in Europa 's ocean . However , if Europa 's ocean were too cold , biological processes similar to those known on Earth could not take place . Similarly , if it were too salty , only extreme halophiles could survive in its environment . 
 Evidence suggests the existence of lakes of liquid water entirely encased in Europa 's icy outer shell and distinct from a liquid ocean thought to exist farther down beneath the ice shell . If confirmed , the lakes could be yet another potential habitat for life . 
 Evidence suggests that hydrogen peroxide is abundant across much of the surface of Europa . Because hydrogen peroxide decays into oxygen and water when combined with liquid water , the authors argue that it could be an important energy supply for simple life forms . 
 Clay @-@ like minerals ( specifically , phyllosilicates ) , often associated with organic materials on Earth , have been detected on the icy crust of Europa . The presence of the minerals may have been the result of a collision with an asteroid or comet . 
 Life on Earth could have been blasted into space by asteroid collisions and arrived on the moons of Jupiter in a process called <unk> . 
 = The 2nd Law = 
 The 2nd Law is the sixth studio album by English rock band Muse . It was released on 1 October 2012 in the United Kingdom and elsewhere on 28 September , 2 and 3 October under Warner Bros. Records and the band 's own Helium @-@ 3 imprint . The title of the album refers to the second law of thermodynamics and the album 's cover art features a map of the human brain 's pathways , which was taken from the Human Connectome Project . Recording of the album took place in four different studios , began in October 2011 , and ended in August 2012 . Mainly self @-@ produced by the band , with the exception of the song " Follow Me " which was co @-@ produced by English electronic music trio Nero , The 2nd Law features multiple styles of music and was influenced by acts such as Queen , David Bowie , and Skrillex . 
 Upon release , the album received generally favourable reviews from music critics , holding a 70 / 100 score on review aggregator site Metacritic , and had a very positive commercial performance . It was a top ten @-@ charting album in thirty @-@ one countries and a number one album in thirteen countries . The album has been certified platinum by the BPI in England , the FIMI in Italy , the IFPI in Switzerland , and the MC in Canada . It has also been certified triple @-@ platinum by the SNEP in France . At the 55th Annual Grammy Awards , the album was nominated for Best Rock Album and the album 's second track " Madness " was nominated for Best Rock Song . The album 's third track " Panic Station " was also nominated for Best Rock Song at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards the following year . 
 A total of five official singles were released from the album . " Survival " , released on 27 June , and " Madness " , released on 20 August , were released as the album 's two lead singles . " Survival " was notable for being chosen as the official song for the 2012 Summer Olympics , while " Madness " was notable for its positive commercial performance , as well for topping the Billboard Alternative Songs chart for a record nineteen weeks , beating out the previous record set by " The Pretender " by Foo Fighters . Three singles were released after the release of the album : " Follow Me " , released on 7 December , " Supremacy " , released on 20 February 2013 , and , " Panic Station " , released on 31 May . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The 2nd Law was primarily recorded at AIR Studios in London , England and <unk> Studios in Los Angeles , California , with additional recording taking place at Shangri La Studios in Malibu , California and Capitol Studios in Los Angeles . In an interview with Billboard on 18 October 2011 , the band 's manager Anthony Addis revealed that Muse had begun recording their sixth album in London and that he expected it to be released by October 2012 . Muse bassist Christopher Wolstenholme had stated in an interview with BBC Radio 1 that they had aimed to begin recording The 2nd Law in either September or October 2011 . During the recording of the album , band frontman Matt Bellamy jokingly described the album as a " christian gangsta rap jazz odyssey , with some ambient rebellious dubstep and face @-@ melting metal flamenco cowboy psychedelia " on his Twitter account . In an interview with Kerrang ! on 14 December 2011 , Wolstenholme stated that the next Muse album would be " something radically different " from their prior releases . He also said that it felt as if the band were " drawing a line under a certain period " of their career with their sixth album . In another interview Chris mentioned that the band had experimented with music and sounds in particular . It was revealed via Muse 's publicist Tom Kirk on his Twitter account that composer David Campbell was helping the band compose the album . In an interview in the April 2012 issue of NME , Bellamy said that the band were set to include elements of electronic music , with influences coming from acts such as French house duo Justice and UK dance @-@ punk group Does It Offend You , Yeah ? . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The 2nd Law features art rock , progressive rock , and electronic music . The album 's first track , " Supremacy " , has been compared to James Bond theme songs such as the song " Live and Let Die " by Paul McCartney and Wings . " Madness " , according to NME , features influences which draw from Queen 's " I Want to Break Free " and David Bowie 's Scary Monsters album . " Panic Station " , the third track , has been noted as a funk rock song and features collaborations from people who had worked on Stevie Wonder 's " Superstition " . It also includes explicit lyrics , making The 2nd Law Muse 's first album to feature the Parental Advisory label . Bellamy has stated that dubstep producer Skrillex was an influence when writing one of the final two tracks on the album – " The 2nd Law : Unsustainable " . He also stated that the song " Follow Me " was written about his newborn son , Bingham Bellamy . The song was produced by electronic music trio Nero . Bassist Chris Wolstenholme wrote two songs for the album about his battle with alcoholism – " Save Me " and " Liquid State " – and provided lead vocals on both tracks . Bellamy revealed that during the recording of The 2nd Law he was reading the novel World War Z , which became a major influence on the album , especially the tracks " The 2nd Law : Isolated System " and " Survival . " " The 2nd Law : Isolated System " was featured in the film adaptation of the novel . 
 = = Packaging = = 
 The name " The 2nd Law " references the second law of thermodynamics , which is quoted in the track " Unsustainable " as follows : 
 All natural and technological processes proceed in such a way that the availability of the remaining energy decreases . In all energy exchanges , if no energy enters or leaves an isolated system , the entropy of that system increases . Energy continuously flows from being concentrated , to becoming dispersed , spread out , wasted , and useless . New energy cannot be created and high @-@ grade energy is being destroyed . An economy based on endless growth is unsustainable . 
 The album 's cover art , taken from the Human Connectome Project , represents the map of the human brain 's pathways , " tracking the circuits in our heads and how we process information with bright , neon colors . " The artwork was subsequently used by Muse in a social Connectome Project on 21 September 2012 . As more fans joined the online project , the album art was built , representing the network of the neurons within the brain . As the album art branched and more fans joined the network , incremental segments of the album track " The 2nd Law : Isolated System " were released . 
 The album was released as a digital download , CD , CD + DVD ( with The Making of The 2nd Law and bonus feature ) , and vinyl . A deluxe edition box set of The 2nd Law included a CD , DVD , double vinyl and three posters . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 On 6 June 2012 , Muse released a trailer for The 2nd Law with a countdown on the band 's website suggesting a 17 September release date . The trailer , which included dubstep elements , was met with mixed reactions from fans . Muse made the album track " The 2nd Law : Unsustainable " available to fans who pre @-@ ordered the album from their online store , and then uploaded the video for the track onto their YouTube channel on 10 August . 
 The band conducted a competition to produce a music video for " Animals " . The winning video was created by <unk> Freitas and Miguel Mendes ( Oneness Team ) from Portugal . The winning entry was released on 20 March 2013 . 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 = = = = Lead singles = = = = 
 Two singles were released prior to the release of The 2nd Law . " Survival " was released as the album 's first single on 27 June 2012 and premiered on BBC Radio 1 's Zane Lowe show , along with the song 's counterpart intro , " Prelude " . The song served as the official song of the London 2012 Olympics Games and peaked at number 22 on the UK Singles Chart . 
 It was revealed by the band in an interview with NME magazine that " Madness " would be released as the second single . Released on 20 August , it was announced that the song would make its world premiere on BBC Radio 1 at 19 : 30 BST , but the track was leaked online beforehand , due to an unintentional early release in South Korea . The official music video for the song was uploaded on 5 September to the band 's YouTube channel . The song had significant chart performance by peaking in the top 40 in several countries . It has peaked at number 25 in the UK , as well as number 45 in the Billboard Hot 100 , making " Madness " the band 's second @-@ highest charting song in the US , behind " Uprising " . The song was also notable for topping the Billboard Alternative Songs chart for a cumulative amount of nineteen weeks , making it the longest @-@ running number @-@ one song on the chart . The previous record was eighteen weeks , held by the Foo Fighters with their song " The Pretender " . The song has been certified platinum by the FIMI in Italy and the MC in Canada . The song has also been certified double @-@ platinum by the RIAA in the US for 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies of the song sold . 
 = = = = Post – album singles = = = = 
 Three singles followed the release of The 2nd Law . " Follow Me " was revealed as the third single when several promo CD 's allegedly sent to radio stations appeared on eBay . The official lyric video was released on 1 November and the official music video was released on 11 December , both on the band 's official YouTube channel . The song failed to chart in the UK , but it ended up charting in Belgium , France , Italy , and Japan . 
 " Supremacy " was released as the fourth single from the album on 25 February 2013 . The song gained popularity when it was performed at the beginning of the 2013 Brit Awards . Due to this performance , the song charted and peaked at number 58 on the UK singles chart . 
 " Panic Station " was released as a promotional single from the album in the days leading up to its release on 24 September 2012 . Its first airplay occurred on British alternative music station XFM . The band performed this track , as well as " Madness " , on the 6 October 2012 episode of Saturday Night Live . Panic Station was released as the fifth single on 31 May 2013 , accompanied by a music video shot during the Japanese dates of The 2nd Law Tour . The music video was released on 22 April 2013 at 10 : 00 am . PDT on the official Muse YouTube channel . An interactive lyric video for the song was released , as well . The song failed to chart in the UK , but it peaked at number two on the Billboard Alternative Songs chart . Furthermore , " Big Freeze " was released in April 2013 , but only for French radios and without a commercial release . 
 = = = Tour = = = 
 On 7 June 2012 , Muse announced a European Arena tour ; the first leg of The 2nd Law World Tour . The leg included dates in France , Italy , Ireland , Spain , Finland and the United Kingdom as well as other countries . They had also added North American dates to the tour . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The 2nd Law received generally positive reviews upon release . On Metacritic , which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 70 based on 30 reviews , indicating " generally favorable reviews . " BBC music critic Ian Winwood also gave the album a positive review , highlighting " Supremacy " , " Liquid State " and " The 2nd Law : Isolated System " , saying that Muse " present themselves in any guise they please " . The Telegraph 's Helen Brown rated the album four out of five stars , noting the album 's eclectic influences and reserving praise for " Madness " in particular . The Observer 's Kitty Empire also alluded to Muse 's bombastic tendencies , saying " Bellamy is not blind to the contradictions of his band 's attempts continually to ramp the ludicrousness up to 11 ; endless growth is , of course , unsustainable . But for now they remain pretty comfortable with the idea of obscene over @-@ inflation . So should we . " 
 AllMusic rated the album three out of five stars , noting " their excursions into dubstep and dance music on tracks like " Madness " and " Follow Me " feel more like remixes than original songs . Songs like these definitely have the spine of Muse tracks , but the production that 's built up around them feels almost alien . " Kyle Anderson of Entertainment Weekly gave the album a grade of C + , claiming that " the band goes overboard with Queen @-@ isms " and expressing disappointment at the lack of electronic music elements compared to the band 's expectations that the album would be a departure from previous releases . The Guardian 's Alexis Petridis rated the album four out of five stars , complimenting the band 's ambition but finding fault with the album 's bombastic tendencies which were also present on their previous albums , stating " no one goes to see a blockbuster for its profundity and deep characterisation . They go for the stunts and the special effects , both of which The 2nd Law delivers . " 
 The album was a nominee for Best Rock Album at the 2013 Grammy Awards . The song " Madness " was also nominated for Best Rock Song . 
 The album was listed at number 46 on Rolling Stone 's list of the top 50 albums of 2012 , saying " In an era of diminished expectations , Muse make stadium @-@ crushing songs that mix the legacies of Queen , King Crimson , Led Zeppelin and Radiohead while making almost every other current band seem tiny . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Matthew Bellamy , except " Save Me " and " Liquid State " by Chris Wolstenholme . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Personnel adapted from album liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The 2nd Law had a very positive commercial performance , selling around 475 @,@ 000 copies worldwide on its release . It debuted at number 2 on the Billboard 200 with 102 @,@ 000 copies sold in its first week , giving Muse the highest charting debut of their career in the US , although it sold fewer copies than the debut of their previous album The Resistance , which debuted at number three with 128 @,@ 000 copies . It has sold 485 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of May 2015 . It also debuted at number 2 in Australia , Germany , Ireland , Korea and Spain . The album gave Muse their fourth number 1 debut in the UK with first week sales of 108 @,@ 536 copies , while also debuting at number 1 in 13 other countries . It has sold 255 @,@ 000 copies in the UK in 2012 alone . 
 = = = Certifications = = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Generalissimo ( 30 Rock ) = 
 " Generalissimo " is the tenth episode of the third season of the American television comedy series 30 Rock . It was written by executive producer Robert Carlock and directed by Todd Holland . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on February 5 , 2009 . Guest stars in " Generalissimo " include Jon Hamm , Salma Hayek , Patrick Heusinger , Matt Lauer , Doug Mand , Greg Tuculescu , and Teresa Yenque . 
 In the episode , Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) begins receiving mail intended for her new neighbor , Dr. Drew Baird ( Hamm ) , and after going through it she decides she would like to meet him . Meanwhile , Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) resembles a Spanish @-@ language soap opera villain , " The Generalissimo " , which prompts the grandmother ( Yenque ) of Jack 's girlfriend , Elisa ( Hayek ) , to disapprove of their relationship . Back at 30 Rock , the new The Girlie Show with Tracy Jordan ( TGS ) interns ( Heusinger , Tuculescu , and Mand ) invite Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) out for a night of partying . 
 " Generalissimo " received generally positive reviews . According to the Nielsen ratings system , it was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million households during its original broadcast . Todd Holland received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Comedy Series for " Generalissimo " . This episode was submitted for consideration on the behalf of Baldwin for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) receives the mail of her new neighbor , Dr. Drew Baird ( Jon Hamm ) . After going through it , she believes he is the perfect man for her . To try and woo him , she follows the actions of an evil Spanish soap character called " The Generalissimo " from Los Amantes Clandestinos , despite the warnings of Jenna Maroney ( Jane Krakowski ) and Elisa ( Salma Hayek ) . She invites Drew to a nonexistent party , and , when he arrives expecting a party , she informs him that the party is scheduled for the following evening , but nevertheless invites him in . While this plan initially appears to work , things go wrong when Liz accidentally gives Drew Rohypnol and he finds some of his opened mail in her handbag . The next day Drew receives some of Liz 's mail and reads it . He says that based on her mail he probably would have wanted to meet Liz , in the same vein as she had wanted to meet him . They decide to start with a clean slate and go on a real date . 
 Jack Donaghy ( Alec Baldwin ) meets his girlfriend Elisa 's grandmother ( Teresa Yenque ) . The grandmother does not like Jack because he reminds her of the Generalissimo , the antagonist from her favorite Mexican telenovela Los Amantes Clandestinos . Jack buys Los Amantes Clandestinos and tries to kill the Generalissimo off , but the actors on the show refuse to cooperate . Jack then meets Hector <unk> ( also played by Baldwin ) , the actor who plays the Generalissimo , and asks why he will not follow the script . According to Hector , his role as the Generalissimo allows him to cut in line at Disney World , among other perks . Jack shows him a picture of Elisa , explaining that he wants to kill off the character for her . Understanding Jack 's feelings , Hector agrees to help Jack by making the character fall in love with an elderly Hispanic woman , thereby winning the affection of Elisa 's grandmother . The grandmother subsequently accepts Jack as Elisa 's boyfriend , but makes one more request of him : to make NBC News less depressing . Jack responds by airing a montage of pictures of Puerto Rican babies to the music of Tito Puente on The Today Show , much to the displeasure of Matt Lauer . 
 Meanwhile , NBC has hired recently laid off brokers ( Patrick Heusinger , Greg Tuculescu , and Doug Mand ) from Lehman Brothers as interns on TGS with Tracy Jordan . Tracy Jordan ( Tracy Morgan ) is invited to go out on the town with them , but finds that he is incapable of keeping up with their lifestyle . Tracy fears that if the public were to learn that he no longer lives a fast lifestyle , his image would be severely compromised and he would be forced to change from a comedic actor to a dramatic actor . Tracy refuses to allow this to happen , so he buys out Lehman Brothers and sends the interns back to their old jobs on Wall Street . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Generalissimo " was written by executive producer Robert Carlock and directed by Todd Holland . This was the tenth episode written by Carlock and was Holland 's first directed episode . Holland was hired to direct this episode on the recommendation of his agent , who also represents series creator , executive producer and lead actress Tina Fey . " Generalissimo " originally aired in the United States on February 5 , 2009 , on NBC . 
 In October 2008 , when actor Jon Hamm hosted the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) , negotiations took place with the show 's producers for him to guest star on 30 Rock . Two months later , it was confirmed Hamm would appear as a love interest for Fey 's character , Liz Lemon . It was also announced by NBC that Hamm would star in a three @-@ episode arc ; he made his debut in this episode , made his second appearance in " St. Valentine 's Day " , and made his final guest spot in the show 's third @-@ season episode " The Bubble " . Hamm later appeared in the season four episodes " Anna Howard Shaw Day " and " Emanuelle Goes to Dinosaur Land " and the season five episode " Live Show . " 
 In an interview with Entertainment Weekly , Fey said when the writing staff is developing a script , " We 'll have an actor in mind and we 'll keep referring to them . Like for this we said , ' Then Hamm comes in , blah blah blah . ' " She believed that there was no possibility of getting Hamm , though " we were lucky with the timing because Mad Men was on hiatus and he was hosting SNL . So I called over there and asked them [ whispering ] , ' Hey , is that guy funny ? Tell me the truth . ' And they were like , ' Yes , he 's really funny . ' By Saturday I knew they were right . " 
 This episode was actress Salma Hayek 's third appearance on 30 Rock . She first appeared in the episode " Señor Macho Solo " as a nurse for Jack Donaghy 's mother and love interest for Jack . Hayek 's second appearance came in " Flu Shot " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 According to the Nielsen ratings system , " Generalissimo " was watched by 6 @.@ 4 million households , the same as the previous week 's episode " Retreat to Move Forward " , in its original American broadcast . It earned a 3 @.@ 1 rating / 7 share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 3 @.@ 1 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 7 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode was the eleventh highest @-@ rated show on the NBC network that week . Todd Holland , director of this episode , received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Directing For a Comedy Series at the 61st Primetime Emmy Awards . This episode was submitted for consideration on the behalf of Alec Baldwin for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series at the same awards show . 
 Bob Sassone of TV Squad admitted in his review that after seeing the promos for " Generalissimo " audibly groaned , and believed the story about a fictitious soap character resembling Baldwin 's Jack would not work . He wrote that all of the " over @-@ the @-@ top surreal subplots " featured in the season would make this episode " the worst one of all . " After watching the episode , however , Sassone said all the elements worked . Annie Barrett for Entertainment Weekly reported that the two stories , involving Liz and Drew and Jack and Elisa , respectively , were sublime . Barrett said that Baldwin 's performance " alone " would have made the episode great . Jeremy Medina of Paste praised this episode , along with " St. Valentine 's Day " , concluding , " There 's no possible way to mention every funny joke or one @-@ liner in the past two episodes . The show is just too lightning @-@ quick for that . " Writing for The Monterey County Herald Marc Cabrera noted Jack 's interactions with Elisa 's grandmother amongst his favorite moments of season 3 . The Guardian 's Will Dean wrote that " Generalissimo " was the " best episode " of the series . Staci Gold of North by Northwestern wrote that this episode was majorly improved by Baldwin 's " hilarious imitation of a Spanish accent . " IGN writer Robert Canning said that Baldwin stole the show in this episode , and rated it a 9 @.@ 4 out of 10 . 
 Time contributor James Poniewozik was complimentary towards the casting of Jon Hamm as Tina Fey 's love interest , but hoped that Hamm get " fleshed out beyond the central @-@ casting dreamboat " in the series . Further in his review , Poniewozik said that he most enjoyed episodes in which Liz shows her " evil side " because the show " does an excellent job of showing how much work it is for her to be assertive and slightly evil , how she 's excited yet made nervous by the idea at the same time . " As with Poniewozik , Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club complimented 30 Rock as they " pulled it off with aplomb " in regards to Liz 's actions in this episode . He said that Liz and Drew " are so damned delightful that it 's hard not to root for them even if Liz 's antics increasingly border on deranged and criminal . " Rabin said that the Rohypnol incident was funny " but also sweet and more than a little romantic . " Sassone enjoyed Liz and Drew 's scenes , writing that when Fey and Hamm work together they are quite good . Gold said that Liz 's unsuccessful attempts of seduction were " hilarious effects " . Canning wrote that Liz 's " scam " started weakly but that her storyline " grew at a great pace . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Television columnist Alan Sepinwall of The Star @-@ Ledger said that past 30 Rock episodes took " old sitcom cliches " and were able to find a " demented " new take on them . In his review , Sepinwall wrote that " Generalissimo " felt like the staff " came up with the cliches they wanted to mock – goofy / evil twins , a character spinning a ridiculous web of lies to land a new crush – and never moved to the next step . " 
 = Queen 's Hall = 
 For the hall in Edinburgh see Queen 's Hall , Edinburgh . 
 The Queen 's Hall was a concert hall in Langham Place , London , opened in 1893 . Designed by the architect Thomas Knightley , it had room for an audience of about 2 @,@ 500 people . It became London 's principal concert venue . From 1895 until 1941 , it was the home of the promenade concerts ( " The Proms " ) founded by Robert Newman together with Henry Wood . The hall had drab decor and cramped seating but superb acoustics . It became known as the " musical centre of the [ British ] Empire " , and the leading musicians of the late 19th and early 20th century performed there , including Claude Debussy , Edward Elgar , Maurice Ravel and Richard Strauss . 
 In the 1930s , the hall became the main London base of two new orchestras , the BBC Symphony Orchestra and the London Philharmonic Orchestra . These two ensembles raised the standards of orchestral playing in London to new heights , and the hall 's resident orchestra , founded in 1893 , was eclipsed and it disbanded in 1930 . The new orchestras attracted another generation of musicians from Europe and the United States , including Serge Koussevitzky , Willem Mengelberg , Arturo Toscanini , Bruno Walter and Felix Weingartner . 
 In 1941 , during the Second World War , the building was destroyed by an incendiary bomb in the London Blitz . Despite much lobbying for the hall to be rebuilt , the government decided against doing so . The main musical functions of the Queen 's Hall were taken over by the Royal Albert Hall for the Proms , and the new Royal Festival Hall for the general concert season . 
 = = Background = = 
 The site on which the hall was built was bounded by the present @-@ day Langham Place , Riding House Street and Great Portland Street . In 1820 the land was bought by the Crown during the development of John Nash 's Regent Street . Between then and the building of the hall , the site was first sublet to a <unk> and <unk> , and in 1851 a bazaar occupied the site . In 1887 , the leaseholder , Francis Ravenscroft , negotiated a building agreement with the Crown , providing for the clearing of the site and the erection of a new concert hall . The name of the new building was intended to be either " The Victoria Concert Hall " or " The Queen 's Concert Hall " . The name finally chosen , " The Queen 's Hall " , was decided very shortly before the hall opened . The historian Robert Elkin speculates that the alternative " Victoria Concert Hall " was abandoned as liable to confusion with the " Royal Victoria Music Hall " , the formal name of the Old Vic . 
 The new hall was to provide a much @-@ needed music venue in the centre of London . St James 's Hall , just south of Oxford Circus , was too small , had serious safety problems , and was so poorly ventilated as to be unpleasant . Bernard Shaw in his capacity as a music critic commented on " the old unvaried round of Steinway Hall , Prince 's Hall and St James 's Hall " , and warmly welcomed the new building . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Ravenscroft commissioned the architect Thomas Edward Knightley to design the new hall . Using a floor plan previously prepared by C. J. Phipps , Knightley designed a hall with a floor area of 21 @,@ 000 square feet ( 2 @,@ 000 m ² ) and an audience capacity of 2 @,@ 500 . Contemporary newspapers commented on the unusual elevation of the building , with the grand tier at street level , and the stalls and arena downstairs . The exterior carving was by Sidney W. Elmes and Son , and the furnishing was by Lapworth Brothers and Harrison . The lighting was a combination of gas and electricity . 
 The original decor consisted of grey and terracotta walls , Venetian red seating , large red lampshades suspended just above the orchestra 's heads , mirrors surrounding the arena , and portraits of the leading composers to the sides of the platform . The paintwork was intended to be the colour of " the belly of a London mouse " , and Knightley is said to have kept a string of dead mice in the paint shop in order to ensure the correct tone . The arena had moveable seating on a " brownish carpet that blended with the dull <unk> colour of the walls " . The arched ceiling had an elaborate painting of the Paris Opéra , by <unk> , described by E. M. Forster , as " the attenuated Cupids who encircle the ceiling of the Queen 's Hall , inclining each to each with vapid gesture , and clad in sallow pantaloons " . 
 In the centre of the arena there was a fountain containing pebbles , goldfish and <unk> . According to the conductor Sir Thomas Beecham , " Every three or four minutes some fascinating young female fell into the fountain and had to be rescued by a chivalrous swain . It must have happened thirty @-@ five times every night . Foreigners came from all parts of Europe to see it " . At the top of the building , adjoining the conservatory , was the Queen 's Small Hall , seating 500 , for recitals , chamber @-@ music concerts and other small @-@ scale presentations . In July 1894 , Bernard Shaw described it as " cigar @-@ shaped with windows in the ceiling , and reminiscent of a ship 's saloon … now much the most comfortable of our small concert rooms " . The hall provided modern facilities , open frontage for carriages and parking room , a press room , public spaces and bars . 
 At the time , and subsequently , the hall was celebrated for its superb acoustics , unmatched by any other large hall in London . Soon after its opening , Shaw praised it as " a happy success acoustically " . Knightley followed the example of earlier buildings noted for fine acoustics ; the walls of the auditorium were lined with wood , fixed clear of the walls on thick battens , and coarse canvas was stretched over the wood and then sealed and decorated . He calculated that the unbroken surface and the wooden lining would be " like the body of the violin – resonant " . The Observer commented that the building resembled a violin in construction and shape , and also that " the ground plan of the orchestra was founded on the bell of a horn " . 
 Shortly before the opening , Ravenscroft appointed Robert Newman as manager . Newman had already had three different careers , as a <unk> , a bass soloist , and a concert agent . The rest of his career was associated with the Queen 's Hall , and the names of the hall and the manager became synonymous . 
 = = Early years = = 
 The Queen 's Hall first opened its doors on 25 November 1893 . Newman gave a children 's party in the afternoon , and in the evening 2 @,@ 000 invited guests attended what Elkin describes as " a sort of private view " , with popular selections played by the Band of the Coldstream Guards , and songs , piano and organ solos performed by well @-@ known musicians . After the performances , the seats in the arena were removed , lavish refreshments were served , and the guests danced . 
 On 27 November there was a smoking concert given by the Royal Amateur Orchestral Society , of which Prince Alfred ( the second son of Queen Victoria ) was both patron and leader . The performance was attended by the Prince of Wales and the Duke of Connaught . Knightley had built a royal box in the grand circle , but Prince Alfred told Newman , " my brother would never sit in that " , and Newman had it demolished . The royal party was seated in armchairs in the front of the stalls ( pictured right ) . The programme consisted of orchestral works by Sullivan , Gounod , Auber , Mendelssohn and Tchaikovsky , and solos from the violinist <unk> <unk> and the baritone David Ffrangcon @-@ Davies . 
 The official opening of the hall took place on 2 December . Frederic Hymen Cowen conducted ; the National Anthem was sung by Emma Albani and a choir of 300 voices assembled at short notice by Newman ; Mendelssohn 's Hymn of Praise followed , with Albani , Margaret Hoare and Edward Lloyd as soloists . In the second part of the programme there was a performance of Beethoven 's Emperor Concerto , with Frederick Dawson as soloist . 
 From the autumn of 1894 , the hall was adopted as the venue for the annual winter season of concerts of the Philharmonic Society of London , which had formerly been held at St James 's Hall . At the first Philharmonic concert at the Queen 's Hall , Alexander Mackenzie conducted the first performance in England of Tchaikovsky 's Pathétique Symphony , which was so well received that it was repeated , by popular acclaim , at the next concert . During the 1894 – 95 season , Edvard Grieg and Camille Saint @-@ Saëns conducted performances of their works . The Society remained at the Queen 's Hall until 1941 . 
 = = = Promenade concerts = = = 
 To fill the hall during the heat of the late @-@ summer period , when London audiences tended to stay away from theatres and concert halls , Newman planned to run a ten @-@ week season of promenade concerts , with low @-@ priced tickets to attract a wider audience than that of the main season . Costs needed to be kept down , and Newman decided not to engage a star conductor , but invited the young and little known Henry Wood to conduct the whole season . There had been various seasons of promenade concerts in London since 1838 , under conductors from Louis Antoine Jullien to Arthur Sullivan . Sullivan 's concerts in the 1870s had been particularly successful because he offered his audiences something more than the usual light music . He introduced major classical works , such as Beethoven symphonies , normally restricted to the more expensive concerts presented by the Philharmonic Society and others . Newman aimed to do the same : " I am going to run nightly concerts and train the public by easy stages . Popular at first , gradually raising the standard until I have created a public for classical and modern music " . 
 Newman 's determination to make the promenade concerts attractive to everyone led him to permit smoking during concerts , which was not formally prohibited at the Proms until 1971 . <unk> were available in all parts of the hall throughout the concerts , not only during intervals . Prices were about one fifth of those customarily charged for classical concerts : the promenade ( the standing area ) was one shilling , the balcony two shillings , and the grand circle ( reserved seats ) three and five shillings . 
 Newman needed to find financial backing for his first season . Dr George Cathcart , a wealthy ear , nose and throat specialist , offered to sponsor it on two conditions : that Wood should conduct every concert , and that the pitch of the orchestral instruments should be lowered to the European standard diapason normal . Concert pitch in England was nearly a semitone higher than that used on the continent , and Cathcart regarded it as damaging for singers ' voices . Wood , who was a singing teacher as well as a conductor , agreed . The brass and woodwind players of the Queen 's Hall Orchestra were unwilling to buy new low @-@ pitched instruments ; Cathcart imported a set from Belgium and lent them to the players . After a season , the players recognised that the low pitch would be permanently adopted , and they bought the instruments from him . 
 On 10 August 1895 , the first of the Queen 's Hall Promenade Concerts took place . It opened with Wagner 's overture to Rienzi , but the rest of the programme comprised , in the words of an historian of the Proms , David Cox , " for the most part ... blatant trivialities " . Newman and Wood gradually tilted the balance from light music to mainstream classical works ; within days of the opening concert , Schubert 's Unfinished Symphony and further excerpts from Wagner operas were performed . Among the other symphonies presented during the first season were Schubert 's Great C Major , Mendelssohn 's Italian and Schumann 's Fourth . The concertos included Mendelssohn 's Violin Concerto and Schumann 's Piano Concerto . During the season there were 23 novelties , including the London premieres of pieces by Richard Strauss , Tchaikovsky , Glazunov , Massenet and Rimsky @-@ Korsakov . Newman and Wood soon felt able to devote every Monday night of the season principally to Wagner and every Friday night to Beethoven , a pattern that endured for decades . 
 = = = Other presentations = = = 
 Many events at the Queen 's Hall were not presented by Newman . The hall was frequently let to organisations such as the Bach Choir and the Philharmonic Society ( from 1903 the Royal Philharmonic Society ) , and later the London Choral Society and Royal Choral Society . The hall was used for a wide range of other activities , including balls , military band concerts under Sousa , lectures , public meetings , Morris dancing , Eurythmics and religious services . On 14 January 1896 , the UK 's first public film show was presented at the Queen 's Hall to members and wives of the Royal Photographic Society by the maker of the <unk> and Fellow of the society , Birt Acres , and his colleague , Arthur Melbourne @-@ Cooper . This was an improved version of the early Kinetoscope . 
 Newman continued to be interested in new entertainments . The music hall entertainer Albert Chevalier persuaded him to instigate variety performances in the Queen 's Small Hall from 16 January 1899 . These shows were well received ; The Times commented that Chevalier 's " vogue with the cultured classes is as great and as permanent as with his former patrons " . 
 Despite all these various activities , in the public mind the Queen 's Hall quickly became chiefly associated with the promenade concerts . Newman was careful to balance " the Proms " , as they became known , with more prestigious and expensive concerts throughout the rest of the year . He would foster the careers of promising artists , and if they were successful at the Proms they would , after two seasons , be given contracts for the main concert series , billed as the Symphony Concerts . The Proms had to be run on the tightest of budgets , but for the Symphony Concert series Newman was willing to pay large fees to attract the most famous musicians . Soloists included Joseph Joachim , Fritz Kreisler , Nellie Melba , Pablo de Sarasate , Eugène Ysaÿe and , most expensive of all , Ignacy Jan Paderewski . Conductors included Arthur Nikisch and Hans Richter . Among the composers who performed their own works at the hall in its first 20 years were Debussy , Elgar , Grieg , Ravel , Saint @-@ Saëns , Schoenberg , Richard Strauss and Sullivan . 
 = = Early 20th century = = 
 In 1901 Newman became the lessee of the hall as well as its manager , but the following year , after unwise investment in theatrical presentations , he was declared bankrupt . The music publisher Chappell and Co took over the lease of the building , retaining Newman as manager . The Queen 's Hall orchestra and concerts were rescued by the musical benefactor Sir Edgar Speyer , a banker of German origin . Speyer put up the necessary funds , encouraged Newman and Wood to continue with their project of musical education , and underwrote the Proms and the main Symphony Concert seasons . Newman remained manager of the hall until 1906 and manager of the concerts until he died in 1926 . 
 The standard of orchestral playing in London was adversely affected by the deputy system , in which orchestral players , if offered a better @-@ paid engagement , could send a substitute to a rehearsal or a concert . The treasurer of the Royal Philharmonic Society described it thus : " A , whom you want , signs to play at your concert . He sends B ( whom you don 't mind ) to the first rehearsal . B , without your knowledge or consent , sends C to the second rehearsal . Not being able to play at the concert , C sends D , whom you would have paid five shillings to stay away " . The members of the Queen 's Hall Orchestra were not highly paid ; Wood recalled in his memoirs , " the rank and file of the orchestra received only 45s a week for six Promenade concerts and three rehearsals , a guinea for one Symphony concert and rehearsal , and half @-@ a @-@ guinea for Sunday afternoon or evening concerts without rehearsal " . Offered ad hoc engagements at better pay by other managements , many of the players took full advantage of the deputy system . Newman determined to put an end to it . After a rehearsal in which Wood was faced with a sea of entirely unfamiliar faces in his own orchestra , Newman came on the platform to announce : " Gentlemen , in future there will be no deputies ; good morning " . Forty players resigned en bloc and formed their own orchestra , the London Symphony Orchestra . Newman did not attempt to bar the new orchestra from the Queen 's Hall , and its first concert was given there on 9 June 1904 , conducted by Richter . 
 By the 20th century , the Queen 's Hall was regarded not only as " London 's premier concert @-@ hall " but as " the acknowledged musical centre of the Empire " . The drabness of its interior decor and the lack of leg @-@ room in the seating attracted criticism . In 1913 , The Musical Times said , " In the placing of the seats apparently no account whatever is taken even of the average length of lower limbs , and it appeared to be the understanding … that legs were to be left in the cloak room . At twopence apiece this would be expensive , and there might be difficulties afterwards if the cloak room sorting arrangements were not perfect " . Chappells promised to rearrange the seats to give more room and did so within the year ; the seating capacity of the hall was reduced to 2 @,@ 400 . War intervened before the question of refurbishing the decor could be addressed . 
 = = = First World War and post @-@ war = = = 
 On the outbreak of the First World War in 1914 , Newman , Wood and Speyer were obliged to consider the immediate future of concert @-@ giving at the Queen 's Hall . They discussed whether the Proms should continue as planned , and agreed to go ahead . However , within months anti @-@ German feeling forced Speyer to leave the country and seek refuge in the U.S. , and there was a campaign to ban all German music from concerts . Newman put out a statement declaring that German music would be played as planned : " The greatest examples of Music and Art are world possessions and unassailable even by the prejudices and passions of the hour " . 
 When Speyer left Britain in 1915 , Chappell 's took on financial responsibility for the Queen 's Hall concerts . The resident orchestra was renamed the New Queen 's Hall Orchestra . Concerts continued throughout the war years , with fewer major new works than before , although there were nevertheless British premieres of pieces by Bartók , Stravinsky and Debussy . An historian of the Proms , <unk> Orga , wrote : " Concerts often had to be re @-@ timed to coincide with the ' All Clear ' between air raids . Falling bombs , shrapnel , anti @-@ aircraft fire and the droning of Zeppelins were ever threatening . But [ Wood ] kept things on the go and in the end had a very real part to play in boosting morale " . The hall was hit by German air raids , but escaped with only minor damage . A member of Wood 's choir later recalled a hit in the middle of a concert : 
 [ T ] here was a crash , and then a cracking sound , and a shower of plaster began to fall from the roof of the Promenade , which was packed . There was a bit of a rush from the centre of the hall for a moment . One or two of the orchestra disappeared from their seats . Even Sir Henry Wood himself glanced rather anxiously up at the roof , though still wielding his baton . ... After the concert no one was allowed to leave the Hall . ... One of the orchestra nobly returned to the platform and struck up a waltz . We were soon dancing over the floor and really enjoying the experience . We were not released till about 1 a.m " . 
 After the war , the Queen 's Hall operated for a few years much as it had done before 1914 , except for what Wood called " a somewhat disagreeable blue @-@ green " new decor . New performers appeared , including Solomon , Lauritz Melchior and Paul Hindemith . During the 1920s , however , the hall became the battleground between proponents and opponents of broadcasting . William Boosey , the head of Chappells , and effective proprietor of the Queen 's Hall , was adamantly against the broadcasting of music by the recently established British Broadcasting Company ( BBC ) . He decreed that no artist who had worked for the BBC would be allowed to perform at the Queen 's Hall . This put performers in a dilemma ; they wished to appear on the air without forfeiting the right to appear at Britain 's most important musical venue . The hall became temporarily unable to attract many of the finest performers of the day . 
 In the middle of the impasse Newman 's health failed , and he died in November 1926 after a brief illness . Wood wrote , " I feared everything would come to a standstill , for I had never so much as engaged an extra player without having discussed it with him first " . Newman 's assistant , W.W. Thompson , took over as manager of the orchestra and the concerts , but at this crucial point Chappells withdrew financial support for the Proms . After lengthy negotiations , the BBC took over from Chappells in 1927 as sponsor . The Proms were saved , and the hall continued to play host to celebrity concerts throughout the rest of the 1920s and the 30s , some promoted by the BBC , and others as hitherto by a range of choral societies , impresarios and orchestras . As Chappells owned the title " New Queen 's Hall Orchestra " , the resident orchestra had to change its name once again and was now known as Sir Henry J. Wood 's Symphony Orchestra . 
 = = Last years = = 
 In 1927 , the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra , under its conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler , gave two concerts at the Queen 's Hall . These , and later concerts by the same orchestra in 1928 and 1929 , made obvious the comparatively poor standards of London orchestras . Both the BBC and Sir Thomas Beecham had ambitions to bring London 's orchestral standards up to those of Berlin . After an early attempt at co @-@ operation between the BBC and Beecham , they went their separate ways ; the BBC established the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Adrian Boult , and Beecham , together with Malcolm Sargent , founded the London Philharmonic Orchestra . 
 Both orchestras made their debuts with concerts at the Queen 's Hall . The BBC orchestra gave its first concert on 22 October 1930 , conducted by Boult in a programme of music by Wagner , Brahms , Saint @-@ Saëns and Ravel . The reviews of the new orchestra were enthusiastic . The Times commented on its " virtuosity " and of Boult 's " superb " conducting . The Musical Times commented , " The boast of the B.B.C. that it intended to get together a first @-@ class orchestra was not an idle one " , and spoke of " exhilaration " at the playing . The London Philharmonic made its debut on 7 October 1932 , conducted by Beecham . After the first item , Berlioz 's Roman Carnival Overture , the audience went wild , some of them standing on their seats to clap and shout . During the next eight years , the orchestra appeared nearly a hundred times at the Queen 's Hall . There was no role for the old resident orchestra , many of whose members had been engaged by the BBC , and in 1930 it disbanded . 
 With orchestral standards now of unprecedented excellence , eminent musicians from Europe and the U.S. were eager to perform at the Queen 's Hall . Among the guest conductors at the hall in the 1930s were Serge Koussevitzky , Willem Mengelberg , Arturo Toscanini , Bruno Walter and Felix Weingartner . Composer @-@ conductors included Richard Strauss and Anton Webern . Some recordings made in the hall during this period have been reissued on CD . 
 = = = Second World War = = = 
 On the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , the BBC immediately put into effect its contingency plans to move much of its broadcasting away from London to places thought less at risk of bombing . Its musical department , including the BBC Symphony Orchestra , moved to Bristol . The BBC withdrew not only the players , but financial support from the Proms . Wood determined that the 1940 season would nevertheless go ahead . The Royal Philharmonic Society and a private entrepreneur , Keith Douglas , agreed to back an eight @-@ week season , and the London Symphony Orchestra was engaged . The concerts continued through air raids , and audiences often stayed in the hall until early morning , with musical entertainments continuing after the concerts had finished . The season was curtailed after four weeks , when intense bombing forced the Queen 's Hall to close . The last Prom given at the Queen 's Hall was on 7 September 1940 . On 8 December doors and windows of the hall were blown out by blast . After temporary repairs , concerts were continued ; after further damage on 6 April 1941 repairs were again quickly made , and the hall re @-@ opened within days . 
 On the afternoon of 10 May 1941 , there was an Elgar concert at the hall . Sargent conducted the Enigma Variations and The Dream of Gerontius . The soloists were Muriel <unk> , Webster Booth and Ronald <unk> , with the London Philharmonic and the Royal Choral Society . This concert , the last given at the hall , comprised in the view of The Times " performances of real distinction " . That night there was an intensive air raid in which the chamber of the House of Commons and many other buildings were destroyed , and the British Museum and Westminster Abbey were seriously damaged . A single incendiary bomb hit the Queen 's Hall , and the auditorium was completely gutted by fire beyond any hope of replacement . The building was a smouldering ruin in heaps of rubble ; the London Philharmonic lost thousands of pounds ' worth of instruments . All that remained intact on the site was a bronze bust of Wood retrieved from the debris . Concerts continued in London at the Royal Albert Hall and other venues . The Proms were relocated at the Albert Hall , which remains their principal venue . In 1951 , the Royal Festival Hall was opened and succeeded the Queen 's Hall as the main London venue for symphony concerts other than the Proms . 
 In 1954 the government set up a committee , chaired by Lord Robbins with Sir Adrian Boult among its members , to examine the practicability of rebuilding the hall . The committee reported that " on musical grounds and in the interest of the general cultural life of the community " it was desirable to replace the hall , but it was doubtful whether there was a potential demand that would enable it to run without " seriously subtracting from the audiences of subsidised halls already in existence " . From 1982 , London had a second hall large enough for symphony concerts , in the Barbican Centre . 
 The former site of the Queen 's Hall was redeveloped by the freeholder , the Crown Estate . It is now occupied by the Saint Georges Hotel . In 2004 , Richard Morrison wrote of the Queen 's Hall : 
 Everybody who heard concerts in that hall speaks , or spoke , warmly of its acoustics and atmosphere … by all accounts it was perfect . It should have been rebuilt after the war : there were plans , committees , even the start of a fundraising campaign . But it wasn 't , and since then London has not had a symphonic concert hall that comes remotely close to perfection . 
 The site is now marked by a commemorative plaque , which was unveiled in November 2000 , by Sir Andrew Davis , chief conductor of the BBC Symphony Orchestra . 
 = Octopussy = 
 Octopussy ( 1983 ) is the thirteenth entry in the Eon Productions James Bond film series , and the sixth to star Roger Moore as the fictional MI6 agent James Bond . 
 The film 's title is taken from a short story in Ian Fleming 's 1966 short story collection Octopussy and The Living Daylights , although the film 's plot is original . It does , however , include a scene inspired by the Fleming short story " The Property of a Lady " ( included in 1967 and later editions of Octopussy and The Living Daylights ) , while the events of the short story " Octopussy " form a part of the title character 's background and are recounted by her . 
 Bond is assigned the task of following a general who is stealing jewels and relics from the Soviet government . This leads him to a wealthy Afghan prince , Kamal Khan , and his associate , Octopussy . Bond uncovers a plot to force disarmament in Europe with the use of a nuclear weapon . 
 Octopussy was produced by Albert R. Broccoli and Michael G. Wilson , and was released in the same year as the non @-@ Eon Bond film Never Say Never Again . The film was written by George MacDonald Fraser , Richard Maibaum , and Michael G. Wilson , and was directed by John Glen . 
 = = Plot = = 
 British agent 009 is found dead at the British embassy in East Berlin , dressed as a circus clown and carrying a fake Fabergé egg . MI6 immediately suspects Soviet involvement and , after seeing the real egg appear at an auction in London , sends James Bond to investigate and find out the identity of the seller . At the auction , Bond is able to swap the real egg with the fake and engages in a bidding war with exiled Afghan prince Kamal Khan , forcing Khan to pay £ 500 @,@ 000 for the fake egg . Bond follows Khan back to his palace in Rajasthan , India , where Bond defeats Khan in a game of backgammon . Bond escapes with his Indian colleague Vijay , evading Khan 's bodyguard Gobinda 's attempts to kill them both . Bond is seduced by one of Khan 's associates , Magda , and notices that she has a blue @-@ ringed octopus tattoo . Bond permits Magda to steal the real Fabergé egg fitted with a listening device by Q , while Gobinda captures Bond and takes him to Khan 's palace . After Bond escapes from his cell he listens in on the bug in the Fabergé egg and discovers that Khan is working with Orlov , a Soviet general , who is seeking to expand Soviet control into West @-@ Central Europe . 
 After escaping from Khan 's palace , Bond infiltrates a floating palace in Udaipur , India , and there finds its owner , Octopussy , a wealthy business woman and smuggler and an associate of Khan . She also leads the Octopus cult , of which Magda is a member . In Octopussy 's palace , Bond finds out that Orlov has been supplying Khan with priceless Soviet treasures , replacing them with replicas while Khan has been smuggling the real versions into the West via Octopussy 's circus troupe . Orlov is planning to meet Khan at Karl @-@ Marx @-@ Stadt ( Chemnitz ) in East Germany , where the circus is scheduled to perform . After evading Khan 's assassins , who killed Vijay , Bond goes to East Germany . 
 Bond infiltrates the circus and finds that Orlov replaced the Soviet treasures with a nuclear warhead , primed to explode during the circus show at a US Air Force base in West Germany . The explosion would trigger Europe into seeking disarmament in the belief that the bomb was a US one that detonated by accident , leaving its borders open to a Soviet invasion . Bond takes Orlov 's car , drives it along the train tracks and boards the moving circus train . Orlov is shot dead by GDR guards while trying to follow the train across the border into West Germany , who assume that he is attempting to defect to the West . Bond kills the twin knife @-@ throwers Mischka and <unk> in revenge for 009 's death , and , after falling from the train , commandeers a car to get to the Air Force base . At the base , Bond disguises himself as a clown to evade the West German police . He attempts to convince Octopussy that Khan has betrayed her by showing her one of the treasures found in Orlov 's car , which she was to smuggle for him . Octopussy realises that she has been tricked and assists Bond in deactivating the warhead . 
 Bond and Octopussy return to India and launch an assault on Khan 's palace . Khan and Gobinda flee the palace , capturing Octopussy in the process . Bond follows them as they attempt to escape in an aeroplane , clinging to the fuselage and disabling one of its engines . Gobinda falls off the roof of the plane to his death and Bond rescues Octopussy from Khan , the pair jumping onto a nearby cliff moments before the plane crashes into a mountain , killing Khan . While M and General Gogol discuss the return of the jewellery , Bond recuperates with Octopussy aboard her private boat in India . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roger Moore as James Bond , MI6 agent 007 . 
 Maud Adams as Octopussy : A jewel smuggler and wealthy businesswoman . 
 Louis Jourdan as Kamal Khan : An exiled Afghan prince . 
 Kristina <unk> as Magda : trusted subordinate and henchman to Octopussy and Khan 
 Kabir Bedi as Gobinda : Khan 's bodyguard . 
 Steven Berkoff as General Orlov : A Soviet general who works with Khan to bomb a US airbase . 
 David Meyer and Anthony Meyer as Mischka and <unk> : Orlov 's knife @-@ throwing henchmen who are performers in Octopussy 's circus 
 Desmond Llewelyn as Q : MI6 's gadget designer . Llewelyn was disappointed because he was unable to travel to India since his scenes were filmed at Pinewood Studios . 
 Robert Brown as M : Head of the British Secret Service . 
 Lois Maxwell as Miss Moneypenny : M 's secretary . 
 Michaela Clavell as Penelope <unk> : Moneypenny 's assistant . 
 Walter Gotell as General Gogol : KGB leader working to stop Orlov . 
 Vijay Amritraj as Vijay : Bond 's MI6 ally in India . 
 = = Production = = 
 The title ' Octopussy ' comes from the Ian Fleming collection of short stories Octopussy and The Living Daylights . Hardly any of the plot of the short story " Octopussy " is used , however , with its events simply related by Bond as the family backstory for one of the main characters . The scene at Sotheby 's is , though , drawn from the short story " The Property of a Lady " ( included in 1967 and later editions of the collection ) , while Kamal Khan 's reaction following the backgammon game is taken from Fleming 's novel Moonraker . Due to a non @-@ Eon Bond film , Never Say Never Again being released in 1983 , Octopussy saw Roger Moore returning for the role , though he had shown interest in departing from James Bond after For Your Eyes Only . 
 George MacDonald Fraser was hired to work on an early draft of the script and he proposed that the story be set in India . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Following For Your Eyes Only , Roger Moore had expressed a desire to retire from the role of James Bond . His original contract had been for three films , which was fulfilled with The Spy Who Loved Me . Subsequent films were negotiated on a film @-@ by @-@ film basis . Given his reluctance to return for Octopussy , the producers engaged in a semi @-@ public quest for the next Bond , with both Timothy Dalton and James Brolin being suggested . However , when the rival Never Say Never Again was announced , the producers re @-@ contracted Moore in the belief that an established actor in the role would fare better against Sean Connery . Brolin 's three <unk> were publicly released for the first time as a special feature named James Brolin : The Man Who Would Be Bond in the Octopussy Ultimate Edition DVD . 
 The producers were initially reluctant to feature Maud Adams again because her previous character was killed in The Man with the Golden Gun . Sybil Danning was announced in <unk> magazine in 1982 as being Octopussy , but was never actually cast . Faye Dunaway was deemed too expensive . Barbara Carrera said she turned down the role to take a part in the competing Bond film Never Say Never Again . In the book A Star is Found : Our Adventures Casting Some of Hollywood 's Biggest Movies , casting director Jane Jenkins revealed that the Bond producers told her that they wanted a South Asian actress to play Octopussy , so she looked at the only two Indians in a then predominantly white Hollywood , Persis Khambatta and Susie Coelho . Afterwards , she auditioned white actresses , like Barbara Parkins , who she felt could pass for Indian . Finally , Cubby Broccoli announced to her that they would cast Swedish @-@ born Maud Adams , darken her hair , and change a few lines about how she was raised by an Indian family . A different plotline , with Adams ' British father exposed as a traitor , was used instead . As for Adams , she asked to play Octopussy as a European woman and was granted this , but on the title character 's name , she felt the producers " went too far " . 
 Octopussy is also the first film to feature Robert Brown as M , following the death of Bernard Lee in 1981 . Desmond Llewelyn would get an expanded role as Q in this film . One of Bond 's MI6 allies in India was played by Vijay Amritraj , a popular professional tennis player . His character not only shares the same first name with him , but he is also a tennis instructor . He uses a tennis racket as a weapon during the auto rickshaw chase , which is accompanied by the sound of a tennis ball being hit and scenes of onlookers turning their heads left and right as if they are watching a tennis match . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The filming of Octopussy began on 10 August 1982 with the scene in which Bond arrives at Checkpoint Charlie . Principal photography was done by Arthur Wooster and his second unit , who later filmed the knife @-@ throwing scenes . Much of the film was shot in Udaipur , India . The Monsoon Palace served as the exterior of Kamal Khan 's palace , while scenes set at Octopussy 's palace were filmed at the Lake Palace and Jag Mandir , and Bond 's hotel was the Shiv Niwas Palace . In England RAF Northolt , RAF Upper Heyford and RAF Oakley were the main locations . The Karl @-@ Marx @-@ Stadt railways scenes were shot at the Nene Valley Railway , near Peterborough , while studio work was performed at Pinewood Studios and the 007 Stage . Most of the crew as well as Roger Moore had diet problems while shooting in India . 
 The pre @-@ title sequence has a scene where Bond flies a nimble homebuilt Bede BD @-@ 5J aircraft through an open hangar . Hollywood stunt pilot and aerial co @-@ ordinator J.W. " <unk> " <unk> , who piloted the aircraft at more than 150 miles per hour , has said , " Today , few directors would consider such a stunt . They 'd just whip it up in a computer lab . " Having collapsible wings , the plane was shown hidden in a horse trailer ; however , a dummy was used for this shot . Filming inside the hangar was achieved by attaching the aircraft to an old Jaguar car with a steel pole , driving with the roof removed . The second unit were able to add enough obstacles including people and objects inside the hangar to hide the car and the pole and make it look as though Moore was flying inside the base . For the explosion after the mini jet escapes , however , a miniature of the hangar was constructed and filmed up close . The exploding pieces of the hangar were in reality only four inches in length . A Mercedes @-@ Benz saloon car was stolen by Bond and used to chase the train – having had his tyres shot out , Bond drove on the rails and entered the train . During filming , the car had intact tyres in one scene so as to avoid any mishap . 
 Stunt co @-@ ordinator Martin Grace suffered an injury while shooting the scene where Bond climbs down the train to catch Octopussy 's attention . During the second day of filming , Grace – who was Roger Moore 's stunt double for the scene – carried on doing the scene longer than he should have , due to a miscommunication with the second unit director , and the train entered a section of the track which the team had not properly surveyed . Shortly afterwards , a concrete pole fractured Grace 's left leg . 
 The bicyclist seen passing in the middle of a sword fight during the tuk tuk chase sequence was in fact a bystander who passed through the shot , oblivious to the filming ; his intrusion was captured by two cameras and left in the final film . Cameraman Alan Hume 's last scene was that of Octopussy 's followers rowing . That day , little time was left and it was decided to film the sunset at the eleventh hour . 
 The Fabergé egg in the film is real ; it was made in 1897 and is called the Coronation Egg , although the egg in the film is named in the auction catalogue as " Property of a Lady " , which is the name of one of Ian Fleming 's short stories released in more recent editions of the collection Octopussy and The Living Daylights . 
 In a bit of diegesis that " breaks the fourth wall " , Vijay signals his affiliation to MI6 by playing the James Bond Theme on a recorder while Bond is disembarking from a boat in the harbour near the City Palace . Like his fictional counterpart , the real Vijay had a distinct fear of snakes and found it difficult to hold the basket during filming . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The score was composed by John Barry , with the lyrics by Tim Rice . The opening theme , " All Time High " , is sung by Rita Coolidge and is one of seven musical themes in the James Bond series whose song titles do not refer to the film 's title . " All Time High " spent four weeks at number one on the US Billboard Adult Contemporary singles chart and reached number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100 . 
 The soundtrack album was released in 1985 by A & M Records ; the compact disc version of this release was recalled due to a colour printing error which omitted the credits from the album cover , making it a rare collector 's item . In 1997 , the soundtrack was re @-@ issued by Rykodisc , with the original soundtrack music and some film dialogue , on an Enhanced CD version . The 2003 release , by EMI , restored the original soundtrack music without dialogue . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Octopussy 's premiere took place at the Odeon Leicester Square on 6 June 1983 in the company of Prince Charles and Diana , Princess of Wales . Within five months of its premiere , it was released in 16 countries worldwide . The film earned slightly less than For Your Eyes Only , but still grossed $ 187 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 , with $ 67 @.@ 8 million in the United States alone . It also performed slightly better than Never Say Never Again , the non @-@ Eon Bond remake of Thunderball which came out a few months later . 
 The film has received mixed reviews . Some reviewers disliked Bond 's clown costume , gorilla outfit and Tarzan yell during a jungle chase . James Berardinelli claimed that the movie was long and confusing , and strongly criticised Steven Berkoff 's performance , describing it as " offensively bad " and the worst performance of any Bond villain . By contrast , Louis Jourdan 's " suave " performance , the elegance of the film locations in India , and the stunts on aircraft and the train were appreciated . Jeffrey Westhoff at Rotten Tomatoes praised Roger Moore as being " sterling " . Neal Gabler and Jeffrey Lyons at the TV @-@ show Sneak Previews praised the film and said " Octopussy delivers " and " The nice thing about Octopussy is that it 's going back @-@ to @-@ basics , less gadgets , more hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . It 's more of an adventure movie in a more traditional sense and I like it for that " . Danny Peary wrote that Octopussy " has slow spots , little humour , and villains who aren ’ t nearly of the calibre of Dr. No , Goldfinger , or Blofeld . Also , the filmmakers make the mistake of demeaning Bond by having him swing through the trees and emitting a Tarzan cry and having him hide in a gorilla suit and later disguise himself as a clown ( whom all the kids at the circus laugh at ) . It ’ s as if they ’ re trying to remind us that everything is tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek , but that makes little sense , for the film is much more serious than typical Bond outings – in fact , it recalls the tone of From Russia with Love . " Entertainment Weekly chose Octopussy as the third worst Bond film , while Norman Wilner of MSN chose it as the eighth worst , and IGN chose it as the seventh worst . The review aggregator site Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a 42 % rating . 
 Octopussy was nominated for an Academy of Science Fiction , Fantasy & Horror Films Award , with Maud Adams nominated for the Saturn Award in the Best Fantasy Supporting Actress category . Entertainment Weekly ranked her as the best Bond girl of the Roger Moore James Bond films . The film won the Golden Screen Award in Germany and the Golden Reel Award for Best Sound Editing . 
 = = = Character reviews = = = 
 In 2006 Fandango ranked the character Octopussy as one of the top 10 Bond girls , and described her as " a powerful , impressive woman . " Entertainment Weekly ranked her as the 10th worst Bond girl in one list in 2006 , but as the best " babe " of the Roger Moore James Bond films in another list in 2008 . Yahoo ! Movies included the character in a 2012 list of the best Bond girl names , commenting , " This Bond girl moniker was so good , they named the film after her ! " 
 = Stop ( Spice Girls song ) = 
 " Stop " is a song by the British pop group Spice Girls . It was written by the group members with Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins — the songwriters and production duo known as Absolute — at the same time as the group was filming scenes for their movie Spice World . " Stop " was produced by Wilson and Watkins for the group 's second album Spiceworld , which was released in November 1997 . 
 " Stop " is an dance @-@ pop song with influences of Motown 's blue @-@ eyed soul , and features instrumentation from a guitar and a brass . The music video , directed by James Brown and filmed in Ireland , features the group in a traditional 1950s working class street and showed them playing with young girls in various children 's games . The song received mostly positive reviews from music critics , with many of them complimenting the Motown influences and production . " Stop " was performed by the group in a number of live appearances in Europe and North America including their three tours . 
 Released as the album 's third single in March 1998 , it peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart behind " It 's Like That " by Run @-@ D.M.C. vs Jason Nevins , ending the Spice Girls ' streak of consecutive number @-@ one singles in the on the chart at six . It was moderately successful internationally , peaking inside the top twenty on the majority of the charts that it entered . In the United States , " Stop " peaked at number sixteen on the Billboard Hot 100 becoming the group 's sixth consecutive top twenty on the chart . It was the group 's last single that was released before Geri Halliwell 's departure in May 1998 though it was not the last single to include her vocals . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 In June 1997 , the group began filming scenes for their movie Spice World . At the same time , Virgin Records started the first marketing meetings for the Spiceworld album 's promotional campaign , which was set to be released in November . No songs had been written for the album at this point , so the group had to do all the song @-@ writing and recording at the same time as they were filming the movie . Between takes , and at the end of each filming day , the group usually went straight into a mobile recording studio set up in a Winnebago , which followed them between film sets . The schedule was physically arduous with logistical difficulties ; Melanie Brown commented in her autobiography : " doing the two full @-@ time jobs at the same time took its toll and within a couple on weeks , exhaustion set in . " The concept of " Stop " was mainly penned by Geri Halliwell . She came up with the first lines of the song and recorded them into a dictaphone ; the next day she played the tape to Paul Wilson and Andy Watkins — the songwriters and production duo known as Absolute . The duo then worked with the melody and began playing with it . Halliwell commented on her autobiography : 
 I wanted something with a Motown feel . Mel C [ <unk> ] eventually finished off the chorus and we had the basis for a song called " Stop " . Later , when we had more time , the other girls came in and we helped write the verses and bridges . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Stop " is an uptempo dance @-@ pop song with influences of Motown 's blue @-@ eyed soul , and is reminiscent of classic singles by The Supremes or Martha and the Vandellas . It is written in the key of C major , with a time signature set on common time , and moves at a fast tempo of 132 beats per minute . Lyrically , the song calls for a slowing down on the courtship process , and it is particularly addressed to appeal to the young female audience , as the female to female bonds are not threatened . 
 It is constructed in a verse @-@ pre @-@ chorus @-@ chorus form , with a bridge before the third and fourth chorus . It starts with an instrumental introduction , and uses a chord progression of C – B ♭ – Am7 – G , that is also used during the verses and the chorus . In the first verse , Halliwell , Chisholm , Bunton , and Beckham sing each one line . The chords change to Dm11 – Dm9 – Dm11 – Dm9 – Dm7 – Em7 – F <unk> – G during the pre @-@ chorus , followed by the chorus . The same pattern occurs leading to the second chorus , the first part of the second verse consists on the repeated use of the words do and ba da , then Bunton and Chisholm sing the rest of the verse . The group then sing the bridge , and end the song repeating the chorus twice . The song uses the verse melody of When You Were Mine ( Prince song ) with slightly altered phrasing . 
 = = Release = = 
 " Stop " was released in the United Kingdom on 9 March 1998 , in two single versions . The first one , a standard CD single , included the track and live versions of " Something Kinda Funny " , " Mama " , and " Love Thing " , taken from the set of concerts the group did in Istanbul in October 1997 . The second version , also released in a standard CD single , contained the track , along with the David Morales remix , the Stretch & Vern 's Rock & Roll Mix of the song , and a cover version of McFadden & Whitehead 's " Ain 't No Stoppin ' Us Now " , performed along with American singer Luther Vandross . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Stop " was generally well received by music critics . For Sylvia Patterson of the NME , the song is an " obscenely catchy Motown swinger " , she added that it is " the proper pop genius destined to be number one until Japan falls into the sea " . Rolling Stone magazine 's David Wild called it " a retro , Supremes @-@ lite confection that 's as undeniable as it is unoriginal . " David Browne of Entertainment Weekly characterised it as a " delicious re @-@ creation of Motown @-@ era bop packed with skipping @-@ down @-@ the @-@ street good vibrations " . Larry Flick of Billboard magazine said that it has " a bouncy , Supremes @-@ like retro vibe " , and called its hook " irresistible " . Flick also praised the David Morales remix of the song , calling it " a vibrant , time @-@ sensitive disco ditty " , while Howard Scripps from The Press of Atlantic City called it " an obvious girl @-@ group ditty " , and added that it " is another potential hit " . Conversely , in a review of Spiceworld , Andy Gill of The Independent , called the album a " perky but charmless parade of pop pastiches " , and described " Stop " as a " pseudo @-@ Motown stomp " . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic , commented that the song " consolidates and expands the group 's style [ ... ] [ adding ] stomping , neo @-@ Motown blue @-@ eyed soul in the vein of Culture Club " . Erlewine complimented " Stop " in a review of the group 's compilation album , saying that it " is as awesome a slice of obligatory British Tamla / Motown as you 'll get " . Stewart Mason , also from Allmusic compared it to Bananarama 's classic singles , and called it as " a glorious piece of utterly disposable but wonderful disposable pop " . Sputnikmusic 's Amanda Murray also complimented the track , saying that it a " is a thoroughly enjoyable upbeat song , completely carefree and lively " . Music Week described it as an " upbeat , trumpet @-@ led homage to old @-@ school R & B. Very Motown @-@ influenced . [ ... ] an addictive dreamy summer sing @-@ a @-@ long " . The Virginian @-@ Pilot said that the horns on the song are " classic soul with a 90s tweak " . Music critic Roger Catlin of The Buffalo News described it as " a jaunty Motown beat [ ... ] [ with ] a <unk> message " . In a review of the group 's Greatest Hits album , Digital Spy 's Nick Levine said that " Stop " still sounds " like the best song that Motown never produced " . 
 = = = Chart performance = = = 
 " Stop " was released in the United Kingdom in March 1998 . It entered and peaked at number two on the UK Singles Chart , being kept off the top spot by Jason Nevins ' remix of Run – D.M.C. ' s 1983 hit " It 's Like That " . It ended the streak of the Spice Girls ' consecutive number @-@ ones on the chart at six ( from " Wannabe " to " Too Much " ) . " Stop " stayed three weeks inside the top ten , eight weeks inside the top forty , and eighteen weeks in total , earning a silver certification by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) in March 1998 . 
 " Stop " was moderately successful in the rest of Europe . It reached the sixth position on the Eurochart Hot 100 , peaked inside the top ten in Finland , Ireland , the Netherlands , Sweden , and Wallonia , and inside the top twenty in Austria , Flanders , France , Italy , and Switzerland . The song was more successful in Oceania . In New Zealand , it debuted on 12 April 1998 at number thirteen , peaked at number nine , and stayed twelve weeks on the chart . In Australia , it debuted on the ARIA Singles Chart at number eleven , peaking at number five in its fifth week . It remained twenty @-@ one weeks on the chart , and was certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) . 
 In April 1998 , " Stop " debuted on the Canadian RPM singles chart at number ninety @-@ nine , reaching a peak of number three in its ninth week . In the US , " Stop " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 on 20 June 1998 , at number thirty @-@ six . It peaked at number sixteen two weeks later , becoming the group 's sixth consecutive top twenty on the chart . " Stop " peaked at eleven on the Hot 100 Singles Sales chart , but received little support from radio stations , and barely entered the Hot 100 Airplay , peaking at number seventy . The song reached number three on the Hot Dance Singles Sales chart , but only had moderate success on other formats , peaking at fourteen on the Hot Dance Club Play chart , and at thirty @-@ seven on the Mainstream Top 40 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Stop " was shot on 27 January 1998 in Ireland , and was directed by James Brown . About the concept , Melanie Brown commented : " There wasn 't a storyboard for this video — it was more trial and error . It wasn 't planned down to the last detail and was quite a free @-@ for @-@ all . It 's like everything we do — complete chaos ! [ ... ] And we all want to get our bit in , so the director has to be able to encompass us all , plus put his ideas on top of it , and make it all flow . 
 The opening segment , reminiscent of a traditional British 1950s working class street of terraced houses , was filmed at <unk> Street in Dublin , and features scenes of each member of the group knocking on different doors . Then during the first chorus , the group performs a hand @-@ action dance , that was also used during their live performances . The second half of the video , set in the small town of Rathdrum , County <unk> showed the group interacting with young girls in various activities , such as running around the streets dancing , skipping rope , playing hopscotch , cat 's cradle and pat @-@ a @-@ cake , hula <unk> , and participating in competitions of various kinds . The locals are depicted as working @-@ class people who attend the local fair or have a drink in the pub . At the end of the video , the group performs at a stage in the local hall in front of an audience of young and old people . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The song was performed many times on television , in both the UK and the US , including An Audience with ... , Top of the Pops , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno , and the Late Show with David Letterman . For their " Stop " performance at the 1998 BRIT Awards , the group adopted a Supremes @-@ like look , and appeared on the stage in a 1960 @-@ style car . The group performed " Stop " without Halliwell in Modena , Italy ; for the annually hosted Pavarotti and Friends charity concert in June 1998 . 
 In October 1997 , the group performed it as the ninth song of their first live concert at the Abdi <unk> Arena in Istanbul , Turkey . The performance was broadcast on Showtime in a pay @-@ per @-@ view event titled Spice Girls In Concert Wild ! . However , the VHS and DVD release of the concert , Girl Power ! Live in Istanbul , does not include the " Stop " performance . In November 2007 , the group performed together for the first time in nearly a decade at the 2007 Victoria 's Secret Fashion Show , held in Los Angeles , California . The group dressed in military @-@ themed outfits performed " Stop " miming to a backing track , in front of giant glittering lights that spelled out " Spice " in the background . A taped performance of the group <unk> @-@ synching the song , while dressed in blue sailor outfits , aired on 17 November 2007 for the Children in Need 2007 marathon . On 8 November 2010 , Brown performed " Stop " with the second series ' contestants of the Australian edition of The X Factor . 
 The group have performed the song on their three tours , the Spiceworld Tour , the Christmas In Spiceworld Tour , and the Return of the Spice Girls . It remained in the group 's live set after Halliwell 's departure at the end of the European leg of the Spiceworld Tour , her parts were taken by Brown . The performance at the tour 's final concert can be found on the video : Spice Girls Live at Wembley Stadium , filmed in London , on 20 September 1998 . For the Return of the Spice Girls Tour , it was performed as the second song from the show 's opening segment . The group dressed in tight bronze and copper coloured outfits made by Italian fashion designer Roberto Cavalli . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Stop " : 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Published by Windswept Pacific Music Ltd / 19 Music / BMG Music Publishing Ltd . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = Joseph Goebbels = 
 Paul Joseph Goebbels ( German : [ <unk> ] ; 29 October 1897 – 1 May 1945 ) was a German politician and Reich Minister of Propaganda in Nazi Germany from 1933 to 1945 . One of Adolf Hitler 's close associates and most devoted followers , he was known for his skills in public speaking and his deep and virulent antisemitism , which led to his supporting the extermination of the Jews in the Holocaust . 
 Goebbels , who aspired to be an author , obtained a Doctor of Philosophy degree from the University of Heidelberg in 1921 . He joined the Nazi Party in 1924 , and worked with Gregor Strasser in their northern branch . He was appointed as Gauleiter ( district leader ) for Berlin in 1926 , where he began to take an interest in the use of propaganda to promote the party and its programme . After the Nazi Seizure of Power in 1933 , Goebbels ' Propaganda Ministry quickly gained and exerted controlling supervision over the news media , arts , and information in Germany . He was particularly adept at using the relatively new media of radio and film for propaganda purposes . Topics for party propaganda included antisemitism , attacks on the Christian churches , and ( after the start of the Second World War ) attempting to shape morale . 
 In 1943 , Goebbels began to pressure Hitler to introduce measures that would produce " total war " , including closing businesses not essential to the war effort , conscripting women into the labour force , and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht . Hitler finally appointed him as Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War on 23 July 1944 , whereby Goebbels undertook largely unsuccessful measures to increase the number of people available for armaments production and the Wehrmacht . 
 As the war drew to a close and Nazi Germany faced defeat , Magda Goebbels and the Goebbels children joined him in Berlin . They moved into the underground Vorbunker , part of Hitler 's underground bunker complex , on 22 April 1945 . Hitler committed suicide on 30 April . In accordance with Hitler 's will , Goebbels succeeded him as Chancellor of Germany ; he served one day in this post . The following day , Goebbels and his wife committed suicide , after poisoning their six children with cyanide . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Paul Joseph Goebbels was born on 29 October 1897 in Rheydt , an industrial town south of Mönchengladbach near Düsseldorf . Both of his parents were Catholics and from humble beginnings . His father Fritz was a factory clerk ; his mother Katharina ( née <unk> ) was ethnically Dutch . Goebbels had five siblings : Konrad ( 1893 – 1947 ) , Hans ( 1895 – 1949 ) , Maria ( 1896 – 1896 ) , Elisabeth ( 1901 – 1915 ) , and Maria ( 1910 – 1949 ) , who married the German filmmaker Max W. Kimmich in 1938 . In 1932 , Goebbels published a pamphlet of his family tree to refute the rumors that his grandmother was of Jewish ancestry . 
 During childhood , Goebbels suffered from ill health which included a long bout of inflammation of the lungs . He had a deformed right foot which turned inwards , due to a congenital deformity . It was thicker and shorter than his left foot . He underwent a failed operation to correct it just prior to starting grammar school . Goebbels wore a metal brace and special shoe because of his shortened leg , and walked with a limp . He was rejected for military service in World War I due to his deformity . 
 Goebbels was educated at a Christian Gymnasium , where he completed his Abitur ( university entrance examination ) in 1917 . He was the top student of his class and was given the traditional honor to speak at the awards ceremony . His parents initially hoped that he would become a Catholic priest , and Goebbels seriously considered it . He studied literature and history at the universities of Bonn , Würzburg , Freiburg , and Munich , aided by a scholarship from the Albertus Magnus Society . By this time Goebbels had begun to distance himself from the church . 
 Historians , including Richard J. Evans and Roger <unk> , speculate that Goebbels ' lifelong pursuit of women may have been in compensation for his physical disabilities . At Freiburg , he met and fell in love with Anka <unk> , who was three years his senior . She went on to Würzburg to continue school , as did Goebbels . In 1921 he wrote a semi @-@ autobiographical novel , Michael , a three @-@ part work of which only Parts I and III have survived . Goebbels felt he was writing his " own story " . Antisemitic content and material about a charismatic leader may have been added by Goebbels shortly before the book was published in 1929 by <unk> @-@ Verlag , the publishing house of the Nazi Party ( National Socialist German Workers ' Party ; NSDAP ) . By 1920 , the relationship with Anka was over . The break @-@ up filled Goebbels with thoughts of suicide . 
 At the University of Heidelberg , Goebbels wrote his doctoral thesis on Wilhelm von Schütz , a minor 19th century romantic dramatist . He had hoped to write his thesis under the supervision of Friedrich Gundolf , who at that time was a well known literary historian . It did not seem to bother Goebbels that Gundolf was Jewish . However , Gundolf was no longer performing teaching duties , so he directed Goebbels to associate professor Max Freiherr von Waldberg . Waldberg was also Jewish . It was Waldberg who recommended Goebbels write his thesis on Wilhelm von Schütz . After submitting the thesis and passing his oral examination , Goebbels earned his PhD in 1921 . 
 Goebbels then returned home and worked as a private tutor . He also found work as a journalist and was published in the local newspaper . His writing during that time reflected his growing antisemitism and dislike for modern culture . In the summer of 1922 , he met and began a love affair with Else Janke , a schoolteacher . After she revealed to him that she was half @-@ Jewish , Goebbels stated the " enchantment [ was ] ruined " . Nevertheless , he continued to see her on and off until 1927 . 
 He continued for several years to try to become a published author . His diaries , which he began in 1923 and continued for the rest of his life , provided an outlet for his desire to write . The lack of income from his literary works ( he wrote two plays in 1923 , neither of which sold ) forced him to take jobs as a caller on the stock exchange and as a bank clerk in Cologne , a job which he detested . He was dismissed from the bank in August 1923 and returned to Rheydt . During this period , he read avidly and was influenced by the works of Oswald Spengler , Fyodor Dostoyevsky , and Houston Stewart Chamberlain , the British @-@ born German writer whose book The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century ( 1899 ) was one of the standard works of the extreme right in Germany . He also began to study the " social question " , and read the works of Marx and Engels . According to biographer Peter Longerich , Goebbels ' diary entries from late 1923 to early 1924 reflected the writings of a man who was isolated , preoccupied by " religious @-@ philosophical " issues , and lacked a sense of direction . Diary entries of mid @-@ December 1923 forward show Goebbels was moving towards the völkisch nationalist movement . 
 = = Nazi activist = = 
 Goebbels first took an interest in Adolf Hitler and Nazism in 1924 . In February 1924 , Hitler 's trial for treason began in the wake of his failed attempt to seize power in the Beer Hall Putsch of November 8 – 9 , 1923 . The trial attracted widespread press coverage and gave Hitler a platform for propaganda . Hitler was sentenced to five years prison , but was released on 20 December 1924 , after serving just over a year . Goebbels was drawn to the NSDAP mostly because of Hitler 's charisma and commitment to his beliefs . He joined the NSDAP around this time , becoming member number <unk> . In late 1924 , Goebbels offered his services to Karl Kaufmann , who was Gauleiter ( NSDAP district leader ) for the Rhine @-@ Ruhr District . Kaufmann put him in touch with Gregor Strasser , a leading Nazi organizer in northern Germany , who hired him to work on their weekly newspaper and to do secretarial work for the regional party offices . He was also put to work as party speaker and representative for Rhineland @-@ Westphalia . Members of Strasser 's northern branch of the NSDAP , including Goebbels , had a more socialist outlook than the rival Hitler group in Munich . Strasser disagreed with Hitler on many parts of the party platform , and in November 1926 began working on a revision . 
 Hitler viewed Strasser 's actions as a threat to his authority , and summoned 60 Gauleiters and party leaders , including Goebbels , to a special conference in Bamberg , in Streicher 's Gau of Franconia , where he gave a two @-@ hour speech repudiating Strasser 's new political programme . Hitler was opposed to the socialist leanings of the northern wing , stating it would mean " political <unk> of Germany " . Further , there would be " no princes , only Germans " , and a legal system with no " ... Jewish system of exploitation ... for plundering of our people " . The future would be secured by acquiring land , not through expropriation of the estates of the former nobility , but through colonization of territories to the east . Goebbels was horrified by Hitler 's characterisation of socialism as " a Jewish creation " , and his assertion that private property would not be expropriated by a Nazi government . " I no longer fully believe in Hitler . That 's the terrible thing : my inner support has been taken away " , he wrote in his diary . 
 In hopes of winning over the opposition , Hitler arranged meetings in Munich with the three Greater Ruhr Gau leaders , including Goebbels . Goebbels was impressed when Hitler sent his own car to meet them at the railway station . That evening Hitler and Goebbels both gave speeches at a beer hall rally . The following day , Hitler offered his hand in reconciliation to the three men , encouraging them to put their differences behind them . Hitler also gave Goebbels " new insight " into the " social question " . Goebbels capitulated completely , offering Hitler his total loyalty – a pledge that was clearly sincere , and that he adhered to until the end of his life . " I love him ... He has thought through everything , " Goebbels wrote . " Such a sparkling mind can be my leader . I bow to the greater one , the political genius " . Later he wrote : " Adolf Hitler , I love you because you are both great and simple at the same time . What one calls a genius . " As a result of the Bamberg and Munich meetings , Strasser 's new draft of the party programme was discarded . The original National Socialist Program of 1920 was retained unchanged , and Hitler 's position as party leader was greatly strengthened . 
 = = <unk> in Berlin = = 
 At Hitler 's invitation , Goebbels spoke at party meetings in Munich and at the annual Party Congress , held in Weimar in 1926 . For the following year 's event , Goebbels was involved in the planning for the first time . He and Hitler arranged for the rally to be filmed . Receiving praise for doing well at these events led Goebbels to shape his political ideas to match Hitler 's , and to admire and idolize him even more . 
 Goebbels was first offered the position of party Gauleiter for the Berlin section in August 1926 . He travelled to Berlin in mid @-@ September and by the middle of October accepted the position . Thus Hitler 's plan to divide and dissolve the northwestern Gauleiters group that Goebbels had served in under Strasser was successful . Hitler gave Goebbels great authority over the area , allowing him to determine the course for organisation and leadership for the Gau . Goebbels was given control over the local Sturmabteilung ( SA ) and Schutzstaffel ( SS ) and answered only to Hitler . The party membership numbered about 1 @,@ 000 when Goebbels arrived , and he reduced it to a core of 600 of the most active and promising members . To raise money , he instituted membership fees and began charging admission to party meetings . Aware of the value of publicity ( both positive and negative ) , he deliberately provoked beer @-@ hall battles and street brawls , including violent attacks on the Communist Party of Germany . Goebbels adapted recent developments in commercial advertising to the political sphere , including the use of catchy slogans and subliminal cues . His new ideas for poster design included using large type , red ink , and cryptic headers that encouraged the reader to examine the fine print to determine the meaning . 
 Like Hitler , Goebbels practiced his public speaking skills in front of a mirror . Meetings were preceded by ceremonial marches and singing , and the venues were decorated with party banners . His entrance ( almost always late ) was timed for maximum emotional impact . He usually meticulously planned his speeches ahead of time , using pre @-@ planned and choreographed inflection and gestures , but he was also able to improvise and adapt his presentation to make a good connection with his audience . 
 Goebbels ' tactic of using provocation to bring attention to the NSDAP , along with violence at the public party meetings and demonstrations , led the Berlin police to ban the NSDAP from the city on 5 May 1927 . Violent incidents continued , including young Nazis randomly attacking Jews in the streets . Goebbels was subjected to a public speaking ban until the end of October . During this period , he founded the newspaper Der Angriff ( The Attack ) as a propaganda vehicle for the Berlin area . It was a modern @-@ style newspaper which took an aggressive tone . To Goebbels ' disappointment , circulation was initially small , only 2 @,@ 000 . Material in the paper was highly anti @-@ communist and antisemitic . Among the paper 's favourite targets was the Jewish Deputy Chief of the Berlin Police Bernhard Weiß . Goebbels gave him the derogatory nickname " Isidore " and subjected him to a relentless campaign of Jew @-@ baiting in the hope of provoking a crackdown he could then exploit . Goebbels continued to try to break into the literary world , with a revised version of his book Michael finally being published , and the unsuccessful production of two of his plays ( Der Wanderer and Die Saat ( The Seed ) ) . The latter was his final attempt at playwriting . During this period in Berlin he had relationships with many women , including his old flame Anka <unk> , who was now married and had a small child . He was quick to fall in love , but easily tired of a relationship and moved on to someone new . He worried too about how a committed personal relationship might interfere with his career . 
 The ban on the NSDAP was lifted in early 1928 , in time for the Reichstag elections , held on 20 May . Results were poor , with the NSDAP losing nearly 100 @,@ 000 voters and earning only 2 @.@ 6 per cent of the vote nationwide . Results in Berlin were even worse , where they attained only 1 @.@ 4 per cent of the vote . Goebbels was one of twelve NSDAP members to gain election to the Reichstag . This gave him immunity from prosecution for a long list of outstanding charges , including a three @-@ week jail sentence he received in April for insulting the deputy police chief Weiß . The Reichstag changed the immunity regulations in February 1931 , and Goebbels was forced to pay fines for libellous material he had placed in Der Angriff over the course of the previous year . 
 In his newspaper Berliner <unk> ( Berlin Workers Newspaper ) , Gregor Strasser was highly critical of Goebbels ' failure to attract the urban vote . However , the party as a whole did much better in rural areas , attracting as much as 18 per cent of the vote in some regions . This was partly because Hitler had publicly stated just prior to the election that Point 17 of the party programme , which mandated the expropriation of land without compensation , would apply only to Jewish speculators and not private landholders . After the election , the party refocused their efforts to try to attract still more votes in the agricultural sector . In May , shortly after the election , Hitler considered appointing Goebbels as party propaganda chief . But he hesitated , as he worried that the removal of Gregor Strasser from the post would lead to a split in the party . Goebbels considered himself well suited to the position , and began to formulate ideas about how propaganda could be used in schools and the media . 
 By 1930 , the violence between the Nazis and communists led to local SA troop leader Horst Wessel being shot by two members of the Communist Party of Germany . He later died in hospital . Exploiting Wessel 's death , Goebbels turned him into a martyr for the Nazi movement . He officially declared Wessel 's march Die Fahne hoch ( Raise the flag ) , renamed as the Horst @-@ Wessel @-@ Lied , to be the NSDAP anthem . 
 The Great Depression greatly impacted Germany and by 1930 there was a dramatic increase in unemployment . During this time , the Strasser brothers started publishing a new daily newspaper in Berlin , the Nationaler Sozialist . Like their other publications , it conveyed the brothers ' own brand of Nazism , including nationalism , anti @-@ capitalism , social reform , and anti @-@ <unk> . Goebbels complained vehemently about the rival Strasser newspapers to Hitler , and admitted that their success was causing his own Berlin newspapers to be " pushed to the wall " . In late April 1930 , Hitler publicly and firmly announced his opposition to Gregor Strasser and appointed Goebbels to replace him as Reich leader of NSDAP propaganda . One of Goebbels ' first acts was to ban the evening edition of the Nationaler Sozialist . Goebbels was also given control of other Nazi papers across the country , including the party 's national newspaper , the Völkischer Beobachter ( People 's Observer ) . He still had to wait until 3 July for Otto Strasser and his supporters to announce they were leaving the NSDAP . Upon receiving the news , Goebbels was relieved the " crisis " with the <unk> was finally over and glad that Otto Strasser had lost all power . 
 The rapid deterioration of the economy led to the resignation on 27 March 1930 of the coalition government that had been elected in 1928 . A new cabinet was formed , and Paul von Hindenburg used his power as president to govern via emergency decrees . He appointed Heinrich Brüning as chancellor . Goebbels took charge of the NSDAP 's national campaign for Reichstag elections called for 14 September 1930 . Campaigning was undertaken on a huge scale , with thousands of meetings and speeches held all over the country . Hitler 's speeches focused on blaming the country 's economic woes on the Weimar Republic , particularly its adherence to the terms of the Treaty of Versailles , which called for war reparations that had proven devastating to the German economy . He proposed a new German society based on race and national unity . The resulting success took even Hitler and Goebbels by surprise : the party received 6 @.@ 5 million votes nationwide and took 107 seats in the Reichstag , making it the second largest party in the country . 
 In late 1930 Goebbels met Magda Quandt , a divorcée who had joined the party a few months earlier . She worked as a volunteer in the party offices in Berlin , helping Goebbels organize his private papers . Her flat on the <unk> soon became a favourite meeting place for Hitler and other NSDAP officials . Goebbels and Quandt married on 19 December 1931 . 
 For two further elections held in 1932 , Goebbels organized massive campaigns that included rallies , parades , speeches , and Hitler travelling around the country by airplane with the slogan " the Führer over Germany " . Goebbels also undertook numerous speaking tours during these election campaigns . Goebbels had some of their speeches published on gramophone records and as pamphlets . He was also involved in the production of a small collection of silent films that could be shown at party meetings , though they did not yet have enough equipment to widely use this medium . Many of Goebbels ' campaign posters used violent imagery such as a giant half @-@ clad male destroying political opponents or other perceived enemies such as " International High Finance " . His propaganda characterized the opposition as " November criminals " , " Jewish wire @-@ pullers " , or a communist threat . Support for the party continued to grow , but neither of these elections led to a majority government . In an effort to stabilize the country and improve economic conditions , Hindenburg appointed Hitler as Reich chancellor on 30 January 1933 . 
 = = Propaganda Minister = = 
 To celebrate Hitler 's appointment as chancellor , Goebbels organized a torchlit parade in Berlin on the night of 30 January of an estimated 60 @,@ 000 men , many in the uniforms of the SA and SS . The spectacle was covered by a live state radio broadcast , with commentary by longtime party member and future Minister of Aviation Hermann Göring . Goebbels was disappointed to not be given a post in Hitler 's new cabinet . Bernhard Rust was appointed as Minister of Culture , the post Goebbels was expecting to receive . Like other NSDAP officials , Goebbels had to deal with Hitler 's leadership style of giving contradictory orders to his subordinates , while placing them into positions where their duties and responsibilities overlapped . In this way , Hitler fostered distrust , competition , and infighting among his subordinates to consolidate and maximise his own power . The NSDAP took advantage of the Reichstag fire of 27 February 1933 , with Hindenburg passing the Reichstag Fire Decree the following day at Hitler 's urging . This was the first of several pieces of legislation that dismantled democracy in Germany and put a totalitarian dictatorship — headed by Hitler — in its place . On 5 March , yet another Reichstag election took place , the last to be held before the defeat of the Nazis at the end of the Second World War . While the NSDAP increased their number of seats and percentage of the vote , it was not the landslide expected by the party leadership . Goebbels finally received Hitler 's appointment to the cabinet , officially becoming head of the newly created Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda on 14 March . 
 The role of the new ministry , which set up its offices in the 18th @-@ century <unk> across from the Reich Chancellery , was to centralise Nazi control of all aspects of German cultural and intellectual life . Goebbels hoped to increase popular support of the party from the 37 per cent achieved at the last free election held in Germany on 25 March 1933 to 100 per cent support . An unstated goal was to present to other nations the impression that the NSDAP had the full and enthusiastic backing of the entire population . One of Goebbels ' first productions was staging the Day of Potsdam , a ceremonial passing of power from Hindenburg to Hitler , held in Potsdam on 21 March . He composed the text of Hitler 's decree authorizing the Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses , held on 1 April . Later that month , Goebbels travelled back to Rheydt , where he was given a triumphal reception . The townsfolk lined the main street , which had been renamed in his honour . On the following day , Goebbels was declared a local hero . 
 Goebbels converted the 1 May holiday from a celebration of workers ' rights ( observed as such especially by the communists ) into a day celebrating the NSDAP . In place of the usual ad hoc labour celebrations , he organized a huge party rally held at Tempelhof Field in Berlin . The following day , all trade union offices in the country were forcibly disbanded by the SA and SS , and the Nazi @-@ run German Labour Front was created to take their place . " We are the masters of Germany " , he commented in his diary entry of 3 May . Less than two weeks later , he gave a speech at the Nazi book burning in Berlin on 10 May . 
 Meanwhile , the NSDAP began passing laws to marginalize Jews and remove them from German society . The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service , passed on 7 April 1933 , forced all non @-@ Aryans to retire from the legal profession and civil service . Similar legislation soon deprived Jewish members of other professions of their right to practise . The first Nazi concentration camps ( initially created to house political dissenters ) were founded shortly after Hitler seized power . In a process termed Gleichschaltung ( co @-@ ordination ) , the NSDAP proceeded to rapidly bring all aspects of life under control of the party . All civilian organisations , including agricultural groups , volunteer organisations , and sports clubs , had their leadership replaced with Nazi sympathisers or party members . By June 1933 , virtually the only organisations not in the control of the NSDAP were the army and the churches . In a move to manipulate Germany 's middle class and shape popular opinion , the regime passed on 4 October 1933 the <unk> ( Editor 's Law ) , which became the cornerstone of the Nazi Party 's control of the popular press . Modeled to some extent on the system in Benito Mussolini 's Italy , the law defined a <unk> as anyone who wrote , edited , or selected texts and / or illustrated material for serial publication . Individuals selected for this position were chosen based on experiential , educational , and racial criteria . The law required journalists to " regulate their work in accordance with National Socialism as a philosophy of life and as a conception of government . " 
 At the end of June 1934 , top officials of the SA and opponents of the regime , including Gregor Strasser , were arrested and killed in a purge later called the Night of Long Knives . Goebbels was present at the arrest of SA leader Ernst Röhm in Munich . On 2 August 1934 , President von Hindenburg died . In a radio broadcast , Goebbels announced that the offices of president and chancellor had been combined , and Hitler had been formally named as Führer und Reichskanzler ( leader and chancellor ) . 
 = = = <unk> of the Ministry = = = 
 The propaganda ministry was organized into seven departments : administration and legal ; mass rallies , public health , youth , and race ; radio ; national and foreign press ; films and film censorship ; art , music , and theatre ; and protection against counter @-@ propaganda , both foreign and domestic . Goebbels style of leadership was tempestuous and unpredictable . He would suddenly change direction and shift his support between senior associates ; he was a difficult boss and liked to berate his staff in public . Goebbels was successful at his job , however ; Life wrote in 1938 that " [ p ] <unk> he likes nobody , is liked by nobody , and runs the most efficient Nazi department . " 
 The Reich Film Chamber , which all members of the film industry were required to join , was created in June 1933 . Goebbels promoted the development of films with a Nazi slant , and ones that contained subliminal or overt propaganda messages . Under the auspices of the Reichskulturkammer ( Reich Chamber of Culture ) , created in September , Goebbels added additional sub @-@ chambers for the fields of broadcasting , fine arts , literature , music , the press , and the theatre . As in the film industry , anyone wishing to pursue a career in these fields had to be a member of the corresponding chamber . In this way anyone whose views were contrary to the regime could be excluded from working in their chosen field and thus silenced . In addition , journalists ( now considered employees of the state ) were required to prove Aryan descent back to the year 1800 , and if married , the same requirement applied to the spouse . Members of any chamber were not allowed to leave the country for their work without prior permission of their chamber . A committee was established to censor books , and works could not be re @-@ published unless they were on the list of approved works . Similar regulations applied to other fine arts and entertainment ; even cabaret performances were censored . Many German artists and intellectuals left Germany in the pre @-@ war years rather than work under these restrictions . 
 Goebbels was particularly interested in controlling radio , which was then still a fairly new mass medium . Sometimes under protest from individual states ( particularly Prussia , headed by Göring ) , Goebbels gained control of radio stations nationwide , and placed them under the Reichs @-@ Rundfunk @-@ Gesellschaft ( German National Broadcasting Corporation ) in July 1934 . Manufacturers were urged by Goebbels to produce inexpensive home receivers , called <unk> ( people 's receiver ) , and by 1938 nearly ten million sets had been sold . Loudspeakers were placed in public areas , factories , and schools , so that important party broadcasts would be heard live by nearly all Germans . On 2 September 1939 ( the day after the start of the war ) , Goebbels and the Council of Ministers proclaimed it illegal to listen to foreign radio stations . <unk> news from foreign broadcasts could result in the death penalty . Albert Speer , Hitler 's architect and later Minister for Armaments and War Production , later said the regime " made the complete use of all technical means for domination of its own country . Through technical devices like the radio and loudspeaker , 80 million people were deprived of independent thought . " 
 A major focus of Nazi propaganda was Hitler himself , who was glorified as a heroic and infallible leader and became the focus of a cult of personality . Much of this was spontaneous , but some was stage @-@ managed as part of Goebbels ' propaganda work . <unk> of Hitler was the focus of the 1934 Nuremberg Rally , where his moves were carefully choreographed . The rally was the subject of the film Triumph of the Will , one of several Nazi propaganda films directed by Leni Riefenstahl . It won the Gold Medal at the 1935 Venice Film Festival . At the 1935 Nazi party congress rally at Nuremberg , Goebbels declared that " Bolshevism is the declaration of war by Jewish @-@ led international subhumans against culture itself . " 
 Goebbels was involved in planning the staging of the 1936 Summer Olympics , held in Berlin . It was around this time that he met and started having an affair with the actress Lída Baarová , whom he continued to see until 1938 . A major project in 1937 was the Degenerate Art Exhibition , organised by Goebbels , which ran in Munich from July to November . The exhibition proved wildly popular , attracting over two million visitors . A degenerate music exhibition took place the following year . Meanwhile , Goebbels was disappointed by the lack of quality in the National Socialist artwork , films , and literature . 
 = = = Church struggle = = = 
 In 1933 , Hitler signed the Reichskonkordat ( Reich Concordat ) , a treaty with the Vatican that required the regime to honour the independence of Catholic institutions and prohibited clergy from involvement in politics . However , the regime continued to target the Christian churches and to try to weaken their influence . Throughout 1935 and 1936 , hundreds of clergy , nuns , and lay leaders were arrested , often on trumped up charges of currency smuggling or sexual offences . Goebbels widely publicised the trials in his propaganda campaigns , showing the cases in the worst possible light . Restrictions were placed on public meetings , and Catholic publications faced censorship . Catholic schools were required to reduce religious instruction and crucifixes were removed from state buildings . Hitler often vacillated on whether or not the <unk> ( church struggle ) should be a priority , but his frequent inflammatory comments on the issue were enough to convince Goebbels to intensify his work on the issue in the first half of 1937 . 
 In response to the persecution , Pope Pius XI had the " Mit brennender Sorge " ( " With Burning Concern " ) <unk> smuggled into Germany for Passion Sunday 1937 and read from every pulpit . It denounced the systematic hostility of the regime toward the church . In response , Goebbels renewed the regime 's crackdown and propaganda against Catholics . His speech of 28 May in Berlin in front of 20 @,@ 000 party members , which was also broadcast on the radio , attacked the Catholic church as morally corrupt . As a result of the propaganda campaign , enrolment in denominational schools dropped sharply , and by 1939 all such schools were disbanded or converted to public facilities . Harassment and threats of imprisonment led the clergy to be much more cautious in their criticism of the regime . Partly out of foreign policy concerns , Hitler ordered a scaling back the church struggle by the end of July 1937 . 
 = = Goebbels at war = = 
 As early as February 1933 , Hitler announced that rearmament must be undertaken , albeit clandestinely at first , as to do so was in violation of the Versailles Treaty . A year later he told his military leaders that 1942 was the target date for going to war in the east . Goebbels was one of the most enthusiastic supporters of Hitler aggressively pursuing Germany 's expansionist policies sooner rather than later . At the time of the <unk> of the Rhineland in 1936 , Goebbels summed up his general attitude in his diary : " [ N ] ow is the time for action . Fortune favors the brave ! He who dares nothing wins nothing . " In the lead @-@ up to the Sudetenland crisis in 1938 , Goebbels took the initiative time and again to use propaganda to whip up sympathy for the Sudeten Germans while campaigning against the Czech government . Still , Goebbels was well aware there was a growing " war panic " in Germany and so by July had the press conduct propaganda efforts at a lower level of intensity . After the western powers acceded to Hitler 's demands concerning Czechoslovakia in 1938 , Goebbels soon redirected his propaganda machine against Poland . From May onwards , he orchestrated a campaign against Poland , fabricating stories about atrocities against ethnic Germans in Danzig and other cities . Even so , he was unable to persuade the majority of Germans to welcome the prospect of war . He privately held doubts about the wisdom of risking a protracted war against Britain and France by attacking Poland . 
 After the Invasion of Poland in 1939 , Goebbels used his propaganda ministry and the Reich chambers to control access to information domestically . To his chagrin , his rival Joachim von Ribbentrop , the Minister for Foreign Affairs , continually challenged Goebbels ' jurisdiction over the dissemination of international propaganda . Hitler declined to make a firm ruling on the subject , so the two men remained rivals for the remainder of the Nazi era . Goebbels did not participate in the military decision making process , nor was he made privy to diplomatic negotiations until after the fact . 
 The Propaganda Ministry took over the broadcasting facilities of conquered countries immediately after surrender , and began broadcasting prepared material using the existing announcers as a way to gain the trust of the citizens . Most aspects of the media , both domestically and in the conquered countries , were controlled by Goebbels and his department . The German Home Service , the Armed Forces Programme , and the German European Service were all rigorously controlled in everything from the information they were permitted to disseminate to the music they were allowed to play . Party rallies , speeches , and demonstrations continued ; speeches were broadcast on the radio and short propaganda films were exhibited using 1 @,@ 500 mobile film vans . Hitler made fewer public appearances and broadcasts as the war progressed , so Goebbels increasingly became the voice of the Nazi regime for the German people . From May 1940 he wrote frequent editorials that were published in Das Reich which were later read aloud over the radio . He found films to be his most effective propaganda medium , after radio . At his insistence , initially half the films made in wartime Germany were propaganda films ( particularly on antisemitism ) and war propaganda films ( recounting both historical wars and current exploits of the Wehrmacht ) . 
 Goebbels became preoccupied with morale and the efforts of the people on the home front . He believed that the more the people at home were involved in the war effort , the better their morale would be . For example , he initiated a programme for the collection of winter clothing and ski equipment for troops on the eastern front . At the same time , Goebbels implemented changes to have more " entertaining material " in radio and film produced for the public , decreeing in late 1942 that 20 per cent of the films should be propaganda and 80 per cent light entertainment . As Gauleiter of Berlin , Goebbels dealt with increasingly serious shortages of necessities such as food and clothing , as well as the need to ration beer and tobacco , which were important for morale . Hitler suggested watering the beer and degrading the quality of the cigarettes so that more could be produced , but Goebbels refused , saying the cigarettes were already of such low quality that it was impossible to make them any worse . Through his propaganda campaigns , he worked hard to maintain an appropriate level of morale among the public about the military situation , neither too optimistic nor too grim . The series of military setbacks the Germans suffered in this period – the thousand @-@ bomber raid on Cologne ( May 1942 ) , the Allied victory at the Second Battle of El Alamein ( November 1942 ) , and especially the catastrophic defeat at the Battle of Stalingrad ( February 1943 ) – were difficult matters to present to the German public , who were increasingly weary of the war and sceptical that it could be won . On 15 January 1943 , Hitler appointed Goebbels as head of the newly created Air Raid Damage committee , which meant Goebbels was nominally in charge of nationwide civil air defenses and shelters as well as the assessment and repair of damaged buildings . In actuality , the defence of areas other than Berlin remained in the hands of the local Gauleiters , and his main tasks were limited to providing immediate aid to the affected civilians and using propaganda to improve their morale . 
 By early 1943 , the war produced a labour crisis for the regime . Hitler created a three @-@ man committee with representatives of the State , the army , and the Party in an attempt to centralise control of the war economy . The committee members were Hans Lammers ( head of the Reich Chancellery ) , Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel , chief of the Oberkommando der Wehrmacht ( Armed Forces High Command ; OKW ) , and Martin Bormann , who controlled the Party . The committee was intended to independently propose measures regardless of the wishes of various ministries , with Hitler reserving most final decisions to himself . The committee , soon known as the <unk> ( Committee of Three ) , met eleven times between January and August 1943 . However , they ran up against resistance from Hitler 's cabinet ministers , who headed deeply entrenched spheres of influence and were excluded from the committee . Seeing it as a threat to their power , Goebbels , Göring , and Speer worked together to bring it down . The result was that nothing changed , and the Committee of Three declined into irrelevance by September 1943 . 
 Partly in response to being excluded from the Committee of Three , Goebbels pressured Hitler to introduce measures that would produce " total war " , including closing businesses not essential to the war effort , conscripting women into the labour force , and enlisting men in previously exempt occupations into the Wehrmacht . Some of these measures were implemented in an edict of 13 January , but to Goebbels ' dismay , Göring demanded that his favourite restaurants in Berlin should remain open , and Lammers successfully lobbied Hitler to have women with children exempted from conscription , even if they had child care available . After receiving an enthusiastic response to his speech of 30 January 1943 on the topic , Goebbels believed he had the support of the German people in his call for total war . His next speech , the Sportpalast speech of 18 February 1943 , was a passionate demand for his audience to commit to total war , which he presented as the only way to stop the Bolshevik onslaught and save the German people from destruction . The speech also had a strong antisemitic element and hinted at the extermination of the Jewish people that was already underway . The speech was presented live on radio and was filmed as well . Goebbels ' efforts had little impact for the time being , as while Hitler was in principle in favour of total war , he was not prepared to implement changes over the objections of his ministers . The discovery around this time of a mass grave of Polish officers that had been killed by the Red Army in the 1940 Katyn massacre was made use of by Goebbels in his propaganda in an attempt to drive a wedge between the Soviets and the other western allies . 
 = = Plenipotentiary for total war = = 
 After the Allied invasion of Sicily ( July 1943 ) and the strategic Soviet victory in the Battle of Kursk ( July – August 1943 ) , Goebbels began to recognize that the war could no longer be won . Following the Allied invasion of Italy and the fall of Mussolini in September , he raised with Hitler the possibility of a separate peace , either with the Soviets or with Britain . Hitler rejected both of these proposals . 
 As Germany 's military and economic situation grew steadily worse , on 25 August 1943 Reichsführer @-@ SS Heinrich Himmler took over the post of interior minister , replacing Wilhelm Frick . ( H. R. Knickerbocker had written in 1941 that Goebbels and Himmler were " rivals in unpopularity " , and that Goebbels " would be lucky to remain alive twenty @-@ four hours after Hitler 's protective hand was removed " . ) Intensive air raids on Berlin and other cities took the lives of thousands of people . Göring 's Luftwaffe attempted to retaliate with air raids on London in early 1944 , but they no longer had sufficient aircraft to make much of an impact . While Goebbels ' propaganda in this period indicated that a huge retaliation was in the offing , the V @-@ 1 flying bombs , launched on British targets beginning in mid @-@ June 1944 , had little effect , with only around 20 per cent reaching their intended targets . To boost morale , Goebbels continued to publish propaganda to the effect that further improvements to these weapons would have a decisive impact on the outcome of the war . Meanwhile , in the Normandy landings of 6 June 1944 , the Allies successfully gained a foothold in France . 
 Throughout July , Goebbels and Speer continued to press Hitler to bring the economy to a total war footing . The 20 July plot , where Hitler was almost killed by a bomb at his field headquarters in East Prussia , played into the hands of those who had been pushing for change : Bormann , Goebbels , Himmler , and Speer . Over the objections of Göring , Goebbels was appointed on 23 July as Reich Plenipotentiary for Total War , charged with maximising the manpower for the Wehrmacht and the armaments industry at the expense of sectors of the economy not critical to the war effort . Through these efforts , he was able to free up an additional half a million men for military service . However , as many of these new recruits came from the armaments industry , the move put him in conflict with armaments minister Speer . Untrained workers from elsewhere were not readily absorbed into the armaments industry , and likewise the new Wehrmacht recruits waited in barracks for their turn to be trained . 
 At Hitler 's behest , the Volkssturm ( People 's Storm ) – a nationwide militia of men previously considered unsuitable for military service – was formed on 18 October 1944 . Goebbels recorded in his diary that 100 @,@ 000 recruits were sworn in from his Gau alone . However , the men , mostly age 45 to 60 , received only rudimentary training and many were not properly armed . Goebbels ' notion that these men could effectively serve on the front lines against Soviet tanks and artillery was unrealistic at best . The programme was deeply unpopular . 
 = = Defeat and death = = 
 In the last months of the war , Goebbels ' speeches and articles took on an increasingly apocalyptic tone . By the beginning of 1945 , with the Soviets on the Oder River and the Western Allies preparing to cross the Rhine , he could no longer disguise the fact that defeat was inevitable . Berlin had little in the way of fortifications or artillery ( or even Volkssturm units ) , as almost everything had been sent to the front . Goebbels noted in his diary on 21 January that millions of Germans were fleeing westward . He tentatively discussed with Hitler the issue of making peace overtures to the western allies , but Hitler again refused . Privately , Goebbels was conflicted at pushing the case with Hitler since he did not want to lose the confidence of his Führer . 
 When other Nazi leaders urged Hitler to leave Berlin and establish a new centre of resistance in the National Redoubt in Bavaria , Goebbels opposed this , arguing for a last heroic stand in Berlin . His family ( except for Magda 's son Harald , who had served in the Luftwaffe and been captured by the Allies ) moved into their house in Berlin to await the end . He and Magda may have discussed suicide and the fate of their young children in a long meeting on the night of 27 January . He knew how the outside world would view the criminal acts committed by the regime , and had no desire to subject himself to the " debacle " of a trial . He burned his private papers on the night of 18 April . 
 Goebbels knew how to play on Hitler 's fantasies , encouraging him to see the hand of providence in the death of United States President Franklin D. Roosevelt on 12 April . Whether Hitler really saw this event as a turning point as Goebbels proclaimed is not known . By this time , Goebbels had gained the position he had wanted so long – at the side of Hitler . Göring was utterly discredited , although he was not stripped of his offices until 23 April . Himmler , whose appointment as commander of Army Group Vistula had led to disaster on the Oder , was also in disgrace with Hitler . Most of Hitler 's inner circle , including Göring , Himmler , Ribbentrop , and Speer , prepared to leave Berlin immediately after Hitler 's birthday celebration on 20 April . Even Bormann was " not anxious " to meet his end at Hitler 's side . On 22 April , Hitler announced that he would stay in Berlin until the end and then shoot himself . Goebbels moved with his family into the Vorbunker , connected to the lower Führerbunker under the Reich Chancellery garden in central Berlin , that same day . He told Vice @-@ Admiral Hans @-@ Erich Voss that he would not entertain the idea of either surrender or escape . On 23 April , Goebbels made the following proclamation to the people of Berlin : 
 I call on you to fight for your city . Fight with everything you have got , for the sake of your wives and your children , your mothers and your parents . Your arms are defending everything we have ever held dear , and all the generations that will come after us . Be proud and courageous ! Be inventive and cunning ! Your Gauleiter is amongst you . He and his colleagues will remain in your midst . His wife and children are here as well . He , who once captured the city with 200 men , will now use every means to galvanize the defense of the capital . The battle for Berlin must become the signal for the whole nation to rise up in battle ... " 
 After midnight on 29 April , with the Soviets advancing ever closer to the bunker complex , Hitler married Eva Braun in a small civil ceremony within the Führerbunker . Afterwards Hitler hosted a modest wedding breakfast with his new wife . Hitler then took secretary Traudl Junge to another room and dictated his last will and testament . Goebbels and Bormann were two of the witnesses . 
 In his last will and testament , Hitler named no successor as Führer or leader of the Nazi Party . Instead , he appointed Goebbels as Reich Chancellor ; Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz , who was at Flensburg near the Danish border , Reich President ; and Bormann as Party Minister . Goebbels wrote a postscript to the will stating that he would disobey Hitler 's order to leave Berlin : " For reasons of humanity and personal loyalty " he had to stay . Further , his wife and children would be staying , as well . They would end their lives " side by side with the Führer " . 
 In the mid @-@ afternoon of 30 April , Hitler shot himself . After Hitler 's suicide , Goebbels was depressed . Voss later recounted Goebbels said : " It is a great pity that such a man is not with us any longer . But there is nothing to be done . For us , everything is lost now and the only way out left for us is the one which Hitler chose . I shall follow his example . " 
 On 1 May , Goebbels completed his sole official act as Chancellor . He dictated a letter to General Vasily Chuikov and ordered German General Hans Krebs to deliver it under a white flag . Chuikov , as commander of the Soviet 8th Guards Army , commanded the Soviet forces in central Berlin . Goebbels ' letter informed Chuikov of Hitler 's death and requested a ceasefire . After this was rejected , Goebbels decided that further efforts were futile . 
 Later on 1 May , Vice @-@ Admiral Voss saw Goebbels for the last time : " ... While saying goodbye I asked Goebbels to join us . But he replied : ' The captain must not leave his sinking ship . I have thought about it all and decided to stay here . I have nowhere to go because with little children I will not be able to make it , especially with a leg like mine ... ' " 
 On the evening of 1 May 1945 , Goebbels arranged for an SS dentist , Helmut Kunz , to inject his six children with morphine so that when they were unconscious , an ampule of cyanide could be then crushed in each of their mouths . According to Kunz 's later testimony , he gave the children morphine injections but it was Magda Goebbels and SS @-@ Obersturmbannführer Ludwig Stumpfegger , Hitler 's personal doctor , who administered the cyanide . 
 At around 20 : 30 , Goebbels and Magda left the bunker and walked up to the garden of the Chancellery , where they committed suicide . There are several different accounts of this event . According to one account , Goebbels shot Magda and then himself . Another account was that they each bit on a cyanide ampule and were given a coup de grâce immediately afterwards . Goebbels ' SS adjutant Günther Schwägermann testified in 1948 that they walked ahead of him up the stairs and out into the Chancellery garden . He waited in the stairwell and heard the shots sound . Schwägermann then walked up the remaining stairs and once outside he saw their lifeless bodies . Following Goebbels ' prior order , Schwägermann had an SS soldier fire several shots into his body , which did not move . 
 The bodies were then doused with petrol , but they were only partially burned and not buried . A few days later , Voss was brought back to the bunker by the Soviets to identify the partly burned bodies of Joseph and Magda Goebbels and their children . The remains of the Goebbels ' family , Hitler , Braun , General Krebs , and Hitler 's dogs were repeatedly buried and exhumed . The last burial was at the SMERSH facility in Magdeburg on 21 February 1946 . In 1970 , KGB director Yuri Andropov authorised an operation to destroy the remains . On 4 April 1970 , a Soviet KGB team used detailed burial charts to exhume five wooden boxes at the Magdeburg SMERSH facility . Those were burned , crushed , and scattered into the Biederitz river , a tributary of the nearby Elbe . 
 = = Antisemitism and the Holocaust = = 
 Like many Germans of that time , Goebbels was antisemitic from a young age . After joining the NSDAP and meeting Hitler , his antisemitism grew and became more radical . He began to see the Jews as a destructive force with a negative impact on German society . After the Nazis seized power , he repeatedly urged Hitler to take action against the Jews . The party 's goal was to remove them from German cultural and economic life , and eventually to remove them from the country altogether . In addition to his propaganda efforts , Goebbels actively promoted the persecution of the Jews through pogroms , legislation , and other actions . Discriminatory measures he instituted in Berlin in the early years of the regime included bans against their using public transport and requiring that Jewish shops be marked as such . 
 In November 1938 , the German diplomat Ernst vom Rath was killed in Paris by a young Jewish man . In response , Goebbels arranged for inflammatory antisemitic material to be released by the press , and the result was the start of a pogrom . Jews were attacked and synagogues destroyed all over Germany . The situation was further inflamed by a speech Goebbels gave at a party meeting on the night of 8 November , where he obliquely called for party members to incite further violence against Jews while making it appear to be a spontaneous series of acts by the German people . At least a hundred Jews were killed , several hundred synagogues were damaged or destroyed , and thousands of Jewish shops were vandalized in an event called Kristallnacht ( Night of Broken Glass ) . Around 30 @,@ 000 Jewish men were sent to concentration camps . The destruction stopped after a conference held on 12 November , where Göring pointed out that the destruction of Jewish property was in effect the destruction of German property , since the intention was that it would all eventually be confiscated . Goebbels continued his intensive antisemitic propaganda campaign that culminated in Hitler 's 30 January 1939 Reichstag speech , which Goebbels helped to write : 
 If international finance Jewry in and outside Europe should succeed in plunging the nations once more into a world war , then the result will not be the <unk> of the earth and thereby the victory of Jewry , but the annihilation of the Jewish race in Europe ! 
 While Goebbels had been pressing for expulsion of the Berlin Jews since 1935 , there were still 62 @,@ 000 living in the city in 1940 . Part of the delay in their deportation was that they were needed as workers in the armaments industry . Deportations of German Jews began in October 1941 , with the first transport from Berlin leaving on 18 October . Some Jews were shot immediately on arrival in destinations such as Riga and Kaunas . In preparation for the deportations , Goebbels ordered that all German Jews were required by law to wear an identifying yellow badge as of 5 September 1941 . On 6 March 1942 , Goebbels received a copy of the minutes of the Wannsee Conference . The document made the Nazi policy clear : the Jewish population of Europe was to be sent to extermination camps in occupied areas of Poland and killed . His diary entries of the period show that he was well aware of the fate of the Jews . " In general , it can probably be established that 60 percent of them will have to be liquidated , while only 40 percent can be put to work . ... A judgment is being carried out on the Jews which is barbaric but thoroughly deserved , " he wrote on 27 March 1942 . 
 Goebbels had frequent discussions with Hitler about the fate of the Jews , a subject which they discussed almost every time they met . He was aware throughout that the Jews were being exterminated , and completely supported this decision . He was one of the few top NSDAP officials to do so publicly . 
 = = Family life = = 
 Hitler was very fond of Magda Goebbels and the children . He enjoyed staying at the Goebbels ' Berlin apartment , where he could relax . Magda had a close relationship with Hitler , and became a member of his small coterie of female friends . She also became an unofficial representative of the regime , receiving letters from all over Germany from women with questions about domestic matters or child custody issues . 
 In 1936 , Goebbels met the Czech actress Lída Baarová and by the winter of 1937 began an intense affair with her . Magda had a long conversation with Hitler about it on 15 August 1938 . Unwilling to put up with a scandal involving one of his top ministers , Hitler demanded that Goebbels break off the relationship . Thereafter , Joseph and Magda seemed to reach a truce until the end of September . The couple had another falling out at that point , and once again Hitler became involved , insisting the couple stay together . Hitler arranged for publicity photos to be taken of himself with the reconciled couple in October . Magda too had affairs , including a relationship with Kurt <unk> in 1933 and Karl Hanke in 1938 . 
 The Goebbels family included Harald Quandt ( Magda 's son from her first marriage ; born 1921 ) , plus Helga ( 1932 ) , Hilde ( 1934 ) , Helmuth ( 1935 ) , Holde ( 1937 ) , Hedda ( 1938 ) , and Heide ( 1940 ) . Harald was the only member of the family to survive the war . 
 = = = Explanatory notes = = = 
 = Limbs of the horse = 
 The limbs of the horse are structures made of dozens of bones , joints , muscles , tendons and ligaments that support the weight of the equine body . They include two apparatuses : the suspensory apparatus , which carries much of the weight , prevents overextension of the joint and absorbs shock , and the stay apparatus , which locks major joints in the limbs , allowing horses to remain standing while relaxed or asleep . The limbs play a major part in the movement of the horse , with the legs performing the functions of absorbing impact , bearing weight , and providing thrust . In general , the majority of the weight is borne by the front legs , while the rear legs provide propulsion . The hooves are also important structures , providing support , traction and shock absorption , and containing structures which provide blood flow through the lower leg . As the horse developed as a cursorial animal , with a primary defense mechanism of running over hard ground , its legs evolved to the long , sturdy , light @-@ weight , one @-@ toed form seen today . 
 Good conformation in the limbs leads to improved movement and decreased likelihood of injuries . Large differences in bone structure and size can be found in horses used for different activities , but correct conformation remains relatively similar across the spectrum . Structural defects , as well as other problems such as injuries and infections , can cause lameness , or movement at an abnormal gait . Injuries to and problems with horse legs can be relatively minor , such as stocking up , which causes swelling without lameness , or quite serious . Even non @-@ fatal leg injuries can be fatal to horses , as their bodies are designed to bear weight on all four legs and serious problems can result if this is not possible . 
 = = Limb anatomy = = 
