 Operation Postmaster was a British special operation conducted on the Spanish island of Fernando Po , now known as Bioko , off West Africa in the Gulf of Guinea , during the Second World War . The mission was carried out by the Small Scale Raiding Force ( SSRF ) and the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) in January 1942 . Their objective was to board the Italian and German ships in the harbour and sail them to Lagos . The SSRF under the command of Major Gus March @-@ Phillipps left Britain in August 1941 and sailed the Brixham trawler , Maid Honor , to the Spanish colony . 
 The British authorities in the area refused to support the raid , which they considered a breach of Spanish neutrality . Permission for the operation to go ahead eventually came from the Foreign Office in London . On 14 January 1942 , while the ships ' officers were attending a party arranged by an SOE agent , the commandos entered the port aboard two tugs , overpowered the ships ' crews and sailed off with the ships , including the Italian merchant vessel Duchessa d 'Aosta . The raid boosted SOE 's reputation at a critical time and demonstrated its ability to plan and conduct secret operations no matter the political consequences . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1941 the British Admiralty started receiving reports that German submarines were using the rivers in Vichy French parts of Africa as a base for refuelling . The unit selected to investigate the reports was the Small Scale Raiding Force ( SSRF ) also known as No. 62 Commando . The SSRF was formed in 1941 , and consisted of a small group of 55 commando @-@ trained personnel working with the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) . While being under operational control of Combined Operations Headquarters , No. 62 Commando itself was under the command Major Gustavus Henry March @-@ Phillipps , usually called Gus March @-@ Phillipps . 
 Maid Honor , a 65 ton Brixham yacht trawler , left Poole harbour on 9 August 1941 , bound for West Africa . The five man crew were under the command of March @-@ Phillipps . The remainder of the SSRF under the command of Captain Geoffrey Appleyard had departed earlier aboard a troop transport ship . On 20 September 1941 after six weeks under sail Maid Honor arrived at Freetown , Sierra Leone . Freetown was the agreed rendezvous for both groups , Appleyard 's party having arrived at the end of August . After Maid Honor 's arrival in Freetown the search for the German submarine bases started . Sailing into the many rivers and deltas in the area , they failed to locate any submarines or evidence of a submarine base . 
 SOE maintained a presence in West Africa , where it could observe Vichy French , Spanish and Portuguese territories with the intention of identifying and hindering any activities that threatened Britain 's colonial possessions . While the commandos were searching for the German submarine bases SOE agents had become aware of three vessels in the port of Santa Isabel on the Spanish island of Fernando Po 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) off the coast of Africa near the borders of Nigeria and the Guinea . 
 The three ships were the Italian 8 @,@ 500 ton Merchant vessel Duchessa d 'Aosta , the second a large German tug Likomba , the third a diesel @-@ powered barge <unk> . Duchessa d 'Aosta had a working radio which was considered a threat , with the potential to provide details of Allied naval movements . Her declared cargo was 3 million pounds of wool , 316 @,@ 610 pounds of hides and skins , 1 @.@ 3 million pounds of tanning materials , 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 pounds of copra , 544 @,@ 660 pounds of crude asbestos fibre and over 1 @.@ 1 million ingots of electrolytic copper . The first page of the ship 's cargo manifest , was not presented to the port authorities and the ship 's Captain refused to provide them with any details , which led to speculation it was also carrying arms or ammunition . In his visits to the island , SOE agent Leonard Guise kept the ships under observation , and in August 1941 submitted a plan to seize Likomba and disable Duchessa d 'Aosta . Approval for the military operation in a neutral port was given by the Admiralty on 20 November 1941 . 
 To transport the raiders to the island , two tugs , Vulcan and Nuneaton , were provided by the Governor of Nigeria , Sir Bernard Bourdillon . The raiding force would consist of 32 men , four SOE agents , 11 commandos from the SSRF and 17 men recruited from the local population to crew the two tugs . The mission suffered a blow when the British General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) West Africa Command , General Sir George Giffard refused to support the mission and would not release the 17 men required , stating it would compromise some unnamed plans he had in mind and the act of piracy would have repercussions . Responding to the concerns of the GOC West Africa , the Admiralty suspended the operation . The Foreign Office was also not in favour of the operation , and neither was the British Embassy in Madrid , which was concerned about the possible reactions of the Spanish government . The final go ahead , eventually supported by the Foreign Office , was not given until 6 January 1942 , on the grounds that suspicion of British involvement in the raid was inevitable ; what counted was the avoidance of any tangible proof . As a safeguard the Admiralty also dispatched HMS Violet , a Flower class corvette , to intercept the vessels at sea , which would provide the cover story that they had been intercepted while trying to make their way home to Europe . 
 = = Mission = = 
 SOE agent Richard Lippett had obtained employment with the shipping company John Holt & Co ( Liverpool ) , which had business offices on the island . Having taken up the post he started to make preparations for the raid . He became aware that the crew of Duchessa d 'Aosta were in the habit of accepting invitations to parties ashore and had held their own party aboard ship on 6 January 1942 . Under the guise of a party @-@ goer Lippett managed to gain information about the readiness of the ship for sea , crew numbers , and the watch arrangements . 
 The raiders left Lagos in their two tugs on the morning of 11 January 1942 , and while en route they practised lowering <unk> and boarding ships at sea under the command of Captain Graham Hayes . They approached Santa Isabel harbour and at 23 : 15 and 23 : 30 hours on 14 January 1942 ; both tugs were in position 180 metres ( 590 ft ) outside of the harbour . Onshore , Lippett had arranged for the officers from Duchessa d 'Aosta to be invited to a dinner party . Twelve Italian officers and two German officers from Likomba also attended . 
 The boarding parties assembled on the decks of the two tugs as they entered the harbour . Vulcan , with March @-@ Phillipps and his second in command Appleyard on board , headed for Duchessa d 'Aosta . As they approached , a few men could be seen on the after deck of the merchant vessel , but they seemed to take no notice of the tug other than to shine a torch in its direction . At the same time , <unk> under the command of Hayes from Nuneaton , were being paddled towards Likomba and Burundi , which were moored together . Challenged by a watchman on Burundi , they persuaded him with their reply that it was the ship 's captain coming back on board . The men from the canoes boarded Burundi and the two man crew on watch jumped overboard . After planting explosive charges on the anchor chain , the commandos guided Nuneaton alongside Likomba to take her and the Burundi in tow . 
 As soon as they were ready , the charges were blown and Nuneaton started to tow Likomba out of the harbour . Aboard Duchessa d 'Aosta , 11 men had managed to get aboard from Vulcan ; while one group planted charges on the anchor chains , another searched below decks collecting prisoners . Blowing the anchor chains , Vulcan started to tow Duchessa d 'Aosta out of the harbour . The explosions had alerted the population of the town , who started to gather on the pier , but no attempts were made to stop the ships from leaving . Several anti @-@ aircraft emplacements opened fire at imaginary targets , believing the explosions to have been caused by an aerial attack , but the six @-@ inch guns protecting the harbour itself remained silent . From entering the harbour to leaving with the ships under tow , the operation had taken 30 minutes , without any losses to the raiding party . 
 Out at sea on 15 January 1942 , March @-@ Phillipps established a routine of watches and placed guards on the 29 prisoners they had taken . During the evening they started to have trouble with the tugs ' engines and the tow ropes to the captured vessels . The next day Vulcan reached the location for the rendezvous and was " captured " at sea by HMS Violet . Nuneaton , suffering from engine trouble , managed to contact the Nigerian collier <unk> by semaphore , which in turn contacted Lagos , and a ship was dispatched to tow them into port . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Special Operations Executive had now demonstrated their ability to undertake operations , no matter the political consequences . Hugh Dalton , the government minister in charge of SOE , informed British Prime Minister Winston Churchill of the outcome of the raid . He also stated his belief that ... " other neutral governments would be impressed that Britain would if needed disregard the legal formalities of war in their efforts to succeed . " The agent in charge of SOE Africa station submitted a report to the head of SOE Colin Gubbins reflecting on the success of Postmaster : " perhaps next time it will not be necessary for prolonged negotiations before undertaking a 30 minute operation . " 
 The Spanish government was furious about the raid , which was seen as a breach of the country 's neutrality . The foreign minister Serrano <unk> described the operation as an : 
 intolerable attack on our sovereignty , no Spaniard can fail to be roused by this act of piracy committed in defiance of every right and within water under our jurisdiction . Do not be surprised , if we return the answer which the case demands — that of arms . 
 In Germany radio stations reported that a ... " British destroyer had entered the harbour and dropped depth charges to blow up the anchor cables and the ship 's crew were shot " and the 21 January 1942 edition of Völkischer Beobachter published an article with the headline " British Denials – Admiralty Lies on Act of Piracy " . British Naval Intelligence , under advice from Commander Ian Fleming , issued their own communique : 
 In view of the German allegations that Allied naval forces have executed a cutting @-@ out operation against Axis ships in the Spanish port of Santa Isabel , Fernando Po , the British Admiralty considers it necessary to state that no British or Allied ship was in the vicinity ... As a result ... of the German Broadcast , the British Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief dispatched reconnaissance patrols to cover the area . A report has now been received that a large unidentified vessel has been sighted , and British naval vessels are proceeding to the spot to make investigations . " 
 The details of the raid were being kept secret even from the British Chiefs of Staff , who were only informed on 18 January 1942 , that Duchessa d 'Aosta had been intercepted 230 miles ( 370 km ) offshore and was being taken to Lagos . 
 On Fernando Po itself , Richard Lippett , who had remained on the island , was taken in for questioning by the Spanish authorities on 17 January 1942 . He managed to persuade them he had had nothing to do with the departure of the ships , nor had he spent any money on the party for the ships ' officers . He was released from custody on 27 January 1942 , but was refused permission to leave the island . He finally left secretly by canoe , arriving in British territory on 1 March 1942 . In the aftermath of the operation , Maid Honor was left in Lagos and eventually sold to the Sierra Leone government as a converted trawler . Duchess d 'Aosta was sailed to Greenock and then managed by Canadian Pacific as the Empire Yukon for the Ministry of War Transport . <unk> was managed by the Elder Dempster Lines , who renamed it <unk> in 1947 and then sold it to Liberia in 1948 . 
 After the raid March @-@ Phillipps was awarded the Distinguished Service Order , Hayes was awarded the Military Cross , and Appleyard a Bar to his Military Cross ; Lippett and Guise were each appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire . Another commando , and the only professional sailor on the raid , Private Anders Lassen , was the first man to board Duchessa d 'Aosta . For conspicuous efficiency in getting the ship under way , Lassen was given a commission in the field , and the immediate award of the Military Cross . 
 March @-@ Phillipps was killed during Operation Aquatint in September 1942 . On the same mission , Hayes evaded capture and crossed the Spanish border , only to be handed over to the Germans who kept him in solitary confinement for nine months before he was executed by firing squad on 13 July 1943 . Appleyard later joined the Special Air Service , and on the same day that Hayes was executed Appleyard was reported missing when his plane failed to return from a mission . Lassen would also join the Special Air Service ; he was awarded two bars to his MC and promoted to major before receiving a posthumous Victoria Cross in Italy in 1945 . 
 = Zesh Rehman = 
 <unk> " Zesh " Rehman ( Urdu : <unk> <unk> ; born 14 October 1983 ) is a British @-@ Pakistani professional footballer who plays for Pahang FA now called Pahang FC in the Malaysia Super League as a defender . 
 He was the first British Asian to start a Premier League match and is the first to have played in all four divisions of professional football in England . He also plays for the Pakistan national football team and was the first Pakistani international footballer to play professional football in England , Thailand , Hong Kong and Malaysia , as well as the first Pakistani international to play in the AFC Cup . He started his career at Fulham and made a total of 30 appearances , having loan spells at Brighton & Hove Albion and Norwich City . A transfer to Queens Park Rangers followed and he went on to make 50 appearances for the club . During his three years there he went on loan to Brighton & Hove Albion , Blackpool and Bradford City , moving permanently to the latter on a free transfer in June 2009 . Having previously represented England at under @-@ 18 , under @-@ 19 and under @-@ 20 levels , in 2005 he made his debut for Pakistan . 
 Outside of his playing career , Rehman is known for being an ambassador for Kick It Out and the Show Racism the Red Card campaign , and his efforts to help British Asian players . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Rehman was born on 14 October 1983 in Birmingham . His father is Khalid Rehman . As a child in Birmingham he played for his local Sunday league team , <unk> . He was brought up in the Aston area of the city and often played football on the streets in addition to representing his school , his district and his county in football . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Fulham = = = 
 When he was just twelve years old he was spotted by a scout and moved with his family to London where he joined the Fulham Academy . He progressed through the junior , youth and reserve teams at Fulham , which led him to sign his first professional contract . Although a centre back by trade , Rehman was used as a holding midfielder as well as right back in his career at Fulham . 
 In the 2003 – 04 season , Rehman made his professional debut on 23 September 2003 in a 1 – 0 defeat away to Wigan Athletic in the second round of the Football League Cup , coming on as a substitute for Junichi <unk> after 57 minutes . Six days later , he was sent on loan to Brighton & Hove Albion of the Second Division , initially for one month until November . He scored on his debut for the club on 30 September , concluding a 3 – 1 away win at Rushden & Diamonds . On 11 October , he opened a 3 – 0 win against Grimsby Town at the Withdean Stadium , finishing a corner by Leon Knight in Bob Booker 's first match in charge . Rehman 's loan was extended to three months ending in January 2004 . He made eleven league appearances , scoring two goals . 
 He made his Premier League debut for Fulham in a goalless draw at Anfield against Liverpool on 17 April 2004 , replacing Bobby <unk> for the final minute of the match . In doing so , he garnered media attention from British Asian groups by being the first British Asian player to play in the top division of English football . In June , Rehman signed a new contract , to keep him until 2006 . 
 On 21 September 2005 in the League Cup second round , Rehman scored his only goal for Fulham , opening a 5 – 4 extra @-@ time win over Lincoln City at Craven Cottage by heading in <unk> <unk> 's cross . In January 2006 he signed for Championship club Norwich City on loan for the rest of the season as defensive cover for the club . He made five starts for them . Having made 30 appearances in all competitions for Fulham , 26 from the starting line @-@ up and four as a substitute , Rehman had to consider his options if he was to get regular football . Although he had two years remaining on his contract , he wanted to play regular first team football , and as a result , he decided to spend the next two seasons getting as much experience as possible . 
 = = = Queens Park Rangers = = = 
 After being released by QPR on 19 May 2009 , On 8 August 2006 , just prior to the start of the 2006 – 07 season , Rehman signed for Championship club Queens Park Rangers ( QPR ) from Fulham on a three @-@ year contract for an undisclosed fee . In his first season at QPR , Rehman made 27 appearances . 
 Towards the end of the season Rehman was sent on loan to former club Brighton & Hove Albion for a month where he gained more first team football experience . He made his debut on 24 March 2007 in a 0 – 0 draw against Huddersfield Town . He ended his loan stint by playing the full 90 minutes , and earning a yellow card in the process , for the final game of the League One season in a 1 – 1 draw at Cheltenham Town on 5 May 2007 , claiming an assist for the opening goal . He featured in eight full games during his loan spell . 
 Returning to QPR at the start of the new season , chances were limited . The 3 – 1 victory over Leicester City on New Years Day 2008 was Rehman 's 50th game in all competitions since leaving Fulham in 2006 . Rehman finished the 2007 – 08 season in the starting line for QPR against the Championship 's new champions , West Bromwich Albion . 
 = = = = Blackpool ( loan ) = = = = 
 Rehman joined Blackpool in a six @-@ month loan deal on 31 July 2008 , along with teammate Daniel <unk> , who joined the club on a permanent basis , while Blackpool defender <unk> <unk> moved to QPR in exchange . He made his debut for Blackpool as a second @-@ half substitute for Jermaine Wright in a 2 – 0 defeat at League Two club Macclesfield Town in the first round of the 2008 – 09 Carling Cup on 12 August 2008 . He was used as an emergency striker due to injuries to three of the club 's strikers . He made his league debut the following Saturday , in a 1 – 1 draw at Norwich City , coming on early in the second half to replace defender Danny <unk> . 
 Three months into his loan spell , in early October , Rehman said of his move to play for Blackpool : " I 'm quite glad to get away from all the hustle and bustle of London . I really like it up here in Blackpool ; it 's a good club with an ambitious young manager . Hopefully , over the next few months I can convince Simon Grayson I 'm worthy of a long @-@ term contract . " On 31 December he returned to QPR after having made three league appearances , all of which were as a substitute . 
 = = = = Bradford City ( loan ) = = = = 
 On 26 January 2009 , Rehman signed a loan deal with League Two club Bradford City , which was to last until the end of the 2008 – 09 season . Rehman had turned down a chance to move to Luton Town and team up with Mick Harford , who was previously the assistant manager at QPR , and said he was only prepared to drop down to League Two if he joined Bradford City . Rehman said of the move , " I was only prepared to drop down the leagues to play for this club . I spoke to the manager and chairmen and I know they want to get Bradford back up to where they belong . I ’ ve been involved in relegation battles in the past and it 's nice to be joining a club pushing for promotion – that 's a good pressure to have . " He made his debut the following day in a 1 – 0 defeat to Bury at Gigg Lane , and in doing so became the first British Asian to play in all four divisions of professional football in England . He made his home debut on 31 January , playing at right back , in a 2 – 0 home win over Grimsby Town at Valley Parade . In March he turned down the chance to play for Pakistan in the Asian Football Confederation Challenge Cup qualifiers in order to help Bradford 's push for promotion . 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 After being released by QPR on 19 May 2009 , Rehman signed a two @-@ year deal with Bradford City on 19 June , saying of the move , " My gut feeling told me to sign for Bradford and I 've absolutely no regrets . From day one I felt at home here . I 'm fortunate enough to have played in all the divisions and I see this as the next step of my journey . " The Bradford manager , Stuart McCall also revealed that Rehman had taken a large pay cut by joining the club , adding , " Zesh is certainly not signing for Bradford for money — he wants to be a success here , and it will be great to have him on board . " He scored his first goal for the club in a 2 – 2 draw with Barnet on 19 September 2009 . 
 Rehman was captained the club during the 2009 – 10 season and went on to play 42 games . He won the PFA Player in the Community awards on 25 March at The Football League Awards . 
 At the start of the following season new manager Peter Taylor kept Rehman as club captain hailing him a " supremely professional individual and a superb ambassador for the football club " . Struggling to get playing time , making only 12 appearances , Rehman in an interview to BBC Radio said that he was not pleased to sit in the substitute bench in the past few matches . He also added that being the skipper of the team , his experience would help the team to perform . For making these comments , he was stripped off his captainship and put in the transfer list . 
 = = = Muangthong United = = = 
 Rehman signed a two @-@ year deal with Thai Premier League side Muangthong United on 19 December 2010 . He made his debut on 30 January 2011 , in the King 's Trophy against <unk> Sharks at the <unk> Stadium ; his new side lost 2 – 1 . His appearance made him the first Pakistan international to play in Thailand . About his debut Rehman commented " I can honestly say I loved the experience . The passion from the 40 @,@ 000 fans in the crowd made it a day to remember " . During his stint in the club , it was managed by English striker Robbie Fowler . He made a total of thirty league appearances for the Thai club . 
 = = = Kitchee = = = 
 Rehman signed a deal with Hong Kong First Division League side Kitchee on 11 January 2012 . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 win over Sun Hei on 31 January . Rehman scored his first goal for his new club in the AFC Cup against Sông Lam Nghệ An of Vietnam . Rehman won his first piece of silverware of his Hong Kong career by playing a leading role in <unk> 2 – 1 League Cup win over <unk> rivals <unk> Pegasus at the Mong Kok Stadium on 15 April 2012 . Rehman helped Kitchee retain the Hong Kong First Division League title with a 4 – 1 victory over Biu Chun Rangers in the last league game to clinch the title , it was his second trophy for the club and it put them in pole position to complete the domestic treble in Hong Kong Rehman and Kitchee finished the season in impressive fashion by overcoming <unk> after penalties to win Hong Kong FA Cup Final at The Hong Kong Stadium . The victory was a historic moment for the club as Kitchee were crowned domestic treble winners , a feat that has never been matched by a Hong Kong club . Rehman made it into the Hong Kong BMA First Division League team of the season at The <unk> Annual Awards dinner . Rehman also achieved the feat of becoming the first Pakistani player to play in AFC Cup . 
 On 29 August 2012 Rehman played the full game in a pre @-@ season friendly against Premier League giants Arsenal in front of a 40 @,@ 000 crowd as the Hong Kong Champions drew 2 – 2 with the Gunners at The Hong Kong Stadium . On 11 May 2013 Rehman won the Hong Kong FA Cup through a 1 – 0 victory over last year finalist Sun Pegasus FC . On 26 May 2013 Rehman helped Kitchee beat Tuen Mun 3 – 0 in the final of the play off to ensure his teams passage into the AFC Cup 2014 . Rehman played fifteen league games for the club during the 2012 / 13 season , which was followed by six appearances in the next season . 
 = = = Pahang FA = = = 
 In December 2013 , Rehman signed for <unk> club Pahang FA on a two @-@ year contract . His former club Kitchee 's president Ken Ng commented " Zesh has contributed hugely to Kitchee 's success over the last 2 years and he will be truly missed " . His new club 's manager Zainal Abidin Hassan said that they were " delighted " as he " has chosen to come to Pahang ahead of several other teams . " He justified his reason of joining the club as " his destiny " . In his first season with the club , he won three trophies – Malaysia Super League , Malaysia FA Cup and Malaysia Cup , thus winning qualification to the 2015 AFC Cup . In the cup , he played six times without scoring a goal . In 2015 Zesh helped Pahang to finish second in the Malaysia Super League , the highest finish for the club in over a decade and in doing so became the highest goalscoring defender in the league netting 6 times , he scored 8 goals in all competitions throughout the season . Pahang also created history by reaching the AFC Cup quarter final for the first time in their history . Zesh played the majority of the season in <unk> displaying his versatility to the team , performing admirably in the holding role . He played 45 from 46 games in all competitions his best career stats in a season to date . Throughout the year he also achieved some personal milestones such as playing over 300 career games across four nations and notching up 100 + games in Asia and completing five years of playing competitive football in the Asia region . He was handed the captain badge in the beginning of their season . On the 28th of June 2016 Zesh announce via his social media accounts he had amicably agreed to terminate with Pahang FC after a successful 3 @-@ year spell at the club . Zesh said : I would love a future return in a coaching role , something which was offered to me at the start of this season but was not the right moment for me . I will be back to visit my sons birth place of Kuantan . Pahang have the best fans in Malaysia & are by far the best I have played for . Leaving here on excellent terms with the hierarchy , fantastic memories & many formed friendships . Good luck to all the staff & team for the rest of the season . Thank you " . Pahang FC were equally pleased with his contribution . Club CEO and Vice President Datuk Akbar V V Abu was quoted as saying : " Zesh served as an excellent player for Pahang for 3 years in a successful trophy winning team . His example and leadership to the young and local players was outstanding . The door for a future return is open anytime . We would love to see him back in a coaching role one day " 
 = = International career = = 
 Rehman originally represented England , and played for them at under @-@ 18 , under @-@ 19 and under @-@ 20 levels . Becoming the first English @-@ born Pakistani to don an England senior football shirt seemed too far away , however , due to lack of first team opportunities at Fulham . Due to his Pakistani parentage , and because he possessed dual Pakistani and British nationality , Rehman also qualified to represent Pakistan , and he eventually opted to play for them , as he considered it to be a more realistic option . A lot of British Asian groups were against this and wanted him to fight more for an England place to set a standard for English @-@ Asian youth . 
 It was , however , an unrealistic aspiration . With that in mind , and with the blessings of his father , Rehman was approached by Malik Riaz Hai <unk> a young football manager and made his international debut for Pakistan in a 1 – 0 win over Sri Lanka in the 2005 South Asian Football Federation Championship on 7 December 2005 at the Peoples Football Stadium in Karachi . Rehman described his international debut as one of the best memories he has in football , adding , " The reception I received from the first moment till the last was unforgettable . I felt loved , appreciated , respected and wanted and most of all the interest in football really grew immensely . " Pakistan ultimately reached the semi @-@ finals before losing out to Bangladesh 1 – 0 . 
 Rehman was named in the Pakistan squad for the 2010 World Cup qualifying matches against Iraq in October 2007 , and played the match in Lahore but could not help contain Asian champions Iraq from winning 7 – 0 . In the second leg on 28 October he captained Pakistan to a 0 – 0 draw . However , he also had to withdraw from the squad for the <unk> Championship 2008 when he came down with food poisoning . After nearly four years out , Rehman returned to the Pakistan team for the 2012 AFC Challenge Cup qualifiers . 
 In September 2013 Rehman represented Pakistan at the <unk> Championship which was held in Nepal . He played all of the games for Pakistan who narrowly missed out on a semi @-@ final spot despite beating Bangladesh in the last group game . His commanding displays during the tournament earned him a place in the Team of the Tournament . In October 2013 , Rehman captained Pakistan in both of their games at The Peace Cup held in the Philippines , and scored the winning goal in the opener against Chinese Taipei . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Rehman caused controversy in 2007 when in an interview with the British weekly newspaper the Eastern Eye he said that players of Asian descent should consider sticking to their roots rather than dreaming of playing for England . Rehman pointed to Michael Chopra , then with Cardiff City , who had been overlooked to play for England despite being the top scorer in the Championship , yet David Nugent , who was then at fellow Championship club Preston North End , was picked . Rehman claimed " Why wasn ’ t ( Chopra ) picked ahead of Dave Nugent ? He 's the top goal scorer in the Championship but he can ’ t get in ( the England set @-@ up ) . So he needs to maybe look at his decision and go play for India instead of hanging on to the dream of playing for England , because it 's not going to happen , end of discussion . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Rehman has said that , his " sole purpose in trying to be a success as a professional footballer is to inspire other Asian players to follow my lead and achieve their goals . " He is an ambassador for the Asian Football Network ( AFN ) , a grassroots community @-@ led initiative designed to support and facilitate the development of grassroots Asian football in the UK . He has also worked with the Professional Footballers ' Association ( PFA ) to try to increase the number of British Asians taking up a career in professional football , and has attended meetings with the PFA in order to achieve this goal . He has also been involved in the Show Racism the Red Card campaign and he has taken part in Chelsea 's " Search for an Asian Star " campaign . On 12 July 2008 , he took part in the Islam Expo event at the Olympia exhibition centre in West Kensington , London , a four @-@ day event whose primary purpose was to build bridges between Britain 's Muslim communities and the rest of society . Rehman took part in a panel giving feedback from his own experiences about the positive use of sport . 
 In April 2008 , Rehman appeared on the United States @-@ based Afghan satellite television network Noor TV and Bangladesh @-@ based Islamic TV discussing being a Muslim footballer and how it is possible to pursue a career in football while sticking to Islamic roots . On 20 April 2008 , he was a guest on the BBC Asian Network radio station show Breakdown revealing his favourite Desi music tunes . In May 2008 , Rehman was awarded the Community Commitment Award at QPR . In April 2008 , Rehman took part in a radio documentary on BBC Radio 1Xtra about British Asians in football which followed his " journey from playground to Premier League " . 
 In May 2010 , he launched The Zesh Rehman Foundation at Valley Parade to encourage children from all backgrounds to participate in football and sport to better themselves . He was named as one of the 50 World Cup Bid Ambassadors for The FA 's World Cup 2018 bid , entered the Show Racism Red Card Hall of Fame , and was invited onto the PFA management committee by Gordon Taylor . 
 In September 2011 , he launched his iPhone application aimed at helping players who move overseas with the language barrier . He said that he thought of developing the application while his stint with Muangthong United as he had difficulty in communicating with his teammates . 
 In 2014 , he was named as on the special South East Asia contributor for the ESPN South East Asia section by writing blogs and columns about football in the rapidly growing football region of Asia . Rehman wrote his second blog for the ESPN South East Asia section a few days after his side recorded victory in the Malaysia Cup quarter @-@ finals . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club statistics = = = 
 As of match played on 13 February 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 5 September 2013 . 
 = <unk> of Zimbabwe = 
 The paper money of Zimbabwe were physical forms of Zimbabwe 's four incarnations of the dollar ( $ or Z $ ) from 1980 to 2009 . The banknotes of the first dollar replaced those of the Rhodesian dollar at par in 1980 following the proclamation of independence . The Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe issued most of the banknotes and other types of currency notes in its history , including the Bearer cheques and Agro cheques ( " Agro " being short for Agricultural ) that circulated between 15 September 2003 and 31 December 2008 : the Standard Chartered Bank also issued their own emergency cheques from 2003 to 2004 . 
 The Chiremba Balancing Rocks in Epworth , Harare is the main illustration on the obverse of regular banknotes of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe : for the emergency Bearer and Agro cheques , the rocks became part of the Reserve Bank 's emblem that also appeared on the obverse . The reverse of dollar notes often illustrate the culture or landmarks of Zimbabwe . 
 The second dollar ( ZWN ) was replaced on 1 August 2008 by the third dollar ( ZWR ) , which was then phased out by fourth dollar ( ZWL ) with short notice on 2 February 2009 because it rapidly lost value . The economic and trade sanctions imposed against the Zimbabwean government and the Reserve Bank made it difficult to incorporate modern security features on most banknotes issued since September 2008 . 
 The Reserve Bank originally planned to <unk> banknotes of the third dollar on 30 June 2009 but the Zimbabwean dollar as a whole has been suspended since 12 April 2009 , implying that banknotes of both the third and fourth dollar are not de jure legal tender . 
 = = History = = 
 The first banknotes of Zimbabwe were issued by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe ( formerly Reserve Bank of Rhodesia ) for the first dollar ( ZWD ) in 1980 to coincide with the independence of Zimbabwe . These notes replaced the circulating banknotes of the Rhodesian Dollar at par . The first series of banknotes ranged from $ 2 to $ 20 , and carried the signature of Dr. Desmond Krogh , then the last Governor of the Reserve Bank of Rhodesia from 1973 . From 1994 to 1997 the Reserve Bank issued a new series of notes ranging from $ 2 to $ 100 , although the $ 2 banknote was withdrawn and replaced by a coin in 1997 . As rising inflation started to affect the purchasing power of the Zimbabwean Dollar , the $ 500 and $ 1 000 banknotes were issued from 2001 to 2005 with enhanced anti @-@ counterfeiting measures . 
 The RBZ also issued special traveller 's cheques in 2003 , with six denominations ranging from $ 1 000 to $ 100 000 . These were short @-@ lived due to unpopularity with the general public : identification was required both during issue and <unk> of such cheques , which could only be used once by the bearer . As usual , banks levied a commission fee on all of the cheques . 
 On 15 September 2003 , the RBZ and Standard Chartered issued special Bearer cheques with denominations ranging from $ 5 000 to $ 20 000 . These , and subsequent issues of the first and second dollars were time limited and lacked sophisticated anti @-@ counterfeiting measures which were heavily used in many modern banknotes such as those of the Swiss Franc . In the first half of 2006 new denominations of $ 50 000 and $ 100 000 were issued , with the $ 1 million denomination being planned for September 2006 ; it was subsequently never issued . 
 The time limits were either ignored or extended by multiple decrees , meaning that all notes of these issues remained legal tender in practice until 21 August 2006 . 
 On 1 August 2006 the banknotes of the second dollar ( ZWN ) , with less elaborate designs , replaced those of the first dollar at the ratio of 1 000 to 1 . The redenomination ( codenamed Operation Sunrise ) was heavily publicised under the banner Zero to Hero , but was also rapid and disorganised which resulted in many people being unable to convert their old Bearer cheques to new issues before the lapse date , The Reserve Bank Governor Dr. Gideon Gono said that " 10 trillion ( first dollars ) were still out there and it had become manure " . 
 Further denominations ranging from $ 5 000 to $ 500 million were issued in the period between August 2006 and May 2008 as cent cheques quickly became outmoded . In the second quarter of 2008 , special Agro cheques ( Agricultural Cheques ) were issued in denominations ranging from $ 5 billion to $ 100 billion as the currency exchange rate was floated . Since the functions were similar to Bearer cheques , it was in regular use as prices continue to rise . These cheques also carried time limits and limited security features . In the final months of the second dollar , the $ 200 000 cheque was the lowest legal tender denomination by decree , despite having its expiry date extended twice . The $ 100 000 000 Bearer Cheque would have been the lowest legal tender denomination in circulation had the expiry dates of currency cheques been enforced without extension , with the $ 100 billion Agro Cheque being the highest whether or not the $ 200 000 note was legal tender . 
 Munich @-@ based security printers Giesecke & Devrient ceased providing banknote paper to the Reserve Bank on 1 July 2008 in response to an official request from the German government and widespread calls for sanctions ; The Jura JSP software end @-@ user licence , issued to the state @-@ owned Fidelity Printers & <unk> was also terminated on 24 July 2008 for similar reasons although the official press statement quoted that it was de facto impossible to prevent the printers from using the software . 
 On 1 August 2008 the banknotes of the third dollar ( ZWR ) , which were printed for the abandoned second phase of the 2006 redenomination , replaced the cheques of the second dollar at the ratio of 10 billion ( 1010 ) to 1 . The Bearer and Agro cheques of the second dollar were phased out along with the smaller denominations of the third dollar on 1 January 2009 . Despite the reform the Reserve Bank issued several high @-@ value denominations up to $ 100 trillion ( $ 1014 ) in the period between September 2008 to January 2009 , which merely kept in similar pace with the cash rate instead of the black market rates . 
 On 2 February 2009 , banknotes of the fourth dollar ( ZWL ) were introduced to replace those of the third dollar at the ratio of one trillion ( 1012 ) to 1 . It was originally envisaged that banknotes of the third dollar would remain legal tender until 30 June 2009 but all banknotes were withdrawn from circulation following the suspension of the Zimbabwe dollar on 12 April 2009 . 
 = = Paper money of the first dollar ( ZWD ) = = 
 The Chiremba Balancing Rocks near Harare is the main artwork used for obverse sides of the first two banknote designs of the first Zimbabwean dollar . Notes of these design also feature on either side major landmarks and landscapes such as the Kariba Dam and fauna . As hyperinflation took hold at the end of the 20th century the quality of the notes deteriorated as printing plates from previous issues were reconstituted for printing emergency notes . Although the notes of the first design were gradually phased out from 1997 , all remaining notes of the first dollar were forcibly demonetised on 22 August 2006 . 
 = = = Desmond Krogh series = = = 
 The Desmond Krogh series was the first series of banknotes for Zimbabwe , which carried the signature of Dr. Desmond C. Krogh , then the last governor of the Reserve Bank of Rhodesia . They are dated 1980 but issued in 1981 ( except for the $ 20 note , which was issued in 1982 ) . The notes bear Salisbury as the name of its capital rather than Harare , as the name was changed on 18 April 1982 . There are four denominations in this series : $ 2 , $ 5 , $ 10 and $ 20 ; its designs make extensive use of the <unk> technique , heavily relied upon by banknotes of many currencies during the 1980s . 
 The 1982 @-@ dated issues banknotes differed little from the earlier , except that it took into account of the renaming of the country 's capital from Salisbury to Harare . However , there was an error with early runs of the $ 10 banknote ( Pick no . 3b ) , because it bears Salisbury as the name of the capital city instead of Harare . These type of issues are rare . Later runs of the $ 10 note ( Pick no . 3c ) corrected the error . There were no $ 2 banknotes dated 1982 : the second run of this denomination was taken in 1983 with K. Moyana as governor of the Reserve Bank . 
 = = = Kombo Moyana series = = = 
 The Kombo Moyana series refers to a series of banknotes which carried Kombo Moyana 's signature after being appointed governor of the Reserve Bank from 1983 to August 1993 . The series bears the new name of Zimbabwe 's capital ( Harare ) and is indifferent to the last two series except for the date and signature . 
 = = = Leonard Tsumba series = = = 
 In August 1993 , Leonard L. Tsumba replaced K. Moyana as governor of the Reserve Bank . The banknotes which carried his signature are referred to as the Leonard Tsumba series . 
 The first banknotes to be issued with his signature was the two last runs of the original designs , dated 1994 . The first run , which consisted of denominations from $ 2 to $ 20 , had the original watermark of the Zimbabwe Bird ( profile angle , short neck ) , whilst the second run consisted only of the $ 2 and $ 5 denominations , bearing the watermark of the bird with a longer neck and at ¾ profile angle . 
 In 1994 the general design of the banknotes was reviewed to keep up with advancing technologies against counterfeiting , which resulted in the release of two new denominations ( $ 50 and $ 100 ) between 1994 and 1995 , also to counter the effects of consumer price inflation , which peaked at 41 @.@ 6 % in 1992 . Although the Chiremba Balancing Rocks were retained , other features including latent imaging in which the letters RBZ can be seen when the banknote is tilted horizontally at the eye level and identification marks for the visually impaired were added to the design , and the neck of the Zimbabwe Bird watermark was longer . The $ 5 , $ 10 and $ 20 banknotes were also revised with the new designs in 1997 , whilst the $ 2 banknote was and replaced by a coin in the same year with the $ 5 denomination undergoing the same process in August 2001 . 
 The $ 500 denomination was first issued with red as the main colour in 2001 . The 2003 @-@ dated versions were brown . It was followed by the $ 1 000 denomination on 2 October 2003 , the sole difference between the two variants of the $ 1 000 notes ( Pick no . 12 ) only being the typeface of the serial number . 
 = = = Gideon Gono series = = = 
 The Gideon Gono series of 2004 carried the signature of the incumbent Reserve Bank governor , Dr. Gideon Gono and consisted of only one denomination of the first dollar ( $ 500 ) . This was the last series of regular banknotes of the first dollar , as hyperinflation forced all regular banknotes series out of use , although remaining legal tender theoretically until 21 August 2006 . 
 = = = Standard Chartered series = = = 
 The Standard Chartered series was a series of emergency bearer cheques issued by the Standard Chartered Bank ( hence the title on the top of these cheques ) and the Cargill Cotton Group . They were authorised by the Reserve Bank as legitimate issues and were valid for six months from the date of issue , the first currency notes of the Zimbabwean dollar to have a time limit . They carry the signature of the company 's finance director Priscilla <unk> and operations director Stephen Newton @-@ Howes . 
 = = = 2003 bearer cheque series = = = 
 The 2003 bearer cheque series was a series of emergency currency notes of the first dollar which were in circulation between 15 September 2003 and the withdrawal of the first dollar on 21 August 2006 . The $ 5 000 , $ 10 000 and $ 20 000 denominations were issued from 15 September 2003 , whilst the $ 50 000 and $ 100 000 denominations , depicting Victoria Falls on reverse , were introduced on 1 October 2005 . Following the redenomination of August 2006 , bearer cheques that were originally scheduled to expire on 31 December 2006 were demonetised early . 
 Bearer cheques dated 15 September 2003 bear the signature of the acting governor Charles <unk> . The remainder of the series bear the signature of Dr. Gideon Gono , who was appointed governor in November 2003 . 
 = = Paper money of the second dollar ( ZWN ) = = 
 The Zimbabwean dollar was first <unk> on 1 August 2006 under a currency reform campaign codenamed Operation Sunrise and involving the motto Zero to Hero . New @-@ style bearer cheques of the second dollar ( ISO 4217 : ZWN ) was introduced and replaced those of the first dollar ( ZWD ) at the ratio of 1 000 to 1 . 
 The change over process was given at short notice and was also rapid because all issues prior to the August 2006 series were to be demonetised and rendered worthless on 21 August 2006 . Poor communications meant that many civilians of Zimbabwe were unable to convert old bearer cheques to new ones before the deadline . 
 = = = 2006 , 2007 and 2008 Bearer cheque series = = = 
 The 2006 bearer cheque series was put into circulation on 1 August 2006 and initially consisted of 14 denominations , ranging from 1 ¢ to $ 100 000 . The cheques were signed by Dr. Gideon Gono and were set to expire on 31 July 2007 , except for the $ 100 and $ 500 cheques , which were initially due to expire on 31 December 2007 , but later extended to 31 July 2008 . The $ 5 denomination was also issued , despite not being widely publicised in the changeover campaign . 
 Two variations that were issued for the $ 10 000 and $ 100 000 denominations are recognised in the Standard Catalog of World Paper Money : the difference between them was the use of digit grouping . Cheques with the denomination expressed as ' 10000 ' or ' 100000 ' bear serial numbers with the ( scarce ) prefix AA , while notes with prefixes AB onwards is expressed as ' 10 000 ' or ' 100 000 ' . 
 The 2007 bearer cheque series was first issued on 2 March 2007 with the introduction of $ 5 000 and $ 50 000 cheques to act as intermediary denominations between the $ 1 000 , $ 10 000 and $ 100 000 cheques respectively . As inflation intensified , the $ 200 000 bearer cheque was also introduced on 1 August 2007 , followed by the joint introduction of the $ 250 000 , $ 500 000 , and $ 750 000 denominations on 20 December 2007 . The $ 200 000 bearer cheque had its date of lapse extended twice up to 31 December 2008 . 
 The $ 50 000 denomination was the first denomination to use the Optically Variable Ink technique , on the value positioned at the top right of the obverse . The $ 750 000 denomination of the December 2007 series was the only note out of all cheques of the second dollar to bear a holographic strip , as the cheque was printed on paper that was prepared for the 1 000 ZWD notes ( Pick No. 12 ) . 
 The circulation of the 2008 bearer cheque series commenced on 18 January 2008 with three denominations ranging from $ 1 million to $ 10 million , and concluded with the issue of the $ 500 million bearer cheque on 15 May 2008 . Three denominations of the 2008 series remained legal tender at the ratio of 1010 to 1 until being demonetised on 31 December 2008 . 
 There are two variants of the $ 10 million denomination , the primary difference being the typeface and size of the serial number . Those with slightly larger serial numbers bear the prefix DA . The $ 25 million banknote is larger in dimension out of the rest of the 2008 series . 
 = = = Agro cheque series = = = 
 The Reserve Bank issued Special Agro ( Agricultural ) cheques from 15 May to 31 July 2008 . Although of a different design and with the intention for use only by farmers , it had found its way into regular use because of the parallel functions with bearer Cheques and the exponential rise of food prices . Following the 2008 currency reform , Agro and bearer cheques were phased out on 1 January 2009 . 
 The four denominations in this series are not the same by dimensions as the $ 25 billion note used different paper from the 500 ZWD banknote of 2001 . The $ 100 billion ( $ 1011 ) Agro Cheque was the largest of the second dollar , sharing the record for the most number of zeroes depicted on a banknote with the Yugoslav 500 billion ( $ 5 × 1011 ) dinar note of 1993 , up until January 2009 . 
 = = Paper money of the third dollar ( ZWR ) = = 
 The 2007 banknote series was prepared by the Reserve Bank in October 2006 for the abandoned second phase of Operation Sunrise . The Chiremba Balancing Rocks was to be reinstated as the main feature on the obverse whilst use of the Zimbabwe Bird watermark continued . There were additional security features as opposed to previous issues , which included security threads , see @-@ through register marks and recognition marks for the partially sighted . Holographic security threads and Optically Variable Ink were used on the $ 100 , $ 500 and $ 1 000 notes . When the redenomination of 1 August 2008 occurred these notes were put into circulation as banknotes of the third dollar between 1 August 2008 to 31 December 2008 . 
 The 2008 banknote series circulated from 29 September 2008 to 12 April 2009 . The series demonstrated the intensity of hyperinflation during the period as the highest denomination increased from $ 1 000 to $ 100 trillion ( $ 1014 ) by January 2009 , the latter being the largest denomination issued by the Reserve Bank . The first issues of the series were the $ 10 000 and $ 20 000 denominations . These were followed by the following denominations : 
 The large number of denominations issued in late @-@ 2008 as well as the suspension of paper supply by Giesecke & Devrient affected the Reserve Bank 's ability to maintain the quality of the banknotes . Later denominations copied design features from the original 2007 banknote series and lacked many modern security features that banknotes of major currencies ( such as the Canadian Dollar ) relied on . The notes denominated from $ 20 000 to $ 500 000 and then from $ 10 million onwards used non @-@ watermarked paper , whilst the $ 500 million notes were printed on pure cotton . A silhouette of the Zimbabwe Bird in Optically Variable Ink was used in such notes to compensate for this , but the iridescent strip was dropped for higher denominations . The $ 10 000 and $ 1 000 000 notes reused paper for the $ 1 000 notes ( Pick no . 72 ) , thereby carrying the embedded holographic thread and watermark . Two types of paper ( regular and lined ) were used on $ 20 000 , $ 50 000 and $ 500 000 banknotes . 
 = = Paper money of the fourth dollar ( ZWL ) = = 
 The Zimbabwe dollar was again reformed on 2 February 2009 when the fourth dollar replaced the third dollar at the ratio of 1 000 000 000 000 ( 1012 ) to 1 with the original intention of phasing out the latter by 1 July 2009 . The 2009 banknote series was issued for the fourth dollar which circulated from 2 February 2009 until the suspension of the dollar on 12 April 2009 . The series consisted of denominations ranging from $ 1 to $ 500 . The notes had a revised design with chevrons as registration devices , the Zimbabwe Bird in Optically Variable Ink and an iridescent strip . Most parts of the design were recycled from designs of past issues and do not have a watermark although a plain space existed in the areas where it would normally be positioned . 
 = = Replacement banknotes = = 
 Special prefixes were allocated for Replacement banknotes of Zimbabwe . The prefixes used were as follows : 
 = = Valuation and collecting ability = = 
 <unk> Zimbabwean banknotes ( such as the $ 100 trillion denomination ) have gained considerable interest from the Numismatic community and buyers in general for its absurdity rather than the design . Some examples of such notes may be sold further in excess of their true face value . 
 The price and value of a Zimbabwean banknote depend on various factors : the rarity , based on factors such as the name of capital city , how long it was printed , or the type of watermark ; its condition , and the national situation at time of issue , such as shortages or hyperinflation . Common designs and variants such as the $ 100 note of 1995 ( Pick no . 9 ) are usually valued at about $ 1 apiece , while rare varieties such as the $ 10 Salisbury error note ( Pick no . 3b ) and the Standard Chartered issues are valued at around $ 100 or more . Zimbabwean banknotes are usually sold by banknote dealers over the counter or on the internet , although the most valued types theoretically qualify for inclusion in auction . 
 = = Other circulating banknotes = = 
 As in every fiscal emergency , hard currency , particularly the United States dollar , has long served as a parallel currency on the black market , and many prices in shops would be posted in US dollars , even during periods when it was illegal to possess foreign currency or to transact business in US dollars . 
 A unique form of circulating specie is the fuel ration coupon , which has been issued in 2005 , 2006 , 2007 and 2008 . Known denominations include 1 , 5 , 10 , 20 , 25 , & 50 litres of petrol ( gasoline ) , kerosene and / or diesel , and translate roughly into the local petrol price ( about 1 UK pound sterling per litre or US $ 1 @.@ 50 in late 2008 ) . Businesses , including Western Union , have been reported paying employees with these coupons , and even auctions have been transacted in this currency . As with much Zimbabwe currency , printing standards are crude and counterfeiting is rampant ; the RBZ has been dissuading this widespread use . 
 = Washington State Route 11 = 
 State Route 11 ( SR 11 ) is a 21 @.@ 28 @-@ mile ( 34 @.@ 25 km ) long state highway that serves Skagit and Whatcom counties in the U.S. state of Washington . SR 11 , known as Chuckanut Drive , begins at an interchange with Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) north of Burlington and continues northwest through several small towns and the Chuckanut Mountains to the Fairhaven district of Bellingham , where the highway turns east and ends again at I @-@ 5 . 
 A segment of what is now SR 11 was originally added to the state highway system in 1895 as a Blanchard – Whatcom County line road . The highway became State Road 6 in 1905 and was named Waterfront Road in 1907 . The road was incorporated into the Pacific Highway in 1913 and U.S. Route 99 ( US 99 ) in 1926 . After an inland bypass was designated by the state to become US 99 in 1931 , Chuckanut Drive became U.S. Route 99 Alternate . During the 1964 highway renumbering , the road became SR 11 . In 1987 , SR 11 was realigned through Bellingham , shifting its northern terminus south to Fairhaven . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 11 , named Chuckanut Drive for its whole route , begins at a partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 5 north of Burlington . From the interchange , the highway travels northwest through farmland , closely paralleling a BNSF Railway route from Mount Vernon to Bellingham , also used by the Amtrak Cascades service . The road turns north to intersect Bow Hill Road , formerly SR 237 until 1991 , east of Edison . SR 11 continues north to Blanchard , where it begins to traverse a narrow strip of land between the Chuckanut Mountains and Samish Bay . Midway between Blanchard and the Skagit – Whatcom county line , the highway travels through a hairpin turn at Oyster Creek . 
 In Whatcom County , SR 11 travels generally northward through part of the oldest state park in Washington , the 2 @,@ 683 @-@ acre ( 10 @.@ 86 km2 ) Larrabee State Park . 
 Just past the park , the route travels through the Chuckanut Bay Community , situated on a small , fairly level peninsula separating Samish and Chuckanut bays . The steep mountainsides return north of the community , however , as SR 11 follows Chuckanut Bay to the southern outskirts of Bellingham . Here , the highway briefly parallels Bellingham Bay as it leaves the rural mountains for the city 's densely populated Fairhaven district . 
 The route initially heads northwest through Fairhaven , passing the district 's middle school and park before becoming 12th Street and crossing over the Interurban Trail . Two blocks north of the trail , SR 11 turns to travel east on Old Fairhaven Parkway , a wide two @-@ lane highway with a center left @-@ turn lane . The route continues past residential and commercial areas for about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to a diamond interchange with I @-@ 5 . While SR 11 ends here , Old Fairhaven Parkway continues east as Connelly Avenue . 
 = = History = = 
 Parts of modern SR 11 have been part of the state highway systems in Washington since 1895 , when a road from Blanchard to Whatcom County became a state @-@ maintained roadway . The road became State Road 6 in 1905 and was named Waterfront Road in 1907 . A survey of a north – south highway from Blaine to Vancouver was approved in 1909 , and the highway was built as the Pacific Highway in 1913 . In Skagit County , the Pacific Highway utilized the pre @-@ existing State Road 6 . Chuckanut Drive , a 20 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 32 km ) section of the Pacific Highway in the Chuckanut Mountains , was opened as a gravel road during the spring of 1916 and paved in 1921 . The Pacific Highway became State Road 1 in a 1923 restructuring of the highway system , at which time State Road 6 was completely replaced . When the U.S. route system was formed in 1926 , the Pacific Highway became US 99 . In 1931 , an inland bypass via Lake Samish was added to State Road 1 and US 99 . The former route of US 99 on Chuckanut Drive became US 99 Alternate . 
 US 99 became Primary State Highway 1 ( PSH 1 ) in 1937 and US 99 Alternate became the Chuckanut Drive branch of the main highway , running from Burlington to downtown Bellingham . A 1964 renumbering introduced a new system of sign routes that was scheduled to go into effect in 1970 . As originally planned , the Chuckanut Drive branch of PSH 1 — already US 99 Alternate — would be co @-@ signed as SR 11 . In 1967 , Secondary State Highway 1F ( SSH 1F ) was established , connecting US 99 Alternate to US 99 via Fairhaven . During the same year , I @-@ 5 replaced US 99 , leading to the removal of the US 99 Alternate designation from what would become SR 11 . In 1970 , the SR 11 designation went into effect , running from Burlington to Downtown Bellingham . 
 SR 11 originally continued northeast through Downtown Bellingham to a terminus at a partial cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 5 just northeast of the downtown district . From Old Fairhaven Parkway , the route continued north on 12th Street in Fairhaven before turning northeast on Boulevard Street . The street split into a pair of one @-@ way streets , Forest Street and State Street , south of downtown . Forest Street merged into State Street in downtown Bellingham , and State Street subsequently merged into Iowa Street soon after . From here , Iowa Street carried SR 11 east for three blocks to a junction with I @-@ 5 . In 1987 , the northernmost portion of SR 11 was realigned to follow the route of former SSH 1F , then known as Old Fairhaven Parkway . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Redback spider = 
 The redback spider ( Latrodectus hasseltii ) is a species of venomous spider indigenous to Australia . It is a member of the cosmopolitan genus Latrodectus , the widow spiders . The adult female is easily recognised by her spherical black body with a prominent red stripe on the upper side of her abdomen and an hourglass @-@ shaped red / orange streak on the underside . Females have a body length of about 10 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) , while the male is much smaller , being only 3 – 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 16 in ) long . 
 Mainly nocturnal , the female redback lives in an untidy web in a warm sheltered location , commonly near or inside human residences . It preys on insects , spiders and small vertebrates that become ensnared in its web . It kills its prey by injecting a complex venom through its two fangs when it bites , before wrapping them in silk and sucking out the liquefied insides . Male spiders and spiderlings often live on the periphery of the female spiders ' web and steal leftovers . Other species of spider and parasitoid wasps prey on this species . The redback is one of few arachnids which usually display sexual cannibalism while mating . The sperm is then stored in the spermathecae , organs of the female reproductive tract , and can be used up to two years later to fertilise several clutches of eggs . Each clutch averages 250 eggs and is housed in a round white silken egg sac . The redback spider has a widespread distribution in Australia , and inadvertent introductions have led to established colonies in New Zealand , Japan , and in greenhouses in Belgium . 
 The redback is one of the few spider species that can be seriously harmful to humans , and its preferred habitat has led it to being responsible for the large majority of serious spider bites in Australia . Predominantly neurotoxic to vertebrates , the venom gives rise to the syndrome of latrodectism in humans ; this starts with pain around the bite site , which typically becomes severe and progresses up the bitten limb and persists for over 24 hours . Sweating in localised patches of skin occasionally occurs and is highly indicative of latrodectism . <unk> symptoms of nausea , vomiting , headache , and agitation may also occur and indicate severe poisoning . An antivenom has been available since 1956 , and there have been no deaths directly due to redback bites since its introduction . 
 = = Taxonomy and naming = = 
 = = = Common names = = = 
 The common name " redback " is derived from the distinctive red stripe along the dorsal aspect of its abdomen . Other common names include red @-@ striped spider , red @-@ spot spider , jockey spider , Murra @-@ <unk> spider , <unk> spider and the Kanna @-@ <unk> spider . 
 = = = History = = = 
 Before DNA analysis , the taxonomy of the widow spider genus Latrodectus had been unclear — changes in the number of species reflect the difficulty of using morphology to determine subdivisions within the genus . Substantial interest in their systematics was most likely prompted by the medical importance of these venomous spiders . Swedish arachnologist Tamerlan Thorell described the redback spider in 1870 from specimens collected in Rockhampton and Bowen in central Queensland . He named it Latrodectus hasseltii in honour of colleague <unk> van Hasselt . In the same paper , he named a female from Cape York with an all @-@ black abdomen L. scelio , now regarded as the same species . These specimens are in the <unk> <unk> in Stockholm . 
 German arachnologist Friedrich Dahl revised the genus in 1902 and named L. <unk> from New Guinea , which was later regarded as a subspecies of the redback . Another subspecies , L. h. <unk> , was described by Norwegian entomologist <unk> Strand in 1911 . Subspecies indica ( of L. scelio ) had been described by Eugène Simon in 1897 , but its origin is unclear . Frederick Octavius Pickard @-@ Cambridge questioned Dahl 's separating species on what he considered minor anatomical details but Dahl dismissed Pickard @-@ Cambridge as an " ignoramus " . Pickard @-@ Cambridge was unsure whether L. hasseltii warranted species status , though he confirmed scelio and hasseltii as a single species , other researchers such as Ludwig Carl Christian Koch noting the differences to be inconsistent . The redback was also considered by some to be conspecific with the katipo ( L. katipo ) , which is native to New Zealand , though Koch regarded them as distinct . 
 Reviewing the genus <unk> in 1959 , arachnologist Herbert Walter Levi concluded that the colour variations were largely continuous across the world and were not suitable for distinguishing the individual species . Instead , he focussed on differences in the morphology of the female sexual organs , and revised the number of recognised species from 22 to 6 . This included reclassifying the redback and several other species as subspecies of the best @-@ known member of the group , the black widow spider ( Latrodectus mactans ) , found in North America and other regions . He did not consider the subspecies L. h. <unk> , L. h. <unk> and L. h. indicus distinct enough to warrant recognition . Subsequently , more reliable genetic studies have split the genus into about 30 species , and the redback has no recognised subspecies in modern classifications . 
 = = = Placement = = = 
 A member of the genus Latrodectus in the family Theridiidae , the redback belongs in a clade with the black widow spider , with the katipo as its closest relative . A 2004 molecular study supports the redback 's status as a distinct species , as does the unique abdomen @-@ presenting behaviour of the male during mating . The close relationship between the two species is shown when mating : the male redback is able to successfully mate with a female katipo producing hybrid offspring . However , the male katipo is too heavy to mate with the female redback , as it triggers a predatory response in the female when it approaches the web , causing the female to eat it . There is evidence of interbreeding between katipo and redbacks in the wild . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult female redback has a body around 1 centimetre ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) long , with slender legs , the first pair of which are longer than the rest . The round abdomen is a deep black ( occasionally brownish ) , with a red ( sometimes orange ) longitudinal stripe on the upper surface and an hourglass @-@ shaped red / orange streak on the underside . Females with incomplete markings or all @-@ black abdomens occasionally occur . The cephalothorax is much smaller than the abdomen , and is black . Redback spiderlings are grey with dark spots , and become darker with each moult . Juvenile females have additional white markings on the abdomen . The bright red colours may serve as a warning to potential predators . Each spider has a pair of venom glands each attached to each of its chelicerae with very small fangs . Small compared to the female , the male redback is 3 – 4 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 – 0 @.@ 16 in ) long and is light brown , with white markings on the upper side of the abdomen and a pale hourglass marking on the underside . 
 Another species in Australia with a similar physique , Steatoda capensis , has been termed the " false redback spider " , but it is uniformly black ( or plum ) , and does not display the red stripe . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Web = = = 
 The redback is mainly nocturnal ; the female remains concealed during the day , and spins her web during the night , usually remaining in the same location for most of her adult life . Classified as a gum @-@ footed tangle web , the web is an irregular @-@ looking tangle of fine but strong silk . Although the threads seem random , they are strategically placed for support and entrapment of prey . The rear portion of the web forms a funnel @-@ like retreat area where the spider and egg sacs are found . This area has vertical , sticky catching threads that run to ground attachments . The vertical strands act as trip wires to initially alert the spider to the presence of prey or threats . They also snare and haul prey into the air when weaker horizontal strands that hold them down , known as guy lines , break when prey thrash around . These webs are usually placed between two flat surfaces , one beneath the other . The female spends more time in the funnel and less time moving around during cooler weather . 
 = = = Prey = = = 
 Redbacks usually prey on insects , but can capture larger animals that become entangled in the web , including trapdoor spiders , small lizards , and even on rare occasion snakes . One web was recorded as containing a dead mouse . The woodlouse ( Porcellio scaber ) is a particularly common food item . Developing spiderlings need size @-@ appropriate prey , and laboratory studies show that they are willing to consume common fruit flies ( Drosophila melanogaster ) , mealworm larvae ( Tenebrio molitor ) , <unk> flies and early nymphs of cockroaches . Food scraps and lighting attract insect prey to areas of human activity , which brings the redbacks . Once alerted to a creature becoming ensnared in a trap line , the redback advances to around a leg 's length from its target , touching it and squirting a liquid glutinous silk over it to immobilise it . It then bites its victim repeatedly on the head , body and leg joints and wraps it in sticky and dry silk . Unlike other spiders , it does not rotate its prey while wrapping in silk , but like other spiders , it then injects a venom that liquefies its victim 's innards . Once it has trussed the prey , the redback takes it to its retreat and begins sucking out the liquefied insides , generally 5 to 20 minutes after first attacking it . Redback spiders do not usually drink , except when starved . 
 Commonly , prey @-@ stealing occurs where larger females take food items stored in other spiders ' webs . When they encounter other spiders of the same species , often including those of the opposite sex , they engage in battle , and the defeated spider is eaten . If a male redback is accepted by a female , it is permitted to feed on the victims snared in the female 's web . Baby spiders also steal food from their mother , which she tries to prevent . They also consume sticky silk as well as small midges and flies . <unk> are cannibalistic , more active ones sometimes eating their less active siblings . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 <unk> hatch from their eggs after about 8 days and can emerge from the egg sac as early as 11 days after being laid , although cooler temperatures can significantly slow their development so that emergence does not occur for months . After hatching they spend about a week inside the egg sac , feeding on the yolk and molting once . Baby spiders appear from September to January ( spring to early summer ) . Male spiders mature through five instars in about 45 – 90 days . Females mature through seven – eight instars in about 75 – 120 days . Males live for up to six or seven months , while females may live between two and three years . Laboratory tests have shown that redbacks may survive for an average of 100 days , and sometimes over 300 days without any food , those starved at 10 ° C faring better than those kept without food at 25 ° C. Spiders are known to reduce their metabolic rates in response to starvation , and can distend their abdomens to store large amounts of food . Redbacks can survive temperatures from below freezing point to 40 ° C , though they do need relatively warm summers , with temperatures of 15 to 25 ° C for two to three months , to survive and breed . 
 Redback spiderlings cohabit on the maternal web for several days to a week , during which time sibling cannibalism is often observed . They then leave by being carried on the wind . They follow light and climb to the top of nearby logs or rocks before extending their abdomens high in the air and producing a droplet of silk . The liquid silk is drawn out into a long gossamer thread that , when long enough , carries the spider away . This behaviour is known as ballooning or kiting . Eventually , the silken thread will adhere to an object where the young spider will establish its own web . They sometimes work cooperatively , climbing , releasing silk and being carried off in clusters . Juvenile spiders build webs , sometimes with other spiders . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Before a juvenile male leaves its mother 's web , it builds a small sperm web on which it deposits its sperm from its gonads and then collects it back into each of its two palps ( copulatory organs ) , because the gonads and palps are not internally connected . After it moults into its last instar , it sets off wandering to seek a female . The male spider does not eat during this period . How males find females is unclear , and it is possible they may balloon like juveniles . A Western Australian field study found that most males took 6 to 8 weeks to travel around 3 to 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 9 @.@ 8 to 11 @.@ 5 ft ) with occasional journeys of over 8 m ( 26 ft ) , but that only around 11 – 13 % successfully found a mate . They are attracted by pheromones , which are secreted by unmated sexually @-@ mature female redback spiders onto their webs and include a serine derivative ( N @-@ 3 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> ( S ) -2 @-@ <unk> @-@ L @-@ serine ) . This is thought to be the sole method by which males assess a female 's reproductive status , and their courtship dismantles much of the <unk> @-@ marked web . 
 During mating , the male redback attempts to copulate by inserting one of its palps into the one of the female 's two spermathecae ( sperm storage organs ) , each of which has its own insemination orifice . It then tries and often succeeds in inserting the other palp into the female 's second orifice . The redback spider is one of only two animals known where the male has been found to actively assist the female in sexual cannibalism . In the process of mating , the much smaller male somersaults to place his abdomen over the female 's mouthparts . In about two of three cases , the female fully consumes the male while mating continues . Males which are not eaten die of their injuries soon after mating . Sacrifice during mating is thought to confer two advantages to the males . The first is the eating process allows for a longer period of copulation and thus fertilisation of more eggs . The second is females which have eaten a male are more likely to reject subsequent males . Although this prohibits future mating for the males , this is not a serious disadvantage , because the spiders are sufficiently sparse that less than 20 % of males ever find a potential mate during their lifetimes , and in any case , the male is functionally sterile if he has used the contents of both of his palps in the first mating . 
 Some redback males have been observed using an alternative tactic that also ensures more of their genetic material is passed on . Juvenile female redbacks nearing their final moulting and adulthood have fully formed reproductive organs , but lack openings in the exoskeleton that allow access to the organs . Males will bite through the exoskeleton and deliver sperm without performing the somersault seen in males mating with adult females . The females then moult within a few days and deliver a clutch of fertilised eggs . 
 Once the female has mated , the sperm is stored in one or both of her spermathecae . The sperm can be used to fertilise several batches of eggs , over a period of up to two years ( estimated from observations of closely related species ) , but typically restarts the female 's pheromone production advertising her sexual availability about three months after mating . A female spider may lay four to ten egg sacs , each of which is around 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 39 in ) in diameter and contains on average around 250 eggs , though can be as few as 40 or as many as 500 . She prepares a shallow concave disc around 3 mm ( 1 ⁄ 8 in ) in diameter before laying eggs into it over a period of around five minutes before laying more silk to complete the sac , which becomes spherical , the whole process taking around one and a quarter hours . She can produce a new egg sac as early as one to three weeks after her last . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The World Spider Catalog gives the distribution of the redback spider as Southeast Asia to Australia , and New Zealand . It is probably native to Australia ; however , it has been suggested that it may have been spread to Australia by human activities , because it was first found at seaports . Queensland researchers Robert Raven and Julie @-@ Ann Gallon also argued its preference for habitats altered by humans to be further evidence of this . Spider expert Barbara York Main queried that were it indeed introduced , it would be odd that Australia was missing from the worldwide distribution of Latrodectus species . The redback 's close relationship with the New Zealand katipo also supports the native status of both in their respective countries . 
 The species was known by 1850 in South Australia , only 14 years after European settlement there , but had not been reported in early spider collections in other colonies . Outside urban areas , the redback is more often found in drier habitats ranging from sclerophyll forest to desert , even as harsh as the Simpson Desert . It became much more common in urban areas in the early decades of the 20th century , and is now found in all but the most inhospitable environments in Australia and its cities . It is particularly common in Brisbane , Perth and Alice Springs . The redback spider is commonly found in close proximity to human residences . Webs are usually built in dry , dark , sheltered sites , such as among rocks , in logs , tree hollows , shrubs , old tyres , sheds , outhouses , empty tins and boxes , children 's toys or under rubbish or litter . <unk> and the undersurface of toilet seats are common sites . Populations can be controlled by clearing these habitats , squashing the spiders and their egg sacs , and using pesticide in outhouses . The CSIRO Division of Entomology recommends against the use of spider pesticides due to their toxicity , and because redbacks are rapid <unk> anyway . 
 Spiders in the French territory of New Caledonia in the Pacific were identified as L. <unk> in 1920 , based on morphology . Their behaviour differs from Australian redbacks , as they do not engage in sexual cannibalism and are less prone to biting humans . The first recorded envenomation in New Caledonia was in 2007 . 
 = = = Introductions = = = 
 The redback spider 's affinity for human @-@ modified habitat has enabled it to spread to several countries via international shipping and trade . Furthermore , its tolerance to cold means that it has the ability to colonise many temperate countries with a winter climate cooler than Australia . This is concerning due to the risks to people being bitten who are unaware of its venomous nature , and also to the conservation of local threatened insect species that the redback might prey upon . 
 Redback spiders are also found in small colonies in areas of New Zealand . They are frequently intercepted by quarantine authorities , often among steel or car shipments . They were introduced into New Zealand in the early 1980s and now are found around Central Otago ( including Alexandra , Bannockburn and near <unk> ) in the South Island and New Plymouth in the North Island . Authorities in the United Arab Emirates warn residents and visitors of redback spiders , which have been present since 1990 . Colonies have also been established in greenhouses in Belgium , and isolated observations indicate possible presence in New Guinea , the Philippines , and India . Some redbacks were found in Preston , Lancashire , England , after a container of parts arrived from Australia ; some may have escaped into the countryside before pest controllers could destroy them . One redback was recently found in a back garden in Dartford in Kent . Two females were discovered in the Iranian port city of Bandar Abbas in 2010 . 
 There is an established population of redback spiders in Osaka , Japan , thought to have arrived in cargoes of wood chips . In 2008 , redback spiders were found in Fukuoka , Japan . Over 700 have been found near the container terminal in Hakata Bay , Fukuoka City . Dispersal mechanisms within Japan are unclear , but redbacks are thought to have spread by walking or by being carried on vehicles . In September 2012 , a woman was hospitalised after being bitten in the Higashi Ward of Fukuoka City . Signs warning about redback spiders have been posted in parks around the city , as Japan previously had no dangerous spiders . 
 = = Predators and parasitoids = = 
 The black house spider ( <unk> insignis ) , daddy @-@ long @-@ legs spider ( Pholcus <unk> ) and the giant daddy @-@ long @-@ legs spider ( <unk> <unk> ) are known to prey on the redback spider , and redbacks are often absent if these species are present in significant numbers . <unk> nigricornis , a spider wasp , is a parasitoid of the adult redback . Other wasps of the families <unk> and Ichneumonidae parasitise redback eggs , and <unk> lacewings ( Neuroptera and <unk> ) prey on redback eggs . 
 = = Bites to humans = = 
 = = = Incidence = = = 
 The redback spider is responsible for far more envenomations requiring antivenom than any other creature in Australia . Estimates of the number of people thought to be bitten by redback spiders each year across Australia range from 2 @,@ 000 to 10 @,@ 000 . The larger female spider is responsible for almost all cases of redback spider bites . The smaller male was thought to be unable to <unk> a human , although some cases have been reported ; their rarity is probably due to the male 's smaller size and proportionally smaller fangs , rather than the male being incapable of biting or lacking potent venom . The bite from both juvenile and mature females appear to have similar potency . The male bite usually only produces short @-@ lived , mild pain . Most bites occur in the warmer months between December and April , in the afternoon or evening . As the female redback is slow @-@ moving and rarely leaves her web , bites generally occur as a result of placing a hand or other body part too close to the web , such as when reaching into dark holes or wall cavities . Bites often also occur when a hidden spider is disturbed in objects such as clothes , shoes , gloves , building materials or garden tools . 
 A 2004 review reported 46 % of bites occurring on distal extremities of the limbs , 25 % on proximal areas of limbs ( upper arms and thighs ) , 21 % on the trunk , and 7 % on the head or neck . In some cases the same spider bites a victim multiple times . Historically , victims were often bitten on the genitalia , though this phenomenon disappeared as outhouses were superseded by plumbed indoor toilets . Conversely , bites on the head and neck have increased with use of safety helmets and ear muffs . Precautions to avoid being bitten include wearing gloves and shoes while gardening , not leaving clothes on the floor , and shaking out gloves or shoes before putting them on . Also , children can be educated not to touch spiders . 
 = = = Venom = = = 
 The redback and its relatives in the genus <unk> are among the most dangerous spider genera , alongside funnel @-@ web spiders ( <unk> and <unk> ) , mouse spiders ( <unk> ) , banana spiders ( <unk> ) and recluse spiders ( <unk> ) . Venom is produced by holocrine glands in the spider 's chelicerae ( mouth parts ) . Venom accumulates in the lumen of the glands and passes through paired ducts into the spider 's two hollow fangs . The venom of the redback spider is thought to be similar to that of the other Latrodectus spiders . It contains a complex mixture of cellular constituents , enzymes and a number of high @-@ molecular @-@ weight toxins , including insect toxins and a vertebrate neurotoxin called alpha @-@ latrotoxin , which is active in humans . 
 In vertebrates , alpha @-@ latrotoxin produces its effect through destabilisation of cell membranes and degranulation of nerve terminals , resulting in excessive release of neurotransmitters , namely acetylcholine , norepinephrine and GABA . Excess neurotransmitter activity leads to the clinical manifestations of envenomation , although the precise mechanisms are not well @-@ understood . Female redbacks have an average of around 0 @.@ 08 – 0 @.@ 10 mg of venom , and experiments indicate that the median lethal dose ( LD50 ) for mice at room temperature is 10 – 20 % of this quantity ( 0 @.@ 27 – 0 @.@ 91 mg / kg based on the mass of the mice used ) , but that it is considerably more deadly for mice kept at lower or higher temperatures . Pure alpha @-@ latrotoxin has an LD50 in mice of 20 – 40 µg / kg . 
 The specific variant of the vertebrate toxin found in the redback was cloned and sequenced in 2012 , and was found to be a sequence of 1180 amino acids , with a strong similarity to the equivalent molecule across the Latrodectus mactans clade . The syndromes caused by bites from any spiders of the Latrodectus genus have similarities ; there is some evidence there is a higher incidence of sweating , and local and radiating pain with the redback , while black widow envenomation results in more back and abdominal pain , and abdominal rigidity is a feature common with bites from the west coast button spider ( Latrodectus <unk> ) of South Africa . 
 One crustacean @-@ specific and two insect @-@ specific neurotoxins have been recovered from the Mediterranean black widow ( L. tredecimguttatus ) , as have small peptides that inhibit angiotensin @-@ 1 @-@ converting enzyme ; the venom of the redback , although little @-@ studied , likely has similar agents . 
 = = = Antivenom = = = 
 Redback antivenom was developed by Commonwealth Serum Laboratories , then a government body involved with discovering antivenoms for many venomous Australian creatures . Production involves the milking of venom from thousands of redbacks and repeatedly inoculating horses with non @-@ lethal doses of it . The horses ' immune systems make polyclonal antibodies . Blood plasma , containing the antibodies , is extracted by plasmapheresis . The plasma is treated with pepsin , and the active F ( ab ' ) 2 fragments are separated and purified . Each vial contains 500 units of redback antivenom in approximately 1 @.@ 5 ml , which is enough to inactivate 5 mg redback spider venom . The antivenom has been safely administered to women in various stages of pregnancy . 
 Redback antivenom has been widely used in Australia for decades , although evidence from controlled studies for its effectiveness has been lacking . Further studies are needed to confirm or refute its effectiveness . It appears clinically active against <unk> caused by Steatoda spiders ; however , as these cases are often mild and the evidence of its effectiveness is limited , this treatment is not recommended . Similarly , the antivenom has been effective with those of L. katipo , and L. tredecimguttatus . Animal studies also support its use against envenomation from other widow spiders , having successfully been tested against venom from L. mactans , L. hesperus , and L. tredecimguttatus ( synonym L. lugubris ) . 
 = = = Signs and symptoms = = = 
 <unk> from a redback spider bite produces a syndrome known as latrodectism ; a half to two @-@ thirds of people bitten develop significant pain or systemic symptoms . The diagnosis is made from the clinical condition , often based on the victim being aware of a bite and ideally with identification of the spider . Laboratory tests are rarely needed and there is no specific test for the venom or latrodectism . 
 The redback 's small size means that swelling or puncture marks at the bite site are uncommon . The bite may be painful from the start , but more often only feels like a pinprick or mild burning sensation . Within an hour , a more severe local pain may develop with local sweating and sometimes piloerection ( goosebumps ) — these three symptoms together are a classic presentation of redback spider envenomation . Pain , swelling and redness can spread proximally up a limb or away from the bite site and regional lymph nodes may become painful . Some subjects with delayed symptoms may present with a characteristic sweating and pain in the lower limbs , generally below the knees , or a burning sensation in the soles of the feet . This may eventuate even if the person was bitten somewhere else on their body . 
 Around one in three subjects develops systemic envenomation ; this may occur after a number of hours , or rarely , be delayed for more than 24 hours ; symptoms typically include nausea , vomiting , abdominal or chest pain , agitation , headache , generalised sweating and hypertension . Severe pain usually persists for over 24 hours after being bitten , and symptoms of envenomation may linger for weeks or even months . Rare complications include seizure , coma , pulmonary edema , respiratory failure or localised skin infection . Children , the elderly , or those with serious medical conditions are at much higher risk of severe effects and death resulting from a bite . Infants have died within hours of a bite , but adult fatalities have taken up to 30 days . 
 Children and infants may be unable to report being bitten , making it difficult to associate their symptoms with a spider bite . Symptoms seen in infants include inconsolable crying , refusing to feed and a general erythematous rash . Muscle aches and pains , and neck spasm are often seen in children over four years of age . 
 Unlike those of some other Australian spiders , redback bites do not <unk> . <unk> has been misdiagnosed as various medical conditions including acute hepatitis , sepsis , testicular torsion or an acute abdomen . 
 = = = Treatment = = = 
 Treatment is based on the severity of poisoning from the bite ; the majority of cases do not require medical care , and patients with localised pain , swelling and redness usually only require local application of ice and simple oral analgesia such as paracetamol . Pressure immobilisation of the wound site is not recommended , as the venom spreads very slowly and is not affected . Keeping the victim still to reduce the spread of the venom is beneficial . 
 Hospital assessment is recommended if simple pain relief does not resolve local pain , or clinical features of systemic envenoming occur . Opioid analgesics may be necessary to relieve pain . Antivenom is generally given for adults suffering severe local pain or symptoms of systemic envenomation consistent with latrodectism , which include pain and swelling spreading proximally from site , distressing local or systemic pain refractory to simple analgesia , chest pain , abdominal pain , or excessive sweating ( diaphoresis ) . A significant proportion of bites will not result in envenomation or any symptoms developing ; around 2 – 20 % of bite victims require treatment with the antivenom . In an Australian study of 750 emergency hospital admissions for spider bites where the spider was definitively identified , 56 were from redbacks . Of these , 37 had significant pain lasting over 24 hours , but only six were treated with the antivenom . 
 The antivenom manufacturer 's product information recommends one vial , although this is often insufficient . Hence current guidelines indicate two vials , with a further two vials recommended if symptoms do not resolve within two hours . The antivenom can be given by injection intramuscularly ( IM ) or intravenously ( IV ) . The manufacturer recommends IM use , with IV administration reserved for life @-@ threatening cases . However , toxicologist Geoffrey Isbister has suggested IM antivenom is not as effective as IV antivenom , after finding that IM antivenom takes longer to reach the blood serum . These concerns have led two handbooks to recommend IV in preference to IM administration in Australian practice . Despite a long history of usage and anecdotal evidence of effectiveness , there is a lack of data from controlled studies confirming the antivenom 's benefits . Before the introduction of antivenom , benzodiazepines and intravenous calcium gluconate were used to relieve symptoms of pain and distress , although calcium is not recommended as its benefit has not been shown in clinical trials . 
 Studies support the safety of antivenom , with around a 5 % chance of an acute reaction , 1 – 2 % of anaphylaxis and 10 % chance of a delayed reaction due to serum sickness . Nevertheless , it is recommended that an injection of adrenaline be ready and available in case it is needed to treat a severe anaphylactic reaction , and also that the antivenom from the vial be administered diluted in a 100 ml bag of intravenous solution for infusion over 30 minutes . While it is rare that patients report symptoms of envenomation lasting weeks or months following a bite , there are case reports from the 1990s in which antivenom was reported to be effective in the relief of chronic symptoms when administered weeks or months after a bite , however , in the vast majority of cases , it is administered within 24 hours . 
 = = = Prognosis = = = 
 In almost all cases , symptoms resolve within a week . Fatalities are very unlikely ; no deaths have been reported since the introduction of antivenom in 1956 , but before this , redback spider bites had resulted in at least 14 deaths in Australia . 
 = = Bites to animals = = 
 Redback spider bites are difficult to diagnose in pets unless witnessed . Dogs appear to have some resistance . They are at serious risk only if bitten many times , and rarely need antivenom . Cats are likely to be more susceptible and require antivenom , which can reverse symptoms very quickly . Guinea pigs , horses and camels are very susceptible . As with humans , the symptoms are predominantly autonomic in nature alongside pain at the bite site . Dogs may also suffer vomiting and diarrhoea , muscle tremors or clonic contractions , and abdominal wall rigidity , while cats may salivate excessively , protrude their tongue or be <unk> . 
 = = Historical treatment of bites = = 
 Most traditional or historical first @-@ aid treatments for redback spider bites are either useless or dangerous . These include making incisions and promoting bleeding , using ligatures , applying alkaline solutions , providing warmth , and sucking the venom out . In modern first aid , incising , sucking , applying bandages and <unk> are strongly discouraged . In 1893 , the Camperdown Chronicle reported that a doctor noticed that a severely ill <unk> victim got much better overnight following treatment using injections of strychnine and cocaine ; strychnine had been popular as a snake bite antidote , but it was not effective . As of 2011 , administration of magnesium sulphate was reported to have had some benefit though evidence of effectiveness is weak . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Indigenous Australians in New South Wales mixed the venom with that of snakes and pine tree gum to form a broth used to coat spear tips . Slim Newton drew popular attention to redbacks with his song " The Redback on the Toilet Seat " , which won the Golden Guitar at the first Country Music Awards of Australia in 1973 . Newton recalled an occasion when a friend used his outside toilet where the light globe had blown and reported he was lucky there was not a redback spider on the toilet seat . The phrase inspired him to write the song . A sculpture of an impossibly large redback , one of Australia 's big things , was built in 1996 at Eight Mile Plains , Queensland . The Angels 1991 album Red Back Fever takes its name from the spider . Matilda Bay Brewing Company produces a wheat beer called Redback , with the distinctive red stripe as the logo . The redback appears in the name and emblem of the South Australia cricket team . The Airborne Redback , an Australian ultralight trike , was also named after the spider . Redback Boots is an Australian <unk> manufacturing company , which uses the spider in its name and logo . In 2006 a redback spider stamp was designed as part of a " Dangerous Australians " stamp series , but was withheld from general circulation by Australia Post due to concerns that the realistic depiction would scare people opening their letter boxes . 
 = Richard Wright ( musician ) = 
 Richard William " Rick " Wright ( 28 July 1943 – 15 September 2008 ) was an English musician , composer , singer and songwriter . He was a founding member , keyboardist and vocalist of the progressive rock band Pink Floyd , performing on all of the group 's albums , except for The Final Cut , including The Piper at the Gates of Dawn , The Dark Side of the Moon , Wish You Were Here and The Division Bell , and playing on all of their tours . 
 Wright grew up in Hatch End , London and met future Pink Floyd bandmates Roger Waters and Nick Mason while studying at the Regent Street Polytechnic . The group found commercial success in 1967 with frontman Syd Barrett before Barrett 's instability led to him being replaced by David Gilmour , with Wright taking over songwriting duties with Waters . Initially a straightforward singer / songwriter , Wright later acted as an arranger to Waters and Gilmour 's compositions . He began to contribute less towards the end of the 1970s and left the band after touring The Wall in 1981 . He rejoined the band as a session player in 1987 for A Momentary Lapse of Reason , and became a full @-@ time member again for The Division Bell in 1994 . Sessions with Wright during this period were later released on the album The Endless River . Away from the Floyd , Wright recorded two solo albums , including a collaboration with Anthony Moore on Broken China , and briefly formed the duo Zee . After rejoining Waters , Mason and Gilmour as Pink Floyd for Live 8 in 2005 , he became part of Gilmour 's regular solo touring band , singing occasional lead on songs such as " Arnold Layne " , before his death in September 2008 . 
 Overshadowed by band mates Barrett , Waters and Gilmour and being the quietest and most reserved member of Pink Floyd , Wright 's contributions have been overlooked , but his death brought a reappraisal and recognition of his talents . His jazz and improvisation influences and keyboard performances were an important part of the Pink Floyd sound ; being a prominent player of the Farfisa and Hammond organs and the Kurzweil synthesizer . Wright sang regularly in the band , and occasionally took the lead vocal on Pink Floyd songs such as " Time " , " Remember a Day " and " Wearing the Inside Out " . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wright , whose father was head biochemist at <unk> Dairies , grew up in Hatch End , north west London and was educated at the Haberdashers ' Aske 's School . He taught himself to play guitar , trumpet and piano at age 12 after he was recuperating from breaking a leg . His mother helped and encouraged him to play the piano . He took private lessons in musical theory and composition at the Eric Gilder School of Music and became influenced by the trad jazz revival , learning the trombone and saxophone as well as the piano . Uncertain about his future , he enrolled in 1962 at the Regent Street Polytechnic which was later incorporated into the University of Westminster . There he met fellow musicians Roger Waters and Nick Mason , and all three joined a band formed by classmate Clive Metcalf called Sigma 6 . 
 Wright 's position in the band was tenuous to begin with , as he did not choose a definitive instrument , playing piano if a pub had one , otherwise settling on the trombone or rhythm guitar . Wright moved in with Waters and Mason to a house in Stanhope Gardens , Highgate , and began serious rehearsals to become a professional group . Although Mason and Waters were competent students , Wright found architecture of little interest and after only a year of study moved to the London College of Music . He took a break from studies and travelled to Greece for a sabbatical . Their landlord , Mike Leonard , purchased a Farfisa organ , and briefly replaced Wright in the band . However , the organ ultimately became Wright 's main instrument . Through a friend , he arranged the fledgling group 's first recording session in a West Hampstead studio , just before Christmas 1964 . Guitarists Bob Klose and Syd Barrett joined the band , which became Pink Floyd . 
 = = Pink Floyd = = 
 Pink Floyd had stabilised around Barrett , Waters , Mason and Wright by mid @-@ 1965 , and after frequent gigging that year became regulars on the Underground live circuit in London . While Barrett was the dominant member , writing most material , singing most lead vocals and playing lead guitar , Wright played a supportive role , playing keyboards and singing , with occasional lead , and writing his own material . As the most qualified musician , Wright was responsible for tuning guitars , and would often tune Waters ' bass for him in concert . Later on , he had a <unk> to tune guitars silently during gigs . In the band 's early days , before acquiring a full @-@ time road crew , Wright was responsible for unloading the gear at the end of each gig . 
 While not credited for vocals on The Piper at the Gates of Dawn , he sang lead on Barrett @-@ penned songs like " Astronomy Domine " and " Matilda Mother " . Examples of his early compositions include " Remember a Day " , " See @-@ Saw " , " Paint Box " and " It Would Be So Nice " . Wright was close friends with Barrett , and at one point the pair shared a flat in Richmond . After Barrett left the group in 1968 due to mental health issues , Wright considered leaving and forming a group with Barrett , but realised it would not have been practical . 
 Following Barrett 's departure and replacement by David Gilmour , Wright took over writing duties with Waters but gradually became less involved as a singer and songwriter as the band 's career progressed . His organ playing remained an important part of the band 's live set , including " Interstellar Overdrive " , " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " and " Careful with That Axe , Eugene " and he contributed musical themes for film scores ( More , Zabriskie Point and Obscured by Clouds ) . He made significant contributions to Pink Floyd 's long , epic compositions such as " Atom Heart Mother " , " Echoes " ( on which he harmonised with Gilmour for the lead vocals ) and " Shine On You Crazy Diamond " . On 1973 's The Dark Side of the Moon he composed the music for " The Great Gig in the Sky " and " Us and Them " . He also contributed to other album tracks such as " Breathe " and " Time " , singing the lead vocals on the latter 's chorus . 
 Wright 's contributions to the band diminished in the late 1970s as Waters began to write more material , with Animals being the first album that he did not receive any songwriter credits . By the time the group was recording The Wall in 1979 , Waters had become frustrated that Wright was not contributing enough yet still claiming an equal share of production royalties . Wright refused to catch up on the recording backlog as his first marriage had deteriorated and he had not seen enough of his children , deciding family was more important . Waters considered suing Wright , but ultimately decided an easier thing to do would be for Wright to leave the band at the end of the project . As the band was in financial trouble at the time , Wright agreed to these terms . Several other musicians , including Waters , Gilmour , producer Bob Ezrin , composer Michael Kamen and session player Fred Mandel played keyboards on The Wall . Wright was retained as a salaried session musician during the live concerts to promote that album in 1980 – 81 , but ironically he became the only member of Pink Floyd to profit from the initial run of the costly Wall shows , since the net financial loss had to be borne by the three remaining " full @-@ time " members . Wright did not attend the 1982 premiere of the film version of Pink Floyd — The Wall . In 1983 , Pink Floyd released The Final Cut , the only album from the band on which Wright does not appear . His absence from the credits was the first time fans realised he had left the group , which was officially confirmed some years later . 
 After Waters ' departure in 1985 , Wright began to contribute to Pink Floyd again , beginning with sessions for the album A Momentary Lapse of Reason . However , he did not legally rejoin as an equal to Gilmour and Mason , and was a salaried musician for the resulting tour , as his contract said he could not rejoin as a full member . On the album credits , his name was listed after Mason and Gilmour and his photo did not appear on the cover . 
 By 1994 , he had rejoined the group full @-@ time as an equal partner with Gilmour and Mason . He co @-@ wrote five songs and sang lead vocals on one song ( " Wearing the Inside Out " ) for the next Pink Floyd album , The Division Bell . This was followed by the double live album and video release Pulse in 1995 . Wright , like Mason , performed on every Pink Floyd tour . 
 On 2 July 2005 , Wright , Gilmour and Mason were joined by Waters on stage for the first time since the Wall concerts for a short set at the Live 8 concert in London . This was the last time that all four ( post @-@ Barrett ) Pink Floyd members performed together . Wright underwent eye surgery for cataracts in November 2005 , preventing him from attending Pink Floyd 's induction into the UK Music Hall of Fame . 
 Wright 's last Floyd appearance , a posthumous one , was on 2014 's The Endless River . The album contained mostly instrumental music recorded during the Division Bell sessions in 1993 @-@ 1994 . 
 = = Other work = = 
 Wright rarely played live outside of Pink Floyd compared to the other members . Along with Gilmour , Wright played on Barrett 's second solo album , Barrett in 1970 and helped with production . He later recalled working on the album as a way of helping Barrett in any way possible . In 1974 , he guested at a concert by Sutherland Brothers & Quiver at Newcastle Polytechnic . 
 Wright recorded his first solo project , Wet Dream , in early 1978 in Super Bear Studios , France , which featured touring guitarist Snowy White and saxophonist Mel Collins . The album was released in September with minimal commercial success . 
 During 1984 , Wright formed a new musical duo with Dave Harris ( from the band Fashion ) called Zee . The pair had been introduced by a mutual friend , saxophonist Raphael Ravenscroft . They signed a record deal with EMI Records and released only one album , Identity , which was a commercial and critical flop . Wright later referred to Zee as " an experiment best forgotten " . 
 In 1996 , inspired by his successful input into The Division Bell , Wright released his second solo album , Broken China , which had been co @-@ written with lyricist Anthony Moore , who helped with production and engineering . The album covers the theme of depression and helped Wright come to terms with seeing friends affected by it . Musical contributions came from Pino Palladino on bass , Manu Katché on drums , Dominic Miller ( known from his guitar work with Sting ) and Tim Renwick , another Floyd associate , on electric guitar . Gilmour contributed a guitar part for " Breakthrough " but his performance didn 't make the final mix of the album . Wright considered taking the album on tour , but concluded it wouldn 't be financially viable . Sinéad O 'Connor sang lead vocal on two tracks , " Reaching for the Rail " and " Breakthrough " , with Wright covering the remainder . 
 In 1999 , touring Floyd keyboardist Jon Carin joined with Wright 's wife to bring Wright and Waters back together after some 18 years apart ; the two men met backstage after a tour date by Waters . 
 Wright played at several of Gilmour 's solo shows in 2002 , contributing keyboards and vocals , including his own composition " Breakthrough " . In 2006 , he became a regular member of Gilmour 's solo touring band along with former Floyd sidemen Jon Carin , Dick Parry and Guy Pratt . He contributed keyboards and background vocals to Gilmour 's solo album , On an Island , and performed live in Europe and North America that year . On stage with Gilmour he played keyboards , including a revival of the Farfisa for performing " Echoes " . Wright sang lead on " Arnold Layne " , which was released as a live single . He declined an offer to join Waters and Mason on the The Dark Side of the Moon Live tour to spend more time working on a solo project . 
 In 2006 , Wright joined Gilmour and Mason for the official screening of the P • U • L • S • E DVD . Inevitably , Live 8 surfaced as a subject in an interview . When asked about performing again , Wright replied he would be happy on stage anywhere . He explained that his plan was to " meander " along and play live whenever Gilmour required his services . The same year , he co @-@ wrote the Helen Boulding B @-@ side , " Hazel Eyes " , with Chris <unk> . 
 Wright 's final vocal performance took place at " The Madcap 's Last Laugh " a tribute concert at The Barbican in London on 10 May 2007 . It was organised by Joe Boyd in the memory of Barrett who had died the previous July , and featured Waters solo before Wright performed as part of Pink Floyd , including a performance of " Arnold Layne " . His final live performance was as part of David Gilmour 's band at the premiere of Gilmour 's concert DVD Remember That Night on 6 September 2007 at the Odeon Leicester Square , London . After an edited version of the film had been shown , the band took to the stage to jam . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Wright married his first wife , Juliette Gale , in 1964 . She had been a singer in one of the early bands that evolved into Pink Floyd . They had two children and divorced in 1982 . His second marriage to Franka lasted between 1984 and 1994 . Wright married his third wife Mildred " Millie " Hobbs in 1995 , with whom he had a son , Ben . They separated in 2007 . Wright 's daughter Gala is married to Floyd and Gilmour touring bassist Guy Pratt . 
 Wright had been fond of the Greek islands since a sabbatical visit in 1964 , before Pink Floyd were formed . He moved to Greece in 1984 after Zee , briefly retiring from music , and enjoyed sailing and yachting . In his later years , Wright lived in France and spent time on a yacht he owned in the Virgin Islands . He found sailing therapeutic , relieving him from the pressures of the music business . He was also a keen collector of Persian rugs . 
 = = Death = = 
 Wright died at home of lung cancer on 15 September 2008 , aged 65 . At the time of his death , he had been working on a new solo album , which was thought to comprise a series of instrumental pieces . 
 The surviving members of Pink Floyd paid Wright tribute . Waters said " it is hard to overstate the importance of his musical voice in the Pink Floyd of the ' 60s and ' 70s " and was happy that they had managed to reunite for Live 8 . Mason said Wright 's contributions to Floyd were under @-@ rated , and that his playing " was the sound that knitted it all together " , comparing his " quiet one " status in the band to George Harrison . Gilmour called him " my musical partner and my friend " , praised the ability of the two men 's voices to blend , such as on " Echoes " . Wright 's death brought Pink Floyd to a formal end , with Gilmour re @-@ iterating that it would be wrong to resume touring without him . 
 On the day of Wright 's death , Elton John , while playing a concert in Saskatoon , Saskatchewan , Canada dedicated the song " Believe " to him . On 23 September , Gilmour performed " Remember a Day " , a Wright composition from Pink Floyd 's second album , A Saucerful of Secrets , on a live broadcast of Later ... with Jools Holland on BBC Two as a tribute to Wright . In an interview later on in the show , Gilmour said that Wright had intended to perform with him that day , but that he had texted Gilmour a couple of weeks before his death to advise him that he would not be well enough to attend . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Wright 's main influence was jazz , particularly Miles Davis and John Coltrane . He never considered himself a typical songwriter , preferring to create whole albums of music with a theme , later saying " if the words came out like the music , and we didn 't have anything else to do , then quite a few would be written " . A number of compositions credited to Wright came out of improvisation and randomly trying ideas , some of which were picked up enthusiastically by his band mates . Wright later said " I just play and don 't really think about what I 'm doing , I just let it happen " . Of all the Pink Floyd members , Wright was the most reserved , sitting down behind the keyboards and concentrating on the music . 
 In the 1970s , Wright listened to some contemporary progressive rock bands , and particularly liked early Peter Gabriel @-@ fronted Genesis . He later asked some of the musicians in Gabriel 's solo touring band to play on Broken China . Wright enjoyed playing the organ , and considered the style he used in Pink Floyd to be unique . He played solos in the early part of Floyd 's career , frequently using Egyptian scales , such as on " Matilda Mother " or " Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun " . His jazz background led to him being interested in free form music , with adherence to tempo being less important . Later , he was more interested in complementing each piece with organ , electric piano or synthesizer as a backing instrument , while still featuring occasional solos . 
 = = = Equipment = = = 
 In the early days of the band , Wright dabbled with brass before settling on Farfisa electric organs as his main instrument onstage . He originally owned a single @-@ manual Combo Compact model , which was used for early recordings of " Interstellar Overdrive " , and later upgraded to a dual @-@ manual Compact Duo . During the 1960s , Wright relied heavily on his Farfisa fed through a Binson Echorec platter echo , as heard on the Ummagumma live album . On later tours , the instrument was fed through a joystick control allowing the signal to be sent through up to six speakers in an auditorium , which was called the " Azimuth Coordinator " . Wright stopped using the Farfisa after The Dark Side of the Moon , but revisited it in later years , playing it on Gilmour 's On An Island tour . It was recorded for the sessions that eventually became The Endless River . 
 Wright played the piano and Hammond organ in the studio from the start of Pink Floyd 's recording career ; using the Hammond 's bass pedals for the closing section of " A Saucerful of Secrets " . He used a Mellotron in the studio for some tracks , including Ummagumma 's " <unk> " and on the " Atom Heart Mother " suite . For a brief period in 1969 , Wright played vibraphone on several of the band 's songs and in some live shows , and reintroduced the trombone on " <unk> My Time " . He started using a Hammond organ regularly on stage alongside the Farfisa around 1970 and a grand piano became part of his usual live concert setup when " Echoes " was added to Pink Floyd 's regular set list . All three keyboards are used in the concert film Pink Floyd : Live at Pompeii . 
 In the 1970s , Wright began using synthesizers such as the VCS 3 , ARP String Ensemble and Minimoog , which were featured on " Shine on You Crazy Diamond " . Wright wrote the closing part of the track alone , and included a brief extract of the band 's early single " See Emily Play " on the Minimoog towards the end . He used a number of electric pianos during the 1970s , including a Wurlitzer fed through a wah @-@ wah pedal on " Money " and an unaccompanied Rhodes introduction for " Sheep " on Animals . 
 From the 1987 Momentary Lapse of Reason tour onwards , Wright and touring keyboardist Jon Carin favoured Kurzweil digital synthesizers , including the <unk> keyboard and <unk> rack module for reproducing piano and electric piano sounds . Wright retained the Hammond along with a Leslie speaker , playing it onstage and using it during the Division Bell sessions . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = With Pink Floyd = = = 
 See Pink Floyd discography 
 = = = With Syd Barrett = = = 
 Barrett – 1970 
 = = = Solo albums = = = 
 Wet Dream – 1978 
 Broken China – 1996 
 = = = With Zee = = = 
 Identity – 1984 
 = = = With David Gilmour = = = 
 David Gilmour in Concert ( DVD ) – 2002 ( guest appearance ) 
 On an Island – 2006 
 Appears on two tracks : " On an Island " ( Hammond organ ) & " The Blue " ( backing vocals ) 
 Remember That Night ( DVD / Blu @-@ ray ) – 2007 
 Live in Gdańsk ( CD / DVD ) – 2008 
 = Hemiptera = 
 The Hemiptera / <unk> / or true bugs are an order of insects comprising around 50 @,@ 000 – 80 @,@ 000 species of groups such as the cicadas , aphids , planthoppers , leafhoppers , and shield bugs . They range in size from 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 04 in ) to around 15 cm ( 6 in ) , and share a common arrangement of sucking mouthparts . The name " true bugs " is sometimes limited to the suborder Heteroptera . Many insects commonly known as " bugs " belong to other orders ; for example , the <unk> is a fly , while the May bug and ladybug are beetles . 
 Most hemipterans feed on plants , using their sucking and piercing mouthparts to extract plant sap . Some are parasitic while others are predators that feed on other insects or small invertebrates . They live in a wide variety of habitats , generally terrestrial , though some species are adapted to life in or on the surface of fresh water . Hemipterans are hemimetabolous , with young nymphs that somewhat resemble adults . Many aphids are capable of parthenogenesis , producing young from unfertilised eggs ; this helps them to reproduce extremely rapidly in favourable conditions . 
 Humans have interacted with the Hemiptera for millennia . Some species are important agricultural pests , damaging crops by the direct action of sucking sap , but also harming them indirectly by being the vectors of serious viral diseases . Other species have been used for biological control of insect pests . Hemipterans have been cultivated for the extraction of dyestuffs cochineal ( also known as carmine ) and for shellac . The bed bug is a persistent parasite of humans . Cicadas have been used as food , and have appeared in literature from the Iliad in Ancient Greece . 
 = = Diversity = = 
 Hemiptera is the largest order of hemimetabolous insects ( not undergoing complete metamorphosis ) containing over 75 @,@ 000 named species ; orders with more species all have a pupal stage , Coleoptera ( 370 @,@ 000 described species ) , Lepidoptera ( 160 @,@ 000 ) , Diptera ( 100 @,@ 000 ) and Hymenoptera ( 100 @,@ 000 ) . The group is very diverse . The majority of species are terrestrial , including a number of important agricultural pests , but some are found in freshwater habitats . These include the water boatmen , pond skaters , and giant water bugs . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The present members of the order Hemiptera ( sometimes referred to as <unk> ) were historically placed into two orders , the so @-@ called Homoptera and Heteroptera / Hemiptera , based on differences in wing structure and the position of the rostrum . The order is now more often divided into four or more suborders , after the " Homoptera " were established as paraphyletic . Molecular phylogenetics analysis by Song et al . ( 2012 ) supports this cladogram : 
 The <unk> ( <unk> ) were not included in Song 's analysis . The suggestion that the Auchenorrhyncha are paraphyletic has been debated , and in 2012 , the phylogeny was described as " contentious " ; a multilocus molecular phylogenetic analysis suggested that the Auchenorrhyncha , like the Sternorrhyncha , <unk> , Heteroptera , <unk> , Cicadomorpha , <unk> , Cercopoidea , and Cicadoidea , were all monophyletic . 
 The closest relatives of hemipterans are the thrips and lice , which collectively form the " <unk> assemblage " within the Exopterygota . 
 The fossil record of hemipterans goes back to the Carboniferous ( <unk> ) . The oldest fossils are of the <unk> from the Lower Permian and are thought to be basal to the Auchenorrhyncha . <unk> and Cicadomorpha appear in the Upper Permian , as do Sternorrhyncha of the <unk> and <unk> . Aphids and <unk> appear in the Triassic . The <unk> extend back to the Lower Jurassic . The Heteroptera first appeared in the Triassic . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The defining feature of hemipterans is their " beak " in which the modified mandibles and maxillae form a " stylet " which is sheathed within a modified labium . The stylet is capable of piercing tissues and sucking liquids , while the labium supports it . The stylet contains a channel for the outward movement of saliva and another for the inward movement of liquid food . A salivary pump drives saliva into the prey ; a cibarial pump extracts liquid from the prey . Both pumps are powered by substantial dilator muscles in the head . The beak is usually folded under the body when not in use . The diet is typically plant sap , but some hemipterans such as assassin bugs are blood @-@ suckers , and a few are predators . 
 Both herbivorous and predatory hemipterans inject enzymes to begin digestion <unk> ( before the food is taken into the body ) . These enzymes include amylase to hydrolyse starch , <unk> to weaken the tough cell walls of plants , and <unk> to break down proteins . 
 Although the Hemiptera vary widely in their overall form , their mouthparts form a distinctive " rostrum " . Other insect orders with mouthparts modified into anything like the rostrum and stylets of the Hemiptera include some Phthiraptera , but for other reasons they generally are easy to recognize as non @-@ hemipteran . Similarly , the mouthparts of <unk> , some Diptera and Thysanoptera superficially resemble the rostrum of the Hemiptera , but on closer inspection the differences are considerable . Aside from the mouthparts , various other insects can be confused with Hemiptera , but they all have biting mandibles and maxillae instead of the rostrum . Examples include cockroaches and <unk> , both of which have longer , many @-@ segmented antennae , and some beetles , but these have fully hardened forewings which do not overlap . 
 = = = Wing structure = = = 
 The forewings of Hemiptera are either entirely membranous , as in the Sternorrhyncha and Auchenorrhyncha , or partially hardened , as in most Heteroptera . The name " Hemiptera " is from the Greek <unk> ( hemi ; " half " ) and πτερόν ( pteron ; " wing " ) , referring to the forewings of many <unk> which are hardened near the base , but membranous at the ends . Wings modified in this manner are termed <unk> ( singular : <unk> ) , by analogy with the completely hardened elytra of beetles , and occur only in the suborder Heteroptera . In all suborders , the hindwings – if present at all – are entirely membranous and usually shorter than the forewings . The forewings may be held " <unk> " over the body ( typical of Sternorrhyncha and Auchenorrhyncha ) , or held flat on the back , with the ends overlapping ( typical of Heteroptera ) . The antennae in Hemiptera typically consist of four or five segments , although they can still be quite long , and the tarsi of the legs have two or three segments . 
 = = = Sound production = = = 
 Many hemipterans can produce sound for communication . The " song " of male cicadas , the loudest of any insect , is produced by tymbal organs on the underside of the abdomen , and is used to attract mates . The tymbals are <unk> disks of cuticle , which are clicked in and out repeatedly , making a sound in the same way as popping the metal lid of a jam jar in and out . 
 <unk> sounds are produced among the aquatic Corixidae and <unk> ( <unk> ) using tibial combs rubbed across rostral ridges . 
 = = = Life cycle = = = 
 Hemipterans are hemimetabolous , meaning that they do not undergo metamorphosis , the complete change of form between a larval phase and an adult phase . Instead , their young are called nymphs , and resemble the adults to a greater or less degree . The nymphs moult several times as they grow , and each instar resembles the adult more than the previous one . Wing buds grow in later stage nymphs ; the final transformation involves little more than the development of functional wings ( if they are present at all ) and functioning sexual organs , with no intervening pupal stage as in holometabolous insects . 
 = = = = Parthenogenesis and vivipary = = = = 
 Many aphids are parthenogenetic during part of the life cycle , such that females can produce unfertilized eggs , which are clones of their mother . All such young are female ( <unk> ) , so 100 % of the population at these times can produce more offspring . Many species of aphid are also viviparous : the young are born live rather than laid as eggs . These adaptations enable aphids to reproduce extremely rapidly when conditions are suitable . 
 = = Locomotion = = 
 Hemipterans make use of a variety of modes of locomotion including swimming , skating on a water surface and jumping , as well as walking and flying like other insects . 
 = = = Swimming and skating = = = 
 Several families of Heteroptera are water bugs , adapted to an aquatic lifestyle , such as the water boatmen ( Corixidae ) , water scorpions ( <unk> ) , and <unk> ( <unk> ) . They are mostly predatory , and have legs adapted as paddles to help the animal move through the water . The <unk> or water striders ( <unk> ) are also associated with water , but use the surface tension of standing water to keep them above the surface ; they include the sea skaters in the genus <unk> , the only truly marine group of insects . 
 = = = Marangoni propulsion = = = 
 Marangoni effect propulsion exploits the change in surface tension when a soap @-@ like surfactant is released on to a water surface , in the same way that a toy soap boat propels itself . Water bugs in the genus <unk> ( <unk> ) can travel at up to 17 cm / s , twice as fast as they can walk , by this means . 
 = = = Flight = = = 
 Flight is well developed in the Hemiptera although mostly used for short distance movement and dispersal . Wing development is sometimes related to environmental conditions . In aphids , both winged and wingless forms occur with winged forms produced in greater numbers when food resources are depleted . Aphids and whiteflies can sometimes be transported very long distances by atmospheric updrafts and high altitude winds . 
 = = = Jumping = = = 
 Many Auchenorrhyncha including representatives of the cicadas , leafhoppers , <unk> , planthoppers , and froghoppers are adapted for jumping ( saltation ) . <unk> , for example , jump by rapidly depressing their hind legs . Before jumping , the hind legs are raised and the femora are pressed tightly into curved indentations in the coxae . <unk> can attain a take @-@ off velocity of up to 2 @.@ 7 metres per second and an acceleration of up to 250 g . The instantaneous power output is much greater than that of normal muscle , implying that energy is stored and released to catapult the insect into the air . Cicadas , which are much larger , extend their hind legs for a jump in under a millisecond , again implying elastic storage of energy for sudden release . 
 = = = Sedentary lifestyles = = = 
 In contrast , most Sternorrhyncha females are sedentary or completely sessile , attached to their host plants by their thin feeding stylets which cannot be taken out of the plant quickly . 
 = = Ecological roles = = 
 = = = Feeding modes = = = 
 = = = = Herbivores = = = = 
 Most hemipterans are phytophagous , using their sucking and piercing mouthparts to feed on plant sap . These include cicadas , leafhoppers , <unk> , planthoppers , froghoppers , aphids , whiteflies , scale insects , and some other groups . Some are <unk> , being host specific and only found on one plant taxon , others are <unk> , feeding on a few plant groups , while others again are less discriminating <unk> and feed on many species of plant . The relationship between hemipterans and plants appears to be ancient , with piercing and sucking of plants evident in the Early Devonian period . 
 Hemipterans can dramatically cut the mass of affected plants , especially in major outbreaks . They sometimes also change the mix of plants by predation on seeds or feeding on roots of certain species . Some sap @-@ suckers move from one host to another at different times of year . Many aphids spend the winter as eggs on a woody host plant and the summer as <unk> reproducing females on a herbaceous plant . 
 Phloem sap , which has a higher concentration of sugars and nitrogen , is under positive pressure unlike the more dilute xylem sap . Most of the Sternorrhyncha and a number of <unk> groups feed on phloem . Phloem feeding is common in the <unk> , most <unk> and in the Heteroptera . The <unk> <unk> specialize in feeding on non @-@ vascular mesophyll tissue of leaves , which is more nutritious than the leaf epidermis . Most Heteroptera also feed on mesophyll tissue where they are more likely to encounter defensive secondary plant metabolites which often leads to the evolution of host specificity . Obligate xylem feeding is a special habit that is found in the Auchenorrhyncha among Cicadoidea , Cercopoidea and in <unk> <unk> . Some phloem feeders may take to xylem sap facultatively , especially when facing dehydration . <unk> feeders tend to be polyphagous ; to overcome the negative pressure of xylem requires a special cibarial pump . Phloem feeding <unk> typically have symbiotic micro @-@ organisms in their gut that help to convert amino acids . Phloem feeders produce honeydew from their anus . A variety of organisms that feed on honeydew form symbiotic associations with phloem @-@ feeders . Phloem sap is a sugary liquid low in amino acids , so insects have to process large quantities to meet their nutritional requirements . <unk> sap is even lower in amino acids and contains monosaccharides rather than sucrose , as well as organic acids and minerals . No digestion is required ( except for the hydrolysis of sucrose ) and 90 % of the nutrients in the xylem sap can be utilised . Some phloem sap feeders selectively mix phloem and xylem sap to control the osmotic potential of the liquid consumed . A striking adaptation to a very dilute diet is found in many hemipterans : a filter chamber , a part of the gut looped back on itself as a countercurrent exchanger , which permits nutrients to be separated from excess water . The residue , mostly water with sugars and amino acids , is quickly excreted as sticky " honey dew " , notably from aphids but also from other <unk> and Sternorrhyncha . 
 Some Sternorrhyncha including <unk> and some aphids are gall formers . These sap @-@ sucking hemipterans inject fluids containing plant hormones into the plant tissues inducing the production of tissue that covers to protects the insect and also act as sinks for nutrition that they feed on . The <unk> gall psyllid for example , causes a woody gall on the leaf petioles of the <unk> tree it infests , and the nymph of another psyllid produces a protective lerp out of hardened honeydew . 
 = = = = Predators = = = = 
 Most other hemipterans are predatory , feeding on other insects , or even small vertebrates . This is true of many aquatic species which are predatory , either as nymphs or adults . The predatory shield bug for example stabs caterpillars with its beak and sucks out the body fluids . The saliva of predatory <unk> contains digestive enzymes such as proteinase and phospholipase , and in some species also amylase . The mouthparts of these insects are adapted for predation . There are toothed stylets on the mandibles able to cut into and abrade tissues of their prey . There are further stylets on the maxillae , adapted as tubular canals to inject saliva and to extract the pre @-@ digested and liquified contents of the prey . 
 Some species attack pest insects and are used in biological control . One of these is the spined soldier bug ( <unk> <unk> ) that sucks body fluids from larvae of the Colorado beetle and the Mexican bean beetle . 
 = = = = <unk> " parasites " = = = = 
 A few hemipterans are <unk> ( often described as " parasites " ) , feeding on the blood of larger animals . These include bedbugs and the triatomine kissing bugs of the assassin bug family Reduviidae , which can transmit the dangerous Chagas disease . The first known hemipteran to feed in this way on vertebrates was the extinct assassin bug Triatoma dominicana found fossilized in amber and dating back about twenty million years . <unk> pellets fossilised beside it show that it transmitted a disease @-@ causing Trypanosoma and the amber included hairs of the likely host , a bat . 
 = = = As symbionts = = = 
 Some species of ant protect and farm aphids ( Sternorrhyncha ) and other sap @-@ sucking hemipterans , gathering and eating the honeydew that these hemipterans secrete . The relationship is symbiotic , as both ant and aphid benefit . Ants such as the yellow anthill ant , Lasius flavus , breed aphids of at least four species , <unk> <unk> , <unk> ulmi , Forda marginata and Forda <unk> , taking eggs with them when they found a new colony ; in return , these aphids are obligately associated with the ant , breeding mainly or wholly asexually inside <unk> . Ants may also protect the plant bugs from their natural enemies , removing the eggs of predatory beetles and preventing access by parasitic wasps . 
 Some leafhoppers ( Auchenorrhyncha ) are similarly " milked " by ants . In the Corcovado rain forest of Costa Rica , wasps compete with ants to protect and milk leafhoppers ; the leafhoppers preferentially gave more honeydew , more often , to the wasps , which were larger and may have offered better protection . 
 = = = As prey : defences against predators and parasites = = = 
 Hemiptera form prey to predators including vertebrates , such as birds , and other invertebrates such as ladybirds . In response , hemipterans have evolved antipredator adaptations . <unk> may feign death ( <unk> ) . Others such as <unk> <unk> secrete toxic fluids to ward off arthropod predators ; some Pentatomidae such as <unk> are able to direct these fluids at an attacker . Toxic <unk> compounds are accumulated by the <unk> <unk> fasciatus when it consumes milkweeds , while the <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> acquires 2 @-@ <unk> from its food plant , Eucalyptus . Some long @-@ legged bugs mimic twigs , rocking to and fro to simulate the motion of a plant part in the wind . The nymph of the Masked hunter bug camouflages itself with sand grains , using its hind legs and tarsal fan to form a double layer of grains , coarser on the outside . The Amazon rain forest cicada <unk> <unk> display bright red deimatic flash coloration on their hindwings when threatened ; the sudden contrast helps to startle predators , giving the cicadas time to escape . The coloured patch on the hindwing is concealed at rest by an olive green patch of the same size on the forewing , enabling the insect to switch rapidly from cryptic to deimatic behaviour . 
 Some hemipterans such as <unk> have bold aposematic warning coloration , often red and black , which appear to deter passerine birds . Many hemipterans including aphids , scale insects and especially the planthoppers secrete wax to protect themselves from threats such as fungi , parasitoidal insects and predators , as well as abiotic factors like desiccation . Hard waxy coverings are especially important in the sedentary Sternorrhyncha such as scale insects , which have no means of escape from predators ; other Sternorrhyncha evade detection and attack by creating and living inside plant galls . <unk> Cicadoidea and Cercopoidea have glands attached to the Malpighian tubules in their proximal segment that produce mucopolysaccharides , which form the froth around <unk> , offering a measure of protection . 
 Parental care is found in many species of Hemiptera especially in members of the <unk> and numerous Heteroptera . In many species of shield bug , females stand guard over their egg clusters to protect them from egg parasitoids and predators . In the aquatic <unk> , females lay their eggs on the back of the male which guards the eggs . Protection provided by ants is common in the Auchenorrhyncha . 
 = = Interaction with humans = = 
 = = = As pests = = = 
 Although many species of Hemiptera are significant pests of crops and garden plants , including many species of aphid and scale insects , other species are harmless . The damage done is often not so much the deprivation of the plant of its sap , but the fact that they transmit serious viral diseases between plants . They often produce copious amounts of honeydew which encourages the growth of sooty mould . Significant pests include the cottony cushion scale , a pest of citrus fruit trees , the green peach aphid and other aphids which attack crops worldwide and transmit diseases , and jumping plant lice which are often host plant @-@ specific and transmit diseases . 
 = = = For pest control = = = 
 Members of the families Reduviidae , <unk> and <unk> are obligate predators . Some predatory species are used in biological pest control ; these include various <unk> , and even some members of families that are primarily phytophagous , such as the genus <unk> in the family <unk> . Other hemipterans are omnivores , alternating between a plant @-@ based and an animal @-@ based diet . For example , <unk> hesperus is used to control whitefly on tomatoes but also sucks sap , and if deprived of plant tissues will die even if in the presence of whiteflies . 
 = = = Insect products = = = 
 Other hemipterans have positive uses for humans , such as in the production of the dyestuff carmine ( cochineal ) . The FDA has created guidelines for how to declare when it has been added to a product . The scale insect <unk> coccus produces the brilliant red @-@ coloured carminic acid to deter predators . Up to 100 @,@ 000 scale insects need to be collected and processed to make a kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lbs ) of cochineal dye . A similar number of lac bugs are needed to make a kilogram of shellac , a brush @-@ on colourant and wood finish . Additional uses of this traditional product include the waxing of citrus fruits to extend their shelf @-@ life , and the coating of pills to moisture @-@ proof them , provide slow @-@ release or mask the taste of bitter ingredients . 
 = = = As human parasites and disease vectors = = = 
 Chagas disease is a modern @-@ day tropical disease caused by Trypanosoma cruzi and transmitted by kissing bugs , so @-@ called because they suck human blood from around the lips while a person sleeps . 
 The bed bug , <unk> <unk> , is an external parasite of humans . It lives in bedding and is mainly active at night , feeding on human blood , generally without being noticed . Bed bugs mate by traumatic insemination ; the male pierces the female 's abdomen and injects his sperm into a secondary genital structure , the <unk> . The sperm travel in the female 's blood ( haemolymph ) to sperm storage structures ( seminal <unk> ) ; they are released from there to fertilise her eggs inside her ovaries . 
 = = = As food = = = 
 Some larger hemipterans such as cicadas are used as food in Asian countries such as China , and they are much esteemed in Malawi and other African countries . Insects have a high protein content and good food conversion ratios , but most hemipterans are too small to be a useful component of the human diet . At least nine species of Hemiptera are eaten worldwide . 
 = = = In art and literature = = = 
 Cicadas have featured in literature since the time of Homer 's Iliad , and as motifs in decorative art from the Chinese Shang dynasty ( 1766 @-@ 1122 B.C. ) . They are described by Aristotle in his History of Animals and by Pliny the Elder in his Natural History ; their mechanism of sound production is mentioned by Hesiod in his poem Works and Days " when the <unk> flowers , and the tuneful <unk> sitting on his tree in the weary summer season pours forth from under his wings his shrill song " . 
 = = = In mythology and folklore = = = 
 Among the bugs , cicadas in particular have been used as money , in folk medicine , to forecast the weather , to provide song ( in China ) , and in folklore and myths around the world . 
 = = = Threats = = = 
 Large @-@ scale cultivation of the oil palm Elaeis guineensis in the Amazon basin damages freshwater habitats and reduces the diversity of aquatic and semi @-@ aquatic Heteroptera . Climate change may be affecting the global migration of hemipterans including the potato leafhopper , <unk> fabae . Warming is correlated with the severity of potato leafhopper infestation , so increased warming may worsen infestations in future . 
 = Tech Tower = 
 The Lettie Pate Whitehead Evans Administration Building , commonly known as Tech Tower , is a historic building and focal point of the central campus of the Georgia Institute of Technology ( Georgia Tech ) in Atlanta , Georgia , US . 
 Located at 225 North Avenue NW in Midtown Atlanta , it was erected in 1888 as the Academic Building , with classrooms to complement the hands @-@ on training in the adjacent shop building . It was the second edifice completed on the Georgia Tech campus and it is the oldest surviving one . 
 Tech Tower has achieved local , cultural , and historical significance . Monuments and plaques commemorating philanthropy towards Georgia Tech adorn the building and surrounding landscape . The red brick , Victorian @-@ style building is the architectural anchor of the Georgia Institute of Technology Historic District , a landmark of tradition and school spirit , and the present @-@ day administrative hub of the Institute . It has been the site of many ceremonies and important events , including a visit by U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt and its dedication in honor of Lettie Pate Whitehead Evans , " Tech 's greatest benefactor . " 
 Lighted signs spelling TECH hang on each of the four sides of the seven @-@ story central tower , dominating the building 's facade and visible from many parts of the Georgia Tech campus and surrounding area . Georgia Tech students have several times stolen the letter ' T ' from one of these signs , a prank once tolerated but now strictly forbidden . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1887 , the state of Georgia acquired 9 acres ( 3 @.@ 6 ha ) of land from Atlanta pioneer Richard Peters that would form the original campus of what was then called the Georgia School of Technology , as well as the site of its first two structures . The state hired the well @-@ known architectural firm Bruce & Morgan to design an Academic Building , containing " ample accommodations in halls , offices , apparatus rooms , recitation and lecture rooms , free hand and mechanical drawing rooms , library and chapel , " as well as a Shop Building , in which " boiler and engine rooms , wood shop , machine shop , forge room and foundry " were located . 
 Both buildings boasted towers and edifices of similar design . The complementary names and purposes of these buildings reflected the School 's founding principles of valuing both theory and practice , while their similar appearance emphasized the equal standing of these principles . Construction work , contracted by Angus McGilvray with his low bid of US $ 43 @,@ 250 ( $ 1 @.@ 14 million in 2016 ) , began with the Academic Building in June 1887 ; the building was completed in September 1888 . The Shop Building , completed shortly afterward , was destroyed by fire in 1892 and rebuilt more modestly without a tower . Following this , the Academic Building , later known as Tech Tower , became the oldest building on the Georgia Tech campus , a distinction it continues to hold more than a century later . 
 On October 20 , 1905 , U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt visited the Georgia Tech campus . On the steps of Tech Tower , Roosevelt presented a speech about the importance of engineering education . He then shook hands with each of the 500 students present . 
 Georgia Tech 's Class of 1922 installed the famous TECH signs on all four sides of Tech Tower in 1918 , giving rise to the building 's present nickname . Their purpose , as defined by the donors during their first year at Georgia Tech , was to " light the spirit of Tech to the four points of the compass . " The signs were originally made of wood and painted white and gold – the Institute colors . In the 1930s , lightbulbs were affixed to the signs to illuminate them more effectively than the earlier ground @-@ based spotlights . In 1949 , the TECH signs were supplemented by neon lighting in metal frames . 
 In 1978 , Tech Tower and the surrounding 9 acres ( 3 @.@ 6 ha ) of the original campus were added to the National Register of Historic Places as the Georgia Institute of Technology Historic District . Near the entrance to Tech Tower , a historical marker maintained by the Georgia Historical Society commemorates this listing as well as the early history of the Georgia Tech campus . 
 On May 22 , 1998 , Tech Tower was officially renamed the Lettie Pate Whitehead Evans Administration Building in a ceremony presided over by Tech president G. Wayne Clough . Although neither she nor her husbands attended Georgia Tech as a student , Lettie Pate Whitehead Evans was a longtime benefactor of the Institute , contributing over $ 340 million through her philanthropic organization , the Lettie Pate Evans Foundation . 
 Tech Tower 's continuous use since its completion in 1888 has required occasional maintenance and refurbishment . It underwent extensive renovations in 1965 with a focus on remodeling the building 's interior layout . During this time , the library and chapel were replaced with modern office space and furnishings . In contrast , efforts directed towards the exterior of the building have aimed to preserve its historic appearance . A restoration project called the " Tech Tower Renovation " began in 1987 , spearheaded by alumnus Eugene M. " Gene " Clary 's gift of new copper shingles with which to replace Tech Tower 's aging roof tiles . Clary first suggested gold @-@ colored shingles , but John Patrick Crecine , Georgia Tech 's president at the time , insisted on copper shingles to match the building 's original construction materials . One of these shingles and a small marker inside the Tech Tower entrance lobby commemorate Clary and his donation . Additional restoration of Tech Tower 's exterior and the Georgia Institute of Technology Historic District , funded by the Class of 1950 and Class of 1975 , began in 2000 . As part of Phase I of the Georgia Tech Master Plan of 1997 , the area was made " more pedestrian @-@ friendly " with the removal of access roads and the addition of landscaping improvements , benches , and other facilities . 
 = = Structure and appearance = = 
 Tech Tower is built in the Victorian style with Romanesque Revival influences . The building 's original specifications , according to Georgia Tech 's first Annual Catalogue Announcement published in 1889 , are listed as 130 feet ( 40 m ) wide and 120 feet ( 37 m ) deep . It is constructed primarily of red brick and trimmed with granite . The gabled roof , originally terra cotta , was later replaced by copper shingles . The main complex of the building stands four stories high plus a basement . The tower portion stands seven stories high and is topped with four lighted TECH signs ( one on each side ) and a high pitched roof . The main entrance to the building is accessed by ascending a small staircase and entering a small porch which forms the base of Tech Tower . Most of the building 's windows are simple rectangular frames , with the exception of those on the third floor , which are arched . The entire complex sits on the crest of a tree @-@ dotted hill , giving it the appearance of being larger than it actually is . 
 = = = Surroundings = = = 
 As the oldest building on the Georgia Tech campus , Tech Tower has accumulated a number of peripheral monuments and sites of interest over the years . Two walkways encircle the building , including the Tower Walk , donated by the Class of 1950 in 2000 . Georgia Tech 's first class memorial , a marble drinking fountain , was donated in 1911 by the Class of 1903 and is situated east of Tech Tower 's main entrance . Also near the main entrance to Tech Tower is a marbled pair of benches donated by the Class of 1925 in memory of those who died in World War I. A few feet away stands a marbled bench memorial to Paul Howes Norcross , a 1902 Georgia Tech alumnus and former ASCE president who perished in the Norman boat disaster of May 8 , 1925 . The headstone of Sideways the dog is located near Tech Tower 's rear entrance , as is an informational placard detailing Tech Tower 's early history , donated by the Class of 1932 . A staircase donated by the ANAK Society in 1921 connects Tech Tower to the adjacent D. P. Savant Building via a continuous sidewalk . Finally , a steam @-@ driven air compressor , colloquially known as the " steam engine , " sits prominently at the top of the hill near Tech Tower as a reminder of the school 's industrial roots . 
 = = Modern use = = 
 As its official name suggests , Tech Tower is primarily used for administrative purposes . It houses the Office of the Registrar , the Office of Capital Planning and Space Management ( <unk> ) , the Internal Auditing Department , and offices for the Center for the Enhancement of Teaching and Learning ( CETL ) . In addition , the deans of the College of Engineering and the College of Sciences have offices in Tech Tower . 
 Tech Tower is considered an iconic representation of Georgia Tech and of higher education in Atlanta . It is often featured in marketing materials and merchandise for the Institute and its silhouette is recognized throughout the Atlanta metropolitan area . The Tower , Georgia Tech 's undergraduate research journal , is named after Tech Tower . Kessler Campanile , a stylized bell tower built on the Georgia Tech campus as part of an Institute @-@ wide branding campaign in the mid @-@ 1990s , was designed to look like a modernized version of Tech Tower . The campanile is now featured in all Georgia Tech logos , though some have argued that Tech Tower itself would be a more appropriate symbol . 
 = = Stealing the ' T ' = = 
 Students have stolen the huge , symbolic letter ' T ' on the Tech Tower 's TECH signs a number of times . The ' T ' is then returned at the halftime of the homecoming football game , and the students ' achievement celebrated . Tradition dictates that the first ' T ' to be stolen should be the one facing east , as this can most easily be seen from the Downtown Connector . The groups of students responsible for ' T ' thefts generally assume dramatic pseudonyms , such as the " Mystic Marauders " or the " Sneaky Four . " Pervasive rumors of a detailed plan held in the Institute 's archives to execute " the perfect T theft , " crafted by an unnamed Georgia Tech fraternity , are apparently spurious . 
 = = = Notable thefts = = = 
 The ' T ' was first stolen in April 1969 by a secret group of Georgia Tech fraternity brothers calling themselves the " Magnificent Seven " . Inspired by a similar prank that had taken place in 1968 at Harvard University , the students planned the theft as a means of commemorating Institute President Edwin D. Harrison 's retirement . The ' T ' was returned several days later via helicopter at the behest of Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen . 
 On the evening of November 6 , 1997 , the ' T 's were nearly stolen from the north , south and west sides of Tech Tower by five students wielding hacksaws , tin snips , and rappelling equipment . The students were caught by Georgia Tech police acting on a tip provided by an anonymous informant . The stolen north ' T ' was recovered in the back of a blue Ford Explorer that was parked at the Copper Kettle on Howell Mill Road , also in response to an anonymous tip . Each student was required to pay $ 2 @,@ 446 @.@ 75 in damages ( $ 3 @,@ 607 in 2016 ) although criminal charges were not filed . The Georgia Tech Office of Facilities reinstalled the ' T ' on January 31 , 1998 , 87 days after its attempted theft . 
 One of the most theatrical thefts of the ' T ' occurred over the summer of 1999 . The ' T ' on the north face of Tech Tower was stolen by a group of " six or seven people " on the morning of June 3 , 1999 . The perpetrators wrote a letter detailing the theft to the editorial staff of The Technique , Georgia Tech 's student newspaper . The letter , an abridged version of which was subsequently printed in the summer issue of The Technique , described the process of stealing the ' T ' by lowering it via a rope and moving it to a secret location . The letter also included a photograph of the ' T ' " on vacation " in Berkeley Springs , West Virginia . Finally , the perpetrators indicated plans to return the ' T ' during the Georgia Tech Homecoming Parade , according to tradition , as long as no criminal charges would be brought against them . The letter was signed by fictitious Georgia Tech alumnus George P. Burdell . However , the Institute released a notice that those who stole the ' T ' would be harshly punished , and therefore the ' T ' remains to this day at an undisclosed location . 
 The replacement ' T ' on the north face of Tech Tower was stolen on May 28 , 2001 by three students , two of whom were found guilty of numerous conduct code violations by the Undergraduate Judiciary Cabinet and subsequently suspended . The students had successfully removed the ' T ' from its mount but were caught in the act by authorities when the removal triggered an alarm . In October 2005 , a replica of the ' T ' was stolen from the Student Services Building and returned two days later . 
 Around midday on March 18 , 2014 , it was discovered that the north @-@ facing ' T ' had been stolen from Tech Tower . In this case , the thief admitted guilt after detectives approached him at his residence that afternoon , and was suspended through the following summer , while also having to pay a restitution fee and tuition to retake his nearly completed Spring 2014 classes . To handle this financial burden , the restitution fee alone totaling $ 14 @,@ 823 @.@ 98 , a <unk> was created by a friend of the thief that was well known on campus , to assure its legitimacy , without revealing the thief 's identity ( the friend 's name has since been removed from the post because of negative pressure from the GT administration ) . 
 The tradition of stealing the ' T ' from Tech Tower has inspired copycat crimes involving other signage . During a Georgia Tech – NC State football game on November 4 , 2006 , the second ' T ' from a large nc state university banner mysteriously vanished from the upper deck of Carter @-@ Finley Stadium where it had been hanging . It was widely assumed across the Tech campus that the prank was pulled off by a group of Georgia Tech students in an homage to the longstanding Tech Tower tradition ; however , it is possible that the T in the banner came loose and fell to the stands below . Another copy cat incident occurred some time after the 2012 football game with Virginia Tech when vandals , believed to be Yellow Jacket fans , pried a T off of the sign in front of Virginia Tech 's Lane Stadium . The ' T ' was later dropped off at night to the Georgia Tech Police Department . The Georgia Tech president returned it to the Virginia Tech president in September 2012 along with an apology . 
 Similar copycat crimes have occurred on the Georgia Tech campus . In late 2001 , a group of Georgia Tech students calling itself the " Caldwell Liberation Army " stole 32 ' T 's from signs on 16 campus buildings over a period of two nights . The students , who were not caught , vandalized the signs to express their bitterness at being displaced from Caldwell Residence Hall while renovations were taking place . In February 2006 , it was noticed that small vinyl ' T ' stickers were being stolen from informational signs located around the Georgia Tech campus , creating confusion for visitors and new students . According to the Georgia Tech Student Government Association ( SGA ) , ' T ' thefts across campus cost the Institute over $ 100 @,@ 000 from 2010 – 11 . The SGA discouraged these thefts , which they emphasized did not constitute a true Georgia Tech tradition : " The tradition is stealing the ' T ' from Tech Tower – no other ' T 's were ever a part of this tradition . " The campaign drew national press coverage . 
 = = = Institute reaction = = = 
 The Georgia Tech administration 's position on stealing the ' T ' from Tech Tower has varied over the years . When the ' T ' was first stolen in 1969 , interim Institute President Vernon Crawford was so upset he considered canceling classes until it was returned . Afterwards , subsequent presidents opted to turn a blind eye to the practice , with one president , John Patrick Crecine , going so far as to endorse it . 
 Today , stealing the ' T ' is prohibited and is officially punishable with expulsion , although this has not happened in practice . After a Georgia Tech visitor was accidentally killed while climbing the Alexander Memorial Coliseum in 1999 , Institute President G. Wayne Clough banned stealing of the ' T ' and the climbing of any Institute building , due to the risk of fatal falls and the potential for damage to the building . Clough also expressed concern over the " incredibly expensive liability litigation " Georgia Tech could face in the event of an accident . To discourage climbing , security features such as pressure @-@ sensitive roof tiling , fiber optic cabling running throughout the letters , and an audible alarm have been added to the ' T ' to help prevent its theft . 
 In 2011 , the Georgia Tech Student Government Association ( SGA ) launched a " Keep the ' T ' in Tech " campaign to discourage thefts of ' T 's from signage around the campus . The week @-@ long campaign took place from September 26 – 30 and included an online petition to be published in The Technique , an open forum for discussing the issue , an amnesty day for returning stolen ' T 's , and " Live the True Tradition , " an evening event focused on the tradition of stealing the ' T ' from Tech Tower . 
 = Dryandra Woodland = 
 The Dryandra Woodland is a nature conservation area in Western Australia within the Shires of <unk> , Williams and Wandering , about 164 kilometres ( 102 mi ) south @-@ east of Perth and 22 kilometres ( 14 mi ) north @-@ west of the town of Narrogin . It is a complex of 17 distinct blocks managed by the Western Australian Department of Environment and Conservation and spread over approximately 50 kilometres ( 30 mi ) separated by areas of agricultural land . The area is considered to be one of the state 's major conservation areas , and although it is far from pristine due to its history of logging operations , a number of species of threatened fauna are rebuilding populations through the removal of introduced predators such as foxes and feral cats . 
 The combined area of the woodland is 28 @,@ 066 hectares ( 108 @.@ 36 mi2 ) , with individual blocks ranging in size from 87 hectares ( 0 @.@ 34 mi2 ) to 12 @,@ 283 hectares ( 47 @.@ 43 mi2 ) . Part of Dryandra Woodland is listed on the Register of the National Estate by the Australian Heritage Council . 
 In addition to the area 's use as a wildlife refuge , it has anthropological significance with the indigenous Noongar people having strong cultural links there . 
 = = Description = = 
 The Dryandra Woodland is found within the south @-@ western province of the Yilgarn craton , " an ancient plateau composed mainly of granite , with intrusions of dolerite and capped with laterite . Past weathering of the plateau in the Dryandra area has produced a gently undulating countryside " . 
 The woodland lies close to the boundary between the Mallee and Avon Wheatbelt biogeographic regions of the Southwest Botanical Province . It is situated on the western edge of the state 's wheatbelt region : the area is a rare remnant of the open eucalypt woodlands which covered much of the wheatbelt prior to land clearing which started from the 1890s . Dryandra 's flora is transitional between that of the moister jarrah forest ( generally to the south ) and the semi @-@ arid wheatbelt ( to the east ) . It is known particularly for its extensive stands of wandoo ( Eucalyptus wandoo ) , <unk> wandoo ( E. <unk> ) and salmon white gum ( E. lane @-@ <unk> ) , and provides a haven for native flora and fauna while much of the surrounding country is badly affected by salinity . Stands of jarrah ( E. marginata ) and marri ( Corymbia calophylla ) provide additional top cover , and the understorey contains rock sheoak ( Allocasuarina <unk> ) and extensive areas of Banksia ser . Dryandra . Until early 2007 this latter shrub was classified as a separate genus <unk> after which the woodland is named . Species include golden dryandra ( Banksia nobilis ) and prickly dryandra ( B. armata ) . An arboretum on <unk> Road holds a range of Australian native plants . 
 The 17 lots are surrounded by a largely cleared and agricultural landscape . In some cases , road reserves and other linking corridors of uncleared vegetation remain between the woodland islands . Some neighbouring landowners have <unk> areas of previously cleared private land to form additional corridors between these remnants . For certain animals , movement between blocks is necessary on a daily , seasonal or intermittent basis , to provide access to food , shelter , breeding sites and partners . 
 Threatened fauna receive extra protection within the ' Barna Mia ' animal sanctuary , which is open to visitors by appointment for nocturnal tours on alternate evenings . Native marsupial fauna include the <unk> ( <unk> penicillata ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , mala ( <unk> hirsutus ) , <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , and marl ( or western barred bandicoot : <unk> <unk> ) . The <unk> ( or southern brown bandicoot : <unk> <unk> ) is locally extinct but may be reintroduced . 
 The woodland 's position on the transition zone between the wheatbelt and the jarrah forest determines amphibian populations , with several species existing at the eastern or western limits of their range . <unk> includes the western marsh frog ( or golden flecked burrowing frog , Heleioporus <unk> ) which is generally restricted to the western Darling Range . There are at least 98 species of bird in the woodland , including the almost flightless <unk> ( <unk> ocellata ) . 
 Climatically , Dryandra is described as semi @-@ arid , with a warm , dry , Mediterranean climate . It has seven to eight dry months each year with an annual average rainfall of about 500 millimetres ( 20 in ) . Seasonal changes in temperature , rainfall and wind direction are marked and more extreme than coastal areas of the south @-@ west . The wettest months are May through September when about 70 % of the annual rainfall occurs . Meaning daily maximum temperatures are 30 @.@ 9 ° C ( 87 @.@ 6 ° F ) in January and the mean daily minimum of 5 @.@ 6 ° C ( 42 @.@ 1 ° F ) is in August . 
 = = Role in fauna and flora protection = = 
 The following fauna are known to be living in the woodland and have a conservation status of ' threatened ' as recorded in the IUCN Red List : 
 Major populations of three nationally endangered species exist in the woodlands : the <unk> , the red tailed <unk> , and over 50 percent of the total known population of numbat . 
 Over 800 native flora have been identified within the Dryandra Woodland , including 15 that have been declared priority species under the Department of Environment and Conservation 's Declared Rare and Priority Flora List . The conservation codes of P2 thru P4 are for flora that are considered rare but have some populations in areas where they are thought not be under immediate threat ; higher numbers denote a lower threat level . 
 = = Mallet = = 
 In the early 1900s a significant industry established within the forest and surrounding region harvesting bark from brown mallet trees ( Eucalyptus <unk> ) , a species of eucalypt which grows on and near laterite soils in parts of the southern wheatbelt . Bark sent to Germany for analysis was found to contain more than 40 % of high quality , water @-@ soluble tannins suitable for the production of quality leather by the process of tanning . 
 By the mid @-@ 1920s , concerns were being raised about the ability of the area to maintain the supply of naturally grown mallet and by 1929 , stands of the naturally grown mallet had almost disappeared . So , between 1925 and 1962 mallet plantations were established under the management of the Forestry Department which , during the Depression , provided employment for sustenance workers who planted some 4 @,@ 000 hectares ( 9 @,@ 900 acres ) of mallet , starting near ' Lol Gray ' lookout . In 1933 , 50 forestry workers were employed in the plantations . Seven steam trains and a sawmill supported the industry within the woodland . Two dams - ' Lol Gray ' and the ' Old Mill Dam ' provided good quality water to run the trains , as well as domestic water supplies which were carted by train to nearby towns including Narrogin . 
 Mallet bark was exported in ground form and was handled by a number of Fremantle exporters , notably Henry Will & Co . , <unk> and Joyce Bros. Production after 1959 declined rapidly , coinciding with a world glut , increased royalty and production costs , and increased competition from synthetic tannins . The industry had effectively collapsed by the early 1960s . 
 <unk> forests now extend over approximately 30 % , or 8 @,@ 300 hectares ( 32 mi2 ) , of Dryandra . Harvesting from plantation areas for timber production continues today under the Department of Environment and Conservation 's management plan , which includes a vision for the area over the next 100 years . Conservation studies have shown that the managed harvesting will have no detrimental impact on the fauna habitat . 
 In 1960 , Arthur Hunter , a local farmer , started manufacturing tool handles from naturally fallen and low @-@ grade felled wandoo and mallet . This cottage industry has now expanded to produce over 100 @,@ 000 tool handles each year . As well as tool handles , fencing materials and cutting of firewood for domestic use provide local employment . 
 = = Noongar use = = 
 Indigenous peoples occupied the southwest of the state for at least the past 40 @,@ 000 years . In more recent times , thirteen different tribes lived in the region . Collectively , the clans were known as Noongars and the people of the Dryandra area were from the <unk> tribe . 
 The Noongar people have strong cultural links with Dryandra which was known as <unk> . Within the complex , five important archaeological sites have been identified to date , including an ochre pit which was used for body decoration and rock art . One Noongar born in 1910 described the ochre pit as being " a very <unk> place " and somewhere to be avoided at night . Other known sites include artefact scatters , stone arrangements and a scarred tree , however the woodland has not yet been fully surveyed for significant Aboriginal sites . 
 Following requests from local Indigenous people , the Department of Environment and Conservation is considering the feasibility of permitting some cultural activities including hunting and camping within the woodland in order to pass on skills to younger members of that community . If permitted , such activities would need to be managed on a sustainable basis to ensure that the conservation goals of the woodland are not compromised . 
 = = Recent history = = 
 Almost all of the land within the complex today was classified as a state forest in 1903 as an area for the protection of water catchments and growing wandoo and mallet forests . 
 In 1962 , a sub @-@ committee of the Western Australian branch of the Australian Academy of Science made recommendations which were reviewed in 1972 and 1974 by the Environmental Protection Authority of Western Australia . In summary , the recommendations were : 
 " The Committee emphasises the outstanding value of the Dryandra area as wildlife habitat . This is due largely to the protection and management which the area has hitherto received from the Forests Department . The Committee recommends : 
 that state forests 51 ( ' Lol Gray ' ) and 53 ( ' Montague ' ) remain dedicated to that purpose ; 
 that no further portions of Dryandra Forest be planted with pines or other exotic species ; 
 that if any of the mallet plantations are felled they be regenerated to natural bush ; and 
 that the area be managed by the Forests Department as though it were a fauna and flora reserve and that if at any time the area is relinquished by the Forests Department it be made a Class ' A ' reserve for the Conservation of Flora and Fauna , vested in the WA Wildlife Authority . " 
 The recommendations were endorsed by the state cabinet in 1976 . Since that time , Dryandra has been managed principally as a nature reserve but also for limited commercial operations related to plantation timber . 
 In 1995 , a management plan was prepared by CALM ( now known as the Department of Environment and Conservation ) for the Lands and Forest Commission who hold tenure over the state forests which form the woodland . The plan recommended ( amongst other things ) that the entire area be referred to officially as ' Dryandra Woodland ' rather than as various state forests in recognition of its structural difference with the taller and denser forests of the Darling Range . Previously , a smaller section had been referred to as ' Dryandra ' , with other sections known by their various forestry names . 
 The principal objectives of the plan were : 
 to achieve conservation , recreation and timber production goals , and in the next 70 to 100 years for the timber production role to be one of research and development ; 
 to " maintain and restore the natural environment by promoting the appreciation and study of indigenous flora and fauna , and to preserve any feature of archaeological , historic or scientific interest . " 
 = = Accommodation and tourism = = 
 Dryandra Woodland attracts approximately 30 @,@ 000 visitors per annum , including 5 @,@ 000 overnight visits at the Dryandra campsite and settlement within the complex . Accommodation is available at the <unk> Camping Ground located near <unk> Dam and at the Lions Dryandra Village which uses restored cottages from the 1920s Forests Department settlement . Adjacent to the cottages is the <unk> Complex which has several Nissen huts acquired from an air force base and now used to accommodate up to 60 people in groups . The Lions Village was established by several Perth based Lions service clubs in 1972 with the intention of providing a holiday camp for disadvantaged children . 
 Two separate self @-@ drive tours of 20 km ( 12 mi ) and 25 km ( 16 mi ) operate within Dryandra where visitors can follow a marked trail in their own vehicles . On arrival at one of the five or six stop points , an approximate five @-@ minute broadcast through the car 's radio ( tuned to FM frequency 100 MHz ) provides a narrative commentary explaining interesting aspects of the surrounding area . The commentaries are pre @-@ recorded on microchips and broadcast using concealed low power transmitters charged by solar panels . Some of the broadcasts are staged conversations between characters describing day @-@ to @-@ day events in an early forestry worker 's life in Dryandra . Others give a more technical explanation of a particular subject applicable to flora or fauna within a short distance of the car . For example , one stop discusses the naturally occurring poison pea plant ( genus : Gastrolobium spp ) in the woodlands and the extraction and effect of the 1080 poison ( sodium fluoroacetate ) which occurs in the plant . Native mammalian herbivores have evolved with a high level of genetic tolerance to the toxin which is deadly to introduced species including foxes . Baiting programs including the highly successful Western Shield project use 1080 poison to help control foxes without harming native fauna . 
 In addition , various 30 minute to five @-@ hour <unk> can be made along signposted trails through the woodlands , ranging in length from one to 12 @.@ 5 kilometres . 
 = Effects of Hurricane Dean in the Lesser Antilles = 
 The effects of Hurricane Dean in the Lesser Antilles were spread over five island countries and included 3 fatalities . Hurricane Dean of the 2007 Atlantic hurricane season formed in the Atlantic Ocean west of Cape Verde on August 14 , 2007 . The National Hurricane Center 's first Forecast Advisory on the system anticipated that the Cape Verde @-@ type hurricane would pass into the Caribbean through the Lesser Antilles . The storm moved persistently towards the small island chain , strengthening until it passed through the islands three days later on August 17 as a Category 2 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . It went on to brush the island of Jamaica and reached Category 5 strength before making landfall on Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula . 
 While crossing the Lesser Antilles , Dean caused moderate damage in St. Lucia , Martinique , and Dominica , where it washed out roads , damaged houses , and killed 6 people . It also devastated the agriculture @-@ dependent economies of those three states , as well as that of Guadeloupe , destroying between 80 % and 100 % of the banana crops . Deaths were reported as far away as Trinidad . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The National Hurricane Center consistently predicted that the storm would intensify and pass through the islands . As Hurricane Dean approached , the island nations began to prepare with a flurry of activity . On August 14 the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency ( CDERA ) placed its Regional Response Mechanism on standby and contacted the National Disaster Coordinators of all member states in the Lesser Antilles . On August 15 the U.S. Agency for International Development ( USAID ) dispatched teams to Barbados , Dominica , and St. Kitts in advance of the hurricane to provide damage assessment should the hurricane affect those islands . At 11 p.m. AST August 15 ( 0300 UTC August 16 ) the respective governments of St. Lucia , Martinique , Saba , St. Eustatius , and Guadeloupe and its dependencies issued Hurricane watches and the government of the Netherlands Antilles issued a tropical storm watch for the island of St. Maarten , as then @-@ Tropical Storm Dean was expected to intensify to hurricane strength and reach the Windward Islands within 36 hours . Authorities in Martinique canceled a memorial to the victims of West Caribbean Airways Flight 708 and began to set up shelters . 
 At 5 a.m. AST ( 0900 UTC ) August 16 the respective governments of St. Lucia and Dominica issued hurricane warnings in anticipation of Hurricane Dean 's imminent approach . In Dominica , a dozen and a half tourists were evacuated to concrete shelters . The government of Dominica also canceled leave for emergency service personnel and evacuated Princess Margret Hospital , fearing that its roof might be vulnerable to the storm 's winds . At the same time the Meteorological Service of Barbados issued a tropical storm warning for Barbados and a tropical storm watch for St. Vincent . Three hours later , at 8 a.m. AST ( 1200 UTC ) , the Meteorological Service of Antigua issued a tropical storm watch for Montserrat , Antigua , St. Kitts , Nevis and Barbuda . Shortly thereafter the Trinidad and Tobago Meteorological Service issued a tropical storm watch for Grenada and its dependencies . 
 The Eastern Caribbean Donor Group convened a meeting on August 16 under the Chair of the Resident Representative United Nations Development Programme Barbados in anticipation of the hurricane causing significant damage and member states requiring international assistance . At 11 a.m. AST ( 1500 UTC ) the Barbados Meteorological Service issued tropical storm warnings for St. Vincent and the Grenadines , and the Government of the Netherlands Antilles discontinued the hurricane watch on Saba and St. Eustatius , replacing it with a tropical storm warning . At 5 p.m. AST ( 2100 UTC ) August 16 , roughly 15 hours before Hurricane Dean arrived , the Government of France issued hurricane warnings for Martinique and Guadeloupe and its dependencies , and the NHC issued a tropical storm watch for the U.S. Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico . At 8 p.m. AST ( 2100 UTC ) August 16 the Meteorological Service of Antigua issued a tropical storm warning for Anguilla . Martinique 's main airport and both of St. Lucia 's commercial airports closed that night when the last airplanes landed as the storm 's outer rainbands began to sweep over the island . At 11 p.m. AST August 16 ( 0300 UTC August 17 ) the NHC upgraded the tropical storm watch on U.S. Virgin Islands to a tropical storm warning . The next morning , August 17 , the center of Hurricane Dean passed between St. Lucia and Martinique . The Meteorological Service of Antigua issued a tropical storm warning for the British Virgin Islands that same morning , and the Eastern Caribbean Donor Group convened a second meeting to finalize the coordination of three Rapid Assessment Teams . 
 = = Impact = = 
 The storm entered the Caribbean through the Saint Lucia Channel between St. Lucia and Martinique on the morning of August 17 as a Category 2 storm with winds of 90 knots ( 100 mph , 165 km / h ) . 
 = = = St. Lucia = = = 
 Power outages began in some neighborhoods at 6 : 30 p.m. AST ( 2230 UTC ) August 16 , over 12 hours before the storm arrived , and quickly spread over the entire island . The night saw heavy rains , 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 58 inches ) at Hewanorra International Airport , and intense thunderstorms and by morning hurricane force winds peaked at 80 knots ( 90 mph , 145 km / h ) . The winds uprooted trees , downed electricity poles , disabled bridges , triggered landslides , and damaged several roofs . Hurricane Dean tore the corrugated metal roof off Victoria Hospital 's pediatric ward , but its patients had already been evacuated . St. Jude Hospital in Vieux Fort was also damaged when part of the roof blew off its medical ward and fell through the roof of the emergency room . A section of the cafeteria also lost its roof , but no one was injured in either incident . 
 The capital , Castries , was flooded by the storm surge and high seas deposited boulders and fishing boats on the streets . One person drowned in <unk> after being swept away by a rain @-@ swollen river while trying to recover a cow . Flooding was also reported in the town of Dennery where a number of residents had to be evacuated . Nationwide , damage to housing and buildings totaled EC $ 800 @,@ 000 . In the worst hit areas of the north , closest to Hurricane Dean 's path , at least 15 roofs were blown off . Two small waterfront houses were completely destroyed in the town of Gros Islet . The heavy seas also sunk or damaged several boats and damaged coastal roads , in some places eroding the land itself . Coastal damage was estimated at $ 700 @,@ 000 . 
 Although the Ministry of Education reported that eleven schools had sustained a combined total of $ 300 @,@ 000 of damage , the Ministry of Communications , Works , Transport , and Public Utilities reported that most of the country 's other major infrastructure remained functional . They estimated that the cost to clean up all of the roads and drains was $ 900 @,@ 000 and the cost to repair the utilities and communications damage was another $ 505 @,@ 000 . Saint Lucia Air and Sea Ports Authority reported another $ 922 @,@ 000 of damage , but none of these sectors experienced prolonged disruptions to their functionality . 
 The island 's 5 @,@ 000 acres ( 20 km2 ) of banana farms in Mabouya Valley , Roseau Valley , and Marc Marc were severely damaged with many of the plantations waterlogged or outright destroyed . An average of 75 % of the crops were lost , with some fields in the Northern Farms losing up to 80 % and in the Roseau Valley losing up to 85 % . The cost to the agriculture industry was $ 13 @.@ 2 million , bringing Hurricane Dean 's total cost to $ 17 @.@ 3 million ( US $ 6 @.@ 4 million in 2007 ) or 0 @.@ 5 % of the nation 's GDP . 
 = = = Martinique = = = 
 Martinique experienced 160 km / h winds with gusts to 215 km / h . The torrential rainfall , which reached 332 mm ( 13 @.@ 07 inches ) caused flooding throughout the island , with the town of Rivière @-@ Pilote flooding completely . The majority of Martinique 's population were left without electricity , water , telephone , or food . The storm destroyed Martinique 's entire banana crop , and 70 % of the island 's sugar cane plantations . 
 Three people were killed , many more were injured , and 600 <unk> were left homeless . The banana fields were completely destroyed . Officials estimated the damage on the island at about € 250 million ( US $ 337 million ) . 
 = = = Dominica = = = 
 In Dominica , a mother and her seven @-@ year @-@ old son died when one of a dozen landslide caused by the heavy rains fell onto their house . Landslides also blocked several roads in the mountainous country . In another incident two people were injured when a tree fell on their house . 
 Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit initially estimated that 100 to 125 homes were damaged , but in actuality Hurricane Dean damaged many more : 183 houses lost their roofs completely , 205 houses sustained partial damage to their roofs , 43 houses were completely destroyed , 115 houses suffered significant structural damage to components other than their roofs , and 225 non @-@ dwelling buildings were damaged . In total , 771 buildings suffered significant damage . 
 Princes Margret Hospital , the island 's only hospital , suffered damage to the roofs of the psychiatric and intensive care units . This led to heavy water damage , which also spread into the maternity ward and damaged the electrical system . All of the patients had been evacuated before the storm arrived . Because most equipment and supplies had also been removed , the hurricane 's cost to the health sector was limited to the EC $ 3 million of structural damage . 
 The storm surge caused EC $ 15 @.@ 5 million of damage to sea walls and another EC $ 15 million of damage to coastal bridges . Floods and landslides contributed EC $ 17 @.@ 6 million of damage to the island 's road network , while river floods destroyed EC $ 45 @.@ 5 million of river walls . Flooding also devastated the agriculture sector and 95 % of the crops were lost . <unk> a rehabilitation of the banana trees , 99 % of which were destroyed , was expected to take several years . 
 = = = Guadeloupe = = = 
 Overall damage from Dean is fairly minor in Guadeloupe . However the south of Basse @-@ Terre Island suffered moderate damage and sustained wind gust up were between 74 and 78 mph ( 119 and 126 km / h ) in areas such as Marie Galante and Les Saintes , in the Southern section of the island and destroyed 80 % and cost € 150 million ( US $ 220 million ) in Guadeloupe of the banana crop . The country 's main exports . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 Although the winds and rain of the hurricane did not reach as far south as the islands of Trinidad and Tobago , sea swells on the east coast killed two people as they tried to secure a boat . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 St. Lucia and Dominica activated their Caribbean Disaster Emergency Response Agency ( CDERA ) response systems to help assess and correct the storm 's damages . CDERA acknowledged their requests and , based on preliminary damage assessments , initiated a Level Two response which allowed for the event to be managed at the country level with regional assistance limited to technical support and resources where required . Barbados , Saint Vincent and the Grenadines , and Grenada also activated their CDERA response systems . Although they were not directly affected by the hurricane they used the opportunity to test the systems ' operating procedures . The other affected islands of the Lesser Antilles , Martinique and Guadeloupe , are not members of CDERA . 
 CDERA dispatched a technical support team of <unk> , <unk> , and Grenadians to Dominica on August 22 to assist in developing a damage assessment . The Government of Venezuela sent 500 blankets , 500 sheets , 3 large tents , 120 units of tarpaulin , water , and medical supplies to Dominica . The Government of Canada pledged $ 2 million in immediate aid to the afflicted countries . The U.S. Government , through the U.S. Agency for International Development ( USAID ) , declared a disaster in Dominica and St. Lucia and provided $ 25 @,@ 000 and 75 rolls of plastic sheeting to Dominica for emergency shelter repairs and an additional 50 rolls of plastic sheeting to St. Lucia through its National Emergency Management Organization . CDERA petitioned the Caribbean Development Bank for a US $ 100 @,@ 000 relief grant to assist with relief efforts and damage repairs in St. Lucia and Dominica . 
 Although St. Lucia suffered significant damage to its residential structures and agricultural land , its airports and hotels were operational within days having needed only small @-@ scale repair work . Hospitals and other essential services kept running on standby power supplied by independent generators to assist in the cleanup and recovery efforts . Roads connecting the north and south of the island were quickly cleared . <unk> , the nation 's only electricity provider , worked around the clock to repair dozens of downed electrical poles and restored electricity by August 21 . The rest of the island 's infrastructure weathered the storm . Two shelters were opened for hurricane @-@ affected residence , and USAID / OFDA provided US $ 40 @,@ 432 of assistance to the island . 
 Dominican Prime Minister Roosevelt Skerrit declared August 19 , 2007 to be a national day of prayer and thanks @-@ giving . The destruction of 546 residences forced approximately 1 @,@ 000 people into 100 shelters . A USAID disaster specialist liaised with the Dominican Office of Disaster Management and arraigned for assistance to the order of US $ 60 @,@ 648 of relief supplies and $ 25 @,@ 000 of Emergency Shelter supplies . 
 In the days after to storm , some residents of Martinique , still without electricity , food , water , or telephones , took to looting stores and bakeries . Utility workers from Guadeloupe , French Guiana , and France arrived on August 19 to help restore electricity . 
 The Secretary of State for the French Overseas , Christian <unk> , visited Martinique shortly after the hurricane to inspect the damage . He was joined by French Prime Minister , François Fillon on August 22 and the two surveyed the damaged to Guadeloupe and Martinique , the two hardest hit French colonies . A week after the storm hit 11 @,@ 000 people in Martinique were still without telephone and electricity and in the worst hit parts of southern Guadeloupe the water was still not drinkable . Banana crops in Guadeloupe , 80 % of which were destroyed by Dean , will not recover until March , 2008 . 
 = Slow Life = 
 Slow Life is an EP by the Welsh alternative rock band Super Furry Animals , released in 2004 . The EP was made available as a free download and also saw a limited CD release , bundled with remix album Phantom Phorce . Lead track " Slow Life " appeared on the 2003 album Phantom Power and was originally composed as a purely electronic song by keyboardist Cian Ciaran several years earlier . The band were keen to finish the track and Ciaran encouraged them to jam over his original version — this jam was then edited and made into the finished song . The track " Motherfokker " is a collaboration between the Super Furry Animals and rap group Goldie Lookin Chain . 
 The EP received mixed reviews although " Slow Life " itself was singled out for praise by many critics . A music video was made to accompany the track directed by Dylan Jones and <unk> O <unk> . The Super Furries appeared in the 2004 film 9 Songs playing " Slow Life " live during a scene in which one of the characters attends a gig by the band at the Brixton Academy . 
 = = Recording and themes = = 
 " Slow Life " was written in two stages . According to bassist Guto Pryce the " electronic part " was composed by keyboard player Cian Ciaran " quite a few years " before its eventual release . The band had tried to fit this early , purely electronic , version on previous albums but had " never got ' round to it " . By the time the group came to record Phantom Power they were anxious to release the song , however Ciaran was reluctant to leave it in its original form and encouraged the rest of the band to jam over his original track . According to singer Gruff Rhys the instrumentation was recorded " pretty much live " after which lyrics were written and the band 's 10 @-@ minute jam session was " chopped ... up and made into a composed song " with the electronic section intact . Strings were later added by Sean O 'Hagan . Rhys has stated that renting their own studio in Cardiff has given the band the ability to work on tracks such as " Slow Life " over a period of years — the group visit the studio almost every day and play : " the best parts on any of our records , I think , come out of a couple of us being in our little room in Cardiff at three in the morning , just wigging out and being ecstatic in the music . " 
 According to guitarist Huw Bunford the track had the working title " Miami Vice " as it featured a drum roll similar to one used in the theme tune to the 80 's television show of the same name . The band decided not to keep this name as they were keen to avoid links with a particular place — Bunford gave the example of the song 's use on a travel documentary about Miami as something the group did not want to see . Some promotional copies of Phantom Power featured " Slow Life " as the first track although it eventually appeared as the last track on the officially released version of the album . Gruff Rhys has stated that the song had to go at either the beginning or the end of the record as it is the " most sonically impressive " track on the album . Rhys has described his lyrics as " regurgitating what we hear on the news , recycled , vomiting them all back " . The Guardian has interpreted the song as a " cutting critique of middle @-@ east colonialism " . 
 The track " Motherfokker " is a collaboration between the Super Furry Animals and Welsh rappers Goldie Lookin Chain with chorus vocals provided by Cian Ciaran . The two toured together in 2004 and Gruff Rhys has praised the group , stating that " their range of references are insane . They 're extremely bright . They 're crazy . " Rhys has explained that the song is about " an incredibly large aircraft from outer space . [ Goldie Lookin Chain ] are the aliens and it 's about the people of Earth coming together as one " . The two groups have performed the track together several times at Super Furry Animals ' concerts including the 2004 Reading Festival and a date at the Brixton Academy on 22 September 2005 . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The E.P. was released as a free download from the Placid Casual website on 12 April 2004 . Along with the three tracks that make up the E.P. the promotional music video for " Slow Life " was also available to download in QuickTime and Windows Media Video formats . Limited quantities of the E.P. were also issued on CD , bundled with initial copies of remix album Phantom Phorce on its release on 19 April 2004 . The CD version was housed in a floppy disk style picture sleeve . 
 Critical reaction was generally mixed with Cokemachineglow calling the EP " forgettable " , stating that , while " Slow Life " " slides perfectly off Phantom Power " , the other two tracks are weak : " Motherfokker " is a vulgar " Pez candy up the nose " with " shoddy guest rapping " from Goldie Lookin Chain and " Lost Control " is barely more than a remix of Phantom Power track " Out of Control " . PopMatters also dismissed " Motherfokker " and " Lost Control " as inessential b @-@ sides and , during their review of 2007 's Hey Venus ! , the NME suggested that " Motherfokker " is " best @-@ suppressed " . 
 " Slow Life " itself received generally positive reviews ; Pitchfork Media called it a " stunning closer " to Phantom Power , while PopMatters described the song as " the kind of schizophrenic fun we 've come to expect from the band but ... less showy and eager to please , as they control themselves enough to make the jarring , contradicting styles much easier to digest " . Stylus Magazine stated that the " great " track " achieves symbiosis between techno and guitar @-@ pop better than anything else they 've done before " . The BBC agreed calling " Slow Life " the band 's " most successful <unk> techno attempt so far " . The song was placed at number 46 in the 2003 Festive Fifty on John Peel 's BBC Radio 1 show . 
 = = Use of " Slow Life " in 9 Songs = = 
 " Slow Life " is central to the 2004 Michael Winterbottom film 9 Songs , being one of the nine songs mentioned in the title . The movie charts the relationship of main characters Matt and Lisa from their initial meeting to the pair splitting up . Footage of the two attending a series of nine concerts at Brixton Academy , where they initially meet , is interspersed with scenes of the actors performing unsimulated sex . Matt and Lisa are already growing apart when Matt attends a Super Furry Animals concert at the Academy alone . Giving Lisa 's ticket away as she " didn 't want to go " the character comments : " 5000 people in a room and you can still feel alone " . The scene appears roughly forty minutes into the film and shows the band performing " Slow Life " live in its entirety as Matt looks on . 
 = = Music video = = 
 A promotional music video was made to accompany " Slow Life " directed by Dylan Jones and <unk> O <unk> . The video features psychedelic , fluorescent images of the band 's faces in close up as they play and sing along with the track . <unk> and fractal images appear at several points throughout the video . As with the other tracks taken from Phantom Power , " Golden Retriever " and " Hello Sunshine " , the video for " Slow Life " does not appear on the Phantom Power DVD release but is included on the DVD version of greatest hits album Songbook : The Singles , Vol . 1 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs by Super Furry Animals unless otherwise stated . 
 " Slow Life " – 6 : 59 
 " Motherfokker " ( Super Furry Animals / Goldie Lookin Chain ) – 5 : 42 
 " Lost Control " – 4 : 41 
 = = Credits = = 
 = Music of Final Fantasy XIV = 
 The music for the MMORPG Final Fantasy XIV was composed by Nobuo Uematsu , a regular contributor to the music of the Final Fantasy series . Several other composers including Masayoshi Soken and Naoshi Mizuta contributed music for updates to the game . The music for the game 's reboot , Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn , was primarily composed by Soken , who was the sound director for both releases of the game . Music from both releases of the game has been released in several albums , though no album contains music from both XIV and A Realm Reborn . A pair of mini @-@ albums containing a handful of selected tracks from XIV , Final Fantasy XIV : Battle Tracks and Final Fantasy XIV : Field Tracks , were released by Square Enix in 2010 when XIV first launched . A soundtrack album titled Final Fantasy XIV - Eorzean Frontiers , containing most of the music that had been released by that point for XIV , was digitally released in 2012 . A final soundtrack album for the original release of the game , Before Meteor : Final Fantasy XIV Original Soundtrack , was released in 2013 just before the launch of A Realm Reborn , and contains all of the music that was composed for XIV throughout its lifetime . The latest soundtrack album , Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn Original Soundtrack , was released in 2014 , and contains all of the music for A Realm Reborn released up to that point . 
 The soundtracks for both releases of the game were well received by critics . Uematsu 's mix of orchestral and rock tracks for XIV were praised , though the delayed release of a full album drew criticism . Soken 's work on A Realm Reborn , including both his original tracks as well as themes carried over from XIV and previous Final Fantasy games , were heavily praised by reviewers for the game . Music from the initial release of the game has been played in the international Distant Worlds Final Fantasy concert series , and books of sheet music for piano arrangements of music from the game have been produced . 
 = = Creation and influence = = 
 The massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game ( MMORPG ) Final Fantasy XIV was released in two versions : the original ( live between 2010 and 2012 ) , and its remake ( Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn , live since 2013 ) . The music for XIV was composed by Nobuo Uematsu , who was the lead composer for the first ten main Final Fantasy games and a contributor to the Final Fantasy XI and XII soundtracks . Over the two years that XIV was active , several updates were made to the game , which included additional music composed by Masayoshi Soken , Naoshi Mizuta , Tsuyoshi Sekito and Ryo Yamazaki . XIV was poorly received , and despite the updates , Square Enix decided to take the game offline for a time , and relaunch it with a new development team under a new name . Soken , the sound director for both releases , composed the soundtrack to A Realm Reborn . 
 Prior to agreeing to create XIV 's score , Uematsu had already planned to compose " Kimi ga Iru Kara " , the theme song for Final Fantasy XIII . Wanting him to fully focus on XIV , Square Enix asked XIII 's main composer Masashi Hamauzu to write the song instead . Thus , XIII was the first main @-@ series Final Fantasy game soundtrack to not include Uematsu 's work . Despite XIV being an MMO and thus a new genre for him , Uematsu treated it as any other video game project . Compared to his previous work within the series , Uematsu had considerable creative freedom while composing the soundtrack , because the rest of the production team did not fully envision beforehand how the soundtrack would sound or fit into the game . Uematsu created a mixture of orchestral and rock pieces for the game 's battle themes . There was a momentary crisis when he lost most of the data for his completed tracks and needed to hire a data recovery service . He worked as a freelance composer during the project for Square Enix , also composing the music for The Last Story , a game from Final Fantasy creator Hironobu Sakaguchi . The game 's theme song , " Answers " , was sung by Susan Calloway . She was chosen by Uematsu , who had worked with her during the first Distant Worlds concert and was impressed by her singing abilities . 
 For A Realm Reborn , Soken was the primary composer , in addition to reprising his XIV role as lead sound director . The primary goal given to the music team was to make the music true to the series . Naoki Yoshida , the game 's producer and director , told Soken to " give [ the team ] something straightforward that anyone could identify as Final Fantasy , with an easy @-@ to @-@ understand , expressive orchestral sound " . Soken focused primarily on creating the soundtrack rather than his sound director role . He often created new tracks due to requests from staff members . As the game was developed and released in a shorter timeframe than the original release , Soken and the sound team were given less than a year to create both the music and the various sound effects for the game world . According to Soken , it felt like " enough work for two full games in that time " . Unlike the freedom given Uematsu for XIV , most of the tracks for A Realm Reborn had specific guidelines , though Soken was allowed to " do what [ he liked ] " for Titan 's battle theme . Soken sang the vocal work for some tracks , such as the battle theme for Leviathan . Several themes and tracks from the original game were carried over both directly and as a part of new tracks in A Realm Reborn , including the original vocal theme . Soken also remixed pieces from earlier Final Fantasy games for use in special in @-@ game events . 
 = = Original release = = 
 = = = Mini @-@ albums = = = 
 The mini @-@ albums Final Fantasy XIV : Battle Tracks and Final Fantasy XIV : Field Tracks were the first releases of music from the game , and were published by Square Enix on September 29 , 2010 , a week after the game itself was released . They feature selected tracks from XIV . The music was composed by Uematsu and arranged by Tsutomu Narita . Kenichiro Fukui also helped arrange some of the pieces on the Field Tracks mini @-@ album . Battle Tracks has nine pieces , and includes the game 's opening theme , the boss theme " Nail of the Heavens " , and Final Fantasy XIV 's rendition of Uematsu 's " Victory Fanfare " . Field Tracks predominantly features the main themes for the game 's countries Ul 'dah , Gridania and Limsa Lominsa , along with other pieces of music heard during traveling , for a total of eight tracks . Each mini @-@ album was accompanied by special liner notes by Uematsu describing his experiences writing music for the series , with particular reference to the first game . 
 Patrick Gann of RPGFan termed the mini @-@ albums as a good return work from Uematsu despite some of the unexpected battle tracks , though he questioned whether the discs themselves would be worth purchasing once a full soundtrack album was released . Jayson Napolitano of Original Sound Version was generally positive , and cited the composition of the battle themes as " a cross between The Black Mages and Uematsu 's work on Lord of Vermilion " . The more orchestral field tracks were also praised . Chris Greening of Square Enix Music Online termed Field Tracks as " largely likeable " , and appreciated Uematsu 's use of rock music in Battle Tracks , though he disliked the strategy of releasing two incomplete mini @-@ albums rather than a full soundtrack album . Both mini @-@ albums sold well : Battle Tracks appeared at position # 73 on the Japanese Oricon album charts for a week , while Field Tracks appeared at position # 75 for that same week . 
 = = = Eorzean Frontiers = = = 
 Final Fantasy XIV - Eorzean Frontiers was the first full album of music from the game to be released . It was published by Square Enix on September 1 , 2012 as a digital album through iTunes . The tracks include most of the music that had been released for the game at that point , including pieces that were present at the game 's launch and some which were added later , including " Rise of the White Raven " , the theme for Nael Van <unk> , and the themes for the Grand Companies of Eorzea . All of the tracks from the album were additionally released on the same date in a set of smaller digital mini @-@ albums , also released through iTunes , titled Final Fantasy XIV Frontiers - Gridania , <unk> , Limsa Lominsa , and Ul 'dah . The majority of the music was composed by Nobuo Uematsu , with additional pieces contributed by Masayoshi Soken , Naoshi Mizuta , Tsuyoshi Sekito , and Ryo Yamazaki . The 38 tracks of the album cover a duration of 3 : 14 : 24 . 
 Derek Heemsbergen of RPGFan reviewed the album as an " incredibly rich and diverse musical score " , and felt that regardless of the reception to the game itself , that the soundtrack was worthy of a Final Fantasy game . Jayson Napolitano of Destructoid , in his review of the album , found that while there were many interesting tracks in the album and that the total length of more than three hours made the album a " good deal " , that most of the tracks that he enjoyed the most were previously featured on the Final Fantasy XIV Battle Tracks and Field Tracks mini @-@ albums . 
 = = = Before Meteor = = = 
 On August 14 , 2013 , two weeks before the release of A Realm Reborn , Square Enix published Before Meteor : Final Fantasy XIV Original Soundtrack , a full soundtrack album with all of the music composed for the original release of the game , which had shut down a year prior . The 104 @-@ track album was released on a single Blu @-@ ray disc and included music lasting 6 : 05 : 51 , with both the original music by Uematsu as well as the additional tracks composed by Mizuta , Yamazaki , Sekito , Soken , and Ai Yamashita during the game 's run . The disc also included a remastered version of the " A New Beginning " trailer and a bonus download code for an in @-@ game Dalamud Minion . The Blu @-@ ray disc allowed purchasers to rip digital copies of the album on their Blu @-@ ray devices to play without the disc . Emily McMillan of Video Game Music Online generally praised the music , praising some of the newer tracks and Uematsu 's work on the more orchestral tracks . Her main criticisms were that some aspects seemed artificial and that the composers were playing safe with the themes and motifs used . Before Meteor appeared at position # 11 on the Japanese Oricon album charts for its release week and remained in the charts for three weeks . 
 = = A Realm Reborn = = 
 = = = Original Soundtrack = = = 
 Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn Original Soundtrack was released by Square Enix on March 21 , 2014 . It was released on a Blu @-@ ray disc and features 119 tracks lasting 6 : 48 : 00 , all composed by Masayoshi Soken . In addition to the tracks present in the initial launch of A Realm Reborn , the album also includes tracks used in the 2 @.@ 1 patch , A Realm <unk> . Initial copies of the soundtrack also came with a special " Wind @-@ up Bahamut " in @-@ game pet . Soken composed all of the music of the game , as well as sound effects , in only eight months . Emily McMillan of Video Game Music Online , in her review of the album , termed it a " truly fantastic score " , and said that it was superior to the music of the original version of the game . She felt that it was an excellent merging of the traditional Final Fantasy musical style with a modern orchestral score . Mike Salbato of RPGFan also praised the album saying that it was his favorite soundtrack album of 2014 , and that he " can 't recommend A Realm Reborn 's soundtrack highly enough " . 
 In addition to reviews of the album , within the context of the game the music has been well received . Kotaku 's Mike Fahey stated that the music was " wonderful , complex and satisfying " . He often paused to remove the ambient and interface noises so as to hear it better . GamesRadar 's Adam <unk> called it " a standout even amongst Final Fantasy 's storied heritage " while Digital Spy 's Mark Langshaw called it " a sonic feast ... that pays appropriate homage to the long @-@ running RPG series " . The soundtrack won Video Game Music Online 's 2013 Annual Game Music Awards in the Eastern category . A Realm Reborn appeared at position # 10 on the Japanese Oricon album charts for its release week , and remained in the charts for eight weeks . 
 = = = From Astral to Umbral = = = 
 Final Fantasy XIV : From Astral to <unk> Band & Piano Arrangement Album is a Blu @-@ ray album of rock and piano arrangements of music from A Realm Reborn . It features arrangements by Soken , <unk> , Keiko , and Nobuko Toda of pieces originally composed by Soken for the game , and was published by Square Enix on December 17 , 2014 . The first six tracks on the album are piano covers , performed by Keiko , of field and town themes from the game . The following six are rock covers by Soken 's band The Primals of the musical themes from the game of the <unk> , powerful elemental creatures . The Blu @-@ ray disc also features the original versions of the twelve tracks , videos of in @-@ game scenes where the original music plays , as well as one secret track that needs a password to unlock . Some of the original tracks had not yet been released on an official album when Astral to Umbral was produced . 
 Mike Salbato of RPGFan reviewed the album and described it as " a great , if perhaps disjointed experience " . He praised the high quality of the arrangements and performances , but questioned the grouping of the more gentle piano tracks alongside the heavy rock pieces . 
 = = = Before the Fall = = = 
 Final Fantasy XIV : Before the Fall Original Soundtrack is an album of music from four patches to Final Fantasy XIV : A Realm Reborn . These were patches 2 @.@ 2 through 2 @.@ 5 : Through the Maelstrom , Defenders of Eorzea , Dreams of Ice , and Before the Fall . The album was released by Square Enix on August 26 , 2015 on Blu @-@ ray , and includes all of the music that Soken composed for the updates , as well as several pieces for the updates written by Nobuo Uematsu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Ryo Yamazaki . Of the 61 tracks , 16 were previously released on other albums , primarily the Before Meteor album , and these tracks compose the majority of the non @-@ Soken tracks . 
 Christopher Huynh of Video Game Music Online held a mixed opinion of the album , which he criticized as " a rather mixed bag of tracks " . He said that while some of the tracks were excellent , there were several poor pieces as well , and was disappointed in the repeated material . He ascribed the uneven quality of the album to a lack of an overriding theme to the music , which left it as a collection of disparate material . He also criticized the sound quality , believing that the use of a real orchestra would have helped the orchestral pieces . 
 = = = Heavensward = = = 
 Heavensward : Final Fantasy XIV Original Soundtrack is an album of music for the Heavensward expansion pack to A Realm Reborn . The album was released by Square Enix on February 24 , 2016 on Blu @-@ ray , and includes all of the music that Soken composed for the expansion and the 3 @.@ 1 patch " As Goes Light , So Goes Darkness " . A few of the 58 tracks on the album were composed by Yukiko Takada or Nobuo Uematsu , and the majority by Soken . Unlike the prior Before the Fall album , all of the music was new to the album , though 16 of the tracks were previously released in September through November 2015 as Final Fantasy XIV : Heavensward <unk> Vol . 1 @.@ through 3 . 
 The album was well received by Emily McMillan of Video Game Music Online , who lauded the soundtrack 's " brilliant , varied , and extraordinarily fun to hear " themes . She praised the unique atmosphere of the new expansion 's music , as well as it 's integration into the overall game 's soundscape . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Four tracks from Final Fantasy XIV ( " Navigator 's Glory " , " Twilight Over <unk> " , " Primal Judgement " , and an orchestral rendition of " Answers " with vocals by Susan Calloway ) were included in the Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy Returning Home concert on November 6 and 7 , 2010 in Tokyo , Japan , which was released as a CD @-@ DVD package in 2011 . Those four tracks along with " Beneath <unk> Banners " were then added to the general setlist options for the international Distant Worlds : Music from Final Fantasy concert tour . Tracks from A Realm Reborn were included in the Nintendo 3DS rhythm game Theatrhythm Final Fantasy : Curtain Call . An 88 @-@ page book of sheet music for piano arrangements of songs from the soundtrack titled Final Fantasy XIV Piano Solo Sheet Music was published by Dream Music Factory in 2010 , containing the tracks featured in the mini @-@ albums . Dream Music Factory also published piano @-@ arranged sheet music for Before Meteor in 2013 titled Before Meteor : Final Fantasy XIV Piano Solo Sheet Music . 
 = University of Colorado Denver = 
 The University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus ( sic ) is a public research university in the U.S. state of Colorado . It is part of the University of Colorado system . 
 The university has two campuses — one in downtown Denver at the Auraria Campus , and the other at the Anschutz Medical Campus located in neighboring Aurora . The single university is the result of the 2004 consolidation of the University of Colorado Denver and the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center . 
 The University of Colorado Denver is located on Auraria Campus in Downtown Denver , Colorado while the CU Anschutz Medical Campus is located on the Anschutz Medical Campus in Aurora , Colorado , nearly 10 miles away . CU Anschutz shares the campus with the Children 's Hospital and University of Colorado Hospital . There are currently more than 18 @,@ 000 students at the school 's two physical campuses in downtown Denver and in Aurora . The school also offers classes via CU Online . 
 The University of Colorado Denver is the largest research institution in Colorado , attracting more than $ 375 million in research grants annually and granting more graduate degrees than any other institution in the state . CU Denver , along with University of Colorado Hospital and University Physicians , Inc . , employs more than 12 @,@ 200 Coloradans , making it one of the metro Denver area 's top employers . The university serves more than 500 @,@ 000 patients a year through its hospital and clinical services . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus = = = 
 The University of Colorado created the Department of Medicine and Surgery in September 1883 in the Old Main building on the Boulder campus . The Department of Nursing opened in 1898 . 
 By 1892 , the last two years of classes were taught in Denver because the larger population afforded more practical experience . This practice triggered something of a turf battle with the University of Denver 's medical school and the subsequent legal battle went to the state Supreme Court . In 1897 , the court found that CU 's charter restricted them to Boulder . However , in 1910 , CU got an amendment to the state Constitution passed which allowed them to move back to Denver . In 1911 , the School of Medicine combined with the Denver and Gross Medical College to form a larger school with a more comprehensive program , paving the way for the school 's permanent move to Denver . In 1925 , the School of Medicine moved to the campus on Ninth Avenue and Colorado Boulevard in Denver . This would become the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center ( UCHSC ) . 
 In 1995 , the Fitzsimons Army Medical Center was officially put on the Base Realignment and Closure list , after which officials from the Health Sciences Center , University of Colorado Hospital and the City of Aurora presented a proposal to the Department of Defense in Washington , D.C. to repurpose the decommissioned base as an academic health center . In 1999 , the Army base was closed under the 1995 Base Realignment and Closure action . In 2004 , the first UCHSC labs moved from Denver to the research towers on the Fitzsimons campus . In 2006 , the Fitzsimons campus of UCHSC was renamed the Anschutz Medical Campus in recognition of philanthropic donations from Philip and Nancy Anschutz . By the end of 2008 , academic and research operations of all CU Denver health sciences schools and colleges relocated from the Ninth Avenue and Colorado Boulevard campus to the new Anschutz campus , joining the affiliated University of Colorado Hospital and Children 's Hospital . In 2011 , the Regents approved the name University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus . 
 = = = University of Colorado Denver = = = 
 The University of Colorado Denver began as the Extension Center of University of Colorado 's Department of Correspondence and Extension , which was established in 1912 . In 1938 , the Extension Center acquired permanent quarters in Denver in the C.A. Johnson Building at 509 17th Street , where a single , full @-@ time faculty member ran the school with the help of part @-@ time teachers . In 1947 , the Extension Center moved into the Fraternal Building at 1405 Glenarm Place . In 1956 , the University acquired the Denver Tramway Company Building at 14th and Arapahoe Streets ( now the Hotel Teatro and the Denver Center for the Performing Arts Tramway building ) . In 1964 , the Extension Center was renamed the University of Colorado – Denver Center . On January 11 , 1973 , lawmakers , upon proclamation of the governor , amended the state constitution to establish additional CU campuses , transforming the University of Colorado — Denver Center into the University of Colorado Denver ( CU Denver ) . Between 1973 and 1976 , the State of Colorado built the Auraria Higher Education Center ( <unk> ) on a 127 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 51 km2 ) downtown campus to be shared by the University of Colorado Denver , the Metropolitan State University of Denver and the Community College of Denver . In 1977 , the Denver campus expanded to the newly opened <unk> , and later to several buildings extending into downtown Denver . 
 = = = Merger and renaming = = = 
 In the summer of 2004 , the University of Colorado Denver and the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center merged to create the University of Colorado Denver and Health Sciences Center ( <unk> ) . As a result , the University of Colorado encompasses three institutions , down from four . 
 On October 29 , 2007 , the board of regents voted to rename <unk> as the University of Colorado Denver , consisting of the Anschutz Medical Campus and the Denver Campus . 
 In August 2011 , the regents approved a name change to the University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus ( including the vertical bar ) , while its legal name is University of Colorado Denver . The Anschutz Medical Campus is presently referred in official materials as CU Anschutz or CU Anschutz Medical Campus , making no reference to the University of Colorado Denver . The primary name of the Denver Campus ( previously Downtown Campus ) is University of Colorado Denver and it can be referred to as CU Denver but not UC Denver . The domain name for the whole institution is <unk> , while the previous domain name <unk> was turned off in July 2010 . 
 = = Campuses = = 
 = = = Denver Campus = = = 
 CU Denver , part of the Auraria Campus , is located to the southwest of downtown Denver in the Auraria Neighborhood , on Speer Boulevard and Auraria Parkway . CU Denver shares the Auraria Campus with two additional institutes of higher education , making this campus one @-@ of @-@ a @-@ kind : Metropolitan State University of Denver and the Community College of Denver . Regional Transportation District 's ( RTD ) Light Rail has two stops on the Auraria Campus : Colfax at Auraria and Auraria West Campus . 
 CU Denver features both undergraduate and graduate courses , with more than 35 percent of the students graduate students . The campus is located in the heart of the central business district and is in close proximity to the Pepsi Center , <unk> Gardens , The Colorado Convention Center , The Denver Center for the Performing Arts , Larimer Square , and the 16th Street Mall . The reclaimed Tivoli brewery , which closed in 1969 , houses the student union . 
 = = = CU Anschutz Medical Campus = = = 
 The Health Sciences Campus previously had two sub @-@ campuses , the main campus at Ninth Avenue and Colorado Boulevard ( " Ninth and Colorado " ) in Denver , which has since been decommissioned , and a new campus in neighboring Aurora , where all activities of the former Health Sciences Center has since relocated . The latter campus , which is now called the Anschutz Medical Campus , is host to the Research Complex towers , The Barbara Davis Diabetes Center , the <unk> Campbell Native Health building , various centers of the University of Colorado Hospital , and the health sciences library . There are approximately 4000 students at the Anschutz Medical Campus with 1400 of these in the School of Medicine ( including medical and graduate students ) . 
 = = = = Architecture and Layout = = = = 
 The CU Anschutz Medical Campus is a 227 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 9 km2 ) campus for the University and two hospitals : University of Colorado <unk> and Children 's Hospital Colorado . All of the facilities on the campus , with the exception of the former Fitzsimons Hospital ( referred to as 500 Main , or " Building 500 " ) , are new construction . A series of distinct quadrangular zones on the campus governs its architectural design : the research quadrangle , consisting of the three Research Complex towers , features a contemporary glass and metal design ; the education quadrangle is characterized by a brick aesthetic ; and the core quadrangle is located on the central axis of the campus , and anchored by Building 500 . The comprehensive 116 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 10 @,@ 800 m2 ) medical library is located along the center quadrangle of the campus . 
 The combined 578 @-@ acre ( 2 @.@ 3 km2 ) of the Anschutz Medical Campus and the Fitzsimons Life Science District is undergoing a $ 4 @.@ 3 billion renovation and transformation into the largest medical @-@ related redevelopment project in the United States . The 184 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 7 km2 ) Colorado Science + Technology Park in Aurora is being developed directly adjacent to the health sciences areas of campus , providing opportunities to collaborate with biotechnology companies and their resources . The remaining acres of the former military facility are dedicated to commercial , hospitality , retail , and residential development . 
 = = Institutional profile = = 
 University of Colorado Denver offers bachelor 's , master 's , doctoral , and first professional degrees . The university ( including University of Colorado Hospital and University Physicians , Inc . ) operates on a $ 1 @.@ 8 billion annual economy . The University of Colorado Hospital , which is the principal teaching hospital for the University of Colorado Denver , serves more than half a million patients every year . In the 2009 – 10 fiscal year , CU Denver 's two campuses received almost $ 385 million in combined research funding . 
 = = = Enrollment = = = 
 More than 18 @,@ 000 students are enrolled at CU Denver | Anschutz , plus an additional 11 @,@ 000 online students . Among CU Denver | Anschutz students , 57 % are undergraduates and 43 % are pursuing graduate studies . 76 % of the student population are full @-@ time students , 16 % are out @-@ of @-@ state residents , and international students make up 6 % of total enrollment . 14 @,@ 333 students are enrolled on the CU Denver Campus ( Fall 2015 ) . Of these , 70 % are undergraduates , and 30 % are graduate students . 41 % of undergraduate students and 55 % of new freshmen at CU Denver belong to an ethnic minority . The average entering ACT score for new freshmen at CU Denver is 22 @.@ 9 composite . The average entering SAT scores at CU Denver is 549 Math and 542 Verbal . The average high school GPA for new freshmen is 3 @.@ 37 . The most popular undergraduate majors at CU Denver are biology , psychology , pre @-@ engineering , music , and economics . International students on the campus arrive from 125 countries . There are 3 @,@ 901 students enrolled at University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus ( Fall 2014 ) . Of these , 446 are undergraduate students and 3 @,@ 435 are graduate students . 23 % of the student population at the CU Anschutz Medical Campus are an ethnic minority . 
 = = Academics and research = = 
 University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus is one of the largest universities in Colorado with more than 18 @,@ 000 students and awarding more than 4 @,@ 500 degrees in a year . It has the largest graduate business school and graduate school of education in Colorado , and its School of Medicine is the only allopathic ( M.D. granting ) medical school in the state . In 2013 , more than $ 400 million in sponsored research funding was awarded to University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus researchers . The vast majority of this research is dedicated to health sciences at the Anschutz Medical Campus . In 2011 , more than $ 179 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 was awarded by the National Institutes of Health to CU Denver researchers . The core laboratories in the research complex , at the Anschutz Medical Campus , include mass spectrometry , X @-@ ray crystallography , electron microscopy , a 900 mega @-@ hertz nuclear magnetic resonance ( NMR ) spectrometer , DNA array and peptide protein chemistry . The university is considered by the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education to have " very high research activity " with a basic classification of Research Universities ( RU / VH ) ( very high research activity ) . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 The University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus hosts two libraries , one on each of its two campuses . The Auraria library on the CU Denver campus downtown serves the three institutions that share the campus — CU Denver , Metropolitan State University of Denver and Community College of Denver . The library houses nearly 1 million print books , 130 @,@ 000 e @-@ books , 44 @,@ 000 e @-@ journals and 300 databases . The library on the Anschutz Medical Campus is the largest health sciences library in Colorado , with more than 32 @,@ 000 e @-@ journals . The health sciences library opened in late 2007 with two Information Commons , 30 group study rooms , and wireless internet connectivity throughout the library . 
 = = = Schools and colleges = = = 
 University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus offers more than 140 degree programs in 13 schools and colleges . The university offers degrees in a wide variety of academic fields such as engineering , business , culture , history , language , the natural sciences , the biomedical sciences and medicine . CU Denver hosts 8 schools and colleges : the College of Architecture and Planning , the College of Arts & Media , The Business School , the School of Education & Human Development , the College of Engineering and Applied Science , the College of Liberal Arts and Sciences , the School of Public Affairs and its Presidential Climate Action Project , and the Graduate School . The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences is CU Denver 's largest school on the Downtown Denver Campus , offering 23 baccalaureate degrees , 17 master 's degrees , and 4 PhD programs . CU Denver sponsors the only college of architecture and planning in Colorado . The School of Architecture and Planning is located on 14th street , offering graduate degrees in architecture , urban design , and landscape architecture . In the engineering areas , the downtown campus has worked with Lockheed Martin and Raytheon . On the Anschutz Medical Campus , the university houses the School of Dental Medicine , the School of Medicine , the College of Nursing , the Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences , Colorado School of Public Health , and the Graduate School . 
 = = = = School of Medicine = = = = 
 The university 's School of Medicine offers a four @-@ year program leading to an MD degree , and houses various graduate programs leading to the PhD degree . The school also includes a Child Health Associate / Physician Assistant ( <unk> ) degree and a doctor of Physical Therapy degree . Both are three @-@ year programs . The Medical Scientist Training Program ( <unk> ) awards both MD and PhD degrees . There are about 650 MD students at the school , plus 350 in the Physical Assistant and Physical Therapy programs and 400 in Graduate Medical Education . 
 = = = = School of Pharmacy = = = = 
 The University of Colorado 's School of Pharmacy ( SOP ) began in 1911 as a division of the School of Medicine in Boulder . It became an independent college in 1913 and a school in 1957 . It received its accreditation in 1938 – 1939 and awarded a B.S. in Pharmacy degree in 1995 – 1996 when it received a full accreditation status awarding the Doctor of Pharmacy ( <unk> ) degree by the <unk> . In 1986 , the School of Pharmacy was administratively transferred to the University of Colorado Health Sciences Center in Denver . The physical transfer from Boulder and final consolidation of faculty , staff and students was completed between August and November 1992 . In 2008 , the school moved to the Anschutz Medical Campus , and offers medical and graduate degrees in pharmacy , the pharmaceutical sciences , molecular toxicology , and pharmaceutical outcomes research . 30 % of its class is from out of state . In 2009 , the NIH awarded $ 7 @,@ 310 @,@ 389 and $ 19 @,@ 189 @,@ 543 in grants towards the SOP and Pharmacology department , respectively . In 2011 , the school will move into its new building , the Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences which will also be located on the Anschutz Medical Campus . 
 = = = = Graduate School = = = = 
 The Graduate School at CU Denver | Anschutz awards more graduate degrees than any other institution in Colorado . The school consists of nearly 60 graduate programs . The departments running these programs are housed in the schools and colleges on both campuses of the university . These offerings include both department @-@ based and interdisciplinary programs in architecture and planning , arts and media , biomedical sciences , business , education and human development , engineering and applied sciences , humanities , applied mathematics , nursing , public affairs , public health , chemistry , and social sciences . Graduate programs at the Anschutz Medical Campus offer MS and PhD degrees focusing on basic , clinical and translational research in the biomedical sciences . 
 = = = = Business School = = = = 
 The University of Colorado Denver Business School is accredited by AACSB International . The school is accredited at both the undergraduate and graduate levels . The Business School is one of only a few schools in the US to have a separate accreditation for its Accounting program . Business is one of the school 's most popular majors since it is located in the heart of Downtown Denver . The Business School has worked with some of Colorado 's top businesses such as Molson Coors , Wells Fargo , First Bank , and Frontier Airlines , who provide feedback on the school 's Business curriculum . 
 = = = = School of Public Affairs = = = = 
 The School of Public Affairs at CU Denver is ranked 29th among schools of public affairs in the United States and is fully accredited by the Network of Schools of Public Policy , Affairs , and Administration ( <unk> ) . The school offers a number of highly ranked programs , including environmental policy , nonprofit management and public management . The online Master of Criminal Justice program was recently ranked in the top 10 nationwide by U.S. News & World Report . Students can choose from a wide range of innovative Master of Public Affairs and Master of Criminal Justice concentrations . The school also offers a Ph.D. in Public Affairs and recently launched a highly successful Bachelor of Criminal Justice undergraduate degree . Through community events and the timely research of the <unk> Institute for Governance , the School of Public Affairs is committed to making a real impact in Colorado , the region and beyond . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 The Chronicle of Higher Education ranks the university as having the top 10 Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index in the United States in the fields of biomedical sciences , developmental biology , human and medical genetics , oncology and cancer biology , structural biology and toxicology . University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus features in a number of rankings in U.S. News & World Report 's America 's Best Graduate Schools . The university ranked 5th among American medical schools for primary care in 2010 , and 27th among medical schools for research . The graduate school ranked 68th in the biological sciences in 2010 . The School of Nursing ranked 15th in the nation in 2007 , while among Nurse Practitioner programs , the university is ranked 8th , 5th , and 3rd in the areas of Adult , Family , and Pediatric , respectively . The medical school is ranked 6th in the specialty of family medicine . The CU Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences is ranked 23rd in the nation , and the School of Public Affairs is ranked 32nd . The Princeton Review included CU Denver | Anschutz in its Best Western Colleges , Best in the West in 2008 . The university ranked 34th on the Forbes list of best public colleges . The Business School is the 5th Best Graduate School for Physician – Executives ( 2007 ) , according to Modern Healthcare . In 2010 , CU Denver | Anschutz ranked 7th in The Scientist 's Best Places to Work for <unk> survey . 
 = = Student life = = 
 University of Colorado Denver has over 100 student organizations , honor societies , professional organizations and faith @-@ based groups , that offer social , service , and professional opportunities for their members within the university and community . First time freshmen and first time international students at the downtown campus are generally required to live on campus , in the Campus Village , a student housing complex at the Auraria Campus for students , faculty and staff from any of the three schools that share the campus . CU Denver provides a variety of sports and recreation activities to students , faculty and staff , including personal training , intramural basketball , volleyball , soccer , squash , and tennis , and sports equipment check out for on or off campus use . 
 The CU Denver student newspaper , the Advocate , comes out weekly during the school year . The Distinguished Lecture Series hosts an array of speakers , that have included David Horowitz and Malcolm @-@ Jamal Warner . The Tivoli Student Union serves as a student center for the Community College of Denver , Metropolitan State University of Denver and University of Colorado Denver . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 = = = Notable faculty = = = 
 Mark A. Heckler , founding dean of its College of Arts and Media 
 Nobel Laureate Tom Cech , of CU Boulder , is an affiliated faculty with CU Denver 's Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics . 
 Leo Franca from the Department of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences has developed stabilized finite elements , important in computational mechanics and engineering simulation . 
 Lawrence Hunter is the founder of the International Society for Computational Biology , the world 's oldest and largest professional organization for bioinformatics and computational biology . 
 Ted Puck , a biophysicist at the medical school , developed a classification system for the human chromosome , and has been referred to as " a pioneer in mammalian cell culture , somatic cell genetics , and the study of human genetic diseases . " He was also the first scientist to grow human tissue from a single cell . 
 Tom <unk> conducted the first liver transplant in the world at CU 's medical school , and is considered " the father of modern transplantation . " 
 Henry Swan revolutionized open heart surgery at the Department of Surgery , pioneering investigations and clinical application of hypothermia in cardiac surgery . 
 Nancy Zahniser , professor of pharmacology awarded for her contributions to the field of dopamine regulation in the brain 
 = = = Notable alumni = = = 
 Rick Alden , 1996 , Owner and CEO <unk> 
 <unk> Bhushan , Olympic table tennis player 
 Michael Hancock , 1995 , Mayor , Denver 
 James Holmes , killer in the 2012 Aurora shooting ( incomplete Ph.D. program ) 
 Frances McConnell @-@ Mills , 1918 , toxicologist 
 John Morse , 2001 , Majority Leader , Colorado State Senator 
 Isaac Slade , 2005 , Lead Singer , The Fray 
 Don Southerton , American writer 
 Gloria Tanner , 1976 , first African American woman Colorado state senator 
 Ed <unk> , 1991 , Mayor , Aurora , Colorado 
 <unk> Cortez , 2012 , <unk> , Olathe , Colorado 
 = No. 78 Squadron RAAF = 
 No. 78 Squadron was a Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) fighter squadron of World War II . It was formed in July 1943 as part of expansion of the RAAF 's fighter force , and was assigned to mobile striking forces for the duration of the war . 
 After completing training , No. 78 Squadron was deployed to the combat zone north of Australia in October 1943 . From November that year until September 1944 the squadron supported the advance of the Allied ground forces through western New Britain and the north coast of New Guinea by attacking Japanese positions , providing fighter protection for recently established beachheads , and escorting Australian and United States bombers . From late 1944 until mid @-@ 1945 it operated against Japanese positions and shipping in the eastern Netherlands East Indies . The squadron took part in the Borneo campaign during the final weeks of the war . No. 78 Squadron was reduced to a cadre after it returned to Australia in December 1945 , but received new aircraft in 1946 and undertook training exercises until being disbanded in April 1948 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Operations during 1943 = = = 
 During 1943 the RAAF received 399 P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk fighter aircraft . Their arrival allowed the service to expand its combat force by forming five new Kittyhawk @-@ equipped squadrons to join the three squadrons that had operated the type in the South West Pacific area since 1942 . 
 No. 78 Squadron was formed at Camden , New South Wales , on 20 July 1943 . It was the fourth of the new Kittyhawk squadrons to be established , following No. 84 Squadron in February , No. 86 Squadron in March and No. 82 Squadron in June ; the final unit , No. 80 Squadron , was formed in September . No. 78 Squadron began to receive its P @-@ 40N Kittyhawk fighters from 2 August 1943 , and conducted training with these aircraft until early October . The squadron began moving from Camden to Woodlark Island in the war zone off New Guinea on 12 October 1943 . However , its destination was changed to Kiriwina island , and the squadron became operational there as part of No. 73 Wing on 27 November . This wing was controlled by No. 10 ( Operational ) Group , a mobile formation established on 13 November to support the planned Allied advance along the north coast of New Guinea . 
 During late November and December 1944 , No. 78 Squadron participated in attacks against Japanese positions in New Britain alongside No. 76 and No. 77 Squadrons , which were also equipped with Kittyhawks . These operations were undertaken to support the landings conducted by American forces at Arawe on 15 December and Cape Gloucester on the 26th of the month . In addition to bombing and strafing Japanese positions , No. 78 Squadron also escorted RAAF and United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) bombers on several occasions . 
 = = = Operations during 1944 = = = 
 No. 78 Squadron moved to Nadzab on the mainland of New Guinea in January 1944 . This redeployment was completed on the 12th of the month , and the squadron began operations as part of No. 78 Wing the next day . Many of the ground attack and escort sorties undertaken by No. 78 Squadron during January supported the Australian Army forces engaged in the Finisterre Range campaign . The squadron was mainly used to escort Australian and USAAF bomber and transport aircraft in February and early March , but it also conducted a small number of ground attack sorties . These escort duties were unpopular among No. 78 Wing 's fighter pilots , who believed that the American officers in charge of the air effort in New Guinea were assigning Australian units to unimportant tasks . In reality , all Allied fighter units recently arrived in New Guinea were initially tasked with escort missions as part of a ' probationary ' period . In March 1944 , No. 78 Wing moved to Cape Gloucester in New Britain to replace the USAAF 's 8th Fighter Group , which was being transferred to Nadzab . No. 78 Squadron 's advance echelon departed Nadzab on 12 March , and the entire squadron became operational in New Britain late in the month . During the last week of March , No. 78 Squadron and the other units of No. 78 Wing struck Japanese positions in New Britain and nearby <unk> island in co @-@ operation with United States Navy PT boats . On 27 March four No. 78 Squadron Kittyhawks attacked and sank two American patrol boats , killing seven sailors and wounding five more . The inquiry conducted after this incident found that the pilots had not been informed that friendly ships were in the area . 
 During April 1944 , No. 78 Wing received orders to move again , this time to support Operation Reckless , the American landing at Hollandia in western New Guinea . The main party of the squadron departed Cape Gloucester on 17 April bound for Tadji airstrip on the mainland of New Guinea , and its <unk> arrived there on the 24th of the month . No. 78 Squadron began flying patrols over the American beachhead at Hollandia the next day . The squadron continued to provide air defence for Hollandia and Tadji throughout early May . From 7 to 10 May a detachment of 16 Kittyhawks from No. 78 Squadron operated from the Hollandia beachhead ; owing to food shortages in the area the pilots arrived with rations for four days loaded in their aircraft . On 15 May the unit moved permanently to an airfield near Hollandia , from which it escorted USAAF bombers and formed part of the force protecting the US Army landings at Wakde on 17 May and Biak on the 27th . Overall , the squadron flew 601 sorties during May . Its operations over Biak included its only air @-@ to @-@ air combat of the war . On 3 June , 16 Kittyhawks from No. 78 Squadron intercepted a group of 12 Nakajima Ki @-@ 43 fighters and two Nakajima B5N bombers near Biak . The Australian airmen downed five Ki @-@ 43s and two B5Ns for the loss of one Kittyhawk and its pilot . This was the last major air battle fought by the RAAF during the Pacific War . On 10 June , eight No. 78 Squadron Kittyhawks were escorting a convoy when they sighted a Japanese Kawasaki Ki @-@ 61 fighter . Two of the Australian aircraft attacked the Ki @-@ 61 and shot it down near <unk> Island . This was the final aerial victory achieved by the RAAF during the New Guinea campaign . No. 78 Squadron continued to fly defensive patrols over Hollandia until 20 July , when it was redeployed to Noemfoor island . This was the squadron 's sixth move in nine months , and the intensive effort needed to pack and unpack stores on each occasion caused widespread fatigue among airmen and ground crew . 
 From 21 July 1944 , No. 78 Squadron supported the US military 's offensive through western New Guinea . The squadron again operated with US Navy PT boats during strikes on Japanese positions in the Vogelkop Peninsula and shipping in <unk> Bay during July ; these operations were undertaken to support the US Army landing at Sansapor on 30 July . Many of No. 78 Wing 's pilots completed their nine @-@ month operational tour during July and were replaced by inexperienced pilots . During the first three weeks of August the squadron flew patrols over the beachhead at Sansapor . The intensive operations over Sansapor were trying , with the official history stating that No. 78 Wing was " pushed almost to the limit of its operational capacity " ; two No. 78 Squadron aircraft were lost during this period . No. 78 Wing attacked Japanese airfields in the Vogelkop Peninsula throughout September , and No. 78 Squadron flew 363 sorties against these targets . The squadron also struck airfields on the <unk> Peninsula as well as Japanese shipping in the easternmost islands of the Netherlands East Indies ( NEI ) during the last months of 1944 . These operations were undertaken to support the American landings in the Philippines , which began in October , and often involved lengthy flights . No. 10 ( Operational ) Group was redesignated the First Tactical Air Force on 25 October ; at this time No. 78 Squadron remained part of No. 78 Wing alongside No. 75 and No. 80 Squadrons . No. 78 Squadron aircraft began staging through airfields on Morotai from early December , and moved to the island between 21 December and January 1945 . During November , Len Waters , the only known Aboriginal Australian fighter pilot of World War II , was posted to No. 78 Squadron . He remained with the unit until the end of the war and completed 95 combat sorties . 
 = = = Operations from 1945 to 1948 = = = 
 No. 78 Squadron continued to attack Japanese positions in the eastern NEI from Morotai in early 1945 . The squadron flew 267 sorties in January during which its aircraft fired 77 @,@ 000 rounds of machine @-@ gun ammunition and dropped 153 @,@ 630 pounds ( 69 @,@ 690 kg ) of bombs . Fewer sorties were flown during February and March , and on 10 April No. 78 Squadron ceased operations from Morotai to prepare to take part in the invasion of Tarakan , an island off the east coast of Borneo . While No. 81 Wing had originally been intended to land at Tarakan , due to delays in moving the unit from Australia No. 78 Wing was substituted shortly before the assault convoys departed Morotai . As a result , the wing had only ten days to pack its stores and prepare for its role in the landing . The main echelon of No. 78 Squadron disembarked at Tarakan on 6 May , but it took much longer than had been anticipated to repair the island 's airfield and the unit was unable to recommence flying operations until 18 July . During this period the squadron 's ground crew worked with Australian Army engineers to build roads , and some personnel spent time on the front line . 
 From 20 July 1945 until the end of the war , No. 78 Squadron operated over Borneo to support the invasion of Balikpapan . Its first strike from Tarakan was flown against Japanese positions in the Sandakan area , and on 24 July aircraft from No. 75 , No. 78 and No. 80 Squadrons attacked airfields near Banjarmasin . The squadron conducted its final combat operation on 9 August , and was still based at Tarakan at the time the Japanese Government 's intention to surrender was announced on the 15th of the month . No. 78 Squadron had suffered 12 fatalities during the war . Following the armistice the squadron undertook leaflet dropping and reconnaissance sorties until November , when the Kittyhawks were flown to Australia . The remainder of the unit 's personnel arrived at Sydney on 12 December 1945 on board the British aircraft carrier HMS Glory . 
 After returning to Australia , No. 78 Squadron moved to Deniliquin in New South Wales on 17 December and most of its personnel were sent on leave until 16 January . The squadron was rapidly reduced to a cadre , and comprised only 17 personnel in July 1946 . The unit was located at RAAF Station Schofields near Sydney from May to August 1946 , and then moved to RAAF Station Williamtown outside of Newcastle . On 4 August 1946 it received four P @-@ 51D Mustang fighters and a single CAC Wirraway trainer . No. 78 Squadron undertook training during 1947 , including exercises with Australian and British warships in March and July . During April 1947 two of the squadron 's Mustangs took part in a Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation cloud seeding experiment ; in this role the aircraft sprayed silver iodide onto clouds from tanks beneath their wings with the goal of generating rain . No. 78 Squadron was disbanded on 1 April 1948 . 
 = Dookudu = 
 Dookudu ( English : Aggression ) is a 2011 Indian Telugu @-@ language action comedy film directed by Srinu Vaitla , featuring Mahesh Babu and Samantha Ruth Prabhu in the lead roles . It was produced by Ram Achanta , Gopi Achanta and Anil Sunkara under the banner 14 Reels Entertainment . It was written by Srinu Vaitla along with Kona Venkat and Gopimohan . S. Thaman composed the music while K. V. Guhan handled the cinematography after Prasad Murella left the project in mid @-@ way . The film is partially inspired from the 2003 German tragicomedy film Good Bye , Lenin ! . 
 Production began on 28 June 2010 at Hyderabad . Shooting began on 22 October 2010 at Turkey and lasted till mid @-@ September 2011 . The film was predominantly shot in Hyderabad , with portions shot in Mumbai , Gujarat , Istanbul , Dubai and Switzerland . The film released on 23 September 2011 in 1600 screens worldwide . 
 Upon release , Dookudu received positive reviews and was commercially successful . The film was cited as " The biggest hit you 've never heard of " by The Los Angeles Times . The film collected a distributor share of ₹ 567 million in its lifetime and grossed more than ₹ 1 billion in its lifetime making it one of the highest grossers of 2011 in Telugu cinema . The film won seven Nandi Awards , six Filmfare Awards , eight SIIMA Awards and eight CineMAA Awards . 
 It was dubbed into Tamil as Athiradi Vettai , into Malayalam as <unk> and into Hindi as The Real Tiger . The film was remade into Bengali as Challenge 2 starring Dev and Pooja Bose in 2012 , and into Kannada as Power in 2014 starring <unk> Rajkumar and Trisha . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During the political realm of N. T. Rama Rao , Shankar Narayana is an independent MLA of the constituency of Shankar Nagar , which is named after him , in Hyderabad , and is regarded as a champion for the poor . When a truck collides with the car his brother Satyam and he are in , Shankar goes into a coma . Except his family , everyone else presumes that he is killed in the accident . His son Ajay is a police officer in Mumbai who fights against the mafia and is on a mission to apprehend Mafia don Nayak who is involved in illegal drug trade , extortion and arms trafficking . 
 When he heads to Turkey in an undercover operation , he meets Prashanthi , the daughter of Ajay 's senior police officer and soon falls in love with her . She initially rejects his advances which makes him give up . However , he is successful in the undercover operation and arrests Nayak 's brother Bunty . After returning to India , he again meets Prashanthi and , to his surprise , she reciprocates his feelings . In an attempt to arrest Nayak , Bunty and the police commissioner is killed and Shankar 's loyal follower <unk> reveals to Ajay that Nayak , along with Shankar 's rival , Mallesh Goud , and Shankar 's other followers <unk> <unk> Rao and <unk> Ganesh , were behind Shankar 's accident , which makes Ajay plot to kill all of them . 
 When Shankar comes out of the coma , the doctors who treated him advise his family that his life is at risk if he encounters or hears anything upsetting , disturbing or shocking . Ajay hides the events surrounding the accident and shifts his family to his previously abandoned mansion which is now being used for film making . Ajay creates a dummy political set @-@ up at this mansion . In the guise of a reality television program , Ajay tricks an aspiring but unsuccessful film actor <unk> by making him believe that the television show is being sponsored by actor Akkineni Nagarjuna 's television channel , and that Nagarjuna wants to offer <unk> very high remuneration for his realistic performance in the show . On the other hand , an aspiring actor <unk> Venkata Rao and Mallesh Goud are tricked by Ajay with a real estate business deal to exploit his criminal nexus . 
 Ajay keeps this drama under wraps from Shankar by making him believe that Ajay is also an MLA revered by people fulfilling his dad 's wishes . He marries Prashanthi after gaining her family 's consent much to Shankar 's delight . Meanwhile , Ajay manages to kill Ganesh and Mallesh without the knowledge of anybody while Shankar believes that they died due to ailments . Nayak reaches Hyderabad to kill Ajay and Ajay 's drama is exposed before everybody except Shankar . <unk> <unk> Rao is killed by Nayak while the latter 's henchmen is killed by Ajay and others in an encounter . Nayak is later killed in a Ramlila event . Shankar too comes to know about Ajay 's drama and is happy for the affection his son showed on him . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Ram Achanta , Gopi Achanta and Anil Sunkara under the banner 14 Reels Entertainment agreed to bankroll a film directed by Srinu Vaitla starring Mahesh Babu in the lead role after completing their debut venture Namo <unk> ( 2010 ) . Regarding the same , Vaitla said that it would be a romance action film and a majority would be shot in North India using a Super 35 . Mahesh 's brother Ramesh Babu was a co @-@ producer . Vaitla worked on the script for more than a year and shelved it temporarily for further modification as he felt it became monotonous and resembles his previous work . The film was officially launched on 28 June 2010 in Ramanaidu Studios at Hyderabad . 
