 New construction almost halted when the Great Depression began in the 1930s . As a result , there are few buildings in the district in that era 's architectural styles . The post office at Fourth and Broadway , built despite much public outcry over the demolition of its landmark 1894 predecessor , is the district 's most notable building of the 1930s . Its stripped @-@ down Classical Revival style shows the influence of Art Deco in its smooth , finished surfaces . The enameled metal facade on a Third Street storefront , dating to 1940 , makes it the only building in the district to show any trace of the Streamline Moderne style . 
 World War II sustained the city 's economy with an increased demand for textiles and all other products it could make . After the war ended , the textile mills , faced with competition from producers in the lower @-@ wage South , closed or left . 
 After a brief postwar increase , Troy 's population began a continuing decline . The city began the first of several urban renewal plans shortly after adopting its 1962 master plan . Those plans called for the demolition of many buildings downtown , to be replaced by a new arterial road , large public housing projects and a shopping mall . After various delays , those projects were either scaled back or abandoned entirely . In the interim many businesses either closed or moved out of downtown . 
 = = = Preservation and renewal = = = 
 In the late 1960s , public opposition to the planned demolition of some of the historic structures downtown like the McCarthy Building led to them being placed on the then @-@ new National Register . In the early 1970s , the five predecessor historic districts were recognized and added as well , along with some other structures . 
 Urban renewal programs are funded in part by federal grants . The National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 , which created the NRHP , requires that federal agencies give consideration to the opinions of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation in assessing the impact their actions will have on listed properties and consider alternatives to any action that would destroy or significantly affect them . The listings of downtown Troy 's districts and buildings therefore had the practical effect of preventing their demolition for urban renewal . 
 By the 1980s , after a Troy Downtown Historic District had been declared eligible for the NRHP by the state 's Historic Preservation Office but not yet submitted to the National Park Service ( NPS ) , which administers the Register , local preservationists realized that the existing historic districts did not fully embrace all of downtown 's historic properties . Instead of applying for boundary increases or nominating more individual properties to the Register , the city decided to merge all five into a new , central district . The NPS accepted the application and entered the new district on the Register in 1986 . 
 Troy 's downtown began reviving . In 1993 , Martin Scorsese used the Second Street area , particularly the Paine Mansion , and some of the Russell Sage buildings as locations for his adaptation of Edith Wharton 's The Age of Innocence , since they replicated the appearance of 1870s Manhattan . River Street became home to many antique stores . Developers began buying the old buildings and adapting them to contemporary uses . RPI began buying properties such as the Rice and Gurley buildings , moving students and faculty into them . In 2006 , The New York Times described the city as having " one of the most perfectly preserved 19th @-@ century downtowns in the United States . " The district 's success led to the proposed expansion in 2014 . 
 = = Significant contributing properties = = 
 The district includes all the area of the original five districts , two National Historic Landmarks , nine properties listed on the National Register in their own right , and several other noteworthy contributing properties among its 679 total historic resources . 
 = = = Predecessor districts = = = 
 Fifth Street @-@ Fulton Street Historic District . Many of the city 's then @-@ prominent businessmen built townhouses here , near the Gurley Building , after the 1862 fire . 
 Grand Street Historic District : Marcus Cummings built townhouses here after that fire . 
 River Street Historic District : The city 's antique district is the oldest neighborhood in Troy , and its pre @-@ industrial commercial center . 
 Second Street Historic District : Many unaltered homes dating to the 1820s , some of them owned by prominent city residents , in the vicinity of the Troy Savings Bank building . 
 Washington Park Historic District : Local businessmen started the city 's first planned neighborhood in 1839 , the first large Greek Revival development in the city . They used London 's residential squares as their model . Philip Johnson called it " one of the finest squares in North America " . 
 = = = National Historic Landmarks = = = 
 W. & <unk> Gurley Building : Fifth and Fulton streets . Built in just nine months after 1862 fire , this location has been home to Gurley Precision Instruments since 1845 . The building , with Renaissance and classically inspired stylings , is an unusual example of a commercial building extremely sympathetic to its neighboring residences . Today owned by RPI and home to some of its divisions , including the Lighting Research Center . 
 Troy Savings Bank : 32 Second Street . Designed by George B. Post in 1875 in stylings that anticipate the emergence of Beaux @-@ Arts , this impressive stone building features a full concert hall upstairs with excellent acoustics . 
 = = = National Register of Historic Places = = = 
 Cannon Building : 1 @-@ 9 Broadway , on the south side of Monument Square . This 1835 collaboration by Alexander Jackson Davis and Ithiel Town got a mansard roof after an 1870 fire . Today it is used as an extended @-@ stay hotel and office space . 
 Hart @-@ Cluett Mansion : An 1828 Federal mansion on Second Street built by a New York merchant as a wedding gift to his daughter . Largely unchanged , it is today the home of the Rensselaer County Historical Society . 
 Ilium Building : Marcus Cummings designed this commercial building at Fourth and Fulton in 1904 . 
 McCarthy Building : 255 River Street , on the west side of Monument Square . Another 1904 building , noted for large proscenium @-@ style front arch window from original use as furniture showroom . Today it hosts the Troy offices of a regional media company . 
 National State Bank Building : 297 River Street . Its fenestration and decoration is similar to Cummings ' Ilium Building a block away . 
 Proctor 's Theater : A 1914 theater on Fourth Street transitioned smoothly between live @-@ entertainment and motion @-@ picture eras . RPI had hoped to convert it into a hotel , but a new proposal to gut the interior completely has been the subject of local controversy . 
 St. Paul 's Episcopal Church : State and Third streets . This 1828 stone Gothic Revival structure is an almost exact duplicate of Ithiel Town 's Trinity Church in New Haven , Connecticut . 
 Troy Public Library : 100 Second Street . It is an 1897 white marble building that has been described as " one of the finest works of Italian Renaissance architecture in the country " . 
 U.S. Post Office : Fourth and Broadway . Built in 1936 , it is one of the most modern of the contributing properties in the district , using a stripped Classical Revival style for the tenth post office location in the city 's history . Its lobby contains one of only three Waldo Peirce murals in American post offices . 
 = = = Other notable contributing properties = = = 
 Commercial building at 46 Third Street : Downtown Troy 's only example of Streamline Moderne architecture . Having an enameled metal facade and storefront , and dating to 1940 , it is the newest contributing property in the district . 
 Caldwell Apartments : Second and State streets . This Arts and Crafts @-@ style building from 1907 was Troy 's first large @-@ scale apartment building . 
 Congregation <unk> Sholom Temple : 167 Third Street . The oldest Reform synagogue in New York , and one of the oldest surviving synagogues in the country ; built in 1870 by Cummings . 
 Hendrick Hudson Hotel : Located on the east side of Monument Square . This seven @-@ story brick Colonial Revival building , dating to 1932 , is the largest building on the square . 
 House at 18 First Street The oldest house in the district is this Federal @-@ style brick house , built in 1808 and added to in 1875 , that survived the 1820 fire . 
 Julia Howard Bush Center : Originally First Presbyterian Church , on the Russell Sage campus in Seminary Park at First and Congress streets . A Greek Revival <unk> temple @-@ front church built in 1835 , it is one of only ten remaining buildings in that style in the U.S. 
 Paine Mansion : 49 2nd Street . This limestone @-@ faced Romanesque Revival home was built in 1894 . 
 Rensselaer County Courthouse : 80 Second Street . The third courthouse on the site was built in 1894 by Cummings in the Classical Revival style . The neighboring Second Street Presbyterian Church , built in 1833 , was later annexed to it and remodeled in 1913 . 
 Rice Building : First and River streets . Calvert Vaux and Frederick Clarke Withers designed this Polychrome 1871 brick flatiron @-@ shaped building . One of the district 's rare examples of Victorian Gothic ; today owned and used by RPI . 
 St. John 's Episcopal Church : First and Liberty streets . Henry Dudley designed this Stone Gothic Revival church built in 1856 by in the style of English parish churches that closely follows models of church design embraced by the contemporary Oxford Movement . 
 St. Paul 's Place : Off State Street between Fourth and Fifth avenues . This is a street of six attached three @-@ story brick rowhouses built ca . 1850 . They feature a variation on Italianate norms with bracketed gables and rounded @-@ arch windows and doors rarely seen with that style in an urban environment . 
 Thompson Drug Company Annex : 155 @-@ 157 River Street . This five @-@ story Richardsonian Romanesque brick building from 1888 copies one of Richardson 's buildings in Pittsburgh . 
 Vail House : 46 First Street . This Federal @-@ style 1818 home is the most notable structure to have survived the 1820 fire . 
 = = Today = = 
 The city has recognized the historic district in its zoning code . It divides the area into six separate districts — the Riverfront , First , Second , Third , Fourth Street and Fifth Avenue local historic districts . The Riverfront district includes the neighborhood to the northwest listed on the National Register as the Northern River Street Historic District . The other five are roughly aligned with the eponymous streets , with the First Street district consisting of two detached areas , the Second and Third street districts taking up most of the central area and the other two occupying the northeastern corner of the district . The city has also made some grants and tax exemptions available to qualified property owners . The city 's current master plan calls for enhancing the district 's mixed @-@ use character , by encouraging both residential use and businesses that serve consumers , particularly retailers , and providing tax incentives for the rehabilitation of historic homes . 
 Troy 's ordinances designate its Planning Commission as the Historic District and Landmarks Review Commission . Property owners in the district must get special permission from the commission for any work on their properties beside ordinary maintenance ( and even for that in some cases ) , to make sure it leaves the historic character of the property and the surrounding buildings intact . 
 In 1989 , the state added most of the district to Troy 's Empire Zone . This economic development incentive gives businesses that locate in the included areas tax credits and exemptions to encourage them to locate there . The state has also moved some of its employees into the district , through the interventions of former State Senate majority leader Joseph Bruno , a resident of nearby Brunswick , who represented the district that included the city . He steered state grants towards the rehabilitation of the buildings that now house state government offices , as well as school aid that helped the city keep its property taxes low . City officials say his help has been vital , and will be missed following his 2008 resignation . 
 RPI has acquired several significant downtown properties , such as the Gurley and Rice buildings and Proctor 's Theater , and renovated them to make homes for programs such as its Lighting Research Center , now housed in Gurley . In the early 2000s , it put $ 2 @.@ 5 million into its Neighborhood Renewal Initiative , which has been used to help homeowners renovate homes and improve the city 's infrastructure . 
 The private sector has also played a large role in revitalizing the area , even without public aid and incentives . Developers have been attracted to the historic buildings and their surrounding neighborhoods , calling it the city 's strongest asset , although they have complained about past stalemates in city government . One initiative has often led to others . River Street 's development into a center for antique stores came about without any public effort or intent , and the restoration of the music hall at the Savings Bank led to many new restaurants opening in the neighborhood . The blocks of River Street north of Monument Square have a dozen woman @-@ owned businesses . 
 Developers , the city , and the colleges see downtown Troy 's future as a center for high @-@ tech companies and the good @-@ paying jobs they provide . In addition to its historic character , the area has space available and is walkable . One local official calls Troy " the Silicon Valley of the 19th century " . Some specific projects have capitalized on this . In 2005 , the Cannon Building was redeveloped into an extended @-@ stay hotel with the target market being visiting faculty at RPI and Russell Sage . With money from the 2009 federal stimulus package , the city improved traffic signals and sidewalks at 18 intersections downtown . 
 The revitalization of downtown Troy has not been entirely without controversy over some of its historic buildings . A 2009 proposal to redevelop Proctor 's by gutting its interior and converting it to office space led to serious opposition . Opponents of the plan organized a website and started an online petition against the use of any state funds for the project . Proponents , including the head of the city 's Downtown Collaborative , said that after three decades of the vacant building 's deterioration , any redevelopment proposal should be seriously considered , regardless of its impact on the building 's historic character . 
 = Have You Seen This Snail ? = 
 " Have You Seen This Snail ? " , also known as " Where 's Gary ? " , is the third episode of the fourth season and the 63rd overall episode of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It was directed by Alan Smart and Tom Yasumi , written by Aaron Springer and Paul Tibbitt . Springer also functioned as storyboard director . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 11 , 2005 . Actress and comedian Amy Poehler guest starred in the episode as the voice of Grandma . Musician Stew performed the featured song " Gary , Come Home " . 
 The series follows the adventures and endeavors of the title character and his various friends in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In this episode , Gary , SpongeBob 's meowing sea snail , runs away from home after feeling neglected by an angry SpongeBob and is adopted by a new owner . After realizing the error of his ways , SpongeBob sets out with his best friend Patrick to search for his adored pet and bring him back to his rightful home . 
 The episode garnered a viewership of eight million , achieving the highest number of cable television viewers aged six to eleven years old for 2005 . " Have You Seen This Snail ? " received generally positive reviews from television critics upon release . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 SpongeBob receives a paddle ball sent to him in the mail and decides to play it . He is totally consumed by the challenge and forgets Gary for ten days . Gary feels neglected and runs away from home . SpongeBob is shaken from his infatuation with the arrival of Patrick , and cannot find Gary . SpongeBob finds a note saying that Gary has left in search of a new owner . Meanwhile , Gary has wandered into a new city , encountering a gang of snails . A kind old lady discovers Gary and mistakes him for one of her own pets , Miss <unk> . Gary is showered with love and food while SpongeBob goes to work , sad that Gary is still missing . Mr. Krabs encourages SpongeBob to work , but SpongeBob misinterprets him , and he takes the day off to look for Gary . He and Patrick puts up posters and signs everywhere in the hope of finding Gary . 
 Gary , at the old lady 's house , has been fed a lot . The old lady puts out fresh sheets of flyers given to her by Patrick . Upon reading them , Gary realizes that SpongeBob truly loves him and wants him back . He tries to leave , but instead of doing that , he ends up going to the closet , filled with empty snail shells . When the old lady tries to feed him again , Gary finds that the old lady most likely has sinister motives — she is possibly trying to fatten and then eat him . He makes his escape , but the old lady chases him out onto the streets . Gary quickly finds one of the gangster snails he saw before , which the old lady now mistakes for Miss <unk> , and takes home instead . Back home , SpongeBob gives up on his search for Gary , and tries to forget about him by taking a walk , but his memories keep coming to mind and upsetting him . He is constantly reminded as the streets are filled with posters and signs for Gary . SpongeBob then hears a meow . At first he thinks he is imagining Gary is there , but then he turns around to find Gary is actually at his side , and he is overjoyed to see his beloved pet again . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Have You Seen This Snail ? " is a half @-@ hour special episode written by Paul Tibbitt , with Aaron Springer serving as writer and storyboard director , and Alan Smart and Tom Yasumi serving as animation directors . The episode originally aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on November 11 , 2005 . Prior its premiere , Nickelodeon released a preview clip and bonus coverage of the episode on Nickelodeon 's broadband online platform TurboNick , available on Nick.com. Nickelodeon also launched the " Trail of the Snail " flash game . 
 In a press release on November 1 , 2005 , Nickelodeon officially announced the episode and promoted it as the " Where 's Gary " special . According to the network , " It 's a sad day in Bikini Bottom when SpongeBob learns that his beloved pet snail Gary is missing and that he may be at fault in the mollusk 's disappearance . " Marjorie Cohn , Executive Vice President of Development and Original Programming for Nickelodeon , said " Kids love their pets and there 's certainly some relatability here in the relationship between SpongeBob and Gary -- skewed though it may be [ ... ] It 's fun to see Gary express a whole range of emotions using only his signature ' meow . ' " 
 In addition to the regular cast , American comedian and Saturday Night Live actress Amy Poehler guest starred in the episode as the voice of Grandma , a sweet old woman who adopted Gary after running away . " Have You Seen This Snail ? " featured an original piece of music written for the episode by the American musician Stew , entitled " Gary , Come Home " . 
 Nickelodeon supported the episode with a month long off @-@ air marketing campaign including print , outdoor and consumer product partner support . Nickelodeon also launched an on @-@ air sweepstakes called " Where 's Gary " . Every night for five days leading to the episode 's premiere , Patchy the Pirate ( a character portrayed as the president of the SpongeBob SquarePants Fan Club played by Tom Kenny ) , and other celebrity guests searched in various locations for Gary . By visiting Nick.com , the viewers could receive a " Trail of The Snail " tracking card to enter Patchy 's search locations in order to win the sweepstakes . The prize was a trip to the Nickelodeon Animation Studios to meet the production team of the show and to sit in on a voice recording session with the series cast . 
 On November 15 , 2005 , " Have You Seen This Snail ? " was released on the DVD compilation called Where 's Gary . In addition , the compilation features six other episodes : " The Lost Mattress " , " Skill Crane " , " Krabs vs. Plankton " , " The Great Snail Race " , and " Good Neighbor " . " Have You Seen This Snail ? " was also included series ' season four DVD compilation . It was also included on SpongeBob SquarePants : The First 100 Episodes DVD , alongside all the episodes of seasons one through five . The DVD was released on September 22 , 2009 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Have You Seen This Snail ? " was viewed by eight million people . It was the highest @-@ rated program on all TV with children aged two @-@ eleven for the year of 2005 behind the Super Bowl and the Super Bowl kick @-@ off , and the highest @-@ rated program on all of cable with children aged two to eleven and children aged six to eleven in 2005 . 
 " Have You Seen This Snail ? " received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Tom Shales of The Washington Post called the episode deeply hilarious and described the plot as a " bittersweet riot " . He drew attention to how the story is similar to the plot of " Dumped " , an earlier episode in which Gary deserted SpongeBob . David Johnson of the DVD Verdict positively reacted to the DVD release of the episode and said " I 'm not sure what to say , here . Mr. <unk> is so ridiculously popular , this disc will most definitely sell itself . " Aida Ekberg of Yahoo ! Voices ranked Amy Poehler on her " Top 10 SpongeBob SquarePants Guest Stars " list and said " I 'm surprised more comedians haven 't been guest stars on SpongeBob . Amy Poehler does a great job with her creepy grandma voice , playing pure evil masked behind plate after plate of chocolate chip cookies . " Paul Mavis of DVD Talk loved the scene " [ ... ] When Gary realizes he has to escape from her crushing love ( which equals constant overeating ) or die like the other snail shells he finds [ ... ] " He said " it 's both funny and rather touching . " 
 A television critic writing for the St. Petersburg Times was not so positive about the episode however , criticizing how SpongeBob 's disappointed and sad character for " Have You Seen This Snail ? " is quite different from the character 's normal bright personality . Blogger and Blogcritics founder Eric Olsen said " the episode itself is rather wan and slack , notably lacking in the air of giddy zaniness that millions of men , women and , um , children so happily cleave to . " 
 = A Thanksgiving Surprise = 
 A Thanksgiving Surprise is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film follows Jack Clyde , a young man who lives a vain and idle life in the city with his rich friends . His wealthy uncle decides to test the morale character and has his lawyers announce his death and giving his fortune to charity . When Jack learns of his death , he is left penniless and is shunned by his friends , but assisted by the poor . Jack struggles to survive , but decides to host a Thanksgiving dinner for those poorer than himself . His uncle sees Jack has learned his lesson and secretly prepares a feast set while Jack sleeps . After the guest arrives , the uncle reveals himself and all ends well . The film was released on November 22 , 1910 and was met with favorable reviews . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from November 26 , 1910 . It states : " Jack Clyde is a rich young fellow who has been brought up by his wealthy uncle in a small Western town . Jack decides that he wants to move to New York and is indulged in this whim by his uncle , who sends with the lad as valet a faithful old servant , who has his welfare at heart . In the city Jack rents expensive apartments , and leads a vain , idle life . Jack 's uncle hears of his conduct and devises a scheme whereby he can make a thorough test of the boy . He instructs his lawyers to announce his death , that the entire fortune has gone to charity , and Jack has been left penniless . Jack is turned out of his rooms and shunned by his rich friends . Among the very poor , whom he formerly despised , he is treated as a comrade . They share with him their last crust , and he ends by marrying them , and falling in love with a humble little flower girl . Jack finally secures a situation as a porter in a hotel . His uncle discovers that he is planning to give a Thanksgiving dinner to all those poorer than himself and decides that Jack has learned his lesson . Jack brings to his poor room a few meager provisions that his week 's salary has permitted him to buy . While waiting for his guests to arrive Jack goes to sleep . His uncle and the old servant who have been watching him closely , seize upon this opportunity to enter Jack 's room and substitute for his poor meal a real Thanksgiving feast . The guests arrive , their host awakes , uncle returns , and Jack is assured that his prosperity is real and not a dream . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 Marie Eline likely as the newspaper boy . 
 Frances Gibson is claimed to be the flower girl , but this is disputed . 
 William Russell 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil or Lucius J. Henderson . Cameramen employed by the company during this era included Blair Smith , Carl Louis Gregory , and Alfred H. Moses , Jr. though none are specifically credited . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Marie Eline was cast in the film , likely as the newspaper boy . Eline had previously played a newspaper boy in Not Guilty . The role of the flower girl has been claimed to be Frances Gibson by an answer column in Motion Picture Story Magazine . This is disputable because Gibson is known only to have a single credit with the Thanhouser Company , in the 1912 release of Nicholas Nickleby . Around this time Gibson was appearing in <unk> Studios productions . Both immediate before and after her only Thanhouser credit , Gibson was employed by <unk> , leading Bowers to speculate that her appearance in that one film may have been as a special project . A different film still shows William Russell and opens the possibility of identifying the other actors . The other cast credits are unknown , but many 1910 Thanhouser productions are fragmentary . In late 1910 , the Thanhouser company released a list of the important personalities in their films . The list includes G.W. Abbe , Justus D. Barnes , Frank H. Crane , Irene Crane , Marie Eline , Violet Heming , Martin J. Faust , Thomas Fortune , George Middleton , Grace Moore , John W. Noble , Anna Rosemond , Mrs. George Walters . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on November 22 , 1910 . The drama film was sometimes labeled as a comedy by advertisers . The film had a wide national release and was shown in theaters in North Carolina , South Dakota , Washington , Kansas , Pennsylvania , California , . Though Hawaii was not yet a state , it was also shown as a new release in July 1912 . 
 The film was positively reviewed by critics . Walton of The Moving Picture News affirmed , stating that the film was a " ... well @-@ staged , naturally acted story with a lesson . There is pathos and stern reality mixed in with fidelity and anxiety , the whole making a story of entrancing and edifying power . " The Moving Picture World summarized the film and remarked , " The contrasts in the delineation of human nature constitute the principal points of interest , and they are worked out with full appreciation of dramatic varieties . The implied false friends have a good many counterparts , and the way they are depicted here is too graphic to be misunderstood . " The New York Dramatic Mirror took a swipe at Bison Pictures of the New York Motion Picture Company and the Powers Picture Plays by praising the camera posing of the film and acknowledging the acting of the flower girl to be well @-@ portrayed . 
 = Hunting Party ( Body of Proof ) = 
 " Hunting Party " is the second episode of the second season of the American medical drama Body of Proof . It was originally broadcast in the United States on ABC on September 27 , 2011 . The episode was directed by Paul Holahan and written by series creator Christopher Murphey . 
 The episode follows Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) , a former neurosurgeon turned medical examiner at Philadelphia , who investigates the murder of Julie Loeb ( Isabella Grace ) , who is shot during a hunting expedition . Accompanied by Peter Dunlop ( Nicholas Bishop ) , Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) and Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) , they question Julie 's family , until Megan is forced to leave the case . Megan begins to investigate the death of Patrick <unk> ( Brad Standley ) , leading her directly back to her former case of Julie 's death . 
 The episode received positive reviews , and was watched by 9 @.@ 19 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , on the Tuesday night it aired in the United States . Critics praised the storyline , calling it " genuinely surprising " , with the plot having a " merry go round of suspects " . They also praised Megan 's dialogue with Peter and the " cute " scenes with Lacey Fleming ( Mary Mouser ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Julie Loeb ( Isabella Grace ) is found shot dead during a hunting expedition in the woods . Megan Hunt ( Dana Delany ) and Peter Dunlop ( Nicholas Bishop ) , begin to examine Julie . Megan notices a scratch on Julie 's husband Martin ( Jay Karnes ) beginning to suspect he is her killer . After interviewing Martin , her step children Thomas ( Joey Adams ) and Erika ( Natalie Floyd ) , their financial manager Alan Wright ( Alex Fernandez ) , and Martin 's ex @-@ wife Alexandra ( Jessica Tuck ) , she accuses Martin of the murder . Kate Murphy ( Jeri Ryan ) tells Megan that Martin has phoned the mayor , and made a complaint about Megan 's behaviour who accused him of Julie 's death . Megan is taken off the case , but gets Ethan Gross ( Geoffrey Arend ) to test a tissue found on the scene . Kate defends her actions to Peter , stating that she did not take her off the case due to her grudge with Megan , as she is dating Megan 's ex @-@ husband Todd Fleming ( Jeffrey Nordling ) . Meanwhile , Curtis Brumfield ( Windell Middlebrooks ) interviews people to become a driver ; a person who carries the bodies from the crime scene to the autopsy , and is ultimately unsuccessful . Bud Morris ( John Carroll Lynch ) and Samantha Baker ( Sonja Sohn ) interview Martin once again , but are interrupted by Megan , who gets back the results from the scratch , once again accusing Martin of fighting with Julie , which he denies , as his blood matched some which was on her fingernail . Kate issues a final warning to Megan , so Megan takes another case . Bud and Samantha interview Alan , and find out that Julie was pregnant when she was shot . 
 Meanwhile , Megan spends time with her daughter Lacey ( Mary Mouser ) , who is upset about having Kate in her father 's life . Megan comforts her , and Lacey reassures Megan that Kate will not replace her . Megan visits the new crime scene , investigating why Patrick <unk> ( Brad Standley ) , is found dead . On the other case , it is revealed that Martin is not the father of Julie 's child , but after much evidence is checked , it is in fact Patrick , the person who was killed in Megan 's case . Julie had asked his old school friend Patrick to be the father of her child , as she wanted someone that she knew . Her request made both Patrick his partner , Steve <unk> ( Michael Dean Connolly ) cry . The couple and Julie had not told Martin , as Martin divorced ex @-@ wife Alexandra after Patrick introduced Julie to Martin , when he was decorating the Loeb 's house . It is revealed that Alan , the financial director , killed both Patrick and Julie . Alan kept stealing from Martin , and was found out by Patrick , so he beat him to death . Julie also found out , so he panicked , and shot her . Alan begs for forgiveness towards Martin , who in anger , shoots Alan , in front of Bud and Samantha and is consequently arrested , whilst Alan dies . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Hunting Party " was written by series creator Christopher Murphey and directed by Paul Holahan . Holahan is best known for directing episodes of Ugly Betty , White <unk> and Shark , the latter starred Jeri Ryan , who plays Kate Murphy on Body of Proof . Daniel Licht who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for the episode . Actor Jay Karnes ( known for his role in The Shield ) guest starred in the episode as Martin Loeb . Jessica Tuck appeared as Alexandra Loeb and Alex Fernandez starred as Alan Wright , the episodes murderer . This episode marked the second , and final , appearance of Jenn <unk> , who played Bethany , the girlfriend of Peter ( Bishop ) . She made her first appearance in the previous episode , " Love Thy Neighbor " . This also marked the first appearances of Adrian Alvarado , who plays Detective Dave Lopez and Ransford Doherty , who plays Detective Tim Bell . From this episode , they appear in two more , " Your Number 's Up " and " Shades of Blue " , and only Doherty appears in " Falling For You " . 
 " Hunting Party " , along with the nineteen episode 's from Body of Proof 's second season , were released on a four @-@ disc DVD set in the United States on September 18 , 2012 . The sets included brief audio commentaries from various crew and cast members for several episode 's , the webisodes entitled " Outbreak " , five " featurettes " on the making of the show , detailing on the fashion , bodies and special effects throughout the season , as well as a " Body of <unk> " blooper reel . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast on 27 September 2011 , " Hunting Party " was seen by 9 @.@ 19 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 1 @.@ 8 rating / 10 share . This means that it was seen by 1 @.@ 8 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 10 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This episode achieved a much lower number of viewers than the previous episode , " Love Thy Neighbour " , as well as the subsequent episode , " Missing " . Body of Proof came seventh in the ratings on Tuesday night ; it was outperformed by two episodes of ABC 's Dancing with the Stars , two episodes of CBS 's NCIS and Unforgettable and FOX 's New Girl . However , it came second in viewers in the timeslot the episode aired , behind <unk> . " Hunting Party " was watched by 1 @.@ 19 million viewers upon its airing on Channel 5 in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 This episode received positive reviews . Christine Orlando from TV Fanatic praised the episode saying , " Body of Proof threw just enough curves to keep me guessing this week and provided enough personal interaction between our characters to make me want to tune in for more " . She praised the interaction between Megan and Lacey calling their conversation " cute " , adding " It 's nice to watch Megan make extra time to spend with her daughter " . She called the Alan 's actions " pathetic " for trying to apologize to Martin for killing his wife saying , " You 've got to be kidding ! " . Orlando added that she did not " see coming " Martin 's reaction to the apology ; he shot Alan , stating " I could understand the sentiment " . She praised the interaction between Megan and Peter , highlighting their conversation over Peter 's girlfriend . Orlando said that she could not understand Megan 's facial expressions to Peter 's girlfriend , whether it was one of jealousy or tease . She said , " Megan was certainly giving Peter a lot of ribbing about his new girlfriend . Was Megan just having fun with him or did it bother her a little ? I couldn 't quite tell " . She finished in saying , " A " Hunting Party " led to a tragic death and a merry go round of suspects on Body of Proof this week " . 
 = Ranulf de Broc = 
 Ranulf de Broc ( sometimes <unk> de Broc ; died around 1179 ) was an Anglo @-@ Norman nobleman and royal official during the reign of King Henry II of England . He held two offices in the royal household as well as performing other administrative duties for the king . During the Becket controversy ( lasting until Becket 's death in 1170 ) between King Henry and Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , de Broc supported the king and was granted the administration of the exiled archbishop 's lands during the later half of the 1160s . This earned de Broc three sentences of excommunication from the archbishop because of de Broc 's financial exactions from the estates . De Broc was with the four men who murdered Becket in December 1170 , although he did not take part in the actual murder . At de Broc 's death around 1179 , he left behind a widow and five daughters , who were his co @-@ heiresses . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 De Broc was the son of Oin <unk> and was the nephew of Nigel de Broc . De Broc held the offices of usher and marshall in the royal household under King Henry II . He was receiver of the forest of <unk> in Hampshire from 1158 to 1168 . 
 = = Administrator of Canterbury = = 
 During the Becket controversy , which began in October 1163 , de Broc supported King Henry II of England and was appointed to oversee the lands and income of the see of Canterbury while Thomas Becket , the Archbishop of Canterbury , was in exile after fleeing England in October 1164 . The estates were given into de Broc 's custody at Christmas 1164 , although the grant was back @-@ dated to Michaelmas ( 29 September ) 1164 . De Broc was to pay the king 1562 pounds 5 shillings and 5 @.@ 5 pence annually from the revenues of the estate . Ranulf entrusted the day @-@ to @-@ day administration of Canterbury to his kinsman Robert de Broc . The de <unk> continued to administer the estates until Michaelmas 1170 . Soon after de Broc took up the administration of Canterbury , Becket accused de Broc of despoiling the Canterbury estates . Historians are not clear on whether Becket 's charges were just propaganda or if the estates were actually damaged . De Broc managed to secure the support of some of the monks of the cathedral chapter of Canterbury , as some monks were willing to inform de Broc of any proceedings of the chapter that were favourable to Becket . 
 Late in December 1164 de Broc was one of the royal officials who took possession of the archiepiscopal residence at Lambeth for the king as well as arresting the relatives , clerks , and members of the household of Becket who had aided Becket 's flight into exile . In June 1166 Becket excommunicated de Broc for his part in administering the archiepiscopal estates for the king while Becket was in exile . Becket again excommunicated de Broc in April 1169 , along with Robert de Broc and a number of other royal officials . 
 = = Role in Becket 's murder = = 
 In July 1170 , Becket and the king were reconciled and the king agreed that the archiepiscopal estates would be returned to Becket 's control . But difficulties dragged on and Becket accused de Broc of stripping the estates of the recent harvest and storing it away from the archbishop 's control . In November , John of Salisbury was sent by Becket to England to inspect the estates prior to Becket 's return from exile . John claimed that although de Broc had originally returned custody of the estates to Becket 's officials , shortly before John 's arrival de Broc had regained control of the estates and expelled Becket 's officials . De Broc was also accused of seizing a cargo of the archbishop 's wine and destroying the ship carrying it . 
 Later in 1170 , de Broc was involved in an attempt to keep Becket from returning to England . Working with de Broc were Roger de Pont L 'Évêque – the Archbishop of York , Gilbert Foliot – the Bishop of London , Josceline de Bohon – the Bishop of Salisbury , Gervase de Cornhill – the Sheriff of Kent , and Reginald de Warenne . De Broc was part of the party that met Becket at Sandwich on 1 December 1070 when the archbishop returned to England . The group , led by Gervase of Cornhill , complained that Becket was sowing dissension in the land by his excommunication of the Archbishop of York and the Bishops of London and Salisbury , but Becket managed to calm the officials by stating he would consider the matter and reply to them the next day . The next day the group was accompanied by some clergy sent by the three excommunicated ecclesiastics , but nothing was accomplished by this meeting except further offers from Becket to consider other options . 
 Becket excommunicated both de <unk> again on Christmas Day , 1170 . On 28 December 1170 , de Broc received at Saltwood Castle four knights – William de Tracy , Reginald <unk> , Hugh de Morville , and Richard le Breton – who had arrived from the continent . The five men conceived a plan to surround Canterbury Cathedral and force Becket to rescind his excommunications . On 29 December 1170 , the five men arrived at Canterbury , where it appears that de Broc was in charge of the soldiers surrounding the cathedral while the other four went inside to negotiate with the archbishop . The four did not succeed in persuading the archbishop and the situation degenerated into the four men murdering Becket at one of the altars of the cathedral . After this , the four rejoined de Broc and searched the archiepiscopal residence for papers and other documents that de Broc was to send to the king . The party then returned to Saltwood . 
 = = Later career and death = = 
 In the Revolt of 1173 – 74 by Henry II 's sons against their father , the king gave de Broc custody of <unk> Castle . On 13 October 1173 , Robert de Beaumont , the Earl of Leicester , captured the castle for the rebels and burned it to the ground . 
 De Broc married <unk> de <unk> , who brought lands at <unk> in Hampshire and <unk> , <unk> and Berwick in Shropshire to the marriage . Besides his wife 's lands , de Broc also held lands worth half a knight 's fee at Angmering in Sussex and lands worth a full knight 's fee at <unk> . 
 De Broc 's marriage produced five daughters , who were de Broc 's <unk> when he died around 1179 . <unk> died in 1204 . The eldest daughter was <unk> , and the other four were Felicia , Sibil , Lucy , and Clemence . <unk> married Stephen of Turnham , Felicia married William Harang , Sibil married William de Arundel and Ralph Belet , and Clemence married William de <unk> . 
 = Indiana State Road 930 = 
 State Road 930 ( SR 930 ) is an Indiana State Road that runs between Fort Wayne and New Haven in the US state of Indiana . The 12 @.@ 97 miles ( 20 @.@ 87 km ) of SR 930 serve as a connection with U.S. Route 30 ( US 30 ) through these two cities between the beginning of the concurrency with Interstate 69 ( I @-@ 69 ) in Fort Wayne and the end of its concurrency with I @-@ 469 in New Haven . All of the highway is listed on the National Highway System . Various sections are urban two @-@ lane highway , urbanized four @-@ lane divided highway , and urbanized six @-@ lane divided highway . The highway passes through industrial and commercial properties . SR 930 was designated in 1998 , and replaced segments of US 30 in Fort Wayne and New Haven that were formerly part of the Lincoln Highway in the 1920s , as well as Coliseum Boulevard , which was designated as part of US 30 in the 1950s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 930 's western terminus is at an interchange with I @-@ 69 , US 24 , US 30 , and US 33 . The highway heads southeast on Goshen Road from the interchange towards Coliseum Boulevard as a six @-@ lane divided highway , passing between commercial properties and woodland . The route turns east onto Coliseum Boulevard as a four @-@ lane undivided road with a center turn lane , passing through commercial and industrial properties . The highway has an at @-@ grade railroad crossing with a single @-@ track rail line . After the railroad crossing , the road has an intersection with US 27 , and continues passing through commercial properties . 
 After US 27 , the highway passes by Glenbrook Square and beings to turns southeast at Clinton Street . The road narrows to a four @-@ lane divided highway at Parnell Avenue and passes by the Allen County War Memorial Coliseum . Then , the road crosses the St. Joseph River and has a traffic light at North Anthony Boulevard . The highway passes between the Indiana University – Purdue University Fort Wayne ( IPFW ) and Ivy Tech Community College campuses , before coming to a traffic light at Crescent Avenue . East of Crescent Avenue , the road enters mainly residential areas of town until the route begins to curve due south toward an intersection with Vance Avenue . After this turn , the route becomes a six @-@ lane divided highway and passes through mainly commercial properties with some woodland . 
 The highway has a traffic light at East State Boulevard and Lake Avenue , before narrowing back to a four @-@ lane divided highway . The road crosses over the Maumee River and the Norfolk Southern Railroad tracks , in a mainly wooded area with some industrial properties . After the railroad tracks , SR 930 leaves Coliseum Boulevard at an interchange with Washington Boulevard . The highway heads east @-@ southeast toward New Haven as a four @-@ lane divided highway , passing through commercial properties . The road crosses over another set of Norfolk Southern railroad tracks and turns due east at New Haven Avenue . 
 After New Haven Avenue , the highway enters the commercial area of New Haven as a four @-@ lane highway with a center turn lane . The route has a traffic light at Lincoln Highway , and SR 930 heads southeast , bypassing downtown New Haven . Southeast of Lincoln Highway , SR 930 is a two @-@ lane highway passing through a mix of commercial and residential properties . The road becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway at Minnich Road , just west of the I @-@ 469 . The eastern terminus of SR 930 is at I @-@ 469 , where US 30 's concurrency with I @-@ 469 ends , and US 30 continues east along the same road where SR 930 ends . 
 The entire length of SR 930 is included as a part of the National Highway System ( NHS ) , a network of highways that are identified as being important for the economy , mobility and defense of the nation . SR 930 is maintained by the Indiana Department of Transportation ( INDOT ) , like all other state roads in the state . The department tracks the traffic volumes along all state highways as a part of its maintenance responsibilities using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) , a calculation of the traffic level along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . In 2010 , INDOT figured that lowest traffic levels were the 14 @,@ 700 vehicles and 2 @,@ 640 commercial vehicles used the highway daily on a section between Hartzell Road and I @-@ 469 in New Haven . The peak traffic volumes were 45 @,@ 210 vehicles and 1 @,@ 630 commercial vehicles AADT along the section of SR 930 between Coldwater Road and North Clinton Street in Fort Wayne . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1913 , the Lincoln Highway was planned to pass through some of the areas that later became SR 930 . These sections include the segment of Goshen Road in Fort Wayne now used by SR 930 , and the section of what is now SR 930 between Maumee Road and Lincoln Highway in New Haven . The Lincoln Highway was opened in 1915 and passed through downtown Fort Wayne and New Haven . In 1917 , Main Market route number 2 was the given number to the Lincoln Highway in Indiana . In 1926 , US 30 was commissioned to follow SR 2 through Fort Wayne and New Haven . In addition , US 24 was concurrent with US 30 from Washington Boulevard in Fort Wayne and Lincoln Highway in New Haven . Then , in the 1950s , Coliseum Boulevard was built as a " <unk> " highway , and US 30 was rerouted onto it to bypass the downtown area of Fort Wayne . In 1998 , US 24 and US 30 were rerouted onto I @-@ 69 and I @-@ 469 and the route that became SR 930 , including Coliseum Boulevard , was to be decommissioned . INDOT tried to give the route to local control , but Allen County , the city of Fort Wayne , and the City of New Haven did not have funds for the roadway . This led INDOT to commission the route as SR 930 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Allen County . 
 = Rust in Peace = 
 Rust in Peace is the fourth studio album by American thrash metal band Megadeth . It was released on September 24 , 1990 by Capitol Records and was produced by Mike Clink . Following the departure of Jeff Young and Chuck Behler in 1989 , Rust in Peace is the first album to feature guitarist Marty Friedman and drummer Nick Menza . Rust in Peace received universal acclaim by fans and critics , and was responsible for bringing Megadeth to the attention of a mainstream metal audience . It has been cited as one of the best thrash metal records of all time by publications such as Decibel and Kerrang ! and listed as one of the 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . The album was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 33rd Grammy Awards . 
 Two singles were released from the album : " Hangar 18 " and " Holy Wars ... The Punishment Due " , which have become staples of the band 's live performances . Rust in Peace features complex musical structures and lyrical themes such as nuclear war and UFOs . The album 's cover art references " Hangar 18 " . A remixed and remastered version featuring four bonus tracks was released in 2004 . In 2010 , the band announced a North American tour to commemorate the album 's 20th anniversary . The performance at the Hollywood Palladium was filmed and released as Rust in Peace Live on CD , DVD and Blu @-@ ray later that year . 
 = = Background and production = = 
 In 1988 , Megadeth appeared at the Monsters of Rock festival at Donington Park in the UK , alongside Iron Maiden , Kiss , Helloween , Guns N ' Roses , and David Lee Roth . The band performed to an audience of more than 100 @,@ 000 people and was soon added to the " Monsters of Rock " European tour , but dropped out after the first show due to bassist David Ellefson 's drug problems . Further issues within the band caused frontman and guitarist Dave Mustaine to fire drummer Chuck Behler and guitarist Jeff Young , and canceled their scheduled 1988 Australian tour . Nick Menza , previously Behler 's drum tech , was hired as the band 's new drummer . The search for a new guitarist was a drawn out process ; Mustaine examined a number of guitarists for the job , including Dimebag Darrell of Pantera , who was initially offered the job before declining . According to Mustaine , one of the last guitarists he had heard about , Marty Friedman , had sent him a copy of Dragon 's Kiss , on which Friedman played . Upon listening to the record , Mustaine had Friedman come in to audition and hired him . This would become the band 's first stable line @-@ up . 
 The title " Rust in Peace " was inspired by a bumper sticker that Mustaine saw on the back of a vehicle while driving home from Lake Elsinore , California . The sticker read : ' May all your nuclear weapons rust in peace ' . Mustaine liked the concept and decided to use it as a title for Megadeth 's upcoming album . Rust in Peace was recorded in Rumbo Studios with producer Mike Clink , while the mixing was handled by Max Norman . Clink was brought in for his work in both Guns N ' Roses ' Appetite for Destruction and UFO 's Strangers in the Night . The producer 's work dealt mostly with the bass , drums and Friedman 's guitar . In a 2002 interview , Mustaine declared that they " really didn ’ t make the record with [ Clink ] " as at the time he was focused on Guns N ' Roses ' Use Your Illusion I and II — which were also being recorded at Rumbo — and stated most of the work in the album was done by himself , Norman , and engineer <unk> Ryan . 
 The album artwork was created by artist Ed Repka , who previously had done the cover for Peace Sells ... but Who 's Buying ? in 1986 . It references " Hangar 18 " , and depicts band mascot Vic Rattlehead and world leaders of the era viewing an alien body . The depicted world leaders , right to left , are U.S. President George H.W. Bush , Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev , West German President ( and later President of a reunified Germany ) Richard von Weizsäcker , Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu and British Prime Minister John Major ( although the identity of the latter is disputed ) . In addition to creating the album 's cover , Repka also supplied artwork for the album 's two singles . 
 = = Composition = = 
 Rust in Peace features songs with multiple sections , shifting time signatures and intricate guitar performance , and is sometimes described as having a progressive style . In this regard , the album has been compared with Metallica 's 1988 album , ... And Justice for All , also noted for its technical complexity . Additionally , the album features multiple lyrical themes : religion , politics and warfare , as well as Mustaine 's personal issues , such as his fight against drug and alcohol addiction , UFO conspiracy theories and even the Marvel Comics character Punisher . 
 The opening song , " Holy Wars ... The Punishment Due " finds its thematic inspiration derived from the Northern Ireland conflict , in which the largely Catholic nationalist community were in conflict with the mainly Protestant loyalist community over the sovereignty of the six counties of Northern Ireland . Mustaine has said that at a show in Antrim , Northern Ireland , he discovered bootlegged Megadeth T @-@ shirts were on sale . He was dissuaded from taking action to have them removed on the basis that they were part of fund raising activities for " The Cause " , explained as something to bring equality to Catholics and Protestants in the region . Liking how " The Cause " sounded as was explained to him , Mustaine dedicated a performance of " Anarchy in the U.K. " to it , causing the audience to riot . The band were forced to travel in a bulletproof bus after the show . This incident , along with Marvel 's Punisher , inspired Mustaine to write the song . 
 " Rust in Peace ... Polaris " , addresses the topic of nuclear warfare , with " Polaris " referring to the Cold War @-@ era Lockheed UGM @-@ 27 Polaris intercontinental ballistic missile . Mustaine has revealed that the song , originally titled " Child Saint " , was one of his earlier compositions , having been written before his tenure with Metallica ( 1982 – 83 ) . Menza proposed the concept for " Hangar 18 " , a song about UFO conspiracies and Area 51 . Musically , the song features twin guitar solos after the verse . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Rust in Peace was released on September 24 , 1990 , and debuted at number 23 on the Billboard 200 , becoming Megadeth 's highest charting album up to that point . In 1994 , the album was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipping one million copies in the United States . Rust in Peace , along with the rest of Megadeth 's Capitol @-@ released studio albums , was remixed and remastered in 2004 . Four bonus tracks were added : a previously unreleased song entitled " My Creation " , and three demos of songs on the album featuring guitarist Chris Poland . 
 Upon release , the album received widespread critical acclaim . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune called it Megadeth 's most accomplished album , praising its " instrumental virtuosity , thoughtful lyricism and punkish rage " . AllMusic 's Steve Huey also named the album " easily Megadeth 's strongest musical effort " . While noting that the entire record is consistently impressive , Huey picked " Hangar 18 " as the " obvious highlight " . Jason Birchmeier , reviewing the album 's 2004 rerelease for AllMusic , observed that the record was a big step forward for the band . However , he criticized the album for being " too consistent " and noted that many of the songs were " sounding overly similar to one another " . 
 Robert Palmer of Rolling Stone wrote that the album is demonstration of how far the " nasty speed thrash " concept can go without being " formulaic and boring " . Reviewing the album for Entertainment Weekly , Jim Farber described the music as " sheer velocity , combined with dexterity " and Mustaine 's lyrics as " nihilistic whimsy " . Mike Stagno from Sputnikmusic agreed that the songwriting was " top notch " on the album , as well as the fast and technical musicianship . He also spoke highly of Friedman 's and Mustaine 's guitar performance , calling them " one of the most potent duos in the scene " . 
 Spin reviewer Tom Nordlie praised the album , deeming it a " mature , complex , surprisingly consonant and <unk> produced album " , and concluded that Rust in Peace " never sleeps " . Music journalist Kim Cooper also noted the album 's maturity and wrote that Rust in Peace " transcended the hard rock genre and raised the bar to a whole new level " . Another positive reaction came from Rock Hard , whose writer Holger Stratmann stated that the record was " pure Megadeth " , filled with " razor sharp guitars " and " snotty vocals " . 
 = = Legacy and influence = = 
 In retrospective analysis , Rust in Peace has been cited as having a large impact on its genre . Heavy metal magazine Decibel labeled the album as a " genre @-@ defining work " , while Kerrang ! wrote that the record " set a new standard for heavy metal in the 90s " . IGN named Rust in Peace the fourth most influential heavy metal album of all time , commenting that the album " displays Dave Mustaine 's finest writing ever " . Additionally , Martin Popoff ranked it eleventh among the best heavy metal albums of all time . In a reader poll organized by MusicRadar in 2010 , Rust in Peace was voted as the sixth best metal album ever . The MusicRadar staff explained that the record saw Megadeth moving " into the big league " , while staying true to their intricate sound and lyricism . In a list compiled by Chad Bowar of About.com , Rust in Peace was placed as the best heavy metal album of the 1990s and named a " thrash masterpiece " . The album was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 33rd Grammy Awards . 
 The tracks " Holy Wars ... The Punishment Due " and " Hangar 18 " have become staples of Megadeth 's live set , and are fan favorites . In 2010 , the band announced a 22 @-@ show North American tour to celebrate the 20th anniversary of Rust in Peace . The band performed the entire album at every show . Dates in South and Central America were later added to the tour , due to positive response from fans . In 2010 , Shout ! Factory released a live recording filmed on the Hollywood Palladium stop of the tour , entitled Rust in Peace Live . It was released on September 7 , 2010 in Blu @-@ ray , CD and DVD formats , and debuted at number 161 on the Billboard 200 and number two on the Billboard DVD charts . 
 Rust in Peace in its entirety was released as purchasable downloadable content in the rhythm game Rock Band , a part of their " Rust in Peace Download Package " . It was released a little more than a year after the release of Peace Sells ... But Who 's Buying ? on the game 's download store . A cover version of " Holy Wars " by Steve <unk> was featured in Rock Revolution . " Holy Wars " was also featured in Guitar Hero : Warriors of Rock , while " Hangar 18 " was featured in Guitar Hero II and as downloadable content for Guitar Hero 5 . Both songs have been described as amongst the most difficult songs in the series ' history . 
 A sequel to " Hangar 18 " titled " Return to Hangar " later featured on Megadeth 's ninth studio album , The World Needs a Hero . It concludes the fictional narrative begun in " Hangar 18 " , where the life forms said to be contained in " Hangar 18 " come back to life and kill those inside the building before escaping . Both songs have been played back @-@ to @-@ back live , which can be heard on Rude Awakening and That One Night : Live in Buenos Aires . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Dave Mustaine , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 = Andrea Dworkin = 
 Andrea Rita Dworkin ( September 26 , 1946 – April 9 , 2005 ) was an American radical feminist and writer best known for her criticism of pornography , which she argued was linked to rape and other forms of violence against women . Although a radical , she said there was a need for liberals , but was widely criticized by liberal feminists . At the same time , she maintained a dialogue with political conservatives and wrote a topically @-@ related book , Right @-@ Wing Women . After suffering abuse from her first husband , she was introduced to radical feminist literature and began writing Woman Hating . Coming to New York , she became an activist on several issues and a writer , eventually publishing 10 books on feminism . 
 During the late 1970s and 1980s , Dworkin became known as a spokeswoman for the feminist anti @-@ pornography movement and for her writing on pornography and sexuality , particularly Pornography : Men Possessing Women ( 1981 ) and Intercourse ( 1987 ) , which remain her two most widely known books . She wrote on pornography from a feminist perspective and in opposition to obscenity law , and she worked with Women Against Pornography and Linda Boreman . She considered the pornography industry to be based on turning women into objects for abuse by men . Dworkin and Catharine MacKinnon developed a legislative approach based on civil rights rather than obscenity to outlaw pornography and allow lawsuits against pornographers for damages , but their efforts were largely unsuccessful . She testified at a Federal commission against pornography , leading some stores to withdraw certain magazines from sale , but a court ruled the government 's efforts unconstitutional . Critics argued that no causal relationship between pornography and harm to women had been found . A Canadian court adapted parts of Dworkin and MacKinnon 's theory on sex equality , although Dworkin opposed parts of the court 's view . Some sex @-@ positive feminists criticized Dworkin 's views as censorious and as denying women 's agency or choice in sexual relationships , leading to the so @-@ called feminist sex wars . 
 Her book Intercourse , which addresses the role of sexual intercourse in society , has been interpreted as opposing all heterosexual intercourse , for example , by Cathy Young , but Dworkin said it does not and that what she was against was male domination by intercourse . Some critics of Dworkin accused her of supporting incest , and she sued for defamation , but a court did not forbid the criticism . She subsequently wrote much in opposition to incest . She wrote some fiction , some of which was held for a time by Canadian customs authorities before it was released , giving rise to a controversy over whether her support for antipornography law had led to the seizure of her own work . When she said she was drugged and raped in a hotel in 1999 , controversy over the truth of the allegations followed . In her later years , she suffered from severe osteoarthritis which limited her mobility . She died of acute myocarditis at the age of 58 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Dworkin was born in Camden , New Jersey , to Harry Dworkin and Sylvia Spiegel . Her father was the grandson of a Russian Jew who fled Russia when he was 15 years old in order to escape military service and her mother was the child of Jewish emigrants from Hungary . She had one younger brother , Mark . Her father was a schoolteacher and dedicated socialist , whom she credited with inspiring her passion for social justice . Her relationship with her mother was strained , but Dworkin later wrote about how her mother 's belief in legal birth control and legal abortion , " long before these were respectable beliefs " , inspired her later activism . 
 Though she described her Jewish household as being in many ways dominated by the memory of the Holocaust , it nonetheless provided a happy childhood until she reached the age of nine , when an unknown man molested her in a movie theater . When Dworkin was 10 , her family moved from the city to the suburbs of Cherry Hill , New Jersey ( then known as Delaware Township ) , which she later wrote she " experienced as being kidnapped by aliens and taken to a penal colony " . In sixth grade , the administration at her new school punished her for refusing to sing " Silent Night " ( as a Jew , she objected to being forced to sing Christian religious songs at school ) . She said she " probably would have become a rabbi " if women could have while she was in high school and she " would have liked " being a Talmudic scholar . 
 Dworkin began writing poetry and fiction in the sixth grade . Around that time , she was undecided about whether to become a lawyer or a writer , because of her interest then in abortion , and chose writing because she could " do it in a room alone " and " nobody could stop me " . Throughout high school , she read avidly , with encouragement from her parents . She was particularly influenced by Arthur Rimbaud , Charles Baudelaire , Henry Miller , Fyodor Dostoevsky , Che Guevara , and the Beat poets , especially Allen Ginsberg , and has included among writers she " admired most " Genet , Shelley , and Byron . 
 = = = College and early activism = = = 
 In 1965 , while a student at Bennington College , Dworkin was arrested during an anti @-@ Vietnam War protest at the United States Mission to the United Nations and sent to the New York Women 's House of Detention . Dworkin testified that the doctors in the House of Detention gave her an internal examination which was so rough that she bled for days afterwards . She spoke in public and testified before a grand jury about her experience , and the media coverage of her testimony made national and international news . The grand jury declined to make an indictment in the case , but Dworkin 's testimony contributed to public outrage over the mistreatment of inmates . The prison was closed seven years later . 
 Soon after testifying before the grand jury , Dworkin left Bennington on the liner Castel Felice to live in Greece and to pursue her writing . She traveled from Paris to Athens on the Orient Express , and went to live and write in Crete . While in Crete , she wrote a series of poems titled ( Vietnam ) Variations , a collection of poems and prose poems that she printed on the island in a book called Child , and a novel in a style resembling magical realism called Notes on Burning Boyfriend — a reference to the pacifist Norman Morrison , who had burned himself to death in protest of the Vietnam War . She also wrote several poems and dialogues which she hand @-@ printed after returning to the United States in a book called Morning Hair . 
 After living in Crete , Dworkin returned to Bennington for two years , where she continued to study literature and participated in campaigns against the college 's student conduct code , for contraception on campus , for the legalization of abortion , and against the Vietnam War . She graduated with a Bachelor 's degree in literature in 1968 . 
 = = Life in the Netherlands = = 
 After graduation , she moved to Amsterdam to interview Dutch anarchists in the Provo countercultural movement . While there , she became involved with , then married , one of the anarchists she met : Cornelius ( Iwan ) Dirk de Bruin . Soon after they were married , she said , de Bruin began to abuse her severely , punching and kicking her , burning her with cigarettes , beating her on her legs with a wooden beam , and banging her head against the floor until he knocked her unconscious . 
 After she left de Bruin late in 1971 , Dworkin said , her ex @-@ husband attacked , persecuted , and harassed her , beating her and threatening her whenever he found where she was hiding . She found herself desperate for money , often homeless , thousands of miles from her family , later remarking that " I often lived the life of a fugitive , except that it was the more desperate life of a battered woman who had run away for the last time , whatever the outcome " . Dworkin worked as a prostitute for a period . Ricki Abrams , a feminist and fellow expatriate , sheltered Dworkin in her home , and helped her find places to stay on houseboats , a communal farm , and deserted buildings . Dworkin tried to work up the money to return to the United States . 
 Abrams introduced Dworkin to early radical feminist writing from the United States , and Dworkin was notably inspired by Kate Millett 's Sexual Politics , Shulamith Firestone 's The Dialectic of Sex , and Robin Morgan 's Sisterhood is Powerful . She and Abrams began to work together on " early pieces and fragments " of a radical feminist text on the hatred of women in culture and history , including a completed draft of a chapter on the pornographic counterculture magazine Suck , which was published by a group of fellow expatriates in the Netherlands . 
 Dworkin later wrote that she eventually agreed to help smuggle a briefcase of heroin through customs in return for $ 1 @,@ 000 and an airplane ticket , thinking that if she was successful she could return home with the ticket and the money , and if caught she would at least escape her ex @-@ husband 's abuse by going to prison . The deal for the briefcase fell through , but the man who had promised Dworkin the money gave her the airline ticket anyway , and she returned to the United States in 1972 . 
 Before she left Amsterdam , Dworkin spoke with Abrams about her experiences in the Netherlands , the emerging feminist movement , and the book they had begun to write together . Dworkin agreed to complete the book — which she eventually titled Woman Hating — and publish it when she reached the United States . In her memoirs , Dworkin relates that during that conversation she vowed to dedicate her life to the feminist movement : 
 Sitting with Ricki , talking with Ricki , I made a vow to her : that I would use everything I knew , including from prostitution , to make the women 's movement stronger and better ; that I 'd give my life to the movement and for the movement . I promised to be honor @-@ bound to the well @-@ being of women , to do anything necessary for that well @-@ being . I promised to live and to die if need be for women . I made that vow some thirty years ago , and I have not betrayed it yet . 
 = = Return to New York and contact with the feminist movement = = 
 In New York , Dworkin worked again as an anti @-@ war organizer , participated in demonstrations for lesbian rights and against apartheid in South Africa . The feminist poet Muriel Rukeyser hired her as an assistant ( Dworkin later said , " I was the worst assistant in the history of the world . But Muriel kept me on because she believed in me as a writer . " ) Dworkin also joined a feminist consciousness raising group , and soon became involved in radical feminist organizing , focusing on campaigns against violence against women . In addition to her writing and activism , Dworkin gained notoriety as a speaker , mostly for events organized by local feminist groups . She became well known for passionate , uncompromising speeches that aroused strong feelings in both supporters and critics , and inspired her audience to action , such as her speech at the first Take Back the Night march in November 1978 , and her 1983 speech at the Midwest Regional Conference of the National Organization for Changing Men ( now the National Organization for Men Against Sexism ) titled " I Want a Twenty @-@ Four Hour Truce During Which There Is No Rape " . 
 = = Relationship with John Stoltenberg = = 
 In 1974 she met feminist writer and activist John Stoltenberg when they both walked out on a poetry reading in Greenwich Village over misogynist material . They became close friends and eventually came to live together . Stoltenberg wrote a series of radical feminist books and articles on masculinity . Although Dworkin publicly wrote " I love John with my heart and soul " and Stoltenberg described Dworkin as " the love of my life " , she continued to publicly identify herself as lesbian , and he as gay . Stoltenberg , recounting the perplexity that their relationship seemed to cause people in the press , summarized the relationship by saying , " So I state only the simplest facts publicly : yes , Andrea and I live together and love each other and we are each other 's life partner , and yes we are both out . " 
 Dworkin and Stoltenberg were married in 1998 ; after her death Stoltenberg said , " It 's why we never told anybody really that we married , because people get confused about that . They think , Oh , she 's yours . And we just did not want that nonsense . " 
 = = Critique of pornography = = 
 Andrea Dworkin is most often remembered for her role as a speaker , writer , and activist in the feminist anti @-@ pornography movement . In February 1976 , Dworkin took a leading role in organizing public pickets of Snuff in New York City and , during the fall , joined Adrienne Rich , Grace Paley , Gloria Steinem , Shere Hite , Lois Gould , Barbara Deming , Karla Jay , Letty <unk> <unk> , Robin Morgan , and Susan Brownmiller in attempts to form a radical feminist antipornography group . Members of this group would go on to found Women Against Pornography in 1979 , but by then Dworkin had begun to distance herself from the group over differences in approach . Dworkin spoke at the first Take Back the Night march in November 1978 , and joined 3 @,@ 000 women in a march through the red @-@ light district of San Francisco . 
 In 1981 , Dworkin published Pornography : Men Possessing Women , which analyzes ( and extensively cites examples drawn from ) contemporary and historical pornography as an industry of woman @-@ hating dehumanization . Dworkin argues that it is implicated in violence against women , both in its production ( through the abuse of the women used to star in it ) , and in the social consequences of its consumption by encouraging men to <unk> the domination , humiliation , and abuse of women . 
 = = <unk> Civil Rights Ordinance = = 
 In 1980 , Linda Boreman ( who had appeared in the pornographic film Deep Throat as " Linda Lovelace " ) made public statements that her ex @-@ husband Chuck Traynor had beaten and raped her , and violently coerced her into making that and other pornographic films . Boreman made her charges public for the press corps at a press conference , with Dworkin , feminist lawyer Catharine MacKinnon , and members of Women Against Pornography . After the press conference , Dworkin , MacKinnon , Gloria Steinem , and Boreman began discussing the possibility of using federal civil rights law to seek damages from Traynor and the makers of Deep Throat . Boreman was interested , but backed off after Steinem discovered that the statute of limitations for a possible suit had passed . 
 Dworkin and MacKinnon , however , continued to discuss civil rights litigation as a possible approach to combating pornography . In the fall of 1983 , MacKinnon secured a one @-@ semester appointment for Dworkin at the University of Minnesota , to teach a course in literature for the Women 's Studies program and co @-@ teach ( with MacKinnon ) an interdepartmental course on pornography , where they hashed out details of a civil rights approach . With encouragement from community activists in south Minneapolis , the Minneapolis city government hired Dworkin and MacKinnon to draft an antipornography civil rights ordinance as an amendment to the Minneapolis city civil rights ordinance . 
 The amendment defined pornography as a civil rights violation against women , and allowed women who claimed harm from pornography to sue the producers and distributors in civil court for damages . The law was passed twice by the Minneapolis city council , but vetoed both times by Mayor Don Fraser , who considered the wording of the ordinance to be too vague . Another version of the ordinance passed in Indianapolis , Indiana in 1984 , but was overturned as unconstitutional under the First Amendment by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals in the case American Booksellers v. <unk> . Dworkin continued to support the civil rights approach in her writing and activism , and supported anti @-@ pornography feminists who organized later campaigns in Cambridge , Massachusetts ( 1985 ) and Bellingham , Washington ( 1988 ) to pass versions of the ordinance by voter initiative . 
 = = Right @-@ Wing Women = = 
 In 1983 , Dworkin published Right @-@ Wing Women : The Politics of Domesticated Females , an examination of women 's reasons for collaborating with men for the limitation of women 's freedom . In the Preface to the British edition , Dworkin stated that the New Right in the United States focused especially on preserving male authority in the family , the promotion of fundamentalist versions of orthodox religion , combating abortion , and undermining efforts to combat domestic violence , but that it also had , for the first time , " succeeded in getting women as women ( women who claim to be acting in the interests of women as a group ) to act effectively on behalf of male authority over women , on behalf of a hierarchy in which women are subservient to men , on behalf of women as the rightful property of men , on behalf of religion as an expression of transcendent male supremacy " . Taking this as her problem , Dworkin asked , " Why do right @-@ wing women agitate for their own subordination ? How does the Right , controlled by men , enlist their participation and loyalty ? And why do right @-@ wing women truly hate the feminist struggle for equality ? " 
 = = Testimony before Attorney General 's Commission on Pornography = = 
 On January 22 , 1986 , Dworkin testified for half an hour before the Attorney General 's Commission on Pornography — also known as the " Meese Commission " ) in New York City , and answered questions from commissioners after completing her testimony . Dworkin 's testimony against pornography was praised and reprinted in the Commission 's final report , and Dworkin and MacKinnon marked its release by holding a joint press conference . Meese Commission subsequently successfully demanded that convenience store chains remove from shelves men 's magazines such as Playboy ( Dworkin wrote that the magazine " in both text and pictures promotes both rape and child sexual abuse " ) and Penthouse . The demands spread nationally and intimidated some retailers into withdrawing photography magazines , among others . The Meese Commission 's campaign was eventually quashed with a First Amendment admonishment against prior restraint by the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in Meese v. Playboy ( 639 F.Supp. 581 ) . 
 In her testimony and replies to questions from the commissioners , Dworkin denounced the use of criminal obscenity prosecutions against pornographers , stating , " We are against obscenity laws . We do not want them . I want you to understand why , whether you end up agreeing or not . " She argued that obscenity laws were largely ineffectual , that when they were effectual they only suppressed pornography from public view while allowing it to flourish out of sight , and that they suppressed the wrong material , or the right material for the wrong reasons , arguing that " Obscenity laws are also woman @-@ hating in their very construction . Their basic presumption is that it 's women 's bodies that are dirty . " 
 Instead she offered five recommendations for the Commission , recommending ( 1 ) that " the Justice Department instruct law @-@ enforcement agencies to keep records of the use of pornography in violent crimes " , ( 2 ) a ban on the possession and distribution of pornography in prisons , ( 3 ) that prosecutors " enforce laws against pimping and pandering against pornographers " , ( 4 ) that the administration " make it a Justice Department priority to enforce RICO ( the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act ) against the pornography industry " , and ( 5 ) that Congress adopt federal anti @-@ pornography civil rights legislation which would provide for civil damages for harm inflicted on women . She suggested that the Commission consider " creating a criminal conspiracy provision under the civil rights law , such that conspiring to deprive a person of their civil rights by coercing them into pornography is a crime , and that conspiring to traffic in pornography is conspiring to deprive women of our civil rights " . Dworkin compared her proposal to the Southern Poverty Law Center 's use of civil rights litigation against the Ku Klux Klan . 
 Dworkin also submitted into evidence a copy of Boreman 's book Ordeal , as an example of the abuses that she hoped to remedy , saying " The only thing atypical about Linda is that she has had the courage to make a public fight against what has happened to her . And whatever you come up with , it has to help her or it 's not going to help anyone " . Boreman had testified in person before the Commission , but the Commissioners had not yet seen her book . 
 = = Intercourse = = 
 In 1987 , Dworkin published Intercourse , in which she extended her analysis from pornography to sexual intercourse itself , and argued that the sort of sexual subordination depicted in pornography was central to men 's and women 's experiences of heterosexual intercourse in a male supremacist society . In the book , she argues that all heterosexual sex in our patriarchal society is coercive and degrading to women , and sexual penetration may by its very nature doom women to inferiority and submission , and " may be immune to reform " . 
 Citing from both pornography and literature — including The Kreutzer Sonata , Madame Bovary , and Dracula — Dworkin argued that depictions of intercourse in mainstream art and culture consistently emphasized heterosexual intercourse as the only kind of " real " sex , portrayed intercourse in violent or invasive terms , portrayed the violence or invasiveness as central to its eroticism , and often united it with male contempt for , revulsion towards , or even murder of , the " carnal " woman . She argued that this kind of depiction enforced a male @-@ centric and coercive view of sexuality , and that , when the cultural attitudes combine with the material conditions of women 's lives in a sexist society , the experience of heterosexual intercourse itself becomes a central part of men 's subordination of women , experienced as a form of " occupation " that is nevertheless expected to be pleasurable for women and to define their very status as women . 
 Such descriptions are often cited by Dworkin 's critics , interpreting the book as claiming " all " heterosexual intercourse is rape , or more generally that the anatomical mechanics of sexual intercourse make it intrinsically harmful to women 's equality . For instance , Cathy Young says that statements such as , " Intercourse is the pure , sterile , formal expression of men 's contempt for women , " are reasonably summarized as " All sex is rape " . 
 Dworkin rejected that interpretation of her argument , stating in a later interview that " I think both intercourse and sexual pleasure can and will survive equality " and suggesting that the misunderstanding came about because of the very sexual ideology she was criticizing : " Since the paradigm for sex has been one of conquest , possession , and violation , I think many men believe they need an unfair advantage , which at its extreme would be called rape . I do not think they need it . " 
 = = Butler decision in Canada = = 
 In 1992 , the Supreme Court of Canada made a ruling in R. v. Butler which incorporated some elements of Dworkin and MacKinnon 's legal work on pornography into the existing Canadian obscenity law . In Butler the Court held that Canadian obscenity law violated Canadian citizens ' rights to free speech under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms if enforced on grounds of morality or community standards of decency ; but that obscenity law could be enforced constitutionally against some pornography on the basis of the Charter 's guarantees of sex equality . The Court 's decision cited extensively from briefs prepared by the Women 's Legal Education and Action Fund ( LEAF ) , with the support and participation of Catharine MacKinnon . 
 Andrea Dworkin opposed LEAF 's position , arguing that feminists should not support or attempt to reform criminal obscenity law . In 1993 , copies of Dworkin 's book Pornography were held for inspection by Canada Customs agents , fostering an urban legend that Dworkin 's own books had been banned from Canada under a law that she herself had promoted . However , the Butler decision did not adopt Dworkin and MacKinnon 's ordinance ; Dworkin did not support the decision ; and her books ( which were released shortly after they were inspected ) were held temporarily as part of a standard procedural measure , unrelated to the Butler decision . 
 = = Fiction = = 
 Dworkin published three fictional works after achieving notability as a feminist author and activist . She published a collection of short stories , The New Woman 's Broken Heart in 1980 . Her first published novel , Ice and Fire , was published in the United Kingdom in 1986 . It is a first @-@ person narrative , rife with violence and abuse ; Susie Bright has claimed that it amounts to a modern feminist rewriting of one of the Marquis de Sade 's most famous works , Juliette . However , Dworkin aimed to depict men 's harm to women as normalized political harm , not as eccentric eroticism . Dworkin 's second novel , Mercy , was published in the United Kingdom in 1990 . According to The Telegraph , the novels " were not popular " . 
 Dworkin 's short fiction and novels often incorporated elements from her life and themes from her nonfiction writing , sometimes related by a first @-@ person narrator . Critics have sometimes quoted passages spoken by characters in Ice and Fire as representations of Dworkin 's own <unk> cf . Dworkin , however , wrote " My fiction is not autobiography . I am not an exhibitionist . I do not show myself . I am not asking for forgiveness . I do not want to confess . But I have used everything I know — my life — to show what I believe must be shown so that it can be faced . The imperative at the heart of my writing — what must be done — comes directly from my life . But I do not show my life directly , in full view ; nor even look at it while others watch . " 
 = = Life and Death = = 
 In 1997 , Dworkin published a collection of her speeches and articles from the 1990s in Life and Death : Unapologetic Writings on the Continuing War on Women , including a long autobiographical essay on her life as a writer , and articles on violence against women , pornography , prostitution , Nicole Brown Simpson , the use of rape during the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Montreal massacre , Israel , and the gender politics of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum . 
 Reviewing Life and Death in The New Republic , philosopher Martha Nussbaum criticizes voices in contemporary feminism for denouncing Catharine MacKinnon and Dworkin as " man @-@ haters " , and argues that First Amendment critiques of Dworkin 's civil ordinance proposal against pornography " are not saying anything intellectually respectable " , for the First Amendment " has never covered all speech : bribery , threats , extortionate offers , misleading advertising , perjury , and unlicensed medical advice are all unprotected " . Nussbaum adds that Dworkin has focused attention on the proper moral target by making harm associated with subordination , not obscenity , civilly actionable . 
 Nevertheless , Nussbaum opposes the adoption of Dworkin 's pornography ordinance because it ( 1 ) fails to distinguish between moral and legal violations , ( 2 ) fails to demonstrate a causal relationship between pornography and specific harm , ( 3 ) holds author of printed images or words responsible for others ' behavior , ( 4 ) grants censorial power to the judiciary ( which may be directed against feminist scholarship ) , and ( 5 ) erases the contextual considerations within which sex takes place . More broadly , Nussbaum faults Dworkin for ( 1 ) occluding economic injustice through an " obsessive focus on sexual subordination " , ( 2 ) reproducing objectification in reducing her interlocutors to their abuse , and ( 3 ) refusing reconciliation in favor of " violent extralegal resistance against male violence " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 In the same year , The New York Times Book Review published a lengthy letter of hers in which she describes the origins of her deeply felt hatred of prostitution and pornography ( " mass @-@ produced , <unk> prostitution " ) as her history of being violently inspected by prison doctors and battered by her first husband and numerous other men . 
 Dworkin was a strong opponent of President Bill Clinton during the Lewinsky scandal . She also expressed support for Paula Jones and Juanita <unk> . 
 Dworkin " was demonised not only by pornographers but by many liberals , whom she held in almost equal contempt " , and " while she was irritated by liberal feminists such as Naomi Wolf , she accepted that her views were not palatable to everyone . ' I have a really strong belief that any movement needs both radicals and liberals , ' she explained . ' You always need women who can walk into the room in the right way , talk in the right tone of voice , who have access to power . But you also need a bottom line . ' " 
 In 2000 , she published Scapegoat : The Jews , Israel , and Women 's Liberation , in which she compared the oppression of women to the persecution of Jews , discussed the sexual politics of Jewish identity and antisemitism , and called for the establishment of a women 's homeland as a response to the oppression of women . 
 In June 2000 , Dworkin published controversial articles in the New Statesman and in the Guardian , stating that one or more men had raped her in her hotel room in Paris the previous year , putting GHB in her drink to disable her . Her articles ignited public controversy when writers such as Catherine Bennett and Julia Gracen published doubts about her account , polarizing opinion between skeptics and supporters such as Catharine MacKinnon , Katharine Viner , and Gloria Steinem . Her reference to the incident was later described by Charlotte Raven as a " widely disbelieved claim " , better seen as " a kind of artistic housekeeping " . Emotionally fragile and in failing health , Dworkin mostly withdrew from public life for two years following the articles . 
 In 2002 , Dworkin published her autobiography , Heartbreak : The Political Memoir of a Feminist Militant . She soon began to speak and write again , and in an interview with Julie Bindel in 2004 said , " I thought I was finished , but I feel a new vitality . I want to continue to help women . " She published three more articles in the Guardian and began work on a new book , Writing America : How Novelists Invented and Gendered a Nation , on the role of novelists such as Ernest Hemingway and William Faulkner in the development of American political and cultural identity , which was left unfinished when she died . 
 = = Illness and death = = 
 During her final years , Dworkin suffered fragile health , and she revealed in her last column for the Guardian that she had been weakened and nearly crippled for the past several years by severe osteoarthritis in the knees . Shortly after returning from Paris in 1999 , she had been hospitalized with a high fever and blood clots in her legs . A few months after being released from the hospital , she became increasingly unable to bend her knees , and underwent surgery to replace her knees with titanium and plastic prosthetics . She wrote , " The doctor who knows me best says that osteoarthritis begins long before it cripples – in my case , possibly from homelessness , or sexual abuse , or beatings on my legs , or my weight . John , my partner , blames Scapegoat , a study of Jewish identity and women 's liberation that took me nine years to write ; it is , he says , the book that stole my health . I blame the drug @-@ rape that I experienced in 1999 in Paris . " 
 When a newspaper interviewer asked her how she would like to be remembered , she said , " In a museum , when male supremacy is dead . I 'd like my work to be an anthropological artifact from an extinct , primitive society " . She died in her sleep on the morning of April 9 , 2005 , at her home in Washington , D.C. The cause of death was later determined to be acute myocarditis . She was 58 years old . 
 = = Legacy and controversy = = 
 Dworkin authored ten books of radical feminist theory and numerous speeches and articles , each designed to assert the presence of and denounce institutionalized and normalized harm against women . She became one of the most influential writers and spokeswomen of American radical feminism during the late 1970s and the 1980s . She characterized pornography as an industry of damaging objectification and abuse , not merely a fantasy realm . She discussed prostitution as a system of exploitation , and intercourse as a key site of subordination in patriarchy . Her analysis and writing influenced and inspired the work of contemporary feminists , such as Catharine MacKinnon , Gloria Steinem , John Stoltenberg , Nikki Craft , Susan Cole , and Amy Elman . 
 Dworkin 's uncompromising positions and forceful style of writing and speaking , described by Robert Campbell as " apocalyptic " , earned her frequent comparisons to other speakers such as Malcolm X ( by Robin Morgan , Susie Bright , and others ) . Gloria Steinem repeatedly compared her style to that of the Old Testament prophets ; Susan Brownmiller recalls her Take Back the Night speech in 1978 : 
 Saturday evening culminated in a candlelit " Take Back the Night " march ( the first of its kind ) through the porn district , kicked off by an exhortation by Andrea Dworkin . I 'd seen Andrea in my living room , but this was the first time I 'd seen Andrea in action . On the spot I dubbed her Rolling Thunder . <unk> in her trademark denim coveralls , she employed the rhetorical cadences that would make her both a cult idol and an object of ridicule a few years later . Dworkin 's dramatized martyrdom and revival @-@ tent theatrics never sat well with me , but I retained my respect for her courage long after I absented myself from the pornography wars . Her call to action accomplished , three thousand demonstrators took to the streets 
 Many of Dworkin 's early speeches are reprinted in her second book , Our Blood ( 1976 ) . Later selections of speeches were reprinted ten and twenty years later , in Letters from a War Zone ( 1988 ) and Life and Death ( 1997 ) . 
 She maintained some political communication with the political right wing . She authored the book Right @-@ Wing Women , reviewed as premised on agreement between feminists and right @-@ wing women on the existence of domination by men in sex and class and disagreement on strategy . She testified at a Meese Commission hearing on pornography , while Attorney General Edwin Meese was serving socially conservative President Reagan . She had a political discourse with National Review writer David <unk> and their spouses arranged by Christopher Hitchens . 
 Her attitude and language often sharply polarized debate , and made Dworkin herself a figure of intense controversy . After her death , the conservative gay writer Andrew Sullivan claimed that " Many on the social right liked Andrea Dworkin . Like Dworkin , their essential impulse when they see human beings living freely is to try and control or stop them – for their own good . Like Dworkin , they are horrified by male sexuality , and see men as such as a problem to be tamed . Like Dworkin , they believe in the power of the state to censor and coerce sexual freedoms . Like Dworkin , they view the enormous new freedom that women and gay people have acquired since the 1960s as a terrible development for human culture . " Libertarian / conservative journalist Cathy Young complained of a " whitewash " in feminist obituaries for Dworkin , argued that Dworkin 's positions were manifestly <unk> , stated that Dworkin was in fact insane , criticized what she called Dworkin 's " destructive legacy " , and described Dworkin as a " sad ghost " that feminism needs to exorcise . 
 Other feminists , however , published sympathetic or celebratory memorials online and in print . Catharine MacKinnon , Dworkin 's longtime friend and collaborator , published a column in the New York Times , celebrating what she described as Dworkin 's " incandescent literary and political career " , suggested that Dworkin deserved a nomination for the Nobel Prize in Literature , and complained that " lies about her views on sexuality ( that she believed intercourse was rape ) and her political alliances ( that she was in bed with the right ) were published and republished without attempts at verification , corrective letters almost always refused . Where the physical appearance of male writers is regarded as irrelevant or cherished as a charming eccentricity , Andrea 's was reviled and mocked and turned into pornography . When she sued for libel , courts trivialized the pornographic lies as fantasy and dignified them as satire " . 
 Dworkin 's reports of violence suffered at the hands of men sometimes aroused skepticism , the most famous example being the public controversy over her allegations of being drugged and raped in Paris . In 1989 , Dworkin wrote an article about her life as a battered wife in the Netherlands , " What Battery Really Is " , in response to fellow radical feminist Susan Brownmiller , who had argued that Hedda Nussbaum , a battered woman , should have been indicted for her failure to stop Joel Steinberg from murdering their adoptive daughter . Newsweek initially accepted " What Battery Really Is " for publication , but then declined to publish the account at the request of their attorney , according to Dworkin , arguing that she needed either to publish anonymously " to protect the identity of the batterer " and remove references to specific injuries , or to provide " medical records , police records , a written statement from a doctor who had seen the injuries " . Instead , Dworkin submitted the article to the Los Angeles Times , which published it on March 12 , 1989 . 
 = = = Incest = = = 
 Some critics , such as Larry Flynt 's magazine Hustler and Gene Healy , allege that Dworkin endorsed incest . In the closing chapter of Woman Hating ( 1974 ) , Dworkin wrote that " The parent @-@ child relationship is primarily erotic because all human relationships are primarily erotic " , and that " The incest taboo , because it denies us essential fulfillment with the parents whom we love with our primary energy , forces us to internalize those parents and constantly seek them . The incest taboo does the worst work of the culture ... The destruction of the incest taboo is essential to the development of cooperative human community based on the free @-@ flow of natural androgynous eroticism " . Dworkin , however , does not explain if " fulfillment " is supposed to involve actual sexual intimacy , and one page earlier characterized what she meant by " erotic relationships " as relationships whose " substance is nonverbal communication and touch " , which she explicitly distinguished from what she referred to as " fucking " . 
 Dworkin 's work from the early 1980s onward contained frequent condemnations of incest and pedophilia as one of the chief forms of violence against women , arguing once that " incest is terrifically important in understanding the condition of women . It is a crime committed against someone , a crime from which many victims never recover " . In the early 1980s she had a public row with her former friend Allen Ginsberg over his support for child pornography and pedophilia , in which Ginsberg said , " The right wants to put me in jail , " and Dworkin responded , " Yes , they 're very sentimental ; I 'd kill you . " When Hustler published in 1985 the claim that Dworkin advocated incest , Dworkin sued them for defamatory libel ; the court dismissed Dworkin 's complaint on the grounds that regardless of whether Hustler 's interpretations of her reflections on incest were valid , even a faulty interpretation of a work placed into the " marketplace of ideas " could not amount to defamation in the legal sense . 
 = = = Pornography = = = 
 Other critics , especially women who identify as feminists but sharply differ with Dworkin 's style or positions , have offered nuanced views , suggesting that Dworkin called attention to real and important problems , but that her legacy as a whole had been destructive to the women 's movement . Her work and activism on pornography – especially in the form of the <unk> Civil Rights Ordinance – drew heavy criticism from groups such as the Feminist Anti @-@ Censorship Task Force ( FACT ) and even some fellow anti @-@ pornography feminists , who criticized the Dworkin @-@ McKinnon legal approach as undermining civil rights . 
 Dworkin also attracted criticism from sex @-@ positive feminists , in what became known as the feminist sex wars of the late 1970s and 1980s . The sex wars were a series of heated debates which polarized feminist thought on a number of issues relating to sex and sexuality . Sex @-@ positive feminist critics criticized Dworkin 's legal activism as censorious , and argued that her work on pornography and sexuality promoted an essentialist , conservative , or repressive view of sexuality , which they often characterized as " anti @-@ sex " or " sex @-@ negative " . Her criticisms of common heterosexual sexual expression , pornography , prostitution and sadomasochism were frequently claimed to disregard women 's own agency in sex or to deny women 's sexual choices . Dworkin countered that her critics often misrepresented her views , and that under the heading of " choice " and " sex @-@ positivity " her feminist critics were failing to question the often violent political structures that confined women 's choices and shaped the meaning of sex acts . 
 = = Publications = = 
 In addition to books , articles , and speeches listed here , she wrote for anthologies and wrote additional articles , and some of her works were translated into other languages . She also published in Gay Community News . 
 = = = Non @-@ fiction = = = 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1974 ) . Woman Hating . New York : Penguin Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1976 ) . Our blood : prophecies and discourses on sexual politics . New York : Harper & Row . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1981 ) . Pornography : men possessing women . London : Women 's Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1983 ) . Right @-@ wing women : the politics of domesticated females . London : Women 's Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ; MacKinnon , Catharine A. ( 1985 ) . The reasons why : essays on the new civil rights law recognizing pornography as sex discrimination . New York : Women Against Pornography . OCLC <unk> . 
 Contains : 
 MacKinnon , Catharine A. ( Winter 1985 ) . " Pornography , civil rights , and speech " . Harvard Civil Rights @-@ Civil Liberties Law Review ( Harvard Law School ) 20 ( 1 ) : 10 – 68 . 
 Extracted in Pornography and Censorship , in Doing Ethics by Lewis Vaughn , second edition , ISBN <unk> 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( Spring 1985 ) . " Against the male flood : censorship , pornography , and equality " . Harvard Journal of Law & Gender ( formerly Women 's Law Journal ) ( HeinOnline on behalf of Harvard Law School ) 8 : 1 – 30 . Pdf . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1987 ) . Intercourse . New York : Free Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ; MacKinnon , Catharine ( 1988 ) . Pornography and civil rights : a new day for women 's equality . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Organizing Against Pornography . ISBN <unk> . Available online . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1989 ) . Letters from a war zone : writings , 1976 @-@ 1989 . New York : E.P. Dutton . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ; MacKinnon , Catharine ( 1997 ) . In harm 's way : the pornography civil rights hearings . Cambridge , Massachusetts : Harvard University Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1997 ) . Life and death : unapologetic writings on the continuing war against women . London : Virago . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 2000 ) . Scapegoat : The Jews , Israel , and Women 's Liberation . New York : Free Press . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 2002 ) . Heartbreak : the political memoir of a feminist militant . New York : Basic Books . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = = Chapters in books = = = = 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1995 ) , " Pornography happens to women " , in Lederer , Laura ; Delgado , Richard , The price we pay : the case against racist speech , hate propaganda , and pornography , New York : Hill and Wang , ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1996 ) , " Biological superiority : the world 's most dangerous and deadly idea " , in Jackson , <unk> ; Scott , Sue , Feminism and sexuality : a reader , New York : Columbia University Press , pp. 57 – 61 , ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1996 ) , " Pornography " , in Jackson , <unk> ; Scott , Sue , Feminism and sexuality : a reader , New York : Columbia University Press , pp. 297 – 299 , ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 2004 ) , " Pornography , prostitution and a beautiful and tragic recent history " , in <unk> , Rebecca ; Stark , Christine , Not for sale : feminists resisting prostitution and pornography , North Melbourne , Victoria : <unk> Press , pp. 137 – 158 , ISBN <unk> 
 = = = = = Other non @-@ fiction = = = = = 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 2003 ) , " Landscape of the ordinary : violence against women " , in Morgan , Robin , Sisterhood is forever : the women 's anthology for a new millennium , New York , New York : Washington Square Press , pp. 58 – 69 , ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Fiction and poetry = = = 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1966 ) . Child . Crete : Heraklion . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1967 ) . Morning hair . Philadelphia : Philadelphia College of Art . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1980 ) . The new <unk> broken heart : short stories . East Palo Alto , California : Frog in the Well . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1986 ) . Ice and fire : a novel . London : Secker & Warburg . ISBN <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1991 ) . Mercy . New York : Four Walls Eight Windows . ISBN <unk> . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1977 ) . Marx and Gandhi were liberals : feminism and the " radical " left . East Palo Alto , California : Frog in the Well . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1978 ) . Why so @-@ called radical men love and need pornography . East Palo Alto , California : Frog in the Well . OCLC <unk> . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( Spring 1985 ) . " Against the male flood : censorship , pornography , and equality " . Harvard Journal of Law & Gender ( formerly Women 's Law Journal ) ( HeinOnline on behalf of Harvard Law School ) 8 : 1 – 30 . Pdf . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1986 ) . Pornography is a Civil Rights Issue for Women . Minneapolis , Minnesota : Organizing Against Pornography . OCLC <unk> . 
 Page 1 of 4 . Page 2 of 4 . Page 3 of 4 . Page 4 of 4 . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1986 ) . " Pornography is a civil rights issue for women " . <unk> ( Nikki Craft ) . Pdf . 
 Page 1 of 2 . Page 2 of 2 . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( Spring 1989 ) . " The ACLU : bait and switch " . Yale Journal of Law and Feminism ( Yale Law School ) 1 ( 1 ) : 37 – 40 . Pdf . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1993 ) . " Prostitution and male supremacy " . Michigan Journal of Gender and Law ( HeinOnline on behalf of University of Michigan Law School ) 1 : 1 – 12 . 
 Page 1 of 2 . Page 2 of 2 . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 1999 ) . Are you listening , Hillary ? President Rape is who he is . 
 Excerpt with Note from John Stoltenberg , 25 May 2007 . 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 30 June 2003 ) . " Book review : A good rape " . New Statesman ( Progressive Media International ) . 
 Review of Lucky by Alice Sebold , ISBN <unk> 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 22 September 2003 ) . " Book review : Out of the closet " . New Statesman ( Progressive Media International ) . 
 Review of Normal : transsexual CEOs , cross @-@ dressing cops , and hermaphrodites with attitude by Amy Bloom , ISBN <unk> 
 Dworkin , Andrea ( 4 March 2013 ) . " The day I was drugged and raped " . New Statesman ( Progressive Media International ) . 
 = = = Speeches and interviews = = = 
 Some were digitalized . 
 Why Men Like Pornography & Prostitution So Much Andrea Dworkin Keynote Speech at International Trafficking Conference , 1989 . ( Audio File : 22 min , 128 kbit / s , mp3 ) 
 Andrea Dworkin 's Attorney General 's Commission Testimony on Pornography and Prostitution 
 Violence , Abuse & Women 's Citizenship Brighton , UK November 10 , 1996 
 " Freedom Now : Ending Violence Against Women " 
 " Speech from Duke University , January , 1985 " 
 Taped Phone Interview Andrea Dworkin interviewed by Nikki Craft on Allen Ginsberg , May 9 , 1990 . ( Audio File , 20 min , 128 kbit / s , mp3 ) 
 Dworkin on Dworkin , ca . 1980 
 = = = Reviews of Dworkin 's works = = = 
 Ice and Fire , by Andrea Dworkin ; Intercourse , by Andrea Dworkin . " Male and Female , Men and Women " . Reviewed by Carol <unk> for the New York Times ( May 3 , 1987 ) . 
 Intercourse , by Andrea Dworkin ; Feminism <unk> , by Catharine MacKinnon . " Porn in the U.S.A. , Part I " . Reviewed by Maureen <unk> for The Nation ( May 30 , 1987 ) : 
 Intercourse , by Andrea Dworkin ( Tenth Anniversary Edition 1997 ) at the Wayback Machine ( archived April 2 , 2003 ) . Reviewed by <unk> Villar for Women in Action ( 3 : 1998 ) . 
 Pornography : Men Possessing Women . " <unk> a Witch : Re @-@ Reading Andrea Dworkin " at the Wayback Machine ( archived March 6 , 2005 ) . Reviewed by Jed Brandt for the NYC <unk> ( February 7 , 2005 ) . 
 = = = Related work = = = 
 She was a member of The American Heritage Dictionary 's Usage Panel . 
 = Sir James Shaw , 1st Baronet = 
 Sir James Shaw , 1st Baronet ( 26 August 1764 – 22 October 1843 ) , became Lord Mayor of London in 1805 . From humble beginnings in a farming family in Ayrshire , he became a successful merchant and politician ; he was a relation of Robert Burns and used his wealth to support Burns 's orphaned children . As Lord Mayor of London , he led the funeral procession of Lord Nelson in 1806 , having established his right to do so and was created baronet twice , in 1809 and 1813 . While later Chamberlain of London , he almost lost his own fortune due to injudicious investments , and died , exonerated , in 1843 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Shaw was born on 26 August 1764 , in Riccarton , Kilmarnock , Scotland , the son of a " respectable farmer " , John Shaw , whose family had farmed the area of <unk> for over 300 years , and Hellen Sellars . On the death of his father , the family moved to Kilmarnock , and Shaw studied at the local grammar school . 
 At the age of 17 , he followed his elder brother to America to seek work , returning after three years to take up a position in the same company 's London offices and becoming a junior partner in the firm . He became a wealthy merchant and financially assisted the children of Robert Burns after Burns 's death in 1796 . He was elected alderman for <unk> in 1798 and became Sheriff of London and Middlesex in 1803 . 
 = = Lord Mayor of London = = 
 Shaw had developed a reputation as a " gentleman and a citizen " and was sponsored for the office of Lord Mayor of London by the Scriveners ' Company , and became only the second member of that guild to achieve that honour . 
 Having taken office in 1805 , Shaw determined to re @-@ establish the tradition whereby the Lord Mayor took precedence in public processions within the City of London over all except the reigning monarch , and took the opportunity of the funeral of Lord Nelson in 1806 to do so . According to one account , Shaw discussed the matter with the Prime Minister , Lord Liverpool , who was aware that the Prince Regent would be attending the funeral , but did not seem willing to take action . Shaw then offered to visit the King himself at Windsor Castle to resolve the matter , and Liverpool said that he would see what could be done . By the following day , the Royal Warrant of Precedence had been granted , and Shaw duly led the procession . 
 = = Baronetcy and later career = = 
 Shaw was created Baronet , of Kilmarnock , in the County of Ayr by George III in 1809 , and re @-@ created in 1813 by a second patent to include a future interest for his nephew . As such , he was appointed a Member of Parliament for London until 1818 , but thereafter sat as an alderman until he resigned in May 1843 . In 1831 he was also appointed Chamberlain of London , and was almost ruined as he inadvertently invested £ 40 @,@ 000 , ( £ NaN as of 2016 ) then a huge sum , of city funds in fake Exchequer bills . On discovering his error , he began to liquidate all his property to repay the sum , but was cleared by a commission of enquiry . Shaw resigned all his positions in 1843 due to long @-@ term illness and died some six months later on 22 October . Shaw was unmarried , and normally his baronetcy would have become extinct on his death , but because of the second patent , the title passed to his nephew , John Shaw . 
 Shaw was also President of St Bartholomew 's Hospital from 1806 to 1831 and President of the Honourable Artillery Company from 1829 to 1843 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Shaw is commemorated in Kilmarnock town centre by a statue of Carrara marble , about 17 feet tall , on a base of Aberdeen granite , executed by sculptor James <unk> ( 1808 – 52 ) . The cost was defrayed by public subscription , which raised almost £ 1000 . It was unveiled on 4 August 1848 and was originally located at the Kilmarnock Cross . On 28 March 1929 the statue was moved to the area of The Dick Institute just off the London Road because of the increase in traffic around the centre of the town . 
 It was described as 
 ... a noble work of art , worthy of the creative genius of the sculptor , Mr. <unk> , and no less worthy of the venerable baronet whom it commemorates , and of whom , we believe , it is a faithful likeness . In symmetry of form it is truly admirable . The mild , benevolent features of Sir James are finely developed ; and , as a whole , it is replete with that seeming animation and intellectual expression which mark the superior powers of the sculptor , and give to the object itself a high and permanent interest . 
 His portrait ( pictured above ) is also shown in the Guildhall , London . 
 = The Phantom Tollbooth = 
 The Phantom Tollbooth is a children 's fantasy adventure novel written by Norton Juster with illustrations by Jules Feiffer , published in 1961 by Random House ( USA ) . It tells the story of a bored young boy named Milo who unexpectedly receives a magic tollbooth one afternoon and , having nothing better to do , drives through it in his toy car , transporting him to the Kingdom of Wisdom , once prosperous but now troubled . There , he acquires two faithful companions and goes on a quest to restore to the kingdom its exiled princesses — named Rhyme and Reason — from the Castle in the Air . In the process , he learns valuable lessons , finding a love of learning . The text is full of puns and wordplay , and many events , such as when Milo unintentionally jumps to Conclusions , an island in Wisdom , explore the literal meanings of idioms . 
 In 1958 , Juster had received a Ford Foundation grant for a children 's book about cities . Unable to make progress on that project , he turned to writing what became The Phantom Tollbooth , his first book . His housemate , Feiffer , a cartoonist , interested himself in the project . Jason Epstein , an editor at Random House , bought the book and published . It has received strong acclaimed reviews and has sold in excess of three million copies , unexpectedly more than its predictions . It has been adapted into a film , opera , and play , and translated into many languages . 
 Though the book is on its face an adventure story , a major theme is the need for a love of education ; through this , Milo applies what he has learned in school , advances in his personal development , and learns to love the life that previously bored him . Critics have compared its appeal to that of Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and to L. Frank Baum 's The Wonderful Wizard of Oz . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Milo is a boy bored by the world around him ; every activity seems a waste of time . He arrives home from another boring day at school to find a mysterious package . Among its contents are a small tollbooth and a map of " the Lands Beyond " , illustrating the Kingdom of Wisdom ( which will also guide the reader from its place on the endpapers of the book ) . Attached to the package is a note " For Milo , who has plenty of time " . Warned by an included sign to have his destination in mind , he decides without much thought to go to <unk> , assuming this is a pretend game to be played on the floor of his room . He maneuvers through the tollbooth in his electric toy car , and instantly finds himself driving on a road that is clearly not in his city apartment . 
 Milo begins with Expectations , a pleasant place where he starts on Wisdom 's road . In Expectations , he seeks directions from the Whether Man , who is full of endless talk . As Milo drives on , he daydreams and soon is paying no attention at all , and gets lost in the Doldrums , a colorless place where nothing ever happens . Milo is soon joining the inhabitants , the <unk> , in killing time there , a pastime angrily interrupted by the arrival of Tock , an oversize talking dog with an alarm clock on each side ( a " watchdog " ) , who tells Milo that only by thinking can he get out of the Doldrums . Head abuzz with unaccustomed thoughts , Milo is soon back on his road , and the watchdog joins him on his journey through Wisdom . 
 Milo and Tock travel to <unk> , one of two capital cities of the divided Kingdom of Wisdom , and home to King Azaz the Unabridged . They meet King Azaz 's cabinet officials and visit the Word Market , wherein are bought and sold the words and letters that empower the world . A fight between the Spelling Bee and the blustering Humbug breaks up the market , and Milo and Tock are arrested by the very short Officer Shrift . In prison , Milo meets the Which ( not to be confused with Witch ) , also known as Faintly Macabre , long in charge of which words should be used in Wisdom . She tells him how the two rulers , King Azaz and his brother , the Mathemagician , had two adopted younger sisters , Rhyme and Reason , to whom everyone came to settle disputes . All lived in harmony until the rulers disagreed with the princesses ' decision that letters ( championed by Azaz ) and numbers ( by the Mathemagician ) were equally important . They banished the princesses to the Castle in the Air , and since then , the land has had neither Rhyme nor Reason . 
 Milo and Tock leave the dungeon . King Azaz hosts them at a banquet where the guests literally eat their words , served to them on plates . After the meal , King Azaz lets Milo and Tock talk themselves into a dangerous quest to rescue the princesses . Azaz flatters the Humbug into being their guide , and boy , dog and insect set off for the Mathemagician 's capital of Digitopolis as they must gain his approval before they can begin their quest . 
 Along the way , they meet such characters as Alec <unk> , a little boy suspended in the air who sees through things and who will grow down until he reaches the ground . Milo then loses time in substituting for Chroma the Great , a conductor whose orchestra creates the colors of the world . 
 In Digitopolis , they meet the Mathemagician , who is still angry at Azaz , and who will not give his blessing to anything that his brother has approved . Milo maneuvers him into saying he will permit the quest if the boy can prove the two have concurred on anything since they banished the princesses . To the number wizard 's shock , Milo proves that the two have agreed to disagree , and the Mathemagician gives his reluctant consent . 
 In the Mountains of Ignorance , the <unk> contend with demons like the Terrible Trivium and the Gelatinous Giant . After overcoming testing obstacles and their own fears , they reach the Castle in the Air . Princesses Rhyme and Reason welcome Milo and agree to return to Wisdom . Unable to enter the castle , the demons cut it loose , letting it drift away , but Milo realizes Tock can carry them down because time flies . The demons pursue , but the armies of Wisdom repel them . Rhyme and Reason heal the divisions in the old Kingdom of Wisdom , Azaz and the Mathemagician are reconciled , and all enjoy a three @-@ day celebration . 
 Milo says goodbye and drives back through the tollbooth . Suddenly he is back in his own room , and discovers he has been gone only an hour , though his journey seemed to take weeks . He awakens the next day with plans to return to the kingdom , but finds the tollbooth gone when he gets home from school . A note instead is there , " For Milo , who now knows the way . " The note states that the tollbooth is being sent to another child who needs help finding his direction in life . Milo is somewhat disappointed but agrees and looks at a now @-@ interesting world around him , concluding that even if he found a way back , he might not have time to go , for there is so much to do right where he is . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Architect Norton Juster was living in his hometown of Brooklyn , after three years in the navy . In June 1960 , he gained a $ 5 @,@ 000 grant from the Ford Foundation to write a children 's book about cities . Juster argued that the young baby boomers would soon have responsibility for the cities , and many lived in the suburbs and did not know them . In his proposal , he said he wanted " to stimulate and heighten perception – to help children notice and appreciate the visual world around them – to help excite them and shape their interest in an environment they will eventually reshape . " Beginning with great enthusiasm , he ground to a halt with too many notes and too little progress . He took a weekend break with friends at Fire Island , and came back determined to put aside the cities book and seek inspiration in another writing project . 
 Juster 's guilt over his lack of progress on the cities book had led him to write pieces of stories about a little boy named Milo , which he began to develop into a book . Juster quit his job so that he could work on the book . His imagination fired by a boy who approached him on the street and with whom he discussed the nature of infinity , Juster wanted to finish the story about " a boy who asked too many questions " before returning to the book on cities . Juster shared his house in Brooklyn Heights with cartoonist Jules Feiffer whose bedroom was immediately below , and who could hear him pacing in the night . Feiffer was surprised to learn that his friend 's insomnia was not caused by the cities book , but by a book about a boy . Juster showed Feiffer the draft to date , and , <unk> , the artist began sketching illustrations . Feiffer knew Judy <unk> , who put deals together in the publishing trade and was his future bride . <unk> got Jason Epstein , an innovative editor at Random House with a deep appreciation for children 's literature , to agree to review the manuscript . Some at Random House considered the book 's vocabulary too difficult : at the time , educators advised against children 's literature containing words the target audience did not already know , fearing the unfamiliar would discourage young learners . Based on seven chapters of manuscript , plus a three @-@ page outline of the rest of the story , Epstein bought the book . 
 Since Juster did the cooking for the housemates , if Feiffer wanted to eat , he had to do the drawings . Feiffer quickly realized the book would require illustrations of the type and quality that John Tenniel had created for Lewis Carroll 's Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland and although a nationally @-@ known artist , doubted his competence to do the text justice . Feiffer considers the double @-@ spread illustration of demons late in the book to be a success and one of his favorites . It differs from his usual style ( which would involve a white background ) , and instead uses Gustave Doré 's drawings as an inspiration . 
 It became a game , with Feiffer trying to draw things the way he wanted , and Juster trying to describe things that were impossible to sketch . These included the Triple Demons of Compromise — one short and fat , one tall and thin , and the third exactly like the first two . Feiffer got his revenge by depicting the author as the Whether Man , clad in a toga . 
 Repeated edits altered the protagonist 's name ( originally Tony ) , removed his parents entirely from the book , and deleted text attempting to describe how the tollbooth package had been delivered . Milo 's age was removed from the text — early drafts have him aged eight or nine — as Juster decided not to state it , lest potential readers decide they were too old to care . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Since no one has ever bothered to explain the importance of learning to Milo , he regards school as the biggest waste of time in his life . Juster intended that the book speak to the importance of learning to love learning . Teaching methods that might bore children , by memorization for example , are mocked in the book , as in the case of the Spelling Bee . Like the Bee , the Humbug 's insult to his fellow insect goes over Milo 's head , but possibly not the reader 's : " A slavish concern for the composition of words is the sign of a bankrupt intellect . " According to Mary Liston in her journal article on law in fantasy realms , " The Phantom Tollbooth concerns the difference between education and wisdom and what processes are conducive to synthesizing both , so as to encourage an attitude of engagement , alertness , and responsibility within an increasingly autonomous individual . " 
 Another theme is the need for common sense to back up rules . Milo journeys through a land where , without Rhyme or Reason , the art of governance has been lost , leading to bizarre results . Milo repeatedly meets characters to whom words are more important than their meaning . The Whether Man , for all his talk , is unable to provide Milo with the information or guidance the boy wants , while Officer Shrift 's investigation of the overturning of the Word Market contains the forms of law , without justice . The denizens around Digitopolis are little better ; the twelve @-@ faced <unk> , named for what he is , turns the logic of his naming on its head when he asks if everyone with one face is called Milo . The attitudes now displayed by the adherents of both brothers are summed up by the <unk> , " as long as the answer is right , who cares if the question is wrong ? " 
 As Milo struggles with words and begins the process of making himself their master , he also has difficulty with numbers , especially when he speaks with .58 of a child , who with parents and two siblings ( whom Milo does not meet ) makes up an average family . Milo has had problems in school with mathematics and problem solving ; his reaction to this encounter is to protest that averages are not real . The partial child enlightens Milo that there is beauty in math beyond the tedium of learning an endless set of rules , " one of the nicest things about mathematics , or anything else you might care to learn , is that many of the things which can never be , often are " . Late in the book , Princess Reason counsels Milo , who has much learning ahead of him , not to be discouraged by its complexity , " You must never feel badly about making mistakes ... as long as you take the trouble to learn from them . For you often learn more by being wrong for the right reasons than you do by being right for the wrong reasons " . An index card in the Juster papers sets forth the germ of the princess ' " memorable " counsel to Milo , " Quite often the road to Rhyme + Reason is through the right mistakes . " 
 Although Milo is bored with learning , that does not mean he knew nothing before his journey . He exhibits characteristics of a well @-@ schooled child of his time ; his speech is polite and peppered with " please " and " thank you " , and when he unexpectedly encounters the partial child , he requests pardon for staring . He can count to a thousand , though his tact in bringing up the subject in the presence of the numbers @-@ hating King Azaz is not the best . Mindful of his mother 's admonition to eat lightly when a guest , he initially orders a light meal at the banquet , only to find the waiters bringing in insubstantial light beams . Not realizing he will be asked to eat his words , he then makes a plausible start at a speech before being interrupted by the king . The Phantom Tollbooth displays Milo 's growth ; Leonard S. Marcus in his notes to its annotated edition writes that the boy learns to think in the abstract , pledging after his unintentional jump to Conclusions that he will not make up his mind again without a good reason . Milo does not accept the word of the demon of insincerity that he is a threat and is rewarded by learning he is not . Just for a moment , Milo is able to float in the air beside Alec <unk> and see things from the perspective he will have as an adult , allowing the young reader to contemplate what it will be like to do the same . According to Liston , Milo " transforms himself from an unthinking and compliant <unk> to a young adult with greater consciousness , a firmer sense of self , and a newly found set of responsibilities " . 
 Even though the day is won by Milo and his fellow questers , it is a great but not a permanent victory , as he hears the kingly brothers begin to argue again as he departs . Juster has written that it was his intent to get Milo out of there as quickly as possible , and that " the fight would have to be won again and again " . 
 Milo 's trip through the lands beyond the tollbooth teaches the previously bored child to appreciate both journey and destination . This is a lesson that had been unlearned by the citizens of Wisdom , as exemplified by the described fate of the twin cities of Reality and Illusions . Although the city of Illusions never actually existed , Reality was lost as its residents concentrated on getting to their destination as quickly as possible , and , unappreciated , the city withered away , unnoticed by the busy people who still hasten along its former streets . Milo meets his trials by defining himself as different from the kingdom 's inhabitants , who either demand or accept conformity , as enforced by the kingdom 's laws , which discourage ( and even outlaw ) thought . Milo cannot accept such laws , beginning when , in the Doldrums , he thinks , thus violating a local ordinance and separating himself from the thoughtless inhabitants . Liston opined that because the Kingdom of Wisdom 's " laws require the impossible , they contradict what it means to be fully human " . 
 = = Influences and comparisons = = 
 The Phantom Tollbooth contains allusions to many works , including those loved by Juster in his own upbringing . Some of Juster 's favorite books as a child , including The Wind in the Willows , had endpaper maps ; Juster insisted on one for his over Feiffer 's opposition , going so far as to sketch one and require that his collaborator reproduce it in his own style . Juster was also inspired by his father Samuel 's love of puns , with which the book is more than sprinkled . In his childhood , Juster spent much time listening to the radio . According to Juster , the need to envision the action when listening to radio serials helped inspire The Phantom Tollbooth , as well as yielding the character of Tock , based on sidekick Jim Fairfield from Jack Armstrong , the All @-@ American Boy . Jim gave Tock his wisdom , courage , and adventurous spirit . As a child , Juster had synesthesia , and could only do arithmetic by making associations between numbers and colors . He remembered that the condition affected word associations . " One of the things I always did was think literally when I heard words . On the Lone Ranger [ radio serial ] they would say , ' Here come the <unk> ! ' and I always had an image of engines , of train engines . " 
 Some of the incidents in the book stem from Juster 's own past . In Digitopolis , the Numbers Mine , where <unk> numerals are dug for , recalled one of Juster 's architecture professors at the University of Pennsylvania , who compared numbers and equations to jewels . The Marx Brothers films were a staple for Juster as a child and his father would quote lengthy passages from the movies ; this inspired the unending series of straight @-@ faced puns that fills the book . 
 Growing up in a Jewish @-@ American household where the parents demanded high achievement , Juster was intimately familiar with expectations , though in his case many of his parents ' hopes were centered on his older brother , an academic star . The Terrible Trivium , the well @-@ dressed , polite demon who sets the questers to mindless tasks , was Juster 's way of representing his own tendency to avoid what he should be doing in favor of a more congenial occupation , such as his evasion of the grant project to write The Phantom Tollbooth . Juster drew on Feiffer 's life experiences as well ; the Whether Man 's adage " Expect everything , I always say , and the unexpected never happens " was a favorite of the cartoonist 's mother . 
 Juster had not read Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland when he wrote The Phantom Tollbooth , but the two books , each about a bored child plunged into a world of absurd logic , have repeatedly been compared . According to Daniel Hahn in his 2012 article on the Juster book , " Alice is clearly Milo 's closest literary kin " . Milo 's conversation with the Whether Man , which leaves him no more comprehending than when he came , recalls that of Alice with the Cheshire Cat . The questions of authority ( something omnipresent for a child ) and of justice run through both books ; the Queen of Hearts ' arbitrary justice is echoed , though with less violence , by Officer Shrift . Alice 's sovereigns , representing the authority figures of Victorian childhood life , rule absolutely ( though not necessarily effectively ) ; a child of the post @-@ World War II world , Milo journeys through a more bureaucratic realm . His quest is far more purposeful than the frustrating journey Alice experiences , and the outcome differs as well — Milo restores his kingdom while Alice overturns hers . Carroll leaves us uncertain if Alice has learned anything from her adventures , but Juster makes it clear that Milo has acquired tools he will need to find his way through life . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The Phantom Tollbooth was published in September 1961 . Its competition among new books for the minds and hearts of children included Roald Dahl 's James and the Giant Peach . The Bronze Bow , set in Biblical times , was newly available , and would bring Elizabeth George <unk> her second Newbery Award in three years . Neither publisher nor first @-@ time author expected many sales for The Phantom Tollbooth , but Juster was nevertheless disappointed not to find his work on store shelves . His mother , Minnie , did her part , as her son put it , " terrorizing " bookstore owners into displaying it . 
 Juster says the book was rescued from the remainders table when Emily Maxwell wrote a strong review of it in The New Yorker . Maxwell wrote , " As Pilgrim 's Progress is concerned with the awakening of the <unk> spirit , The Phantom Tollbooth is concerned with the awakening of the lazy mind . " Hers was far from the only positive piece ; children 's author Ann McGovern reviewed it for The New York Times , writing " Norton Juster 's amazing fantasy has something wonderful for anyone old enough to relish the allegorical wisdom of Alice in Wonderland and the pointed whimsy of The Wizard of Oz " . John Crosby wrote for the New York Herald Tribune , " In a world which sometimes seems to have gone mad , it is refreshing to pause and consider for a moment a book for children which contains a character called ' Faintly Macabre , the not @-@ so @-@ wicked Which . ' The name of the book is The Phantom Tollbooth and it was written by a bearded elf named Norton Juster and illustrated by Jules Feiffer , who is the cleverest of the young neurotics " . Dissenting was the Bulletin of the Center for Children 's Books , which in March 1962 deemed the book an " intensive and extensive fantasy , heavily burdened with contrivance and whimsy " . 
 In 1962 , the book was published in Britain . <unk> Hugh @-@ Jones wrote for The Times Literary Supplement , " The Phantom Tollbooth is something every adult seems sure will turn into a modern Alice ... The obvious guess is that the appeal of this sort of writing is directed towards just the sort of adults who derive a perfectly grown @-@ up pleasure from regularly rereading the Alices . As one might expect , it is illustrated by every grown @-@ up 's favourite child @-@ like pictures with the built @-@ in sad sophistication , the work of Jules Feiffer . " Jennifer Bourdillon reviewed it for The Listener , " This is the story of an imaginary journey , a sort of Pilgrim 's Progress of a little boy in his car ... One would hardly have thought from the sound of this that it would have so magnetic an appeal , but the brilliant verbal humour and the weird and wonderful characters ( the <unk> the Watchdog , Faintly Macabre ) make it that rare delight , a book which parents and children can share . " It reached Australia in 1963 ; The Canberra Times ' reviewer , J.E.B. , deemed it memorable , causing readers to quote from it and leaf through its pages again . 
 = = Later history , editions and adaptations = = 
 After publication , Juster sent a copy of the book to the Ford Foundation , with an explanation of how the projected book on cities had transformed into The Phantom Tollbooth . He never heard back from them , and learned years later that they were delighted by the turn of events . With the book having become an unexpected hit , Juster found himself answering letters from young readers , and a few parents . He found that children understood the wordplay at different ages , and heard from the occasional college student as well . Some students wrote a second time after a gap of years " and they 'll talk to me about a whole different book , normally . But now they 've got a lot more of the words right . A lot more of the fun kind of crazy references " . He learned too that readers were capable of more than he had intended , as in the case of the letter sent by the Mathemagician to King Azaz . Composed entirely of numbers , some readers assumed it was a code and set about breaking it , only to appeal to Juster for help when they were not successful . The numbers were not intended to have any meaning , and were used to convey that the Mathemagician 's letter could not have been understood by Azaz or his advisors . 
 As the book became acclaimed as a modern classic , it began to be used in the classroom , and Juster corresponded with some teachers . After the book 's readers attained adulthood , they wrote of its influence on them . Novelist Cathleen Schine recalled , " it was as if someone had turned on the lights . The concepts of irony , of double entendre , of words as play , of the pleasure and inevitability of intellectual absurdity , were suddenly accessible to me . They made sense to me in an extremely personal way . " British fantasy writer Diana Wynne Jones read her copy so often it fell apart : " it didn 't occur to us that it might be about something . It struck us as a little like The Wizard of Oz , only better . " One reader , signing himself " Milo " , wrote to Rolling Stone in 1970 , " If you want to get freaked out of your undernourished head , pick up The Phantom Tollbooth , by Norton Juster . They tell you it 's a kids ' book , but take my word for it , no one who reads it is ever the same . No hype . " 
 The book continued to garner positive reviews and comments . In 1998 , Amanda Foreman wrote for The Sunday Times of London , " I want to shout about The Phantom from the rooftops . I want to stand in Waterloo and press copies into people 's hands . This is a book that should be in every home . ... Whether you are 8 or 88 Juster 's mixture of allegorical wisdom and logical whimsy will take you on a journey of the spirit . The Phantom is a <unk> mundi of our hearts , proving once again that in laughter and simplicity lies the truth of life " . In a 2011 article written for the book 's fiftieth anniversary , Adam Gopnik wrote , " The book is made magical by Juster 's and Feiffer 's gift for transforming abstract philosophical ideas into unforgettable images . " 
 The book has been translated into many foreign languages , including Chinese , Croatian , Japanese , Korean , Russian , Thai , Turkish and three different Spanish editions : one for Spain , one for Latin America , and one for Spanish speakers in the United States . Juster states that he does not know if the wordplay of the original carries through to the translated works . In 1970 , Chuck Jones made it into a musical film of the same name , with Milo 's room in live action , and animation beyond the tollbooth . Juster dislikes the film , describing it as " drivel " . In February 2010 , director Gary Ross began development of a remake of The Phantom Tollbooth , with the first draft of the script written by Alex Tse . 
 In 2011 , The Annotated Phantom Tollbooth was published , which includes sketches and copies of Juster 's handwritten drafts and word lists , Feiffer 's early drawings , and an introduction and annotations by Leonard S. Marcus . A fiftieth anniversary edition was also published , with appreciations by Maurice Sendak , Michael Chabon and Philip Pullman . More than three million copies have been sold of the original book in the U.S. alone . It has been adapted into a small @-@ scale opera with music by Arnold Black , and book by Juster and Sheldon <unk> , produced by Opera Delaware in 1995 . It was then revamped into a musical that had its debut to strong reviews at the Kennedy Center in Washington , D.C. and then made a national tour . 
 The Phantom Tollbooth remains acknowledged as a classic of children 's literature . Based on a 2007 online poll , the U.S. National Education Association named it one of " Teachers ' Top 100 Books for Children " . In 2012 , it was ranked number 21 among all @-@ time children 's novels in a survey published by School Library Journal . 
 Juster feels that his book still has relevance today , although children 's lives have changed since 1961 : 
 When I grew up I still felt like that puzzled kid — disconnected , disinterested and confused . There was no rhyme or reason in his life . My thoughts focused on him , and I began writing about his childhood , which was really mine ... Today 's world of texting and tweeting is quite a different place , but children are still the same as they 've always been . They still get bored and confused , and still struggle to figure out the important questions of life . Well , one thing has changed : As many states eliminate tolls on highways , some children may never encounter a real tollbooth . Luckily there are other routes to the Lands Beyond . And it is possible to seek them , and fun to try . 
 = = Other works cited = = 
 Juster , Norton ; Marcus , Leonard ( 2011 ) . The Annotated Phantom Tollbooth . New York : Knopf . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 375 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Liston , Mary ( Spring 2009 ) . " The Rule of Law Through the Looking Glass " . Law and Literature 21 ( 1 ) : 42 – 77 . ( subscription required ( help ) ) . 
 = = Selected editions = = 
 = The Last of Us : Left Behind = 
 The Last of Us : Left Behind is an action @-@ adventure survival horror video game developed by Naughty Dog and published by Sony Computer Entertainment . It was released for the PlayStation 3 on February 14 , 2014 , as a downloadable expansion pack to The Last of Us ; it was later bundled with The Last of Us Remastered , an updated version of the game released for the PlayStation 4 on July 29 , 2014 , and was released as a standalone expansion pack for both consoles on May 12 , 2015 . Players control Ellie , a young girl who spends time with her friend Riley after her unexpected return , within a post @-@ apocalyptic world . 
 The Last of Us : Left Behind is played from a third @-@ person perspective ; players use firearms , improvised weapons and stealth to defend against hostile humans and zombie @-@ like creatures infected by a mutated strain of the Cordyceps fungus . Stealth combat utilizes a gameplay mechanic called " Listen Mode " that allows players to effectively locate enemies through a heightened sense of hearing and spatial awareness . The game also features a crafting system , allowing players to customize weapons through the use of upgrades . 
 Following its announcement , The Last of Us : Left Behind was highly anticipated due to the critical success of The Last of Us . It was acclaimed by many reviewers , with praise particularly directed at its story , characterization , and depiction of female and LGBT characters . It won several year @-@ end accolades from multiple gaming publications . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Last of Us : Left Behind is similar to the basic gameplay of The Last of Us . As such , it is an action @-@ adventure survival horror game that uses a third @-@ person perspective . The game involves gunfights , melee combat and a cover system . Throughout the game , players control Ellie . An added feature in combat is the ability to focus the attention of the Infected towards human enemies , by throwing objects to distract them . This results in a lower number of enemies to encounter , giving players a tactical advantage . Throughout the game , players encounter locations and activities around the mall , such as a carousel , photo booth , video arcade , mask store and water guns . All of these locations and activities have some level of interactivity , allowing players to use them in different ways ; for example , the photo booth allows players to select different mannerisms in which to pose for a picture , while using the water guns prompts players to soak Riley . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the aftermath of a fight that leaves Joel ( Troy Baker ) severely injured , Ellie ( Ashley Johnson ) searches in an abandoned mall for supplies to heal him . She discovers a medical kit inside a ruined military helicopter . While making her way back to Joel , Ellie is impeded by the Infected and members of a human group ; she fights them , and eventually meets with an unconscious Joel . Ellie treats Joel 's open wound , and takes him away from the mall to find a hideout for the coming Winter . 
 Months earlier ( before Ellie meets Joel ) , Ellie 's friend Riley ( <unk> King ) surprises Ellie at their boarding school , returning unannounced after many weeks . After revealing that she has become a member of the Fireflies — a revolutionary militia group — Riley takes Ellie to a nearby abandoned shopping mall , discovering that the electricity is functioning . As the two girls play around in the mall , Ellie frequently seeks the reason behind Riley bringing her there . Though initially hesitant to answer , Riley reveals that she has been assigned to another group of Fireflies in a different city , and wished to see Ellie again despite being forbidden to . After fighting over this revelation , Ellie eventually tells her that she supports her decision , because it is something that she has wanted for a long time . Before parting , Riley takes Ellie 's <unk> and plugs it into the sound system , encouraging her to dance with her one last time . Although she initially gets into it , Ellie is unable to maintain her pretence , and tearfully begs Riley not to leave . Without hesitation , Riley rips her dog tags off , deciding to choose Ellie instead of the Fireflies . In response , Ellie impulsively kisses her , which Riley returns . Drawn by the noise of their activities , the Infected pursue Ellie and Riley ; the two attempt to escape , but are bitten . They consider suicide , but choose to spend their final hours together . 
 = = Development = = 
 Naughty Dog began developing The Last of Us : Left Behind following the release of The Last of Us in June 2013 , with a team about half the size . Following the decision to create single @-@ player downloadable content for the game , the development team immediately decided that the story would focus on the character of Ellie ; they found that players of The Last of Us were interested to learn about events in Ellie 's life prior to the events of the main game , particularly the events involving Riley Abel , whom Ellie mentioned in The Last of Us . In addition , they found that some players were interested in the events that occurred between the Fall and Winter segments of the main game , in which Ellie cares for an injured Joel . This led to the team deciding to contrast these two events against each other , feeling as though it helps the story 's pacing . Game director Bruce Straley said that the team felt the story justified the development of Left Behind . 
 Left Behind was written to focus on the relationship between Ellie and Riley , and to recount the events that defined their later personalities . Riley was chronologically introduced to Ellie in The Last of Us : American Dreams , a comic book written by creative director Neil Druckmann and artist Faith Erin Hicks . The team used the comic as a reference point when developing the relationship between Ellie and Riley , becoming particularly interested in having the chance to see more of their relationship ; Druckmann felt that they would not have developed Left Behind if American Dreams hadn 't been written . Druckmann felt that the story of Joel and Ellie 's relationship in The Last of Us dealt with survival , loyalty and love , and that Ellie and Riley 's relationship in Left Behind deals with similar themes . Straley felt that the themes involve love , loss and devotion , pondering the extent that one goes to protect those they care about . Ashley Johnson portrayed Ellie in Left Behind , reprising her role from The Last of Us . To portray Riley , the team cast <unk> King ; Johnson has noted that it was interesting to act against someone different , and that King fit the role immediately . King felt intimidated to become part of a large project , and was worried about " fit [ ting ] in " . The team found it interesting to tell the story of Riley , as players of The Last of Us were already aware of the effect that she had on Ellie ; Left Behind sees Riley 's behavior change Ellie , resulting in the latter 's focus to fight in order to save those close to her . The team were also interested in Ellie 's behavior around Riley ; she is perceived as being more playful . In Left Behind , Ellie and Riley share a kiss ; the team explored omitting the kiss from the game , but felt that it was imperative to the story , and that it strengthened the relationship . Though initially he only felt that Ellie viewed Riley as an influence , Druckmann later considered her romantic appeal , and decided to explore the concept . 
 While writing The Last of Us , Druckmann had a general idea of the events that would shape Ellie 's identity ; when conceiving the story direction for Left Behind , he found that these events were suitable . Druckmann felt that omitting the nature of the argument between Ellie and Riley , which took place prior to the events of the game , allowed players to draw their own conclusions . The team found various sections of the game interesting , such as the references to Facebook and Halloween , as the characters are unaware of their meaning . 
 The smaller time frame of development for Left Behind gave the team an opportunity to trial mechanics and ideas that they were unable to test on the main game . With the game 's combat , an added feature was to allow players to focus the attention of the Infected towards human enemies , allowing an easier escape . The gameplay was also more focused on the characters , as opposed to the combat , to allow players to relate to them more . The gameplay sequences were designed to contrast with other moments of Ellie 's life ; for example , the water gun fight with Riley is contrasted to the gunfights with enemies . The team found that creating some gameplay mechanics was a challenge , with even fewer combat scenarios in Left Behind than in The Last of Us . The animation of the masks also presented a challenge , due to the number of joints ; it took various iterations before the final design was implemented . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The Last of Us : Left Behind was released to critical acclaim . Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating in the 0 – 100 range , calculated an average score of 88 out of 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " , based on 69 reviews . GameRankings assigned it an average review score of 90 % based on 40 reviews . Reviewers praised the character development , story and subtext , gameplay and combat , and depiction of female and LGBT characters . 
 Tom Mc Shea of GameSpot found the story insightful , and IGN 's Colin Moriarty named it one of the game 's standout features . Matt Helgeson of Game Informer wrote that the writing " shines " , and that it significantly assisted with the development of the characters . Henry Gilbert of GamesRadar felt that the story was " intermittently intense , tragic , humorous , and even poignant " . Polygon 's Samit Sarkar wrote that Left Behind " serves as a terrific side story " to the main game , but is " even more impressive " when taken on its own merits . Nick Cowen of Computer and Video Games found the story " less satisfying " than The Last of Us due to its lack of new details about Ellie , but declared it " action @-@ packed and enjoyable " nonetheless . 
 The characters — particularly the relationship between Ellie and Riley — received acclaim . Polygon 's Philip Kollar appreciated the game 's ability to portray realistic female characters , noting that they " aren 't easy stereotypes " , while GameSpot 's Mc Shea felt new appreciation for Ellie by seeing her actions around Riley . Helgeson of Game Informer welcomed the addition of Riley , noting that she is " played with the same level of emotional depth and subtlety " as other characters . The Daily Telegraph 's Tim Martin praised the " interplay " between the Ellie and Riley , and Eurogamer 's Stace Harman felt that the game improves the understanding of Joel and Ellie 's relationship . The character performances also received praise , with IGN 's Moriarty and Kotaku 's Kirk Hamilton noting that the game improved as a result . 
 The game received positive reactions in relation to its depiction of LGBT characters . The kiss shared by Ellie and Riley was described by Kotaku 's Hamilton as " video gaming 's latest breakthrough moment " , declaring it " a big deal " . Keza MacDonald of IGN wrote that the kiss was " so beautiful and natural and funny that [ she ] was left dumbstruck " . Edward Smith of International Business Times felt that the kiss was " the first example of intimacy in a videogame that 's meant anything " , recognizing it as " an expression of both burgeoning teen sexuality and of ... friendship " . Amplify , a project of the non @-@ profit advocacy group Advocates for Youth , reported that the kiss had attracted criticism from some players . 
 Many reviewers found the gameplay and combat a refreshing difference from other games . Eurogamer 's Harman commended the game 's ability to link the gameplay to the story , noting that it adds " diversity and dynamism " . Helgeson of Game Informer praised the additional gameplay feature allowing players to force fights among the Infected and human enemies , naming such sequences " engaging " , while Martin of The Daily Telegraph appreciated the game 's ability to contextualize the combat sequences . However , some critics felt negatively about a gameplay sequence occurring late in the game , which requires players to kill a large number of enemies ; GameSpot 's Mc Shea noted that it felt " unnatural " , and IGN 's Moriarty called it " forced " . Electronic Gaming Monthly 's Eric L. Patterson wrote that players will feel " disappointed " if they play the game " more for the gameplay than the story " . 
 The world and environments of the game drew acclaim from many reviewers . Polygon 's Kollar called the game 's locations " beautiful " , while Eurogamer 's Harman wrote that the level design significantly improved the environments . Moriarty of IGN praised the setting within the mall , due to its regularity in " the real , pre @-@ apocalyptic world " . Mc Shea of GameSpot also felt that the game 's focus on exploration allowed the " well @-@ realized environments [ to ] breathe " , and Martin of The Daily Telegraph noted that Ellie 's body size allowed for " quieter and faster " movement throughout the environments . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The Last of Us : Left Behind received multiple nominations and awards from gaming publications . Following its release , GameSpot awarded Left Behind Game of the Month for February 2014 . For the year 2014 , the game was review aggregator GameRankings ' highest @-@ rated PlayStation 3 game , and Metacritic 's third highest @-@ rated PlayStation 3 game . GameSpot nominated the game for Game of the Year , and awarded it PS3 Game of the Year . It also received Most Valuable Add @-@ On Content at the SXSW Gaming Awards , and Best DLC from Hardcore Gamer . The game 's story received awards at the 11th British Academy Video Games Awards , IGN AU Black Beta Select Awards 2014 , and the 67th Writers Guild of America Awards ; the game 's ending also won Best Memorable Moment from IGN Australia . The character of Ellie received Most Valuable Character at the SXSW Gaming Awards , while Ashley Johnson 's performance as the character won an award at the British Academy Video Games Awards . The game was also recognized as being innovative ; it was nominated for the Games for Change award at The Game Awards 2014 , as well as the Matthew Crump Cultural Innovation Award at the SXSW Gaming Awards . 
 = Charles Coghlan ( politician ) = 
 Sir Charles Patrick John Coghlan KCMG ( 24 June 1863 – 28 August 1927 ) was a lawyer and politician who served as Premier ( later Prime Minister ) of Southern Rhodesia from 1 October 1923 to his death . Having led the responsible government movement in the territory during the latter days of Company rule , he was Southern Rhodesia 's first head of government after it became a self @-@ governing colony within the British Empire . 
 Born , raised and educated in South Africa , of Irish descent , Coghlan moved to Bulawayo in 1900 to practise as a lawyer . He was elected to the Southern Rhodesian Legislative Council in 1908 , representing the Western electoral district . Over the next decade he supported the renewal of the British South Africa Company 's royal charter to administer the Rhodesias , and opposed Southern Rhodesia 's amalgamation with either Northern Rhodesia or the Union of South Africa . He led a delegation to London to discuss responsible government in 1921 , and two years later Southern Rhodesia became a self @-@ governing colony . Coghlan sat in the Legislative Assembly as Member for Bulawayo from 1924 to his death . 
 Coghlan was buried near Cecil Rhodes 's grave , at " World 's View " in the Matopos Hills near Bulawayo . 
 = = Early life ( 1863 – 1882 ) = = 
 Charles Patrick John Coghlan was born on 24 June 1863 in King William 's Town , British <unk> ( part of the Cape Colony from 1866 ) . He had three elder brothers . His father , James Coghlan , was from Ireland and a Roman Catholic ; he had arrived in South Africa in 1851 as a private in the British Army , having enlisted to escape the Irish Potato Famine . After fighting in the Eighth Xhosa War of 1850 – 53 with the 2nd ( The Queen 's Royal ) Regiment of Foot , James was stationed in the <unk> mountains ; he settled there with his wife Isabella Mary ( née Maclaren ) , who was originally from Dumbartonshire , Scotland . They moved to King William 's Town after Coghlan 's discharge from the military and the birth of their first child , a boy also called James . The elder James Coghlan would become a town councillor in King William 's Town . 
 Charles Coghlan was educated at home until January 1870 , when he was enrolled at the Jesuit St Aidan 's College in Grahamstown . He was awarded a bursary to the South African College , Cape Town , where he studied law with the intent of becoming a barrister , but these plans were disrupted by his father 's death from dysentery . Short of money , Charles quit university in 1882 and went to work for Paley and Coghlan , the law firm where his eldest brother James was a partner , in Kimberley . 
 = = Kimberley ( 1882 – 1900 ) = = 
 When Coghlan arrived to join his brother in 1882 , Kimberley was a town of 22 @,@ 000 in search of riches , according to John Smith Moffat . That same year , Cecil Rhodes incorporated the De Beers Mining Company and in 1883 was elected to the Cape Parliament as Member for the newly enfranchised Diamond Fields . Kimberley had come into being after diamonds were found on the De Beers brothers ' farm on Colesberg Kopje in 1869 . Initially dubbed " New Rush " , the site was renamed after Lord Kimberley , the British Secretary of State for the Colonies , in 1873 . It was respectively 5 miles ( 8 km ) and 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the Orange Free State and the South African Republic ( or Transvaal ) , the latter of which had just had its independence restored following the First Boer War of 1880 – 81 . 
 Coghlan was admitted to practise as advocate in the courts of West Griqualand on 9 December 1886 . Ten months later , after Paley 's death , Coghlan and his elder brother formed the firm of Coghlan and Coghlan . Kimberley 's position at the epicentre of the diamond trade led the brothers to develop expertise and a formidable reputation for their work in the mining industry . 
 Rhodes outmanoeuvred his main opponent Barney Barnato and brought all the mines under the control of his company , De Beers , in 1888 . On 30 October of that year , through the signing of the Rudd Concession by King Lobengula of Matabeleland , he obtained exclusive mining rights across all of Lobengula 's territories in Matabeleland , Mashonaland and beyond for his soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ formed British South Africa Company ( BSAC ) . Queen Victoria granted the BSAC a royal charter to administer and develop these territories on 29 October 1889 , for an initial period of 25 years . This charter included the right to take possession of , deal with , and dispose of land . On 12 September 1890 Rhodes 's Pioneer Column reached what was to become Salisbury . 
 Coghlan took an active part in public debates . He was loyal to Britain , but held that all parts of the British Empire should be internally self @-@ governing , with each territory supporting the others . Arguing that this should extend to his ancestral home of Ireland , he expressed support for the Home Rule movement there . He disapproved of the policy of the South African Republic government under Paul Kruger of conscripting uitlanders ( mostly British settlers ) for military service while denying them the electoral franchise . 
 Coghlan was elected to the Kimberley town council in 1897 . The following year Colonel Frederick <unk> 's youngest daughter Gertrude Mary <unk> , described as an attractive and sociable woman , arrived to stay at the house Coghlan shared with his sister and mother . Coghlan married Gertrude in <unk> , a southern suburb of Cape Town , on 10 January 1899 . Around this time Coghlan 's friend Percy Ross Frames invited him to join him in Bulawayo , one of the main settlements in Rhodesia , as Matabeleland , Mashonaland and the adjoining areas were now collectively called . Coghlan was receptive to the idea , but was compelled to stay in Kimberley by the outbreak of the Second Boer War in October 1899 . Kimberley was besieged by Boer forces , cut off by rail and telephone , from 14 October until its relief by General John French on 15 February 1900 . 
 = = Bulawayo ( 1900 – 1908 ) = = 
 After a break in Cape Town , Coghlan and his wife left Kimberley for Bulawayo on 30 July 1900 . There , they found the conditions to be very basic and the buildings , ramshackle . Nevertheless , the settlers enjoyed outdoor pursuits , dances and musical and theatrical performances . Coghlan and his wife lodged at the Grand Hotel . In 1901 , not long after they arrived , the <unk> ' first child was born , but the baby lived only three days . A second child , a girl named Petal , was born in November 1902 and lived to old age . 
 Coghlan gained admission to the Rhodesian bar and entered into partnership with Frames to create Frames and Coghlan . Frames left for Johannesburg in late 1902 , citing the poor economic conditions in Southern Rhodesia following the Second Boer War , ending this firm . Coghlan and Allan Ross Welsh formed a new partnership , Coghlan and Welsh . The firm expanded into Salisbury as Coghlan , Welsh and Tancred in 1907 when Bernard Tancred , a South African cricketer and friend of Coghlan 's from Johannesburg , joined . Shortly before the 1908 elections to the Southern Rhodesian Legislative Council , Welsh sent a telegram to Coghlan , who was visiting relatives in <unk> , advising him to stand . Coghlan did so successfully in March 1908 . 
 = = Towards responsible government ( 1908 – 1922 ) = = 
 It was widely expected that Southern Rhodesia would eventually be incorporated into the Union of South Africa as its fifth province . It was generally considered part of South Africa geographically and in colonial terms , part of the British expansion into the region that had begun with the 1820 Settlers . Representatives from Rhodesia had participated in the South African National Convention of 1908 and section 150 of the South Africa Act 1909 made specific provision for the accession of BSAC territories . Coghlan had represented the interests of the Rhodesian people at the Convention , although his contribution was insignificant . The presence of the Rhodesian delegation had been supported - and even secured - by Louis Botha , who was keen to win the trust of the settlers . In November 1909 , at a banquet for Lord Selborne , the departing High Commissioner in Cape Town , Coghlan spoke of the BSAC and the people of Southern Rhodesia working together towards entering the Union , though some settlers wished to enjoy what he called " an artificial stage of responsible government " first . Indeed , the order in council of 1898 had provided Southern Rhodesia with a constitution that resembled that of a Crown Colony with responsible government and the South Africa Act made no changes to the territory 's administrative framework . 
 Botha , who had been asked by the Union 's first Governor @-@ General Viscount Gladstone to form a government , began to make policies and speeches that appeared to Coghlan to be unfair to South Africans of British origin . The Attorney @-@ General J. B. M. Hertzog interpreted the convention in a way that Coghlan considered to be to the detriment of English @-@ speakers . Coghlan came to the conclusion in 1910 that Southern Rhodesia 's joining the Union was much further off than he had previously thought , though he still saw it as the territory 's inevitable destiny , whose timing and terms the local electorate must determine . At this time , he rejected the notion of responsible government — self @-@ government while retaining colonial status — on the grounds that he thought it would take up to two decades to achieve . He was furthermore against the idea of keeping Rhodesia for English @-@ speaking settlers , seeing in that end the same racial discrimination he perceived the Dutch @-@ speakers to be displaying against the British in the Union . 
 In 1911 , the partnership of Coghlan , Welsh and Tancred ended when Tancred died . Around the same time , Coghlan , who was representing a mining company , encountered Ernest Guest in opposition in a case in the court of the Mining Commissioner , who judged in favour of Guest 's client . Coghlan , although irritated by Guest , recognised his ability and offered him a partnership , which he accepted , leading to the formation of Coghlan , Welsh and Guest in Salisbury in 1912 . 
 Article 33 of the BSAC charter of 1889 gave the British government the right to alter or repeal any of the administrative provisions of the charter after 25 years . So it was widely anticipated by all sections of southern African political opinion after 1910 that the BSAC 's administration would come to an end in 1914 . Yet the BSAC remained in place . 
 During the course of the First World War , Rhodesia 's white population was split between the Unionists , for amalgamation into the Union of South Africa , and the Responsible Government Association , for independence . While the RGA was led by Coghlan , the Union Party 's leader was Herbert Longden , another lawyer from Bulawayo . Longden , like the British Government , believed Rhodesia lacked the population and resources for an independent state . For Britain , union with South Africa would mean avoiding having to buy out the BSAC , leaving the burden on South Africa instead . After the war , Coghlan noted that the new Secretary of State , Winston Churchill , was determined to achieve the amalgamation of Southern Rhodesia with South Africa . For its part , the BSAC encouraged the Unionists , expecting that it would get a better price for its assets from South Africa than from Southern Rhodesia . Other major corporations were also pro union , since South Africa would be able to provide cheap labour from the south . These interests controlled the local press and were thus highly influential in the debate . With General Smuts , a skillful statesman , also on the side of the Unionists , it seemed unlikely that Coghlan would dissuade the electorate from entering into the Union . 
 At the 1920 elections , domestic interests aligned against those of the BSAC , rather than unreservedly in favour of responsible government . The run up to the 1922 referendum was long and acrimonious . For the Union were most of the leading citizens of Salisbury and Bulawayo , the British , South African and Rhodesian presses , the BSAC , and the British government . Against them was the Responsible Government Association , founded in 1917 by Ethel <unk> <unk> . Wallis , in his biography of Coghlan , One Man 's Hand , gives him the credit for the victory of the responsible government lobby . Lewis Hastings , reviewing Wallis 's book , recalls campaigning with Coghlan and says that he was the undisputed leader of the movement — highly competent , with a clear vision , principled and sincere . He attributes Coghlan 's resolve to his years in Kimberley , where he experienced the autocratic rule of the De Beers mining company , owned by the BSAC . 
 By 1922 , the display of unity by white farmers against chartered rule at the 1920 elections fell apart . The majority of them , mostly ranchers and tobacco planters , who relied on the southern market , voted for Union . On the other hand , Mashonaland maize growers , wanting to retain full share of the local produce markets , wanted responsible government . The 1922 referendum results were 8 @,@ 774 for responsible government and 5 @,@ 989 for joining South Africa . The role of women in the defeat of the Unionists was substantial , with approximately 75 % of them voting for responsible government , even when their husbands voted for Union . In a letter to the South African Prime Minister Jan Smuts , the Company Administrator Sir Francis Drummond Chaplin cited anti @-@ Afrikaner sentiments , particularly amongst women , as a major factor in the result . 
 = = Premiership ( 1923 – 1927 ) = = 
 Before 1923 , Coghlan had opposed the amalgamation of Northern and Southern Rhodesia , concerned that it would make responsible government harder to attain . One outcome of the Jameson Raid in 1895 – 96 had been to prevent the concentration of the BSAC into one administration . Instead , the High Commission in Bechuanaland was maintained , Northern Rhodesia kept its own administration , and Britain oversaw BSAC affairs more closely . One year into his premiership , Coghlan began to consider territorial expansion and staked a claim to northwestern Bechuanaland . The Dominions Office rejected the claim on the grounds that the Union of South Africa would respond with its own claim for the southern half of the territory . 
 Coghlan directed his attention to Northern Rhodesia . Howard Moffat , his Minister for Mines and Works , had supervised mineral exploration in Northern Rhodesia twenty years earlier and so knew of the rich copper deposits across the Zambezi . However , Moffat 's first public claim on the northern territory , in November 1925 , was on the issue of control of the railway , which would grant control of the central African cattle trade . At the 1926 imperial conference in London , some degree of control over the railway was granted to Southern Rhodesia . There was also the issue of attracting labour for mines and farms from the far north and this gave impetus to Coghlan 's and Moffat 's territorial expansionism in Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland . Coghlan called on Britain 's Colonial Secretary , Leopold Amery to give the North entirely to the South or at least the <unk> right to it but Amery refused this request . During his tour of Southern Rhodesia the following year , Amery appeared to give support to its claims to neighbouring territories . But by 1928 , after Coghlan 's death , both the Dominions Office and the Colonial Office were for maintaining Northern Rhodesia 's territory intact , and favoured its association with the East African dependencies of Kenya , Tanganyika and Uganda . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Charles Coghlan died on Sunday 28 August 1927 , at the age of 64 of a cerebral haemorrhage . A solemn requiem was celebrated for him in Westminster Cathedral . He was initially buried in the Bulawayo cemetery but , following a petition from Bulawayo Town Council , Parliament consented for him to be reburied in the Matopos Hills , alongside Cecil Rhodes and Starr Jameson at a ceremony on 14 August 1930 . 
 John Chancellor , the first Governor of Southern Rhodesia , after his retirement in 1928 spoke of the progress that the country had made in its first years of responsible government under the stewardship of Sir Charles Coghlan . The country 's economy grew , with annual revenue increasing from £ 1 @.@ 3 million to £ 2 million , with exports up from £ 8 @.@ 5 million to £ 12 million , despite setbacks in the cotton and tobacco industries . 
 The building housing Zimbabwe 's Central Intelligence Organization bore the name of Sir Charles . However , in April 1985 , it was changed by the office of Prime Minister Robert Mugabe to that of <unk> , an ancestral spirit invoked by guerrillas opposing the government of Ian Smith . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Coghlan was knighted in 1910 for his services to the 1908 National Convention , which led to the South Africa Act 1909 and ultimately the formation of the Union of South Africa . 
 In 1925 , the rank of KCMG was conferred on him , the warrant having been signed by his friend Earl Buxton , Chancellor of the Order , who had served as Governor @-@ General of South Africa from 1914 to 1920 and was president of the African Society from 1920 to 1933 . 
 = Cyclone Giri = 
 Very Severe Cyclonic Storm Giri ( IMD designation : BOB 04 , JTWC designation 04B , also known as Cyclone Giri ) was a powerful tropical cyclone which caused catastrophic damage in parts of Myanmar in late October 2010 . Originating from an area of low pressure over the Bay of Bengal on October 19 , the system began as a weak depression 250 km ( 155 mi ) south of Myanmar . Over the following few days , the depression underwent explosive intensification , reaching its peak intensity with winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph 3 @-@ minute sustained ) on October 22 . Cyclone Giri made landfall roughly 50 km ( 31 mi ) northwest of Kyaukpyu , shortly after peaking . Within hours of moving onshore , the system had substantially weakened . By the following day , Giri had degenerated into a tropical depression and the final advisory was issued on the storm . 
 Unlike during Cyclone Nargis in 2008 , the Government of Myanmar took steps to ensure the safety of residents in the path of Cyclone Giri . An estimated 53 @,@ 000 are believed to have evacuated Kyaukphyu before the arrival of the storm . Throughout central Myanmar , at least 157 people are known to have been killed by Giri . Thousands of structures near where the storm made landfall were destroyed , leaving more than 70 @,@ 000 people homeless . An international relief effort began shortly after the storm passed to assist survivors of the storm . Initially , local and foreign media initially criticized the Myanmar government for not giving residents enough warning of the storm and later for keeping quiet on the situation . However , the focus later shifted to the loss of life and relief efforts . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Cyclone Giri was first identified by the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) as an area of low pressure over the Bay of Bengal on October 19 . Early on October 20 , the system was classified as a depression and given the name BOB 04 ; and at that time , the system was situated roughly 250 km ( 155 mi ) southwest of Sittwe , Myanmar . Continued development took place as convection consolidated around the system and banding features formed along the western side of the low . As the depression was situated in an area of weak wind shear , further development was anticipated over the following days . Early on October 21 , the IMD upgraded the system to a deep depression and expected it to further intensify into a cyclonic storm within 24 hours . Shortly thereafter , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued their first advisory on the depression , classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 04B . The system rapidly developed throughout the day on October 21 , developing an eye embedded within deep convection . In response to a near @-@ equatorial ridge to the south , the system slowly tracked towards the northeast , placing Myanmar within its path . Around 0600 UTC , the IMD upgraded the system to a cyclonic storm , assigning it the name " Giri " . 
 Tracking over an area of high sea surface temperatures , rapid intensification ensued during the latter half of October 21 . Following the development of very intense convection , with estimated cloud top temperatures between − 70 and − 80 ° C ( − 94 and − 112 ° F ) , Giri strengthened into a severe cyclonic storm , having sustained winds of at least 95 km / h ( 60 mph 3 @-@ minute sustained ) . Around 1800 UTC , the JTWC estimated that the system intensified into a Category 1 equivalent cyclone on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . Early on October 22 , Giri further strengthened into a very severe cyclonic storm as it slowly moved towards the central coast of Myanmar . Throughout the day , the storm underwent explosive deepening , attaining winds of 240 km / h ( 145 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) by 0900 UTC . Satellite imagery depicted a well @-@ defined 46 km ( 29 mi ) wide eye surrounded by deep convection . Accompanied by strong poleward outflow , additional strengthening took place despite Giri 's proximity to land . 
 In the hours before landfall on October 22 , Giri attained its peak intensity with winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph 3 @-@ minute sustained ) and a barometric pressure of 950 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 05 inHg ) . However , the JTWC estimated that Giri was a substantially stronger storm , nearly attaining Category 5 status ; peak winds were believed to have reached 250 km / h ( 155 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) along with an estimated pressure of 922 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 23 inHg ) . Around 1400 UTC , Cyclone Giri made landfall near Hunter 's Bay , roughly 50 km ( 31 mi ) northwest of Kyaukpyu at peak intensity . Upon doing so , Giri became the most intense storm to ever strike Myanmar , surpassing Cyclone Nargis which struck the Irrawaddy Delta region as a low @-@ end Category 4 equivalent in May 2008 . However , according to the International Federation of Red Cross And Red Crescent Societies , substantial weakening had taken place within the hours before landfall ; they estimated that Cyclone Giri struck the coastline with winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) . Once overland , the cyclone rapidly decayed as convection dissipated . Despite having estimated winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph 1 @-@ minute sustained ) , the JTWC issued their final advisory on Giri just six hours after landfall . By early October 23 , only scattered bursts of convection remained around the center of Giri as it degenerated into a tropical depression . The final advisory from the IMD was issued later that day as the system weakened further . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Shortly after Giri was classified a very severe cyclonic storm , warnings were issued for the coastline of Myanmar . Relative to the storm 's intensity , preparations were minimal ; however , this was because forecasters did not anticipate Giri to strengthen as quickly as it did . The greatest fear of the residents was the aftermath of the storm . There were concerns that the cyclone could cause devastation similar to that of Cyclone Nargis in May 2008 which killed an estimated 140 @,@ 000 people in the Irrawaddy Delta . The chief of the Myanmar Climate Change Watch , a branch within the Myanmar Meteorology and Hydrology Department , urged people to move to higher grounds and into sturdy buildings as a storm surge up to 3 @.@ 6 m ( 12 ft ) was anticipated . Warnings of the storm were constantly broadcast through television , radio and newspapers . In Sittwe , the capital of Rakhine State , authorities used loudspeakers to warn residents about Cyclone Giri . According to the military junta , an estimated 53 @,@ 000 are believed to have evacuated Kyaukphyu before the arrival of the storm . 
 Even though the storm wasn 't expected to hit Bangladesh , the Bangladesh Meteorological Department issued storm signal five , " danger level " , at ports of Cox 's Bazar and Chittagong . Ships and vessels were also asked to return to shore quickly . On October 23 , the warning signals were lowered as the threat from Giri diminished . 
 = = Impact = = 
 According to local media , Cyclone Giri brought a storm surge up to 3 @.@ 7 m ( 12 ft ) , along with waves up to 8 m ( 26 ft ) and winds in excess of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) . In Kyaukphyu , much of the city was left more than 1 @.@ 2 m ( 3 @.@ 9 ft ) under water by the storm . Residents stated that most of Kyaukphyu was destroyed by Giri , with nearly every tree and lamppost felled and all structures damaged or destroyed . Later reports confirmed that roughly 70 % of the city had been destroyed by Giri . In the <unk> <unk> ward , an entire village was flattened by the storm as roughly 1 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed . Near the <unk> Pagoda in Kyaukphyu , nearly 100 homes were completely destroyed . The local Red Cross office in the city was also destroyed after a large tree fell on it due to high winds . Myebon Township was the hardest @-@ hit area in the country : several villages were completely destroyed by the storm and many others were severely damaged . According to the United Nations , roughly 15 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed by the storm throughout Rakhine State . 
 In the <unk> Township , flood waters up to 4 @.@ 6 m ( 15 ft ) deep inundated 20 villages after overflow from a dam was released without warning . Of the few reports coming from the region , there were indications of fatalities in outlying villages . Most of the livestock in the area perished as there was no time to bring them to higher ground safely . The overall timing of the cyclone 's landfall was also devastating for the region . It came at the only harvest of the year for Rakhine State . According to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization , 16 @,@ 187 hectares ( 40 @,@ 000 acres ) of rice paddies were destroyed and another 40 @,@ 468 hectares ( 100 @,@ 000 acres ) were damaged . 
 Within a day of Giri striking Myanmar , three people were reported to have been killed by the storm and tens of thousands of residents were believed to have been left homeless . By October 25 , officials in Myanmar stated that the death toll had risen to 50 and at least 30 people in the <unk> Wan Village were missing . Press reports stated that " The situation here is alarming , " as more bodies were discovered . Offshore , more than 100 fishermen from Myanmar and Bangladesh were reported missing after 21 ships were caught in rough seas produced by the cyclone . By October 29 , at least 94 people were confirmed to have been killed by Giri . Of these fatalities , 84 were in Myebon Township ( <unk> Bon ) and 10 in Pauktaw Township . However , according to local relief groups , the death toll had risen over 100 . 
 By November 2 , 157 fatalities had been confirmed as a result of Cyclone Giri . Of these fatalities , 138 were in Myebon Township , 11 in Pauktaw Township , 5 in <unk> Township and 3 in Kyaukpyu Township . According to officials in Kyaukpyu Township , damage from the storm amounted to 2 @.@ 34 billion kyat ( US $ 359 million ) . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately following the storm , urgent requests for food and clean water were made by residents in the hardest hit areas . By the afternoon of October 23 , the Red Cross began deploying relief supplies to the affected region ; 300 tents and 150 bags of rice were planned to be distributed to Kyaukphyu where at least 5 @,@ 000 people were left homeless . According to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( OCHA ) , a total of 176 @,@ 823 people were affected by the storm and 70 @,@ 795 were left homeless . By October 30 , the number affected and homeless had risen to 1 @.@ 1 million and roughly 100 @,@ 000 respectively . Red Cross officials also reported that an estimated 60 @,@ 000 people were in need of assistance throughout Myanmar . Later that day , a relief charity was opened in Rangoon to aid victims of the storm ; in short order , the charity had received donations of 10 million kyat ( $ 10 @,@ 000 USD ) . By October 25 , temporary shelter camps set up by relief agencies housed an estimated 5 @,@ 000 people . 
 By October 26 , the Government of the Union of Myanmar had begun distributing 60 @,@ 000 zinc roof sheets and the Ministry of Forestry provided 200 tonnes ( 220 tons ) of timber . Through the end of October , six non @-@ governmental organizations in Myanmar planned to distribute emergency food supplies , such rice , oil , salt and pulses , to 5 @,@ 000 residents in Kyaukpyu and Myebon . Health supplies were also being distributed at relief camps by UNICEF in the hardest @-@ hit areas . About 500 family kits containing non @-@ food items , such as tarpaulins and mosquito nets , had been distributed by the Myanmar Red Cross Society and another 1 @,@ 200 were being sent to the area . By the start of November , the government of Myanmar requested medial aid from the United Nations as a cholera outbreak began to unfold . Additional post @-@ storm diseases such as diarrhoea , dysentery , eye infections and skin diseases became prevalent as well . According to locals , at least six people died as a result of cholera . At least 200 people were infected with dysentery and four were killed by the disease in the towns of Kyaukphyu , <unk> and Myebon . The cause of the outbreak was linked to a lack of clean water . 
 = = = International assistance = = = 
 On October 26 , United States Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stated that the country would provide emergency assistance and aid to Myanmar . Roughly a week after the passage of Cyclone Giri , the Government of Australia pledged about US $ 200 @,@ 000 to victims of the storm . The governments of Britain and Japan also pledged to donate US $ 700 @,@ 000 and US $ 500 @,@ 000 respectively to Myanmar . The World Food Programme sent 900 tonnes ( 992 tons ) of rice with another 300 tonnes ( 330 tons ) on the way ; stocks of rice in Kyaukpyu itself had reportedly been exhausted . By late @-@ November , the World Food Programme had allocated US $ 2 @.@ 8 million in relief funds . Roughly 1 @,@ 500 households in Kyaukpyu township were being cared for by Save the Children . Through the United Nations , organizations pledged to provide a total of US $ 54 million in aid . In late @-@ November , the United States provided an additional US $ 3 million in relief funds . 
 = = = Criticism of the Junta = = = 
 International and local media criticized the military government for inadequate warnings prior to Giri 's landfall in the country . However , the junta claims to have informed the public appropriately . Little assistance had reached thousands of survivors days after the storm 's passage , fueling anger from local media sources . Government relief slowly reached the area ; however , workers only cleared debris left by the storm and only encouraged residents to rebuild by giving them the supplies needed to do so . Further criticism was made about the government withholding information on the loss of life and scale of damage . Requests were also made to postpone a national election for residents in Arakan State ; however , no response was given and the elections were still planned to be held on November 7 . 
 Additional criticism continued even a week after the storm , especially over the scale of the disaster . The government claimed that only 27 people had been killed by Giri while numerous local and international agencies stated significantly higher totals . They were also blamed for downplaying the amount of damage , resulting in slower distribution of aid to areas in desperate need . Two weeks after Giri struck Myanmar , little attention was given to the ongoing disaster by the Junta . The Myanmar government continued to keep other countries out of the area and prevent them from knowing what was going on in the hardest hit areas . Thousands of survivors continued to suffer due to the insufficient relief making it into the region . On November 8 , local media discovered that the Junta was threatening to sever aid to the region if residents did not vote for them in the national election . According to <unk> , the opposing party won landslide victories in numerous townships ; however , in the cyclone affected areas , the Junta had complete victories . 
 = The Notorious Byrd Brothers = 
 The Notorious Byrd Brothers is the fifth album by the American rock band The Byrds and was released in January 1968 on Columbia Records ( see 1968 in music ) . Musically , the album represents the pinnacle of The Byrds ' psychedelic experimentation , with the band blending together elements of folk rock , psychedelic rock , country music , electronic music , baroque pop and jazz on many of the songs . Of these disparate styles , the subtle country and western influences evident on a number of tracks pointed towards the full @-@ blown country rock direction that the band would pursue on their next album . In addition , The Notorious Byrd Brothers saw the band and record producer Gary Usher making extensive use of a number of studio effects and production techniques , including phasing , flanging , and spatial panning . The Byrds also introduced the sound of the pedal steel guitar and the Moog modular synthesizer into their music for the first time on the album , making it one of the first LP releases on which the Moog appears . 
 Recording sessions for the album took place throughout the latter half of 1967 and were fraught with tension , resulting in the loss of two members of the band . Rhythm guitarist David Crosby was fired in October 1967 and drummer Michael Clarke left the band midway through recording , returning briefly before finally being dismissed after completion of the album . Additionally , original band member Gene Clark , who had left the group in early 1966 , rejoined for three weeks during the making of the album , before leaving again . Author Ric Menck has noted that in spite of these changes in personnel and the conflict surrounding its creation , The Notorious Byrd Brothers is the band 's most cohesive and ethereal @-@ sounding album statement . 
 Upon its release , the album reached number 47 on the Billboard Top LPs chart and number 12 on the UK Album Chart . A cover of the Gerry Goffin and Carole King song " Goin ' Back " was released in October 1967 as the lead single from the album to mild chart success . Although The Notorious Byrd Brothers was critically praised at the time of its release , it was only moderately successful commercially , particularly in the United States . However , the album is today widely considered to be one of The Byrds ' best LP releases , as well as their most experimental and progressive . 
 = = Background = = 
 The recording of The Notorious Byrd Brothers , during the latter half of 1967 , was marked by severe internal dissolution and acrimony . The Byrds began the recording sessions as a four @-@ piece band , consisting of Roger McGuinn , David Crosby , Chris Hillman , and Michael Clarke , the same line @-@ up that had recorded their two previous albums . By the time of the album 's release , however , only McGuinn and Hillman remained in the group . The first line @-@ up change occurred when drummer Michael Clarke quit the group over disputes with Crosby and the other band members over his playing ability and his apparent dissatisfaction with the material the three songwriting members of the band were providing . He was replaced temporarily by noted session drummers Jim Gordon and Hal Blaine . David Crosby was then fired by McGuinn and Hillman and replaced by a former member of The Byrds , Gene Clark , who stayed on board for just three weeks before leaving again . Prior to Gene Clark rejoining the band , Michael Clarke had also returned from his self @-@ imposed exile , only to be informed by McGuinn and Hillman that he was once again an ex @-@ Byrd after the album was completed . Amid so many changes in band personnel , McGuinn and Hillman needed to rely upon outside musicians to complete the album . Among these hired musicians was Clarence White , who had also played on the group 's previous LP . His contributions to this and subsequent Byrds ' albums eventually led to his being hired as a full @-@ time member of The Byrds as part of the latter @-@ day line @-@ up of the band . 
 = = = David Crosby 's departure = = = 
 David Crosby was fired by McGuinn and Hillman in October 1967 , as a result of friction arising from , among other things , Crosby 's displeasure at the band 's wish to record the Goffin – King composition " Goin ' Back " . Crosby felt that recording the song was a step backwards artistically , especially when the band contained three active songwriters . Another factor that contributed to Crosby 's dismissal was his controversial song " Triad " , a risqué composition about a ménage à trois that was in direct competition with " Goin ' Back " for a place on the album . He eventually gave the tune to Jefferson Airplane , who included a version of the song on their 1968 album , Crown of Creation . Although The Byrds did record " Triad " , the song 's daring subject matter compelled McGuinn and Hillman to prevent it from being released at the time . The track eventually surfaced on the band 's 1987 archival compilation album , Never Before , and was later added to The Notorious Byrd Brothers as a bonus track on the 1997 Columbia / Legacy reissue . 
 Crosby had also annoyed the other members of The Byrds during their performance at the Monterey Pop Festival when he gave lengthy in @-@ between @-@ song speeches on a number of controversial subjects , including the JFK assassination and the benefits of giving LSD to " all the statesmen and politicians in the world . " He further irritated his bandmates at Monterey by performing with rival group Buffalo Springfield , filling in for ex @-@ member Neil Young . His stock within the band deteriorated still further following the commercial failure of his song " Lady Friend " , when it was released as the A @-@ side of a Byrds ' single in July 1967 . His absence from many of the recording sessions for The Notorious Byrd Brothers represented the final straw for McGuinn and Hillman , and Crosby would soon find himself an ex @-@ Byrd , with a handsome severance package and time to associate with his new musical partner , Stephen Stills . It has been suggested that the horse on the cover of the album was unkindly intended to represent Crosby , although this has been denied by both McGuinn and Hillman . 
 Much to Crosby 's chagrin , McGuinn and Hillman reworked his unfinished song " Draft Morning " following his departure and included it in the final running order for the album , awarding themselves a co @-@ writing credit in the process . In the end , Crosby ended up playing on about half of The Notorious Byrd Brothers , appearing on his own three songs , plus " Change Is Now " and " Old John Robertson " . Crosby also appears on several of the bonus tracks included on the 1997 reissue , including " Triad " , " Universal Mind Decoder " and an early version of " Goin ' Back " . 
 = = = Gene Clark 's return = = = 
 Following Crosby 's departure , Gene Clark was asked to rejoin the band . Clark had originally left The Byrds in early 1966 due to his fear of flying and his tendency towards anxiety and paranoia . His debut solo album ( co @-@ produced by The Byrds ' then current producer , Gary Usher , with both Clarke and Hillman playing on it ) had been a critical success but a commercial failure and Clark was currently inactive . Gene Clark rejoined The Byrds in October 1967 for three weeks , during which time he and the band performed on The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour television program , lip @-@ syncing " Goin ' Back " and " Mr. Spaceman " . The Byrds also played several live dates with Clark during a tour of the Midwest . Following the final concert of the tour , Clark 's fear of flying again became a problem when it prevented him from taking a flight to New York with his bandmates and as a result , he left the band soon after . 
 It has been debated by biographers and band historians just how involved Clark was in the recording of The Notorious Byrd Brothers . Clark himself claimed during a 1988 interview for radio station <unk> 97 that he was involved in the recording of " Goin ' Back " and some other songs from the same period , although he didn 't specify what his contributions might have been . There is also studio documentation and eyewitness accounts to suggest that Clark contributed backing vocals to " Goin ' Back " and " Space Odyssey " . One of those eyewitnesses , John Noreen of the L.A. folk rock band The Rose Garden , has stated in an interview that he clearly remembers being at Columbia Recording Studios during sessions for the album and seeing Clark record his backing vocals . This has been corroborated by The Rose Garden 's drummer , Bruce <unk> , who has claimed that Clark 's voice can be heard most clearly on the mono mix of " Goin ' Back " that was released as a single . However , if Clark is present on either " Space Odyssey " or " Goin ' Back " , his contributions are not obvious and must have been buried very low in the mix by producer Gary Usher . The Byrds ' lead guitarist , Roger McGuinn , cannot remember whether Clark contributed to the album or not , but he has admitted that it is possible . McGuinn has , however , gone on record as stating that he wrote the song " Get to You " with Clark , and that the writing credits on the album are mistaken ; they should have read McGuinn / Clark , rather than McGuinn / Hillman . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Despite its troubled genesis , the album contains some of the band 's most gentle and ethereal music , as well as some of its most progressive and experimental . Lyrically , it attempted to deal with many contemporary themes such as peace , ecology , freedom , drug use , alienation and mankind 's place in the universe . The album , as a whole , represented the apex of the McGuinn – Crosby – Hillman songwriting partnership , and took the musical experimentation of the original Byrds to its farthest logical extreme , mixing folk rock , country , psychedelia and jazz , often within a single song . The band and producer Gary Usher also used a number of innovative studio @-@ based production techniques on the album , in particular making heavy use of phasing , spatial panning , and rotary speaker effects . 
 The band also began experimenting with the Moog modular synthesizer on a number of tracks , making The Notorious Byrd Brothers one of the very first rock albums to feature the instrument . McGuinn had first discovered the Moog during the Monterey Pop Festival , where the instrument 's inventor , Robert Moog , had set up a booth to demonstrate his new creation to the musicians who were performing at the festival . Being something of an electronics buff , McGuinn was eager to experiment with the synthesizer in the recording studio , although reportedly , Hillman failed to share his enthusiasm for the instrument . Although McGuinn and Usher played the Moog parts on the song " Space Odyssey " themselves , they ceded the instrument 's other appearances on the album to electronic music pioneer and session musician Paul Beaver . 
 The album also featured the pedal steel guitar playing of session musician Red Rhodes , which represented the first use of the instrument on a Byrds ' recording . This use of pedal steel , along with Clarence White 's countrified guitar playing , foreshadowed the country rock direction that the band would explore on their next album , Sweetheart of the Rodeo . 
 = = = The songs = = = 
 The album 's opening track , " Artificial Energy " , features a prominent horn section and as such , can be seen as a stylistic relative of " Lady Friend " and " So You Want to Be a Rock ' n ' Roll Star " , two earlier Byrds ' songs that made use of brass . The song deals with the dark side of amphetamine use and it was Chris Hillman who initially suggested that the band should " write a song about speed " . The title was suggested by drummer Michael Clarke , and his input in the creation of the song was sufficient to afford him a rare writing credit . Although the song 's lyrics initially seem to be extolling the virtues of amphetamines , the tale turns darker in the final verse when it becomes apparent that the drug taker has been imprisoned for murdering a homosexual man , as evidenced by the song 's final couplet : " I 'm coming down off amphetamine / And I 'm in jail ' cause I killed a queen . " Although the press had accused The Byrds of writing songs about drugs in the past , specifically with " Eight Miles High " and " 5D ( Fifth Dimension ) " , when the band finally did record a song unequivocally dealing with drugs it was largely ignored by journalists . 
 " Artificial Energy " is followed on the album by the poignant and nostalgic Goffin – King song " Goin ' Back " . With its chiming 12 @-@ string Rickenbacker guitar and polished harmony singing , band biographer Johnny Rogan has noted that the song provides a sharp contrast to the negativity and violence of the opening track . The song 's lyrics describe an attempt on the part of the singer to reject the cynicism that comes with being an adult in favor of the innocence of childhood . Thematically , the song recalled the title of The Byrds ' previous album , Younger Than Yesterday , and the understated pedal steel guitar playing of Red Rhodes gives the track a subtle country flavor . 
 A second Goffin – King composition , " Wasn 't Born to Follow " , also displays country and western influences , albeit filtered through the band 's psychedelic and garage rock tendencies . The song 's country leanings are underscored by the criss @-@ crossing musical dialogue between the electric guitar and pedal steel . The rural ambiance is further heightened by the striking imagery of the lyrics which outline the need for escape and independence : a subject perfectly in keeping with the hippie ethos of the day . 
 Another song on the album that deals with the need to escape the confines of society is David Crosby 's " Dolphin 's Smile " . The song was an early example of Crosby 's penchant for using nautical imagery in his songs , a thematic trait he would utilize in future compositions , including " Wooden Ships " and " The Lee Shore " . The theme of unfettered idyllic bliss is further explored in the Chris Hillman @-@ penned " Natural Harmony " . Like " Goin ' Back " , " Natural Harmony " conveys a sense of longing for the innocence of youth , albeit filtered through the awareness @-@ raising properties of psychedelic drugs . It has been suggested by some commentators that the song exhibits the strong influence of David Crosby 's writing style , with its laid @-@ back , jazzy feel and dreamy , high tenor vocal part . 
 The McGuinn and Hillman composition " Change Is Now " , with its lyrics advising the listener to live life to the full , represents a celebration of the philosophy of carpe diem ( popularly translated as " seize the day " ) . Within this context , the song 's lyrics explored a number of other themes , including epiphenomenalism , communalism and human ecology . The quasi @-@ philosophical nature of the song prompted McGuinn to flippantly describe it in a 1969 interview as " another one of those guru @-@ spiritual @-@ mystic songs that no @-@ one understood . " An early instrumental recording of the song , listed under its original working title of " Universal Mind Decoder " , was included as a bonus track on the 1997 reissue of The Notorious Byrd Brothers . " Change Is Now " is notable for being the only song on the album to feature both David Crosby and future Byrd Clarence White together on the same track . 
 " Draft Morning " is a song about the horrors of the Vietnam War as well as a protest against the conscription of men into the military during the conflict . The song was initially written by David Crosby but he was fired from The Byrds shortly after he had introduced it to the rest of the band . However , work had already begun on the song 's instrumental backing track by the time of Crosby 's departure . Controversially , McGuinn and Hillman decided to continue working on the song , despite its author no longer being a member of the band . Having only heard the song 's lyrics in their original incarnation a few times , McGuinn and Hillman couldn 't remember all of the words when they came to record the vocals and so decided to rewrite the song with their own lyrical additions , giving themselves a co @-@ writing credit in the process . This angered Crosby considerably , since he felt , with some justification , that McGuinn and Hillman had stolen his song . Despite its troubled evolution , " Draft Morning " is often considered one of David Crosby 's best songs from his tenure with The Byrds . Lyrically , it follows a newly recruited soldier from the morning of his induction into the military through to his experiences of combat and as such , illustrates the predicament faced by many young American men during the 1960s . The song also makes extensive use of battlefield sound effects , provided for the band by the Los Angeles comedy troupe The Firesign Theatre . 
 Another of Crosby 's songwriting contributions to the album , " Tribal Gathering " , was , for many years , assumed to have been inspired by the Human Be @-@ In : A Gathering Of Tribes , a counter @-@ culture happening held in San Francisco 's Golden Gate Park on January 12 , 1967 . However , in recent years , Crosby has revealed that the song was actually inspired by another hippie gathering held at Elysian Park near Los Angeles on March 26 , 1967 . Played in a jazzy , 5 / 4 time signature , the song 's vocal arrangement was greatly influenced by the music of The Four Freshmen , a vocal group that Crosby had admired as a youngster . 
 Another song on the album that uses a 5 / 4 time signature , albeit with occasional shifts into 3 / 4 time , is the Roger McGuinn and Gene Clark composition " Get to You " . The song recounts a plane trip to London , England just prior to the advent of autumn but the identity of the enigmatic " you " mentioned in the song 's title is not specified in the lyrics and thus , can be interpreted as either a waiting lover or as the city of London itself . Although Clark helped to co @-@ write the song , he had left The Byrds by the time it was recorded and therefore does not appear on the track . 
 " Old John Robertson " , which had already been issued some six months earlier as the B @-@ side of the " Lady Friend " single , was another country @-@ tinged song that looked forward to the band 's future country rock experimentation . The song was inspired by a retired film director who lived in the small town near San Diego where Chris Hillman grew up . John S. Robertson was something of an eccentric figure around the town , regularly wearing a Stetson hat and sporting a white handlebar moustache , which gave him the appearance of a character out of the old American West . In the song , Hillman recalls the children of the town and their cruel laughter at this colorful figure , as well as the combination of awe and fear that he elicited in the townsfolk . During the recording of the song , Crosby switched instruments with Hillman to play bass instead of his usual rhythm guitar . The track also makes liberal use of the studio effects known as phasing and flanging , particularly during the song 's orchestral middle section and subsequent verse . The version of " Old John Robertson " found on the B @-@ side of the " Lady Friend " single is a substantially different mix from the version that appears on The Notorious Byrd Brothers album . 
 The final track on the album , " Space Odyssey " , is a musical retelling of Arthur C. Clarke 's short story " The Sentinel " , which was also the inspiration for Stanley Kubrick 's 1968 film , 2001 : A Space Odyssey . The song makes extensive use of the Moog modular synthesizer and features a droning , dirge @-@ like melody reminiscent of a sea shanty . Since " Space Odyssey " predates the release of 2001 : A Space Odyssey , McGuinn and his co @-@ writer , Robert J. Hippard , composed lyrics that referred to a pyramid being found on the Moon , as was the case in " The Sentinel " . However , the pyramid was replaced by a rectangular monolith in both the film and the accompanying novelization . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The Notorious Byrd Brothers was released on January 15 , 1968 in the United States ( catalogue item CL <unk> in mono , CS <unk> in stereo ) and on April 12 , 1968 in the UK ( catalogue item <unk> in mono , S <unk> in stereo ) . However , there is some evidence to suggest that the U.S. release date may have been brought forward to January 3 , 1968 . Regardless , the album 's appearance during the first month of 1968 surprised many fans of the band , who had been led to believe by contemporary press reports that the album was still in the planning stages . It peaked at number 47 on the Billboard Top LPs chart , during a chart stay of 19 weeks , but fared better in the United Kingdom where it reached number 12 , spending a total of 11 weeks on the UK chart . The album 's front cover photograph was taken by Guy Webster , who had also been responsible for the cover of The Byrds ' Turn ! Turn ! Turn ! album . The " Goin ' Back " single was released ahead of the album on October 20 , 1967 and reached number 89 on the Billboard Hot 100 but failed to chart in the UK . The album is notable for being the last Byrds LP to be commercially issued in mono in the United States , although subsequent albums continued to be released in both mono and stereo variations overseas . 
 The album was almost universally well received by the music press upon release , with Jon Landau in the newly launched Rolling Stone magazine noting that " When The Byrds get it together on record they are consistently brilliant . " Landau went on to praise The Byrds ' musical eclecticism , before stating " Their music is possessed by a never @-@ ending circularity and a rich , child @-@ like quality . It has a timelessness to it , not in the sense that you think their music will always be valid , but in the sense that it is capable of forcing you to suspend consciousness of time altogether . " Crawdaddy ! magazine was also enthusiastic in its praise of the album , with Sandy Pearlman describing it as " enchantingly beautiful " . Pete Johnson , in his review for the Los Angeles Times , summed up the album as " 11 good songs spiked with electronic music , strings , brass , natural and supernatural voices , and the familiar thick texture of McGuinn 's guitar playing . " 
 In a contemporary review published in Esquire magazine , music critic Robert Christgau described The Notorious Byrd Brothers as " simply the best album the Byrds have ever recorded . " Christgau went on to rank it with other releases of the era by Love ( Forever Changes ) and The Beach Boys ( Wild Honey ) , remarking " [ i ] t 's hard to believe that so much good can come out of one place [ i.e. Los Angeles ] . " In the UK , Record Mirror gave the album a rare five @-@ star rating , commenting " Hard though it was for The Byrds to follow @-@ up their near @-@ perfect Younger Than Yesterday album , they 've done it with this fantastic disc . " The Melody Maker newspaper was also complimentary about the album , describing it as " A beautiful selection , representing US pop at its finest . " Beat Instrumental concluded their review by stating " It 's true to say that The Byrds are one of the two best groups in the world . Nobody can say any different with the proof of this album . " 
 In 1997 , Rolling Stone senior editor David Fricke described the album as The Byrds ' " finest hour " and " the work of a great rock & roll band , in every special sense of the word " . On his official website , Robert Christgau again commented on the album , declaring that The Notorious Byrd Brothers ( along with its follow @-@ up , Sweetheart of the Rodeo ) is " [ one ] of the most convincing arguments for artistic freedom ever to come out of American rock " . Parke Puterbaugh , writing for the Rolling Stone website in 1999 , noted the presence of " burbling Moog synthesizers and purring steel guitars " on the album , which he ultimately described as " a brilliant window onto an unforgettable place and time " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Over the years , The Notorious Byrd Brothers has gained in reputation and is often considered the group 's best work , while the contentious incidents surrounding its making have been largely forgotten . The album managed to capture the band at the height of their creative powers , as they pushed ahead lyrically , musically and technically into new sonic territory . Band biographer Johnny Rogan has noted that The Byrds ' greatest accomplishment on the album was in creating a seamless mood piece from a variety of different sources , bound together by innovative studio experimentation . Although the album is widely regarded as the band 's most experimental , its running time of a little under 29 minutes also makes it their briefest . 
 The album was voted the fourth @-@ best album ever in a 1971 ZigZag magazine readers ' poll and the 1977 edition of the Critic 's Choice : Top 200 Albums book ranked it at number 154 in a list of the " Greatest Rock Albums of All @-@ Time " . A subsequent edition of the book , published in 1988 , ranked the album at number 75 . In 1995 , Mojo magazine placed the album at number 36 in their list of " The 100 Greatest Albums Ever Made " . In 2003 , the album was ranked at number 171 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of " The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " and number 32 on the NME 's list of the " 100 Best Albums " . In 2004 , Q magazine included the album in its list of " The Music that Changed the World " . 
 The Notorious Byrd Brothers was remastered at 20 @-@ bit resolution as part of the Columbia / Legacy Byrds series . It was reissued in an expanded form on March 25 , 1997 , with six bonus tracks , including Crosby 's controversial ballad " Triad " , the Indian @-@ influenced " Moog Raga " , and an instrumental backing track for the outtake " Bound to Fall " . The final track on the CD extends to include a hidden track featuring a radio advertisement by producer Gary Usher for the album , as well as a recording of an in @-@ studio altercation between the band members . 
 Following the release of the album , The Byrds ' recording of " Wasn 't Born to Follow " was used in the 1969 film Easy Rider and included on the accompanying Easy Rider soundtrack album . In addition , the song " Change Is Now " has been covered by the progressive bluegrass band The Dixie Bee @-@ Liners , on the tribute album Timeless Flyte : A Tribute to The Byrds — Full Circle , and by rock band Giant Sand , on Time Between – A Tribute to The Byrds . Ric Menck , best known for being a member of the band Velvet Crush , has written a book about the album for Continuum Publishing 's 33 ⅓ series . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Side 1 = = = 
 " Artificial Energy " ( Roger McGuinn , Chris Hillman , Michael Clarke ) – 2 : 18 
 " Goin ' Back " ( Carole King , Gerry Goffin ) – 3 : 26 
 " Natural Harmony " ( Chris Hillman ) – 2 : 11 
 " Draft Morning " ( David Crosby , Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) – 2 : 42 
 " Wasn 't Born to Follow " ( Carole King , Gerry Goffin ) – 2 : 04 
 " Get to You " ( Gene Clark , Roger McGuinn ) – 2 : 39 
 NOTE : The album erroneously credits " Get to You " to Chris Hillman and Roger McGuinn . 
 = = = Side 2 = = = 
 " Change Is Now " ( Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) – 3 : 21 
 " Old John Robertson " ( Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) – 1 : 49 
 " Tribal Gathering " ( David Crosby , Chris Hillman ) – 2 : 03 
 " Dolphin 's Smile " ( David Crosby , Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) – 2 : 00 
 " Space Odyssey " ( Roger McGuinn , Robert J. Hippard ) – 3 : 52 
 = = = 1997 CD reissue bonus tracks = = = 
 " Moog Raga " [ Instrumental ] ( Roger McGuinn ) – 3 : 24 
 " Bound to Fall " [ Instrumental ] ( Mike Brewer , Tom Mastin ) – 2 : 08 
 " Triad " ( David Crosby ) – 3 : 29 
 " Goin ' Back " [ Version One ] ( Carole King , Gerry Goffin ) – 3 : 55 
 " Draft Morning " [ Alternate End ] ( David Crosby , Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) – 2 : 55 
 " Universal Mind Decoder " [ Instrumental ] ( Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) – 13 : 45 
 NOTE : this song ends at 3 : 32 ; at 4 : 32 begins " The Notorious Byrd Brothers Radio Advertisement " which ends at 5 : 41 ; at 6 : 42 begins " Dolphin 's Smile " [ In @-@ studio Argument ] ( David Crosby , Chris Hillman , Roger McGuinn ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 <unk> : 
 Due to his departure from the group , David Crosby appears only on tracks 4 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 ( plus bonus tracks 13 – 17 ) . 
 Sources for this section are as follows : 
 The Byrds 
 Roger McGuinn – lead guitar , Moog synthesizer , vocals 
 David Crosby – rhythm guitar , electric bass ( on " Old John Robertson " ) , vocals 
 Chris Hillman – electric bass , guitar ( on " Old John Robertson " ) , mandolin ( on " Draft Morning " ) , vocals 
 Michael Clarke – drums on tracks 1 , 4 , 8 , 9 , 10 ( plus bonus tracks 16 – 17 ) 
 Gene Clark – possible backing vocal on tracks 2 and 11 
 Additional Personnel 
 = = Release history = = 
 = = = Single release = = = 
 " Goin ' Back " b / w " Change Is Now " ( Columbia <unk> ) October 20 , 1967 ( US number 89 ) 
 = Action off Lofoten = 
 The Action off Lofoten was a naval battle fought between the German Kriegsmarine and the British Royal Navy off the southern coast of the Lofoten Islands , Norway during World War II . A German squadron under Vizeadmiral Günther Lütjens consisting of the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau met and engaged a British squadron under Admiral Sir William Whitworth consisting of the battlecruiser HMS Renown and 9 destroyers . After a short engagement , Gneisenau suffered moderate damage and the Germans withdrew . 
 = = Background = = 
 The German invasion of Norway , Operation Weserübung , began on 9 April 1940 . In order to prevent any disruption of the invasion by the British , the Kriegsmarine had previously dispatched a force under Vice Admiral Günther Lütjens to protect the troop convoy landing at Narvik . The German squadron consisted of the battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau , the heavy cruiser Admiral Hipper , and 10 destroyers . With intelligence suggesting that the Germans were massing ships , the British sent out a squadron under Admiral Sir William Whitworth to deny German access to neutral Norwegian waters by laying mines in Operation Wilfred and prevent any German naval movements into the Atlantic Ocean . 
 Shortly after departing German waters on 7 April , Lütjens ′ force was attacked by British bombers which did no damage to the squadron . On 8 April , Admiral Hipper and the German destroyers were dispatched to Narvik while the German capital ships headed north for a diversionary manoeuver into the North Atlantic . As Admiral Hipper left , she met and engaged the British destroyer HMS Glowworm which had become separated from Admiral Whitworth ′ s main force . Though Vizeadmiral Lütjens — and the two German battleships — was nearby , their assistance was deemed unnecessary , and Admiral Hipper sank Glowworm , though taking some damage in return . Whitworth ′ s main force then caught sight of the Scharnhorst and Gneisenau at 03 : 30 on 9 April and moved to engage the battleships . 
 Whitworth ′ s force consisted of the battlecruiser Renown and the nine remaining destroyers . HMS Hotspur , Hardy , Havock , and Hunter were " H " -class destroyers while HMS Esk was an " E " -class destroyer and HMS Ivanhoe , Icarus , and Impulsive were of the " I " <unk> . HMS Greyhound was of the " G " class . Renown had been completely reconstructed between 1936 and 1939 , with lighter machinery , increased armour and upgraded armament . She mounted a main battery of six 42 @-@ calibre 15 @-@ inch guns with improved shells and greater range and a dual @-@ purpose secondary battery consisting of twenty 4 @.@ 5 inch ( QF 4 @.@ 5 inch L / 45 ) arranged in ten turrets [ The four " I " and " E " -class destroyers had been rigged for mine laying and most of their normal armament had been removed ; they only possessed two 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch ( 120 mm ) guns each . Greyhound and the " H " -class destroyers were more capable ships , with each armed with eight torpedo tubes and four 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch guns . Of the H @-@ class destroyers , Hardy was built as a destroyer leader and thus had an additional 4 @.@ 7 @-@ inch gun . 
 The German force consisted of the two Scharnhorst @-@ class battleships , each with a main battery of nine 28 @.@ 3 cm guns and a secondary battery of twelve 15 cm guns . In a close range engagement , the British force was superior , but at a distance the guns on Whitworth ′ s destroyers were outranged and the German firepower was greater . The German force also held a speed advantage over Renown , having a top speed of 32 knots ( 59 km / h ; 37 mph ) to the battlecruiser ′ s 30 knots ( 56 km / h ; 35 mph ) , but was slower than the destroyers , which could steam at 36 knots ( 67 km / h ; 41 mph ) . Thus , Lütjens clearly held an advantage over Renown , though the German force was significantly vulnerable to attack from Whitworth ′ s destroyers . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 04 : 30 , Gneisenau sighted Renown on its radar and the German ships cleared for action . Due to poor weather conditions , neither side was able to engage the other until 05 : 05 , as heavy seas and poor visibility prevented the two squadrons from closing within range . Renown began the action by attacking Gneisenau with her 15 @-@ inch guns . The German warships returned fire at 05 : 08 with Gneisenau scoring two hits on Renown with her 11 inch shells . Both shells failed to explode , with the first hitting the British battlecruiser ′ s foremast and the second passing through the ship near the steering gear room . About the same time , Renown struck Gneisenau with two shells . These hits damaged the German battleship 's director tower , forward range finders , and aft turret . Renown then moved her fire to Scharnhorst . These early salvos were sporadic and lasted until 06 : 00 , when the engagement was broken off for 20 minutes due to waves breaking over Renown ′ s forward turrets . 
 At 06 : 20 , the action reignited , with ineffectual fire coming from both sides . Fearing a torpedo attack on the damaged Gneisenau , the Germans increased their speed and disengaged at 07 : 17 . The German battleships retreated when Renown ′ s escorts opened fire , despite the fact that the destroyers ′ guns did not have sufficient range to successfully engage Lütjens ′ ships . The Germans mistook Whitworth ′ s smaller vessels for much more powerful capital ships and as a result thought they were heavily outgunned . Determined to steer clear of what he thought was a superior force , Lütjens managed to shake off the British squadron and end the action by sailing west into the Arctic Ocean . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite the Royal Navy winning a minor tactical victory over the Kriegsmarine , the Germans considered the engagement a strategic success due to the fact that Whitworth ′ s force was delayed long enough to keep it from interfering with the landings at Narvik . After the action had ended , Whitworth ′ s force continued to search for the German capital ships . With the British squadron occupied , the German destroyer @-@ transports managed to make their way through to Narvik after destroying two Norwegian coastal defence ships in their path . After their engagement with Renown , the German battleships linked up with Admiral Hipper on the 11th near Trondheim . From there , they returned to Germany , reaching Wilhelmshaven on 12 April where the damage to Gneisenau was repaired . 
 = HMS Hampshire ( 1903 ) = 
 HMS Hampshire was one of six Devonshire @-@ class armoured cruisers built for the Royal Navy in the first decade of the 20th century . She was assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet upon completion . After a refit she was assigned to the reserve Third Fleet in 1909 before going to the Mediterranean Fleet in 1911 . She was transferred to the China Station in 1912 and remained there until the start of World War I in August 1914 . 
 The ship hunted for German commerce raiders until she was transferred to the Grand Fleet at the end of 1914 . She was assigned to the 7th Cruiser Squadron upon her return home . She was transferred to the 2nd Cruiser Squadron in 1916 and was present at the Battle of Jutland . Several days later she was sailing to Russia , carrying the Secretary of State for War , Field Marshal Lord Kitchener , when she is believed to have struck a mine laid by a German submarine . She sank with heavy loss of life , including Kitchener and his staff . Rumours later circulated of German spies and sabotage being involved in the sinking . Her wreck is listed under the Protection of Military Remains Act , though part was later illegally salvaged . Several films have been made exploring the circumstances of her loss . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 Hampshire was designed to displace 10 @,@ 850 long tons ( 11 @,@ 020 t ) . The ship had an overall length of 473 feet 6 inches ( 144 @.@ 3 m ) , a beam of 68 feet 6 inches ( 20 @.@ 9 m ) and a deep draught of 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) . She was powered by two 4 @-@ cylinder triple @-@ expansion steam engines , each driving one shaft , which produced a total of 21 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 16 @,@ 000 kW ) and gave a maximum speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The engines were powered by seventeen Yarrow and six cylindrical boilers . She carried a maximum of 1 @,@ 033 long tons ( 1 @,@ 050 t ) of coal and her complement consisted of 610 officers and enlisted men . 
 Her main armament consisted of four breech @-@ loading ( BL ) 7 @.@ 5 @-@ inch Mk I guns mounted in four single @-@ gun turrets , one each fore and aft of the superstructure and one on each side . The guns fired their 200 @-@ pound ( 91 kg ) shells to a range of about 13 @,@ 800 yards ( 12 @,@ 600 m ) . Her secondary armament of six BL 6 @-@ inch Mk VII guns was arranged in casemates amidships . Four of these were mounted on the main deck and were only usable in calm weather . They had a maximum range of approximately 12 @,@ 200 yards ( 11 @,@ 200 m ) with their 100 @-@ pound ( 45 kg ) shells . Hampshire also carried 18 quick @-@ firing ( QF ) 3 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and two submerged 18 @-@ inch torpedo tubes . Her two 12 @-@ pounder 8 cwt guns could be dismounted for service ashore . 
 At some point in the war , the main deck six @-@ inch guns of the Devonshire @-@ class ships were moved to the upper deck and given gun shields . Their casemates were plated over to improve seakeeping and the four 3 @-@ pounder guns displaced by the transfer were landed . 
 The ship 's waterline armour belt had a maximum thickness of six inches ( 152 mm ) and was closed off by five @-@ inch ( 127 mm ) transverse bulkheads . The armour of the gun turrets was also five inches thick whilst that of their barbettes was six inches thick . The protective deck armour ranged in thickness from .75 – 2 inches ( 19 – 51 mm ) and the conning tower was protected by twelve inches ( 305 mm ) of armour . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Hampshire , named to commemorate the English county , was laid down by Armstrong Whitworth at their Elswick shipyard on 1 September 1902 and launched on 24 September 1903 . She was completed on 15 July 1905 and was initially assigned to the 1st Cruiser Squadron of the Channel Fleet together with most of her sister ships . She began a refit at Portsmouth Royal Dockyard in December 1908 and was then assigned to the reserve Third Fleet in August 1909 . She recommissioned in December 1911 for her assignment with the 6th Cruiser Squadron of the Mediterranean Fleet and was transferred to the China Station in 1912 . 
 When the war began , she was in Wei Hai Wei , and was assigned to the small squadron led by Vice Admiral Martyn Jerram , commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the China Station . She was ordered to destroy the German radio station at Yap together with the armoured cruiser Minotaur and the light cruiser Newcastle . En route the ships captured the collier SS Elspeth on 11 August and sank her ; Hampshire was too short on coal by then to make the island so Jerram ordered her back to Hong Kong with the crew of the Elspeth . At the end of the month , she was ordered down to the Dutch East Indies to search for any German ships at sea , narrowly missing the German light cruiser Emden . The German ship had not been reported since the war began and she sailed into the Bay of Bengal and began preying upon unsuspecting British shipping beginning on 14 September . Hampshire was ordered there to search for Emden and remained there through October and November , together with the armed merchant cruiser Empress of Asia , looking for the raider until she was destroyed on 9 November by HMAS Sydney . Hampshire then escorted a ANZAC troop convoy through the Indian Ocean and Red Sea to Egypt . Hampshire was refitted in Gibraltar in December before returning home to serve with the Grand Fleet . She was assigned the 7th Cruiser Squadron in January 1915 and was detached in November to escort shipping in the White Sea . She returned home in time to participate in the Battle of Jutland on 31 May 1916 with the 2nd Cruiser Squadron . During the battle she was never actually engaged and only fired four salvos at the German II Scouting Group that fell well short of their targets in addition to shooting at illusory submarine periscopes throughout the day . 
 = = = Last voyage and sinking = = = 
 Immediately after the battle , she was ordered to carry Lord Kitchener from Scapa Flow on a diplomatic mission to Russia via the port of Arkhangelsk . Due to the gale @-@ force conditions , it was decided that Hampshire would sail through the Pentland Firth , then turn north along the western coast of the Orkney Islands . This course would provide a lee from the strong winds , allowing escorting destroyers to keep pace with her . She departed Scapa Flow at 16 : 45 and about an hour later rendezvoused with her two escorts , the Acasta @-@ class destroyers Unity and Victor . As the ships turned to the northwest the gale increased and shifted direction so that the ships were facing it head on . This caused the destroyers to fall behind Hampshire . As it was considered unlikely that enemy submarines would be active in such conditions , Captain <unk> of the Hampshire ordered Unity and Victor to return to Scapa Flow . 
 Sailing alone in heavy seas , Hampshire was approximately 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) off the mainland of Orkney between Brough of Birsay and Marwick Head at 19 : 40 when an explosion occurred and she heeled to starboard . She had struck one of several mines laid by the German minelaying submarine U @-@ 75 on 28 / 29 May 1916 , just before the Battle of Jutland . The detonation had holed the cruiser between bows and bridge , and the lifeboats were smashed against the side of the ship by the heavy seas when they were lowered . About 15 minutes after the explosion , Hampshire sank by the bow . Of the 655 crewmen and 7 passengers aboard , only 12 crewmen on two Carley floats managed to reach the shore alive ; Kitchener and his staff were lost . 
 Fritz Joubert Duquesne , a Boer and German spy , claimed to have assumed the identity of Russian Count Boris <unk> and joined Kitchener in Scotland . Duquesne supposedly signalled a German U @-@ boat shortly after departing Scapa Flow to alert them that Kitchener ’ s ship was approaching . He was then rescued by the submarine as Hampshire sank . In the 1930s and ' 40s , he ran the Duquesne Spy Ring and was captured by the FBI along with 32 other Nazi agents in the largest espionage conviction in U.S. history . 
 = = = = The wreck = = = = 
 The wreck is designated as a controlled site under the Protection of Military Remains Act at coordinates 59 ° 7 @.@ 065 ′ N 3 ° 23 @.@ 843 ′ W and diving is forbidden without a licence . The ship is upside down at a depth of 55 – 70 metres ( 180 – 230 ft ) of water . In 1983 one propeller and part of its drive shaft were illegally salvaged . They are now on view at the Scapa Flow Visitor Centre and Museum , Lyness , Hoy , Orkney . 
 = = Media = = 
 The sinking of the ship and the events surrounding Kitchener 's death are portrayed in the 1969 film Fraulein Doktor about a female spy , and the 1921 film How Kitchener Was Betrayed . 
 = Kepler @-@ 11d = 
 Kepler @-@ 11d is an exoplanet discovered in the orbit of the sun @-@ like star Kepler @-@ 11 . It is named for the telescope that discovered it , a NASA spacecraft named Kepler that is designed to detect Earth @-@ like planets by measuring small dips in the brightness of their host stars as the planets cross in front . This process , known as the transit method , was used to note the presence of six planets in orbit around Kepler @-@ 11 , of which Kepler @-@ 11d is the third from its star . Kepler @-@ 11d orbits Kepler @-@ 11 well within the orbit of Mercury approximately every 23 days . The planet is approximately six times more massive than the Earth , and has a radius that is three and a half times larger than that of Earth 's . It is , however , far hotter than Earth is . Its low density , comparable to that of Saturn , suggests that Kepler @-@ 11d has a large hydrogen – helium atmosphere . Kepler @-@ 11d was announced with its five sister planets on February 2 , 2011 after extensive follow @-@ up studies . 
 = = Name and discovery = = 
 As with all exoplanets , Kepler @-@ 11d is named first for its host star , Kepler @-@ 11 . Because Kepler @-@ 11d was announced at the same time as the five other planets in the system , their names are sorted by their distances from the host star ; thus , because Kepler @-@ 11d is the third planet from Kepler @-@ 11 , it was given the designation d . Kepler @-@ 11 was named for the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA Earth @-@ trailing satellite purposed with discovering Earth @-@ like planets in a small area of the sky between the constellations Cygnus and Lyra by observing planets that transit , or cross in front of , their host stars with respect to Earth . The transit causes the star 's brightness to dim slightly and at a regular rate , a phenomenon that the Kepler satellite notes till future study can prove or disprove the existence of a planetary body . Kepler @-@ 11d was flagged by Kepler @-@ 11 , given the designation KOI @-@ 157 . 
 Required follow @-@ up observations were conducted at the Hale and Shane telescopes in California ; the W.M. Keck Observatory 's Keck I telescope in Hawaii ; telescopes at the WIYN , Whipple , and MMT observatories in Arizona ; and the Hobby @-@ Eberly and Harlan J. Smith telescopes of west Texas . Additionally , the Spitzer Space Telescope was used . Kepler @-@ 11d , along with its five sister planets , were announced to the public on February 2 , 2011 . Its discovery paper was published in the journal Nature the next day . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11 is a G @-@ type star in the Cygnus constellation . With a mass of .95 Msun , a radius of 1 @.@ 1 Rsun , a measured metallicity of 0 , and an effective temperature of 5680 K , Kepler @-@ 11 is near in mass ( 95 % of Sun ) , radius ( 110 % of Sun ) , and iron content as the Sun . Metallicity has been observed to play a major role determining the type of planet a star forms . As metal @-@ rich gas clouds tend to cause planetary cores to aggregate to a gravitationally prominent size while primordial gases still exist in the system , gas giants tend to form under such conditions . It is also slightly cooler than the Sun . However , it is estimated to be eight ( ± two ) billion years old , far older than the Sun is . Kepler @-@ 11 is host to five other planets other than Kepler @-@ 11d : Kepler @-@ 11b , Kepler @-@ 11c , Kepler @-@ 11e , Kepler @-@ 11f , and Kepler @-@ 11g . The first five planets in the system have orbits that would collectively fit inside the orbit of planet Mercury , while Kepler @-@ 11g orbits at a considerably further distance in relation to the orbits of its inner counterparts . 
 At a distance of 613 parsecs , Kepler @-@ 11d has an apparent magnitude of 14 @.@ 2 . It is , thus , not visible with the naked eye . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11d has a mass of 6 @.@ 1 ME and a radius of 3 @.@ 43 RE , making it some six times more massive than Earth with nearly three and a half times the radius . With a density of .9 grams / cm3 , Kepler @-@ 11d 's density is less than that of water and comparable to that of the gas giant Saturn . This suggests that , unlike its sister planets Kepler @-@ 11b and Kepler @-@ 11c , which are closer to their host star , Kepler @-@ 11d has maintained a large atmosphere that is most likely composed to hydrogen and helium . Kepler @-@ 11d has an equilibrium temperature of 692 K , nearly 2 @.@ 7 times the equilibrium temperature of Earth . Kepler @-@ 11d orbits at a mean distance of .159 AU from its host star and completes an orbit every 22 @.@ <unk> days , making it the third planet from Kepler @-@ 11 . In comparison , planet Mercury orbits the Sun every 87 @.@ 97 days at a distance of .387 AU . Kepler @-@ 11d has an orbital inclination of 89 @.@ 3 ° . Thus , Kepler @-@ 11d is almost exactly edge on with respect to Earth . 
 The presence of large quantities of hydrogen and helium on Kepler @-@ 11d , Kepler @-@ 11e , and Kepler @-@ 11f suggest that these planets formed within the first few million years of the system 's existence , when gas could still be captured from the forming protoplanetary disc . 
 = Tau Ceti = 
 Tau Ceti ( τ Cet , τ Ceti ) is a star in the constellation Cetus that is spectrally similar to the Sun , although it has only about 78 % of the Sun 's mass . At a distance of just under 12 light @-@ years from the Solar System , it is a relatively nearby star , and is the closest solitary G @-@ class star . The star appears stable , with little stellar variation , and is metal @-@ deficient . 
 Observations have detected more than ten times as much dust surrounding Tau Ceti as is present in the Solar System . Since December 2012 , there has been evidence of possibly five planets orbiting Tau Ceti , with two of these being potentially in the habitable zone . Because of its debris disk , any planet orbiting Tau Ceti would face far more impact events than Earth . Despite this hurdle to habitability , its solar analog ( Sun @-@ like ) characteristics have led to widespread interest in the star . Given its stability , similarity and relative proximity to the Sun , Tau Ceti is consistently listed as a target for the Search for Extra @-@ Terrestrial Intelligence ( SETI ) , and it appears in some science fiction literature . 
 It can be seen with the unaided eye as a third @-@ magnitude star . As seen from Tau Ceti , the Sun would be a third @-@ magnitude star in the northern hemisphere constellation Boötes . 
 = = Name = = 
 Tau Ceti does not have a widely @-@ recognized traditional name , and is usually simply referred to as Tau Ceti . 
 The name " Tau Ceti " is the Bayer designation for this star , established in 1603 as part of German celestial cartographer Johann Bayer 's Uranometria star catalogue : it is " number T " in Bayer 's sequence of constellation Cetus . It has the proper name <unk> <unk> . In the catalogue of stars in the <unk> of Al Achsasi al Mouakket , written at Cairo about 1650 , this star was designated <unk> al <unk> ( <unk> <unk> - <unk> al <unk> ) , which was translated into Latin as Tertia <unk> , meaning the third of the ostriches . This star , along with η Cet ( Deneb <unk> ) , θ Cet ( <unk> Al <unk> ) , ζ Cet ( <unk> <unk> ) , and υ Cet , were Al <unk> ( <unk> ) , the Hen <unk> . 
 In Chinese , the " Square Celestial Granary " ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Tiān <unk> ) refers to an asterism consisting of τ Ceti , ι Ceti , η Ceti , ζ Ceti , θ Ceti and 57 Ceti . Consequently , τ Ceti itself is known as the " Fifth Star of Square Celestial Granary " ( Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : Tiān <unk> wǔ ) . 
 = = Motion = = 
 The proper motion of a star is its amount of movement across the celestial sphere , determined by comparing its position relative to more distant background objects . Tau Ceti is considered to be a high @-@ proper @-@ motion star , although it only has an annual traverse of just under two arc seconds . It will require about two thousand years before the location of this star shifts by more than a degree . A high proper motion is an indicator of closeness to the Sun . Nearby stars can traverse an angle of arc across the sky more rapidly than the distant background stars and are good candidates for parallax studies . In the case of Tau Ceti , the parallax measurements indicate a distance of 11 @.@ 9 ly . This makes it one of the closest star systems to the Sun , and the next @-@ closest spectral class @-@ G star after Alpha Centauri A. 
 The radial velocity of a star is its motion toward or away from the Sun . Unlike proper motion , a star 's radial velocity cannot be directly observed , but must be determined through measurement of the spectrum . Due to the Doppler shift , the absorption lines in the spectrum of a star will be shifted slightly toward the red ( or longer wavelengths ) if the star is moving away from the observer , or toward blue ( or shorter wavelengths ) when it moves toward the observer . In the case of Tau Ceti , the radial velocity is about − 17 km / s , with the negative value indicating that it is moving toward the Sun . 
 The distance to Tau Ceti , along with its proper motion and radial velocity , allow the motion of the star through space to be calculated . The space velocity relative to the Sun is about 37 km / s . This result can then be used to compute an orbital path of Tau Ceti through the Milky Way . It has a mean <unk> @-@ centric distance of 9 @.@ 7 kiloparsec ( 32000 ly ) and an orbital eccentricity of 0 @.@ 22 . 
 = = Physical properties = = 
 The Tau Ceti system is believed to have only one stellar component . A dim optical companion has also been observed with magnitude 13 @.@ 1 . As of 2000 , it was 137 arcseconds distant from the primary . It may be gravitationally bound , but it is considered more likely to be a line @-@ of @-@ sight coincidence . 
 Most of what is known about the physical properties of Tau Ceti and its system has been determined through spectroscopic measurements . By comparing the spectrum to computed models of stellar evolution , the age , mass , radius and luminosity of Tau Ceti can be estimated . However , using an astronomical interferometer , measurements of the radius of the star can be made directly to an accuracy of 0 @.@ 5 % . Through such means , the radius of Tau Ceti has been measured to be 79 @.@ 3 ± 0 @.@ 4 % of the solar radius . This is about the size that is expected for a star with somewhat lower mass than the Sun . 
 = = = Rotation = = = 
 The rotation period for Tau Ceti was measured by periodic variations in the classic H and K absorption lines of singly ionized calcium , or Ca II . These lines are closely associated with surface magnetic activity , so the period of variation measures the time required for the activity sites to complete a full rotation about the star . By this means the rotation period for Tau Ceti is estimated to be 34 d . Due to the Doppler effect , the rotation rate of a star affects the width of the absorption lines in the spectrum . ( Light from the side of the star moving away from the observer will be shifted to a longer wavelength ; light from the side moving towards the observer will be shifted toward a shorter wavelength . ) By analyzing the width of these lines , the rotational velocity of a star can be estimated . The projected rotation velocity for Tau Ceti is : 
 <unk> · sin i ≈ 1 km / s 
 where <unk> is the velocity at the equator and i is the inclination angle of the rotation axis to the line of sight . For a typical G8 star , the rotation velocity is about 2 @.@ 5 km / s . The relatively low rotational velocity measurements may indicate that Tau Ceti is being viewed from nearly the direction of its pole . 
 = = = Metallicity = = = 
 The chemical composition of a star provides important clues to its evolutionary history , including the age at which it formed . The interstellar medium of dust and gas from which stars form is primarily composed of hydrogen and helium with trace amounts of heavier elements . As nearby stars continually evolve and die , they seed the interstellar medium with an increasing portion of heavier elements . Thus younger stars will tend to have a higher portion of heavy elements in their atmospheres than do the older stars . These heavy elements are termed metals by astronomers and the portion of heavy elements is the metallicity . The amount of metallicity in a star is given in terms of the ratio of iron ( Fe ) , an easily observed heavy element , to hydrogen . A logarithm of the relative iron abundance is compared to the Sun . In the case of Tau Ceti , the atmospheric metallicity is roughly : 
 equivalent to about a third the solar abundance . Past measurements have varied from − 0 @.@ 13 to − 0 @.@ 60 . 
 This lower abundance of iron indicates that Tau Ceti is almost certainly older than the Sun . Its age had previously been estimated to be about 10 Ga but is now thought to be around half that at 5 @.@ 8 Ga . This compares with 4 @.@ 57 Ga for the Sun . However , computed age estimates for Tau Ceti can range from 4 @.@ 4 – 12 Ga , depending on the model adopted . 
 Besides rotation , another factor that can widen the absorption features in the spectrum of a star is pressure broadening . The presence of nearby particles will affect the radiation emitted by an individual particle . So the line width is dependent on the surface pressure of the star , which in turn is determined by the temperature and surface gravity . This technique was used to determine the surface gravity of Tau Ceti . The log g , or logarithm of the star 's surface gravity , is about 4 @.@ 4 — very close to the log g = 4 @.@ 44 for the Sun . 
 = = = Luminosity and variability = = = 
 The luminosity of Tau Ceti is equal to only 55 % of the Sun 's luminosity . A terrestrial planet would need to orbit this star at a distance of about 0 @.@ 7 AU in order to match the solar @-@ insolation level of Earth . This is approximately the same as the average distance between Venus and the Sun . 
 The chromosphere of Tau Ceti — the portion of a star 's atmosphere just above the light @-@ emitting photosphere — currently displays little or no magnetic activity , indicating a stable star . One nine @-@ year study of temperature , granulation , and the chromosphere showed no systematic variations ; Ca II emissions around the H and K infrared bands show a possible 11 @-@ year cycle , but this is weak relative to the Sun . Alternatively it has been suggested that the star could be in a low @-@ activity state analogous to a Maunder minimum — a historical period , associated with the Little Ice Age in Europe , when sunspots became exceedingly rare on the Sun 's surface . Spectral line profiles of Tau Ceti are extremely narrow , indicating low turbulence and observed rotation . The amplitude of the star 's oscillations are about half those of the Sun , and have a lower mode lifetime . 
 = = Life and planet searches = = 
 Principal factors driving research interest in Tau Ceti are its proximity , Sun @-@ like characteristics and their implications for possible planets and life . For categorization purposes , Hall and Lockwood report that " the terms ' <unk> star ' , ' solar analog ' , and ' solar twin ' [ are ] progressively restrictive descriptions " . Tau Ceti fits the second category , given its similar mass and low variability , but relative lack of metals . The similarities have inspired popular culture references for decades , as well as scientific examination . 
 Tau Ceti has been a target of a radial velocity planetary searches . As of 1988 , observations ruled out any periodical variations attributable to massive planets around Tau Ceti inside of Jupiter @-@ like distances . Ever @-@ more precise measurements continue to rule out such planets , at least until December 2012 . The velocity precision reached is about 11 m / s measured over a five @-@ year time span . This result excludes the presence of hot Jupiters , and probably excludes any planets with minimum mass greater than or equal to Jupiter 's mass and with orbital periods less than 15 years . In addition , a survey of nearby stars by the Hubble Space Telescope 's Wide Field and Planetary Camera was completed in 1999 , including a search for faint companions to Tau Ceti ; none were discovered to limits of the telescope 's resolving power . 
 These searches only excluded larger brown dwarf bodies and giant planets , so smaller , Earth @-@ like planets in orbit around the star were not precluded . If " hot Jupiters " did exist in close orbit they would likely disrupt the star 's habitable zone ; their exclusion was thus considered positive for the possibility of Earth @-@ like planets . General research has shown a positive correlation between the presence of planets and a relatively high @-@ metallicity parent star , suggesting that stars with lower metallicity such as Tau Ceti have a lower chance of having planets . Primitive life on Tau Ceti 's planets might reveal itself through an atmospheric composition unlikely to be abiotic , just as oxygen on Earth is indicative of life . 
 = = = SETI and <unk> = = = 
 The most optimistic search project to date was Project Ozma , which was intended to " search for extraterrestrial intelligence " ( SETI ) by examining selected stars for indications of artificial radio signals . It was run by the astronomer Frank Drake , who selected Tau Ceti and Epsilon Eridani as the initial targets . Both are located near the Solar System and are physically similar to the Sun . No artificial signals were found despite 200 hours of observations . Subsequent radio searches of this star system have also turned up negative . 
 This lack of results has not dampened interest in observing the Tau Ceti system for biosignatures . In 2002 , astronomers Margaret Turnbull and Jill Tarter developed the Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems ( <unk> ) under the auspices of Project Phoenix , another SETI endeavour . The list contained more than 17 @,@ 000 theoretically habitable systems , approximately 10 % of the original sample . The next year , Turnbull would further refine the list to the 30 most promising systems out of 5000 within one hundred light @-@ years of the Sun , including Tau Ceti ; this will form part of the basis of radio searches with the Allen Telescope Array . She also chose Tau Ceti for a final shortlist of just five stars suitable for searches by the ( indefinitely postponed ) Terrestrial Planet Finder telescope system , commenting that " these are places I 'd want to live if God were to put our planet around another star " . 
 = = Planetary system = = 
 On December 19 , 2012 , evidence was presented that suggest a system of five planets orbiting Tau Ceti . The planets ' estimated minimum masses are between two and six times the mass of Earth and their orbital periods range from 14 to 640 days . One of them , tentatively named Tau Ceti e , appears to orbit about half as far from Tau Ceti as Earth does from the Sun . With Tau Ceti 's luminosity of 52 % that of the Sun and a distance from the star of 0 @.@ 552 AU , the planet would receive 1 @.@ 71 times as much stellar radiation as Earth does , slightly less than Venus with 1 @.@ 91 times Earth 's . Nevertheless , some research places it within the star 's habitable zone . The Planetary Habitability Laboratory has estimated that Tau Ceti f , which would receive 28 @.@ 5 % as much starlight as Earth , would be narrowly within the habitable zone of the star as well . 
 The habitable zone for this star , defined as the locations where liquid water could be present on an Earth @-@ size planet , is at a radius of 0 @.@ 55 – 1 @.@ 16 AU , where 1 AU is the average distance from the Earth to the Sun . 
 = = = Tau Ceti e = = = 
 Tau Ceti e is an unconfirmed , fourth @-@ known planet orbiting Tau Ceti that was detected by statistical analyses of the data of the star 's variations in radial velocity that were obtained using HIRES , AAPS , and HARPS . Few properties of the planet are known other than its orbit and mass . It orbits at a distance of 0 @.@ 552 AU ( between the orbits of Venus and Mercury in the Solar System ) with an orbital period of 168 days and has a minimum mass of 4 @.@ 3 Earth masses . Because the minimum mass of a super @-@ Earth is 5 Earth masses , Tau Ceti e may be Earth sized . If it possesses an Earth @-@ like atmosphere , the surface temperature would be around 68 ° C ( 154 ° F ) . 
 = = = Tau Ceti f = = = 
 Tau Ceti f is an unconfirmed fifth planet orbiting Tau Ceti that was discovered in 2012 by statistical analyses of the star 's variations in radial velocity , based on data obtained using HIRES , AAPS , and HARPS . It is of interest due to its predicted habitability and Earth @-@ like properties , with an Earth Similarity Index of 0 @.@ 71 and an orbit that places it in Tau Ceti 's extended habitable zone . 
 Few properties of the planet are known other than its orbit and mass . It orbits Tau Ceti at a distance of 1 @.@ 35 AU ( near Mars 's orbit in the Solar System ) with an orbital period of 642 days and has a minimum mass of 6 @.@ 6 Earth masses , which means it may be a super @-@ Earth . Assuming an Earth @-@ like atmosphere , the surface temperature would be approximately − 40 ° C ( 233 K ) . With a denser atmosphere able to produce a stronger greenhouse effect it could have a much higher temperature , between 0 ° C and 50 ° C ; warm enough for liquid water to exist on the surface . 
 = = = Debris disk = = = 
 In 2004 , a team of UK astronomers led by Jane Greaves discovered that Tau Ceti has more than ten times the amount of cometary and asteroidal material orbiting it than does the Sun . This was determined by measuring the disk of cold dust orbiting the star produced by collisions between such small bodies . This result puts a damper on the possibility of complex life in the system , because any planets would suffer from large impact events roughly ten times more frequently than Earth . Greaves noted at the time of her research that " it is likely that [ any planets ] will experience constant bombardment from asteroids of the kind believed to have wiped out the dinosaurs " . Such bombardments would inhibit the development of biodiversity between impacts . However , it is possible that a large Jupiter @-@ sized gas giant could deflect comets and asteroids . 
 The debris disk was discovered by measuring the amount of radiation emitted by the system in the far infrared portion of the spectrum . The disk forms a symmetric feature that is centered on the star , and the outer radius averages 55 AU . The lack of infrared radiation from the warmer parts of the disk near Tau Ceti imply an inner cut @-@ off at a radius of 10 AU . By comparison , the Solar System 's Kuiper belt extends from 30 – 50 AU . To be maintained over a long period of time , this ring of dust must be constantly replenished through collisions by larger bodies . The bulk of the disk appears to be orbiting Tau Ceti at a distance of 35 – 50 AU , well outside the orbit of the habitable zone . At this distance , the dust belt may be analogous to the Kuiper belt that lies outside the orbit of Neptune in the Solar System . 
 Tau Ceti shows that stars need not lose large disks as they age and such a thick belt may not be uncommon among Sun @-@ like stars . Tau Ceti 's belt is only 1 ⁄ 20th as dense as the belt around its young neighbor , Epsilon Eridani . The relative lack of debris around the Sun may be the unusual case : one research team member suggests the Sun may have passed close to another star early in its history and had most of its comets and asteroids stripped away . Stars with large debris disks have altered astronomical thinking about planet formation ; debris disk stars , where dust is continually generated by collisions , appear to form planets readily . 
 = Ariel ( Disney character ) = 
 Princess Ariel is a fictional character and the title character of Walt Disney Pictures ' 28th animated film The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) . She subsequently appears in the film 's prequel television series , direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel The Little Mermaid II : Return to the Sea ( where her daughter , Melody , takes over as the lead character , while Ariel is a secondary character instead ) and direct @-@ to @-@ video prequel The Little Mermaid : Ariel 's Beginning . Ariel is voiced by Jodi Benson in all official animated appearances and merchandise . She is fourth in the Disney Princess lineup , and the only princess to become a mother to her own child . 
 Ariel has a distinctive appearance , with her long , flowing , bright red hair , blue eyes , green mermaid tail and purple seashell bikini top . In the films and television series , she is the seventh @-@ born daughter of King Triton and Queen Athena of an underwater kingdom of <unk> . She is often rebellious , and in the first film longs to be a part of the human world . She marries Prince Eric , whom she rescued from a shipwreck , and together they have a daughter , Melody . 
 The character is based on the title character of Hans Christian Andersen 's " The Little Mermaid " story , but was developed into a different personality for the 1989 animated film adaptation . Ariel has received a mixed reception from critics ; some publications such as Time criticize her for being too devoted to her man whereas others , such as Empire , praise the character for her rebellious personality , a departure from previous Disney Princesses . 
 = = Development = = 
 Ariel was based on the title character of Hans Christian Andersen 's " The Little Mermaid " , but co @-@ director and writer Ron Clements felt that the mermaid in the original story was too tragic and rewrote the character , resulting in Ariel . 
 Jodi Benson , who was predominantly a stage actress , was chosen to voice Ariel because the directors felt " it was really important to have the same person doing the singing and speaking voice " . Clements stated that Benson 's voice had a unique " sweetness " and " youthfulness " . When recording the vocals for " Part of Your World " , Benson asked that the lights in the studio be dimmed , to create the feeling of being deep under the sea . " Part of Your World " , which was referred to by songwriter Howard Ashman as the " I Want " song , was originally going to be cut from the final film , owing to Jeffrey Katzenberg 's belief that it slowed the story down , but Ashman and Keane fought to keep it in . 
 Ariel 's original design was developed by animator Glen Keane . Her appearance was based on a number of inspirational sources , including Glen <unk> 's wife , actress Alyssa Milano ( who was 16 at the time in addition to hosting the making of the special on Disney Channel , ) and model @-@ comedian Sherri Stoner , who provided live @-@ action references for the animators during the development of the film . The movement of Ariel 's hair underwater was based on footage of astronaut Sally Ride while she was in space . Extra reference was given by filming Stoner swimming in a pool , which also helped guide Ariel 's aquatic movement . 
 A challenge in animating Ariel for the 1989 film was the color required to show Ariel in the changing environments , both under the sea and on land , for which the animators required thirty @-@ two color models , not including costume changes . The bluish @-@ green color of Ariel 's fin was a hue specially mixed by the Disney paint lab ; the color was named " Ariel " after the character . The choice of red as Ariel 's hair color was the subject of dispute between the filmmakers and studio executives who wanted the character to have blonde hair . It was noted that red hair contrasted better with Ariel 's green tail , red was easier to darken than yellow , and Disney 's live @-@ action branch Touchstone Pictures had recently released Splash that had a blonde mermaid ; Ariel 's red hair was ultimately kept . 
 In an interview , Jodi Benson stated that for Ariel 's Beginning , the writers revised the script multiple times to make sure Ariel retained her relevance in a more modern context . Benson complained to them that they wrote Ariel out of character and suggested they bring her back to her roots . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Ariel is the youngest of King Triton and Queen Athena 's seven daughters . She is often seen in the company of Flounder , her best friend , and Sebastian , her father 's advisor who is often assigned to keep an eye on her . In the television series and first film , Ariel has a fascination with the human world and often goes off to find human artifacts that she displays in a secret grotto . Ariel is often rebellious , wandering off on her own to explore her surroundings , and frequently disobeys the orders of her father or Sebastian , causing conflict between the characters . In The Little Mermaid she is depicted as being willing to do anything to be with Prince Eric , even giving up her voice to become human . Clements described her as a typical teenager , prone to errors of judgment . She also is incredibly curious , and her curiosity often leads her into dangerous situations . 
 Ariel is kind to others no matter what their circumstances , as depicted in the television series . In an early episode , Ariel helps an orphaned <unk> who had fallen in with a bad crowd . In another episode , Ariel befriends a supposed bad @-@ luck creature and protects it from Ursula and other merfolk who wish it harm . Ariel appears as an adult in Return to the Sea , and gives birth to a daughter named Melody , becoming the first , and currently only , Disney princess to become a mother . Ariel is protective of her daughter , as Triton was of Ariel in the first film . After Morgana threatens Ariel and King Triton , Prince Eric and Ariel build a wall around the palace to protect Melody from Morgana and other terrors of the ocean . Although it protected her , it could not protect her curiosity . Ariel 's Beginning depicts her personality as it was in the original film , after Jodi Benson had advocated returning the character to her roots . Ariel is once again rebellious , and after her father decrees music to be banned in Atlantica she runs away with Sebastian and his band . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = The Little Mermaid = = = 
 Ariel first appears in The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , in which she is shown as being adventurous and curious about the world of humans , a fascination which angers both her father King Triton and his court composer Sebastian , as merfolk are not allowed to make contact with the human world . She and Flounder go in search of human objects , which they take to a seagull named Scuttle for appraisal . Ariel falls in love with a human prince named Prince Eric after saving him from drowning , and visits the sea witch , Ursula , who agrees to turn her into a human in exchange for her voice . Ariel must make Prince Eric fall in love with her and romantically kiss her within three days , lest she belong to Ursula forever . 
 Unknown to Ariel , this agreement is part of Ursula 's bigger plan to trap Ariel 's father , King Triton and steal his magical trident . After being transformed , she is soon found by Eric and is taken back to his castle . Ariel almost manages to obtain the " kiss of true love " , but is stopped by Ursula 's underhanded tactics . On the third day , Ursula transforms herself into a human , calling herself " Vanessa " and using Ariel 's voice , and bewitches Eric to make him marry her . After learning from Scuttle that the woman is Ursula in disguise , Ariel disrupts the wedding and regains her voice but the sun sets as Ariel and Prince Eric are about to kiss , transforming Ariel back into a mermaid . After transforming herself back into her true witch form , Ursula takes Ariel back into the ocean , where she is met by King Triton and Sebastian . 
 Triton trades himself for Ariel , enabling Ursula to steal his crown and enabling her to claim his trident , a fascination which angers Ariel , who will not allow Ursula to destroy merfolk and humans . In the battle that follows , Ariel is trapped at the bottom of a whirlpool . Before Ursula can destroy her , Eric kills Ursula by ramming a derelict ship 's splintered prow through her . After Ursula dies , her spell is broken , and King Triton and the merfolk are transformed back to normal merpeople . At the end of the film , after King Triton uses his magical trident to transform her into a human , Ariel leaves the sea to live in the human world , and she and Eric marry and live happily ever after . 
 = = = Television series = = = 
 A prequel television series that originally aired from 1992 to 1994 , depicts Ariel 's life as a mermaid under the sea with Sebastian , Flounder , and her father . Ariel appears in all 31 episodes of the series , which is set an unspecified time before the first film . The series follows Ariel 's adventures with her friends and family , and sometimes has Ariel foiling the attempts of enemies that are intent on harming her or the kingdom of Atlantica . 
 Ariel 's relationships with various characters from the film are highlighted and expanded , such as the love and occasional conflict between Ariel and her father , how Ariel met Flounder and Scuttle , the relationships between Ariel and her sisters , and Ariel 's early fear and avoidance of Ursula the sea witch . Other recurring new characters are also introduced , such as <unk> Urchin and mermaid Gabriella that become Ariel 's friends , as well as the Evil Manta , Lobster Mobster and Da Shrimp , who are Ariel 's enemies . Ariel 's mother is absent from the series , having already died prior to the events of the series , though she is occasionally mentioned in vague terms . In one episode Ariel comes across Hans Christian Andersen , author of " The Little Mermaid " . In the fictionalized encounter she saves Andersen 's life , inspiring him to write the story . 
 Some episodes of the series are musical , and feature original songs performed by the characters . A soundtrack containing some of these songs was released in 1992 under the title " Splash Hits " . 
 = = = The Little Mermaid II : Return to the Sea = = = 
 In The Little Mermaid II : Return to the Sea ( 2000 ) , Ariel , now the new queen of Prince Eric 's kingdom , has given birth to a daughter named Melody . When Melody 's safety is threatened by Ursula 's sister Morgana after using her as a hostage to get King Triton 's Trident , Ariel and her husband Eric decide they must keep Melody away from the sea . So they build a large wall to separate it from the castle . 
 But Melody 's love of the sea proves too strong and she visits Morgana , who turns her into a mermaid temporarily . King Triton uses his trident to transform Ariel back into her own mermaid form to find and rescue Melody . Morgana tricks Melody into taking part in a plot to steal her grandfather King Triton 's trident . Together with Tip the Penguin and Dash the Walrus she goes to Atlantica and succeeds in acquiring the trident . Ariel arrives as they return with it to Morgana , and tries to persuade Melody to give back the trident . Morgana captures Ariel , tightly wrapping her tentacle around Ariel 's mouth and body . She then seals Melody behind a block wall . Tip and Dash rescue Melody and Ariel manages to free themselves . Morgana then uses the trident 's magic to force everyone to bow before her . 
 Melody manages to grab the trident and returns it to King Triton , who then punishes Morgana by sending her to the bottom of the ocean frozen in a block of ice . Triton returns Ariel to human form , the wall separating Eric 's castle from the sea is torn down , and contact between humans and merfolk is restored . 
 = = = The Little Mermaid : Ariel 's Beginning = = = 
 The prologue of The Little Mermaid : Ariel 's Beginning ( 2008 ) shows Ariel as a young mermaid , living happily with her father , King Triton , her mother , Queen Athena , and her six older sisters . As Ariel and her family relax in a lagoon , a pirate ship approaches and everyone flees except Athena , who returns to recover a music box Triton had given her and is killed when the ship crushes her . Afterwards , a devastated King Triton bans all music from Atlantica and throws the music box deep into the ocean . Ariel and her sisters grow up forgetting music and living under their father 's strict rules , enforced by Marina del Rey , their governess . 
 Ariel meets Flounder and follows him to a secret underground club where Sebastian and his band play music . There she sings the song " I Remember " , which reminds her of her distant past surrounded by love and music , and of her mother . Ariel introduces her sisters to the club , but eventually they are caught thanks to Marina , who had followed them . Sebastian and his band are imprisoned and the club is closed under Triton 's orders . After arguing with Triton , Ariel breaks the band out of prison and escapes with them . 
 With Sebastian 's assistance Ariel finds her mother 's music box , and they decide to return it to Triton . On their way back to Atlantica , they encounter Marina , and a struggle ensues in which Ariel is knocked unconscious , witnessed by Triton . Ariel makes a full recovery , and a remorseful Triton allows music back into Atlantica . 
 = = In other media = = 
 = = = Tie @-@ in music albums = = = 
 In addition to the film 's official soundtrack , two original music albums were released by Walt Disney Records for the franchise : Sebastian from The Little Mermaid ( 1990 ) and The Little Mermaid : Songs from the Sea ( 1992 ) . The former is a cover album mainly focusing on Samuel E. Wright as Sebastian , with Ariel providing supporting vocals , while the latter is a concept album of original songs that depict a day in Ariel 's life under the sea . Ariel also appears in Songs and Story : Ariel 's Christmas Under the Sea , a Christmas @-@ themed mini @-@ album with a read @-@ along story and two original songs . Jodi Benson performs in @-@ character as Ariel in all these albums . 
 = = = Printed media = = = 
 Ariel appears in a number of printed media that have been released as part of the franchise . 
 A series of twelve prequel novels were published in 1994 by Disney Press , following young Ariel 's adventures living under the sea with her sisters and father . The titles are : Green @-@ Eyed Pearl and <unk> Visits the Palace by Suzanne <unk> ; Reflections of <unk> and The Same Old Song by Marilyn Kaye ; Arista 's New Boyfriend and Ariel the Spy by M. J. Carr ; King Triton , Beware ! , The Haunted Palace and The Boyfriend Mix @-@ Up by Katherine Applegate ; The Practical @-@ Joke War by Stephanie St. Pierre ; The Dolphins of Coral Cove by K. S. Rodriguez ; and Alana 's Secret Friend by Jess Christopher . The novels mostly focus on the domestic setting of Ariel and her sisters living together . 
 In 1992 Disney Comics released a four @-@ issue The Little Mermaid Limited Series <unk> series . In 1994 Marvel Comics released its own title , Disney 's The Little Mermaid , which ran for twelve issues . All these comics are prequels to the film , and feature Ariel a mermaid living under the sea having adventures with Flounder and Sebastian , and thwarting villains that wish to take over or destroy Atlantica . 
 = = = Disney Princess = = = 
 In 2000 , Ariel became an official member of the newly launched Disney Princess line , an umbrella franchise that includes various Disney princesses under its banner . Ariel is one of the original 8 characters that were included at the franchise 's launch . The franchise is directed at young girls , and covers a wide variety of merchandise , including but not limited to magazines , music albums , toys , video games , clothes and stationery . 
 This franchise includes illustrated novels starring the various princesses , two of which are about Ariel : The Birthday Surprise and The <unk> Star Necklace . Both novels are written by Gail Herman , and contain original stories about Ariel 's life as a human and Eric 's wife , but still maintaining close relationships with her father and sisters under the sea . The franchise also includes illustrated short stories about Ariel 's life as a human , such as Ariel and the Aquamarine Jewel , Ariel 's Dolphin Adventure , and Ariel 's Royal Wedding . Ariel also appears as a supporting character in one volume of the Japanese manga Kilala Princess , where she is seen in her pre @-@ movie mermaid form . 
 Jodi Benson provides Ariel 's voice for her appearances in the Disney Princess music albums , DVDs and video games . The first original song released for this franchise is " If You Can Dream " , which featured Cinderella , Aurora , Ariel , Belle , Pocahontas , Jasmine and Mulan singing together . Other original songs that feature Ariel are " I Just Love Getting Dressed for Tea " , " Manners and Etiquette " , " The Princess Dance " and " Happy Birthday , Princess " from Disney Princess Tea Party ( 2005 ) ; " Christmas Is Coming ! " , " Christmas in the Ocean " , " Ariel 's Christmas Island " and " The Twelve Days of Christmas " from Disney Princess Christmas Album ( 2009 ) ; and " Ariel 's Sing @-@ Along Sea Song : the Crab Song " from Disney Princess Party ( 2010 ) . Ariel also appears in the franchise video games Disney Princess : Enchanted Journey ( 2007 ) , Disney Princess : Magical Jewels ( 2007 ) and Disney Princess : My Fairytale Adventure ( 2012 ) . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 Ariel appears in the Broadway adaptation of the 1989 film , which ran at the Lunt @-@ Fontanne Theatre with previews from November 3 , 2007 leading to opening night on January 10 , 2008 . This original production closed on August 30 , 2009 , but other US and international productions have followed since . The character of Ariel for the stage adaptation was originated by Sierra <unk> , with the role also portrayed later by actresses Chelsea Morgan Stock and Michelle <unk> . Jodi Benson , the original voice actress for Ariel , attended the musical 's opening night . 
 In order to portray the characters underwater , the actors wore Heelys wheeled footwear , which simulate the gliding action of swimming creatures . The actors playing Ariel and the other merfolk had wire @-@ frame tails attached to their hips . Subsequent productions feature different designs for Ariel and the merfolk ; the Dutch and Japanese productions use wirework and aerial stunts to create the illusion of underwater swimming . 
 The stage musical follows the basic structure of the film , but there are some differences between the two . Ariel acknowledges and is acknowledged by Ursula as family , since in this version Ursula is Triton 's sister . In a new subplot , Grimsby holds a contest inviting all the princesses in the land for a singing competition for Eric to choose his bride ; Ariel cannot sing , but she dances for Eric , and he chooses her . Ariel also has a more active role in the final battle , where she is the one who defeats Ursula by destroying her Nautilus shell that contains her power . 
 In addition to the songs in the film , Ariel has new songs by Alan Menken and lyrics by Glenn Slater . " The World Above " is Ariel 's introductory song , where she expresses her admiration and curiosity with the human world , " Beyond My Wildest Dreams " is performed after Ariel has become human and given up her voice , and is used to express her thoughts about the human world and Eric , and " If Only ( quartet ) " is a quartet between Ariel , Eric , King Triton and Sebastian where all four express longing and sadness for their current situation : Ariel saddened that she only has one day left to get Eric to kiss her , Eric 's confusion of falling for Ariel despite longing for the mysterious girl who saved his life , King Triton 's regret at driving Ariel away , and Sebastian for his inability to help Ariel achieve her dreams . 
 = = = Disney Parks = = = 
 Ariel makes regular appearances in the Walt Disney Parks and Resorts , having a special location called Ariel 's Grotto at most of them . Ariel 's Grotto was torn down at Walt Disney World 's Magic Kingdom owing to the Fantasyland expansion . An " The Little Mermaid " mini @-@ land can be found in the Magic Kingdom 's New Fantasyland . It includes a replica of Prince Eric 's Castle , a dark ride called Ariel 's Undersea Adventure , a market called " Prince Eric 's Village Market " , and Ariel 's meeting grotto . She has a major role in Mickey 's PhilharMagic and stars in her own live stage shows at Disney 's Hollywood Studios and Tokyo DisneySea . A dark ride based on the movie was designed for Disneyland Paris but never built . A re @-@ designed version of the attraction , called Ariel 's Undersea Adventure , was built as part of the major expansion for Disney California Adventure Park . She also has her own hotel at the Disney 's Art of Animation Resort . There is a land in Tokyo DisneySea titled " Mermaid Lagoon " . It features many rides and attractions themed around the Little Mermaid . A clone of the dark ride found in Disney California Adventure Park and Magic Kingdom was to be a part of Fantasyland in Hong Kong Disneyland , but was never built . A clone of the dark ride was also supposed to be in Tokyo DisneySea , but was canceled due to budget reasons . A Little Mermaid dark ride is or was planned in every Disney resort worldwide . 
 = = = Video games and television = = = 
