 Not long after the film was released , late Muppet creator Jim Henson proposed a live @-@ action show based on the film , titled Little Mermaid 's Island . Ariel was to be portrayed by Marietta <unk> , and she would interact with various puppet characters created by Jim Henson 's Creature Shop . Two episodes of this series were filmed but not aired due to complications after Henson 's death . 
 Ariel appears in various video games based on the films , including the video game adaptation of the first film and the popular Kingdom Hearts series . In the first Kingdom Hearts , Ariel 's story has an unrelated plot to that of the movie . Ariel also makes an appearance in the sequel , Kingdom Hearts II , where its storyline loosely follows the plotline of the 1989 film . They 're also was an appearance card in the video game Mickey 's Memory Challenge on 1993 . 
 In 2001 , Ariel appeared occasionally in the animated television series Disney 's House of Mouse as one of Mickey 's guests at the night club . She is seen in both her mermaid and human forms . 
 On November 24 , 2013 Ariel made a brief appearance in a TV special Sofia the First : The Floating Palace , which is part of the computer @-@ animated television series Sofia the First . In the special , Sofia is trying to help her mermaid friend , Oona , whose underwater kingdom is under threat . Sofia wishes for help , and the magical amulet of <unk> summons Ariel in her mermaid form , who gives Sofia advice on what to do . Ariel performs the song " The Love We Share " with Sofia . 
 = = = Once Upon a Time = = = 
 A live @-@ action version of Ariel appeared in the ABC television series Once Upon a Time , where she was played by Joanna García . Showrunners Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz had wanted to introduce the character for a while , but saved her for season three when the show 's setting temporarily moved to the fictional Neverland , a land with mermaids . Ariel 's highly anticipated appearance was announced with a teaser trailer at the show 's panel at the San Diego Comic @-@ con on July 20 , 2013 , during the hiatus between the second and third seasons . The showrunners provided their own " spin " on the character of Ariel for the show , but maintained her spirit as someone " who wants to see the world and who wants to experience things outside of what they know " . In portraying the role , García had to film scenes swimming in the cold ocean water of Vancouver with her legs bound , which was additionally challenging since it was her first role after giving birth . Ariel 's main arc took place over several episodes of the 2013 @-@ 2014 third season , and she appeared briefly in one episode of the fourth season . 
 Ariel first appears in the sixth episode season three , " Ariel . " In the Enchanted Forest flashbacks of the episode , Ariel meets Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) by saving her from drowning . Snow and Ariel become friends , during which Snow advises Ariel to pursue her love interest Prince Eric ( Gil McKinney ) , whom she 'd rescued from drowning earlier . Ursula , the sea goddess , has given merfolk the ability to gain legs once a year ; Ariel uses this gift to turn human and attend Prince Eric 's ball with Snow . At the ball , Ariel and Eric dance , with Eric commenting that Ariel seems familiar to him . Eric invites Ariel to join him on an expedition around the world that is leaving the following morning . As Ariel contemplates her dilemma she is approached by the Evil Queen Regina , who has disguised herself as Ursula and pretends to want to help her . Regina 's true agenda is to capture Snow , but Ariel thwarts Regina 's plan and manages to escape with Snow . As an act of revenge , Regina takes Ariel 's voice so she cannot call out to Eric before he leaves on his voyage . 
 Years later Regina calls to Ariel for help . Regina is trapped on Neverland and needs Ariel to use her merfolk ability to travel between realms and collect something from Storybrooke . In return , Regina restores Ariel 's voice , gives her a bracelet that can give her legs for 24 hours , and tells her that Prince Eric is in Storybrooke . In the following episode , " Dark Hollow , " Ariel travels to Storybrooke to meet Belle , and they work together to find Pandora 's box . Ariel manages to bring the box back to Regina in Neverland , and in return Regina casts a spell on the bracelet so Ariel can use it to gain legs whenever and for however long she wishes . At the beginning of the tenth episode of the season , " The New Neverland , " Ariel and Eric are reunited in Storybrooke . 
 In the seventeenth episode , " The Jolly Roger , " Ariel has been separated from Eric again due to the events of " The New Neverland " . In the Enchanted Forest , she learns that Eric has been kidnapped by Blackbeard the pirate , and teams up with Hook to help save him . Faced with an ultimatum , Hook chooses the Jolly Roger over information on Eric 's whereabouts ; Ariel is angered at Hook but leaves to find Eric on her own . In Storybrooke a year later , <unk> disguises herself as Ariel , pretending that she 's still searching for Eric in order to torment Hook with his guilt . It is later revealed that Ariel successfully found Eric on her own and they have been living happily together . 
 Ariel returns briefly in season four episode " Poor Unfortunate Soul . " She rescues Captain Hook from drowning when he falls off the Jolly Roger after altercation with the sea witch Ursula . Ariel explains to Hook through dialogue that Queen Elsa of Arendelle cast a spell to shrink the Jolly Roger into a bottle in order to punish its previous owner , Blackbeard ; Ariel was unknowingly trapped in the spell as well . Although Ariel is still mildly angry with Hook after their last encounter , she is grateful for his freeing her from the ship 's spell . Ariel then helps bring Ursula 's father , King Poseidon , to Storybrooke so that the father @-@ daughter pair can reconcile . 
 Reception for the role has been received positively , with Amy Ratcliffe of IGN saying " The mermaid was endearing , and Garcia couldn 't have done a better job with her . She had terrific chemistry with everyone , too . " 
 = = = Concert = = = 
 In 2016 a stripped @-@ down concert version of The Little Mermaid was staged at the Hollywood Bowl , featuring the songs from the film and four songs from the Broadway musical . Sara Bareilles performed the role of Ariel for the first two nights of the concert ( June 4 and 5 ) , while Jodi Benson , the original voice actress for Ariel , reprised her role for the June 6 performance . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Ariel has received a mixed reception from critics . Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times praised the character , writing that " Ariel is a fully realized female character who thinks and acts independently , even rebelliously , instead of hanging around passively while the fates decide her destiny " . James <unk> of Reelviews wrote that Ariel can be viewed as a template for future Disney heroes and heroines . He also praised Jodi Benson 's vocal performance for the character . In an article for Empire , Levi Buchanan stated that Ariel is " powerful and self @-@ reliant " . Janet Maslin of The New York Times complimented Ariel , stating that " teenagers will appreciate the story 's rebellious heroine " and went on to praise Ariel 's wit . Josh Tyler of Cinema Blend wrote favorably about Ariel although he believed that the character was eroticized , stating , " The scene where Ursula rips out her throat and gives her extremely naked parts below the waist is almost titillating , though I 'm sure to little kids it seems entirely innocent " . Similarly , reviewer John Puccio said that " Ariel is perhaps the sexiest @-@ looking animated character the Disney artists have ever drawn " . In his review of Ariel 's Beginning , James Plath of DVD Town wrote , " For little girls , Ariel is one of the most beloved of Disney princesses , and she holds a warm place in the hearts of parents as well " . Rory <unk> of Film Threat praised Jodi Benson 's vocal performance in Ariel 's Beginning , writing that " Benson adds more to the appeal of Ariel for older fans , and younger girls just learning about her , as well as generations not born yet who will undoubtedly become attached to her , ensuring the continued existence of the franchise " . 
 In their review of The Little Mermaid , the staff of TV Guide wrote that Ariel resembled " a big @-@ haired , denatured Barbie doll , despite her hourglass figure and skimpy seashell brassiere " . Tamara Weston of Time wrote that while Ariel is less passive and more strong @-@ willed than her predecessors , she still " gives up her voice to be with a man " who comes to her rescue at the film 's climax . Hal Hinson of The Washington Post wrote that it would be difficult for children to relate to Ariel 's " feelings of disenchantment and longing for another world " and that she " doesn 't have much personality " . However , Hinson also wrote a positive statement about Ariel , saying it was " refreshing ... to see a heroine who has some sense of what she wants and the resources to go after it " . Nell Minow of Common Sense Media had a mixed view of Ariel , praising her for being " adventuresome , rebellious , and brave " but also criticizing that she " gives up everything – her family , her home , her voice – for love , even though her trust in the sea witch puts everyone she loves in danger " . Daphne Lee of The Star called Ariel " annoying " and went on to state that Ariel " is a silly girl who gives up her voice and her family for a man she knows next to nothing about " . 
 Despite her mixed critical reception , Ariel remains popular with audiences , and is considered one of Disney 's most iconic animated characters , with her specific color combination of red hair , lavender seashells and green tail making her distinctly identifiable . A poll in the Internet Movie Database showed Ariel to be the second most alluring animated character after Jessica Rabbit . In August 2011 , Jodi Benson was honored with a Disney Legend for her work as Ariel and her other projects at Disney . 
 A bi @-@ annual convention called <unk> is dedicated to the character . Ariel is an official " ambassador " for the " Keep Our Oceans Clean " campaign by Environmental Defense , The National Maritime Sanctuary , and The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . " Hipster Ariel " has become a popular internet meme , utilizing a screenshot of Ariel with photoshopped glasses accompanied by a humorous caption . Ariel 's distinct appearance makes her the subject of " look @-@ alike " events and competitions . In the reality TV show and dancing competition Dancing With the Stars , Candace Cameron Bure , Peta Murgatroyd , and Marla Maples dressed up as Ariel in their performances in seasons 18 , 20 , and 22 respectively . 
 = Strez = 
 Strez ( Bulgarian : <unk> ; original spelling : <unk> ) ( fl . 1207 – 1214 ) was a Bulgarian sebastokrator and a member of the Asen dynasty . A major contender for the Bulgarian throne , Strez initially opposed the ascension of his close relative Tsar Boril . He fled to Serbia , where he accepted the vassalage of Grand Prince Stefan Nemanjić , and Serbian support helped him establish himself as a largely independent ruler in a large part of the region of Macedonia . However , Strez turned against his suzerains to become a Bulgarian vassal and joined forces with his former enemy Boril against the Latins and then the Serbs . Strez was murdered amidst a major anti @-@ Serbian campaign under unclear circumstances in a plot that likely involved Saint Sava . 
 = = Throne contender and Serbian vassal = = 
 Nothing is mentioned of Strez until the events in the wake of the sudden death of Tsar Kaloyan ( 1197 – 1207 ) during his siege of the Crusader @-@ held Thessaloniki . Just like Alexius Slav , another noble who would later emerge as a separatist , Strez was a nephew of the Asen brothers Peter , Ivan Asen and Kaloyan , who were the first three emperors of the Second Bulgarian Empire . However , it is unclear whether through his relation to the early <unk> he was a first cousin or a brother of Boril ( 1207 – 1218 ) . 
 At the time of Kaloyan 's death , Strez was in the capital Tarnovo , perhaps seeking to capitalize on his ancestral rights to the Bulgarian crown . However , Boril proved to be the more ambitious candidate . Boril persecuted the other candidates for the throne , and Alexius Slav , along with Ivan Asen 's sons Ivan Asen II had to leave Bulgaria . 
 As happened to other members of the royal family , Boril 's ascension forced Strez and his closest supporters to flee , in that case to neighbouring Serbia , where he was welcomed by the reigning Stefan Nemanjić ( 1196 – 1228 ) in 1207 or early 1208 . Even though Boril requested the extradition of Strez to Bulgaria , the Serbian ruler hoped to use Strez as a puppet in gaining Bulgarian @-@ held territory . Stefan believed that Strez 's royal ancestry and imperial aspirations would make it much easier to impose Serbian rule over Macedonia , Kosovo and Braničevo , as well as Belgrade , all captured by Bulgaria under Kaloyan . At the same time , Boril was unable to take military action against Strez and his Serbian patron , as he had suffered a major defeat at the hands of the Latins at Plovdiv . Stefan went as far as to become a blood brother of Strez in a ceremony which Stefan was hoping would secure Strez 's loyalty . 
 In 1208 , Strez headed a Serbian force which seized much of the Vardar valley from Bulgaria . He established himself as a Serbian vassal at the Prosek fortress ( near modern Demir Kapija ) , formerly the capital of another Bulgarian separatist , <unk> Chrysos . By 1209 , Strez 's realm spread over much of Macedonia , from the Struma valley in the east , where he bordered the lands controlled by Boril , to Bitola and perhaps Ohrid in the west , and from Skopje in the north to Veria in the south . While Strez quickly gained the support of the local Bulgarian population and possibly inherited the remaining administration from Boril 's rule , Serbian units nevertheless remained in his domains , either to guarantee his loyalty or with the intent to oust him and annex his lands . 
 = = Bulgarian vassal = = 
 Alexius Slav 's marriage to the daughter of Latin Emperor Henry of Flanders in 1209 was potentially a great danger to Boril , who could be facing their joint forces . Fearing such a coalition , Boril approached Strez , who was at the time gaining more power and was close to complete independence from Serbia . Strez agreed to a union with his former enemy , though only after Boril reconfirmed his complete autonomy . Strez eliminated the remaining Serbian troops in his lands in an act that the Serbs saw as devil @-@ inspired treason . It is not impossible that Boril persuaded Strez through military action , though it is more likely that the union was achieved through negotiations . 
 In the same year , Strez and Boril had come to peace with Michael I Komnenos Doukas , the ruler of Epirus . In late 1209 , Strez and Michael may have attempted a joint campaign against Thessaloniki , as they both lost lands to the Latins in what was likely a retaliation raid in late 1209 or early 1210 . The failure of this attack prompted Michael to break away from his Bulgarian allies and support the Latins . In early 1211 , Strez clashed with the Latins and Epirotes at Thessaloniki and required Boril 's assistance after Michael and Henry invaded the western reaches of Strez 's realm . In the early summer , the allied Bulgarian army suffered a heavy defeat at Bitola at the hands of Michael , Henry 's brother Eustace and Bernard of <unk> . Even though it resulted in no territorial losses , it prevented Strez from an expansion to the south . In relation to an anti @-@ Bogomil council in 1211 , Strez is referred to as a sebastokrator . The title was either conferred to him by Boril as part of their agreement in 1209 , or was awarded to Strez by Kaloyan during his rule . In any case , Boril certainly recognized Strez 's right to that appellation . There are signs that Strez divided his possessions into administrative units , each headed by a sebastos . In 1212 , Strez was powerful enough to be considered one of the Latin Empire 's chief adversaries , along with Boril , Michael and Nicaean emperor Theodore I Laskaris , by Henry himself . 
 = = Anti @-@ Serbian campaign and death = = 
 After a series of military failures against the Latins , Boril made peace with Henry in 1213 , cemented through two royal marriages . As Boril 's vassal , Strez joined the Bulgarian – Latin union , the short @-@ term goal of which was a double invasion of Serbia . In 1214 , the forces of Boril and Henry attacked Serbia from the east , while Strez 's army , deemed in contemporary sources to be " countless " , penetrated Serbian territory from the south and reached the Polog . Facing a major invasion on two fronts , the Serbs were quick to ask for peace . After Stefan 's envoys to Strez failed , he sent his brother , archbishop Sava ( canonized as Saint Sava ) to Strez 's camp . 
 Even though Sava 's diplomacy was of no effect either , Strez died the night after Sava 's departure . Serbian sources present the death of Strez as a miracle , Strez being stabbed by an angel , though in reality he was very likely murdered in a plot orchestrated by Sava . Historian John V. A. Fine theorizes that Sava may have found supporters among Strez 's nobles , some of whom had turned against him and organized his murder , only to defect to Serbia immediately afterwards . According to the hagiography of Saint Sava , in his dying words Strez claimed he was stabbed by a young soldier on the order of Sava . 
 While Strez 's murder meant an end to the Latin – Bulgarian campaign , Stefan did not undertake a campaign into Macedonia due to the proximity of the coalition troops , which had halted at Niš . In 1217 , all of Strez 's territory was under the Epirote rule of Theodore Komnenos Doukas , though Boril may have controlled some or all of it in the meantime . The Serbs failed to take advantage of Strez 's death as far as they did not manage to acquire any of his former domains . 
 = = Assessment and legacy = = 
 Contemporary Serbian sources , such as the hagiography of Saint Sava , are highly critical of Strez 's actions . The Serbs accused Strez of recklessness , drunkenness , <unk> , treason and cruelty . The hagiography of Saint Sava tells of Strez 's alleged tendency to have captives thrown from a high cliff into the Vardar River for his and his guests ' entertainment . As the prisoners were falling to their death , Strez would sarcastically shout at them not to get their coats wet . Bulgarian historian Ivan <unk> dismisses these allegations as slanderous . In his biography of Strez , he hails the medieval ruler as a " true member of the Asen dynasty " and defends his actions due to him being a " child of his time " . <unk> assesses Strez as a characteristic , vivid personality who put his independence above all . 
 The name of Strez has become a part of Bulgarian folklore , including a legendary account of his life written down as the Biography of Prince <unk> in the 18th century or later . At least one location throughout Macedonia was tied by the locals with Strez , whom the folk interpreted as a voivode or <unk> who defended the people against the Ottomans . Some ruins by the Vardar River near Jegunovce west of Skopje were known to the locals as " Strez 's Fortress " ( <unk> <unk> , <unk> kale ) . Even though in reality his capital , Prosek , lay far to the south , the castle at Jegunovce may have formed part of Strez 's border fortifications , or it may have been the site of his negotiations with Sava and his murder . 
 = Battle of Bad Axe = 
 The Battle of Bad Axe , also known as the Bad Axe Massacre , occurred 1 – 2 August 1832 , between Sauk ( Sac ) and Fox Indians and United States Army regulars and militia . This final battle of the Black Hawk War took place near present @-@ day Victory , Wisconsin in the United States . It marked the end of the war between white settlers and militia in Illinois and Michigan Territory , and the Sauk and Fox tribes under warrior Black Hawk . 
 The battle occurred in the aftermath of the Battle of Wisconsin Heights , as Black Hawk 's band fled the pursuing militia . The militia caught up with them on the eastern bank of the Mississippi River , a few miles downstream from the mouth of the Bad Axe River . The battle that followed was very one @-@ sided : historians have called it a massacre since the 1850s . The fighting took place over two days , with the steamboat Warrior present on both days . By the second day , Black Hawk and most of the Native American leaders had fled , though many of the band stayed behind . The victory for the United States was decisive and the end of the war allowed much of Illinois and present @-@ day Wisconsin to be opened for further settlement . 
 = = Background = = 
 In an 1804 treaty between the governor of Indiana Territory and a council of leaders from the Sauk and Fox , Native American tribes ceded 50 million acres ( 200 @,@ 000 km2 ) of their land to the United States for $ 2 @,@ 234 @.@ 50 and an annual annuity of $ 1 @,@ 000 . The treaty also allowed the Sauk and Fox to remain on their land until it was sold . The treaty was controversial ; Sauk war leader Black Hawk , and others disputed its validity because they said that the full tribal councils were not consulted and the council that negotiated the treaty did not have the authority to cede land . After the discovery of lead in and around Galena , Illinois , during the 1820s , miners began moving into the area ceded in the 1804 treaty . When the Sauk and Fox returned from the winter hunt in 1829 , they found their land occupied by white settlers and were forced to return west of the Mississippi River . 
 Angered by the loss of his birthplace , Black Hawk led a number of incursions across the Mississippi River into Illinois between 1830 and 1831 , but each time was persuaded to return west without bloodshed . In April 1832 , encouraged by promises of alliance with other tribes and the British , he again moved his so @-@ called " British Band " of around 1 @,@ 000 warriors and non @-@ combatants into Illinois . Finding no allies , he attempted to return across the Mississippi to present @-@ day Iowa , but the undisciplined Illinois Militia 's actions led to Black Hawk 's surprising victory at the Battle of Stillman 's Run . A number of other engagements followed , and the militia of Michigan Territory and the state of Illinois were mobilized to hunt down Black Hawk 's band . The conflict became known as the Black Hawk War . 
 The period between the Battle of Stillman 's Run in May and the raid at Sinsinawa Mound in late June was filled with war @-@ related activity . A series of attacks at Buffalo Grove , the Plum River settlement , Fort Blue Mounds , and the war 's most famous incident , the Indian Creek massacre , all took place between mid @-@ May and late June 1832 . Two key battles , one at Horseshoe Bend on 16 June and the other at Waddams Grove on 18 June , played a role in changing public perception about the militia after its defeat at Stillman 's Run . The Battle of Apple River Fort on 24 June marked the end of a week that was an important turning point for the settlers . The fight was a 45 @-@ minute gun battle between defenders garrisoned inside Apple River Fort and Sauk and Fox warriors led by Chief Black Hawk . 
 The next day , after an inconclusive skirmish at Kellogg 's Grove , Black Hawk and his band fled the approaching militia through modern @-@ day Wisconsin . The Sinsinawa Mound raid occurred on 29 June , five days after the Battle of Apple River Fort . As the band fled the pursuing militia , they passed through what are now Beloit and Janesville , then followed the Rock River toward Horicon Marsh , where they headed west toward the Four Lakes region , near modern @-@ day Madison . On 21 July 1832 , the militia caught up with Black Hawk 's band as they attempted to cross the Wisconsin River , near the present @-@ day Town of Roxbury , in Dane County , Wisconsin , resulting in the Battle of Wisconsin Heights . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 A few hours after midnight on 22 July , with Black Hawk 's band resting on a knoll on the Wisconsin Heights Battlefield , Neapope , one of the key leaders accompanying Black Hawk , attempted to explain to the nearby militia officers that his group wanted only to end the fighting and go back across the Mississippi River . In a " loud shrill voice " he delivered a conciliatory speech in his native Ho @-@ Chunk language , assuming Pauquette and his band of Ho @-@ Chunk guides were still with the militia at Wisconsin Heights . However , the U.S. troops did not understand him , because their Sauk allies had already departed the battlefield . Following this failed attempt at peace , Neapope abandoned the cause and returned to a nearby Ho @-@ Chunk village . The British Band had slowly disintegrated over the months of conflict ; most of the Ho @-@ Chunk and Potawatomi that had joined were gone by the Battle of Bad Axe . Others , especially children and the elderly , had died of starvation while the band fled the pursuing militia through the swamps around Lake Koshkonong . 
 Following the engagement at Wisconsin Heights , the militia decided to wait until the following day to pursue Black Hawk . They heard , but did not understand , Neapope 's speech during the night , and to their surprise , when morning arrived their enemy had disappeared . The battle , though militarily devastating for the British Band , had allowed much of the group to escape to temporary safety across the Wisconsin River . The reprieve was short @-@ lived for many – a group of Fox women and children who attempted to escape down the Wisconsin following the battle were captured by <unk> tribes or shot by soldiers further downstream . During the night , while the non @-@ combatants escaped in canoes , Black Hawk and the remaining warriors crossed the river near present @-@ day Prairie du Sac , Wisconsin . The band fled west over rugged terrain toward the banks of the Mississippi River , with a week 's head start on the militia . 
 While the band fled west , Commanding General Henry Atkinson trimmed his force to a few hundred men and set out to join militia commanders Henry Dodge and James D. Henry to regroup and resupply at Fort Blue Mounds . Under the command of Atkinson , around 1 @,@ 300 men from the commands of Henry , Dodge , Alexander Posey and Milton Alexander crossed the Wisconsin River between 27 July and 28 July near present day Helena , Wisconsin . The well @-@ fed and rested militia force picked up Black Hawk 's trail again on 28 July near present @-@ day Spring Green , Wisconsin , and relatively quickly closed the gap on the famished and battle @-@ weary band of Native Americans . On 1 August , Black Hawk and about 500 men , women , and children arrived at the eastern bank of the Mississippi , a few miles downstream from the mouth of the Bad Axe River . On arrival , the leaders of the band , including Black Hawk , called a council meeting to discuss their next move . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = First day = = = 
 Near the mouth of the Bad Axe River , on 1 August 1832 , Black Hawk and Winnebago prophet and fellow British Band leader White Cloud advised the band against wasting time building rafts to cross the Mississippi River , because the U.S. forces were closing in , urging them instead to flee northward and seek refuge among the Ho @-@ Chunk . However , most of the band chose to try to cross the river . 
 While some of the band managed to escape across the Mississippi River that afternoon , the steamboat Warrior , commanded by Captain Joseph Throckmorton , appeared on the scene and halted the band 's attempt to cross to safety . Waving a white flag , Black Hawk tried to surrender , but as had happened in the past the soldiers failed to understand and the scene deteriorated into battle . The warriors who survived the initial volley found cover and returned fire and a two @-@ hour firefight ensued . The Warrior eventually withdrew from battle because of lack of fuel , and returned to Fort Crawford at Prairie du Chien , Wisconsin . 
 At the time , newspaper reports stated that 23 Native Americans were killed , including one woman estimated to be 19 years old ; she was shot through her child 's upper arm as she stood holding the child watching the battle . Her child was retrieved by Lieutenant Anderson after the battle , and taken to the surgical tent , where the baby 's arm was amputated . The child was then taken to Prairie du Chien , where he is believed to have recovered . The fight convinced Black Hawk that refuge lay to the north , not west across the Mississippi . In one of his last actions as commander of the British Band , Black Hawk implored his followers to flee with him , to the north . Many did not listen , and late on 1 August , Black Hawk , White Cloud and about three dozen other followers left the British Band and fled northward . Most of the remaining warriors and non @-@ combatants remained on the eastern bank of the Mississippi . Forces on the Warrior suffered only one casualty – a retired soldier from Fort Snelling was wounded in the knee during the fight . 
 = = = Second day = = = 
 At 2 a.m. on 2 August , Atkinson 's forces awoke and began to break camp , setting out before sunrise . They had moved only a few miles when they ran into the rear scout element of the remaining Sauk and Fox forces . The Sauk scouts attempted to lead the enemy away from the main camp and were initially successful . The combined U.S. forces fell into formation for battle : Generals Alexander and Posey formed the right wing , Henry the left wing , and Dodge and the regulars the center element . As the Native Americans retreated toward the river , the militia 's left wing were left in the rear without orders . When a regiment stumbled across the main trail to the camp , the scouts could only fight in retreat and hope that they had given their comrades a chance to escape the militia , while the Sauk and Fox kept retreating to the river . However , Warrior returned after obtaining more wood in Prairie du Chien , leaving the refueling point about midnight and arriving at Bad Axe about 10 a.m. The slaughter that followed continued for the next eight hours . 
 Henry 's men , the entire left wing , descended a bluff into the midst of several hundred Sauk and Fox warriors , and a desperate bayonet and musket battle followed . Women and children fled the fight into the river , where many drowned immediately . The battle continued for 30 minutes before Atkinson came up with Dodge 's center element , cutting off escape for many of the remaining Native warriors . Some warriors managed to escape the fight to a willow island , which was being peppered with canister shot and gunfire by Warrior . 
 The soldiers killed everyone who tried to run for cover or cross the river ; men , women and children alike were shot dead . More than 150 people were killed outright at the scene of the battle , which many combatants later termed a massacre . The soldiers then scalped most of the dead , and cut long strips of flesh from others for use as razor strops . U.S. forces captured an additional 75 Native Americans . Of the total 400 – 500 Sauk and Fox at Bad Axe on 2 August , most were killed at the scene , others escaped across the river . Those who escaped across the river found only temporary reprieve as many were captured and killed by Sioux warriors acting in support of the U.S. Army . Sioux brought 68 scalps and 22 prisoners to the U.S. Indian agent Joseph M. Street in the weeks following the battle . The United States suffered five killed in action and 19 wounded . 
 = = Context = = 
 The Battle of Bad Axe was a mostly one @-@ sided affair that has been called a massacre by both modern and historical accounts of the engagement , as well as by those who participated . On 3 August 1832 , the day after the battle , Indian Agent Street wrote to William Clark describing the scene at Bad Axe and the events that occurred there . He stated that most of the Sauk and Fox were shot in the water or drowned trying to cross the Mississippi to safety . Major John Allen Wakefield published an account of the war in 1834 , which included a description of the battle . His description characterized the killing of women and children as a mistake : 
 " During the engagement we killed some of the squaws through mistake . It was a great misfortune to those miserable squaws and children , that they did not carry into execution [ the plan ] they had formed on the morning of the battle -- that was , to come and meet us , and surrender themselves prisoners of war . It was a horrid sight to witness little children , wounded and suffering the most excruciating pain , although they were of the savage enemy , and the common enemy of the country . " 
 Black Hawk 's own account , though he was not present at the battle 's second day , termed the incident a massacre . Later histories continued to assail the actions of the whites at Bad Axe . The 1887 Perry A. Armstrong book , The Sauks and the Black Hawk War , called Throckmorton 's actions " inhuman and dastardly " and went on to call him a " second Nero or <unk> [ sic ] " . In 1898 , during events honoring the 66th anniversary of the battle , Reuben Gold Thwaites termed the fight a " massacre " during a speech at the battle site . He emphasized this theme again in a 1903 collection of essays . 
 Modern @-@ day historians have continued to characterize the battle as a wholesale massacre . Mark Grimsley , a history professor at Ohio State University , concluded in 2005 , based on other modern accounts , that the Battle of Bad Axe would be better termed a massacre . Kerry A. Trask 's 2007 work , Black Hawk : The Battle for the Heart of America , points to the writings of Wakefield as evidence that delusional beliefs about doing brave deeds and magnifying manliness spurred the U.S. forces to revel in and pursue massacring and exterminating the Sauk and Fox . Trask concluded that Wakefield 's statement " I must confess , that it filled my heart with gratitude and joy , to think that I had been instrumental , with many others , in delivering my country of those merciless savages , and restoring those people again to their peaceful homes and <unk> , " was a viewpoint held by nearly all militia members . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Black Hawk War of 1832 resulted in the deaths of at least 70 settlers and soldiers , and hundreds of Black Hawk 's band . As well as the combat casualties of the war , a relief force under General Winfield Scott suffered hundreds deserted and dead , many from cholera . The end of the war at Bad Axe ended the large @-@ scale threat of Native American attacks in northwest Illinois , and allowed further settlement of Illinois and what became Iowa and Wisconsin . 
 The members of the British Band , and the Fox , Kickapoo , Sauk , Ho @-@ Chunk and Potawatomi that later joined them , suffered unknown numbers of dead during the war . While some died fighting , others were tracked down and killed by Sioux , Menominee , Ho @-@ Chunk , and other native tribes . Still others died of starvation or drowned during the Band 's long trek up the Rock River toward the mouth of the Bad Axe . The entire British Band was not wiped out at Bad Axe ; some survivors drifted back home to their villages . This was relatively simple for the Potawatomi and Ho @-@ Chunk of the band . Many Sauk and Fox found return to their homes more difficult , and while some returned safely , others were held in custody by the army . Prisoners , some taken at the Battle of Bad Axe , and others taken by <unk> Native American tribes in the following weeks , were taken to Fort Armstrong at modern Rock Island , Illinois . About 120 prisoners – men , women , and children – waited until the end of August to be released by General Winfield Scott . 
 Black Hawk and most of the leaders of the British Band were not immediately captured following the conclusion of hostilities . On 20 August , Sauk and Fox under Keokuk turned over Neapope and several other British Band chiefs to Winfield Scott at Fort Armstrong . Black Hawk , however , remained elusive . After fleeing the battle scene with White Cloud and a small group of warriors , Black Hawk had moved northeast toward the headwaters of the La Crosse River . The group camped for a few days and was eventually counseled by a group of Ho @-@ Chunk , which included White Cloud 's brother , to surrender . Though they initially resisted the pleas for surrender , the group eventually traveled to the Ho @-@ Chunk village at La Crosse and prepared to surrender . On 27 August 1832 , Black Hawk , White Cloud and the remnants of the British Band surrendered to Joseph M. Street at Prairie du Chien . 
 = I Remember You ( Adventure Time ) = 
 " I Remember You " is the twenty @-@ fifth and penultimate episode of the fourth season of the American animated television series Adventure Time . The episode was written and storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . It originally aired on Cartoon Network on October 15 , 2012 . The episode later re @-@ aired on March 25 , 2013 , together with the fifth season episode " Simon & Marcy , " and as such was advertised as a half @-@ hour special . 
 The series follows the adventures of Finn ( voiced by Jeremy Shada ) , a human boy , and his best friend and adoptive brother Jake ( voiced by John DiMaggio ) , a dog with magical powers to change shape and grow and shrink at will . In this episode , Marceline the Vampire Queen ( voiced by Olivia Olson ) collaborates with the Ice King ( voiced by Tom Kenny ) to write a song , and Marceline tries to get the Ice King to remember who he really is . This episode reveals that Marceline and the Ice King knew each other during aftermath of the Mushroom War , a cataclysmic event that occurred a thousand years previous . 
 Formerly titled " Help , " " I Remember You " helped expand upon and explore the Ice King 's previous life . The episode features four songs — " The Fry Song , " " Oh Bubblegum , " " Nuts , " and " Remember You " — all of which were written by Sugar , although Sanchez co @-@ wrote the lyrics on " Oh Bubblegum . " Sugar used an omnichord for the demo of the eponymous song , and her playing ended up as part of the episode . " I Remember You " was watched by 2 @.@ 535 million people and received universal critical acclaim , with many critics praising the story 's depth and its exploration of mental disorders , memory , and loss . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 In the context of the series , Marceline the Vampire Queen is a thousand @-@ year @-@ old vampire . The Ice King is a recurring antagonist of the series , and frequently steals princesses throughout Ooo ; although he is often at odds with Finn and Jake , he is generally not a serious threat . He was formerly a human archaeologist named Simon Petrikov who discovered a magic crown that gives him magical ice powers but eroded his memory and made him go insane . In addition , throughout the series , various character and events hint at the mysterious Mushroom War , a cataclysmic war that destroyed modern human society . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 The Ice King decides that he wants to enlist Marceline 's help in writing a song to woo princesses , taking pages randomly torn from an old scrapbook with him for later inspiration . He flies to her cave , and after a minor scuffle that involves Finn and Jake , Marceline finally relents and helps him write a song . At first , the Ice King simply sings a song he wrote about Princess Bubblegum , before breaking down , crying about his loneliness and damaging Marceline 's living room with his ice magic . Marceline tells him to stop acting crazy , and he pushes her , before timidly retreating to the top of her refrigerator . Marceline begins to lament , via the song " Nuts , " and notes that , despite his instability , she is glad to see him . The Ice King is surprised to find out that she " likes " him and asks for a hug . However , when he misinterprets her feelings and tries to kiss her , Marceline angrily confronts him and asks if he remembers his past by calling him by his actual name : Simon . 
 The Ice King is oblivious to his former self , and Marceline begins looking through the Ice King 's scrapbook pages to show him evidence of his former life . Among the pages is a picture of a young Marceline , with a message to her from a thousand years ago scrawled on the back . The message , written by Simon before his mind was completely consumed by the magic of the crown , asks Marceline to forgive him for whatever he does under the crown 's influence . The Ice King fails to understand the context , and believes that he has written not a note of apology but lyrics , and attempts to add music to his " song " . Overcome by emotion , Marceline cries and begins singing along while the Ice King plays drums , oblivious as to what is actually going on . 
 While the eponymous song " Remember You " is being sung , the episode flashes back almost a thousand years before the events of the episode . A young Marceline is seen crying in the wreckage of a city , presumably after the cataclysmic Mushroom War . Simon Petrikov sees her from a distance and runs over . In an attempt to comfort her , he gives her Hambo , a teddy bear , that he finds in the ruins of a toy store . Marceline takes the stuffed animal , stops crying , and looks up in happiness . 
 = = Production = = 
 " I Remember You " was storyboarded by Cole Sanchez and Rebecca Sugar , from a story by Patrick McHale , Kent Osborne , and Pendleton Ward . The episode was directed by Larry Leichliter . The idea to create an episode based on a shared history between Marceline and the Ice King was Ward 's idea . Sugar had also been pushing for a Marceline and Ice King musical episode . Sugar was responsible for designing Marceline 's look in the episode . According to her , the shirt that Marceline wears was " loosely based off a stretched out old D.A.R.E. shirt . " The original working title for the episode was " Help " . Former storyboard artist and creative director for the series Adam Muto joked that the change was made due to the famous Beatles song of the same name . 
 The episode features three new songs : " Oh Bubblegum " , " Nuts " , and the titular " Remember You " . Sugar composed the music for all four , and wrote the lyrics ( Sanchez co @-@ wrote the lyrics for " Oh Bubblegum " ) . Sugar recorded demos for the songs and Rob Sugar , Rebecca 's father , released the three new demos on his official YouTube account . For the demo for " I Remember You " , Sugar recorded vocals over a separate track of her playing an omnichord ; Sugar 's <unk> playing was eventually worked directly into the episode . According to Rob , the " off @-@ key notes were accidents of running out of power — it took a lot of tries to make it happen on cue . " While Sugar was pitching the song , she played her songs but her omnichord started to lose power . Sugar and the crew realized that the sound of the omnichord losing power fit with the mood of the episode . For the eponymous song , Sugar noted that it " was so amazing to work with Olivia Olson and Tom Kenny on the songs for this episode , they had so much chemistry in the booth together ! " She wrote that she constructed the episode to " do them justice . " Olson noted that , despite the sad themes featured in the installment , recording the dialogue with Kenny and music for the episode was a fun experience . While the two were recording , Olson had to sing Kenny his melodies ; Kenny would then parrot the lines back in the voice of the Ice King . 
 In addition to the three new songs , the episode also features a modified version of " The Fry Song " , which had originally appeared in the second season episode " It Came from the Nightosphere " . During the recording of the aforementioned episode , Tom Kenny recorded his own version of the " Fry Song " for fun , which was later included in the third season episode " Holly Jolly Secrets " . This version later inspired Ice King 's alternate " Gunter " version in " I Remember You " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " I Remember You " aired on October 15 , 2012 . It was viewed by 2 @.@ 535 million people , and received a 0 @.@ 5 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 0 @.@ 5 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds at the time of the broadcast . The episode later re @-@ aired on March 25 , 2013 , together with the fifth season episode " Simon & Marcy , " and was advertised by Cartoon Network as a " half hour special . " This special was watched by 2 @.@ 6 million viewers . 
 The episode received glowing critical reception . Charlie Jane Anders of io9 called the episode " one of the most intense things I 've seen in ages . " She specifically cited the final flashback as noteworthy , noting that " The final scene , where Marceline and Ice King have this weird duet , made me lose my shit and keeps popping into my head . It 's rare that any television show gets its hooks into your brain like that , but especially a kid 's cartoon . " She concluded that the main reason that the ending was so powerful was that it showed the viewers the " immediate aftermath of the Mushroom War " and allowed the viewers to see " the way Marceline 's personal loss mirrors the wider loss of the end of the entire world " following the war . 
 Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club wrote that " never has an Adventure Time episode triggered waterworks like ' I Remember You ' . " He called it " one of the most touching stories this series has ever told , " and praised the way it took Marceline and the Ice King — whom he called two of the show 's most tragic characters — and put " them together in a way that hits like a sledgehammer . " He felt that the episode also served as a way to tell " a heartbreaking story about how mental illness can tear people apart , " noting that the Ice King 's condition is similar to how people with bipolar disorder behave . Eric Kohn of IndieWire , in an article explaining why " Adventure Time is the best sci @-@ fi show on TV right now " following the airing of " Simon & Marcy , " wrote that " I Remember You " was " the finest entry in the series ' history . " He further complimented the titular song , describing it as " heartbreaking " and " show @-@ stopping . " 
 Steven Aoun of PopMatters applauded the way the episode " focuses on two popular supporting characters , and foregrounds the relation between memory and identity . " Furthermore , the site noted that " the sound that takes you by surprise may be your own crying . " Novelist Lev Grossman , in an interview with NPR , praised the backstory of the Ice King and the exploration of his condition , noting that his origin is " psychologically plausible . " Grossman praised the way the series was able to tackle the issues of mental illness , saying : " It 's very affecting . My dad has been going through having Alzheimer 's , and he 's forgotten so much about who he used to be . And I look at him and think this cartoon is about my father dying . " 
 = = Media release = = 
 The episode first saw physical release as part of the 2013 Jake the Dad DVD , which included 16 episodes from the series ' fourth and fifth seasons . It was later re @-@ released as part of the complete fourth season DVD in October 2014 . In addition , the 2014 limited edition 12 " vinyl record release Marceline the Vampire Queen – Rock the Nightosphere included both " Nuts " and " I Remember You " alongside other songs sung by Marceline . 
 = Allah jang Palsoe = 
 Allah jang Palsoe ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Perfected Spelling : Allah yang <unk> ; Indonesian for The False God ) is a 1919 stage drama in six acts written by the ethnic @-@ Chinese author Kwee Tek Hoay . Based on E. Phillips Oppenheim 's short story " The False Gods " , the Malay @-@ language play follows two brothers , one a devout son who holds firmly to his morals and personal honour , the other who worships money and prioritises personal gain . Over more than a decade , the two learn that money ( the titular false god ) is not the path to happiness . 
 Kwee Tek Hoay 's first stage play , Allah jang Palsoe was written as a realist response to whimsical contemporary theatres . Though the published stageplay sold poorly and the play was deemed difficult to perform , Allah jang Palsoe found success on the stage . By 1930 it had been performed by various ethnic Chinese troupes to popular acclaim and pioneered a body of work by authors such as Lauw Giok Lan , Tio Ie Soei , and Tjoa Tjien Mo . In 2006 the script for the play , which continues to be performed , was republished with updated spelling by the Lontar Foundation . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Brothers Tan Kioe Lie and Tan Kioe Gie are preparing to leave their Cicuruk home to find work : Kioe Lie will go to Bandung , while Kioe Gie will go to Batavia ( now Jakarta ) and become a letter @-@ setter . As they are packing , Kioe Lie 's fiancée Gouw Hap Nio visits . She leaves some snacks with their father , the poor farmer Tan Lauw Pe , before going home , promising to take care of Pe while his sons are away . The brothers finish packing , say goodbye to their father , and head for the train station . 
 Three years later , Kioe Lie visits his brother in the latter 's Batavia home . Kioe Gie has become an editor of the newspaper Kamadjoean and is known as a generous philanthropist . Kioe Lie , meanwhile , has become the manager of a tapioca factory , but is planning to leave for competing business run by Tjio Tam Bing , who has offered him twice the salary . Kioe Gie asks him to reconsider , or at least not take any customers , but Kioe Lie is set on his goals . Before Kioe Lie leaves , the brothers discuss marriage : since Lie has no intent to marry Hap Nio soon , Kioe Gie asks permission to marry first . Though Kioe Lie disapproves of Kioe Gie 's sweetheart , a poor orphan girl named Oeij Ijan Nio , he agrees . 
 Another four years pass , and Kioe Gie has become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of <unk> and married Ijan Nio . He is concerned , however , over the newspaper 's new political orientation : the owner , Oeij Tjoan Siat , is aiming to make the paper pro @-@ Dutch East Indies , a stance that Kioe Gie considers a betrayal to the ethnic Chinese . When Tjoan Siat comes to Kioe Gie 's home to ask him to follow the former 's new political leanings , heavily influenced by a monthly payment of 2 @,@ 000 gulden offered by an unnamed political party , Kioe Gie refuses and resigns . 
 During the following week Kioe Gie and his wife sell their belongings and prepare to move back to Cicuruk . This departure is delayed by a visit from Kioe Lie , who reveals that he will be marrying Tam Bing 's widow Tan Houw Nio – Tam Bing having died the year before . Kioe Gie is horrified , both because the widow has the same surname and because Kioe Lie had promised their father on his deathbed to marry Hap Nio . After an extensive argument , Kioe Lie disowns his brother and leaves . 
 Five years later , Kioe Lie and Houw Nio 's marriage is failing . Owing to poor investments ( some made with embezzled money ) , Houw Nio 's gambling , and Kioe Lie 's keeping of a mistress , they have lost their fortune . Kioe Lie tries to convince his wife to sell her jewellery , thus allowing him to return the stolen money . Houw Nio , however , refuses , tells him to sell the house and his mistress ' jewellery , and then leaves . Soon afterwards , Kioe Lie 's friend Tan Tiang An warns him that he will be arrested by the police unless he flees the colony . Together they rent a car and Kioe Lie heads for the port at Batavia . 
 Passing through Cicuruk , the car breaks down and , while the chauffeur attempts to fix it , Kioe Lie takes shelter in a nearby home . He learns that it belongs to Kioe Gie and Hap Nio , who have built up a vast farm , garden , and orchard that provides them with ample income . The two philanthropists are friends with the area 's elite , and Hap Nio is happily married to a rich plantation administrator . When Kioe Gie and his companions return from playing tennis , they discover Kioe Lie hiding shamefully under a piano . Kioe Lie admits that he was wrong to be greedy . When a police officer arrives , Kioe Lie confesses to poisoning Tam Bing , then runs outside and shoots himself . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = Writing = = 
 Allah jang Palsoe was the first stage play by the journalist Kwee Tek Hoay . Born to an ethnic Chinese textile merchant and his wife , Kwee was raised in Chinese culture and schools that focused on modernity . By the time he wrote the drama , Kwee Tek Hoay was an active proponent of Buddhist theology . However , he also wrote extensively on themes relating to native Indonesians and was a keen social observer . He read extensively in Dutch , English , and Malay , and drew on these readings after becoming a writer . 
 According to the historian Nio Joe Lan , Allah jang Palsoe was the first stage drama in Malay by a Chinese writer . The six @-@ act work was written in vernacular Malay , the lingua franca of the Indies , and was based on E. Phillips Oppenheim 's short story " The False Gods " . Though in his foreword Kwee Tek Hoay apologised for the quality of the stage play , writing that " the content and arrangement of this book are far from what you could call neat " , Sumardjo praises his language , feeling that the story flowed well . 
 At the time Allah jang Palsoe was written , stage performances were heavily influenced by orality . Contemporary theatres , such as bangsawan and <unk> , were unscripted and generally used fantastic settings and plotlines . Kwee Tek Hoay heavily disapproved of such whimsy , considering it " better to say things as they are , than to create events out of nothing , which although perhaps more entertaining and satisfying to viewers or readers , are falsehoods and lies , going against the truth " . After condemning contemporary playwrights who merely wrote down existing stories , Kwee Tek Hoay expressed the hope that ultimately a unique form of Chinese Malay theatre — inspired by European theatrical traditions but dealing with Chinese themes — could be developed . Allah jang Palsoe was intended to be the first published stage play in this new tradition . 
 Kwee Tek Hoay made numerous recommendations for the play 's casting , costuming , setting , and music . He wrote that if sufficiently talented actors to portray Kioe Lie and Kioe Gie could not be found , " it would be better to not perform this show " , and that Ijan Nio needed to show " a perfect woman or wife " , as opposed to the " fierce and rough " Houw Nio . He provided four set designs , to be used at appropriate points in the plot , and gave suggestions for setting up the needed backgrounds and props . Kwee recommended that the play include only one song , John Payne and Henry Bishop 's " Home ! Sweet Home ! " , which was to be performed in the sixth act with either English or Malay vocals and a trio of piano , viola , and guitar or mandolin . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 The title Allah jang Palsoe is a reference to money , with an underlying didactic message that money is not everything in the world , and that an unquenchable thirst for it would turn one into " a money animal " . Throughout the dialogue , money is referred to as the false God , with Lie as a character who deifies money to the point of ignoring his other duties and only realising his error after it is too late . Gie , although he does become rich , does not consider money a god , but is a philanthropist and holds to his morals . The Indonesian literary critic <unk> <unk> Damono writes that such a message would have been popular among ethnic Chinese of the contemporary Indies , and as such the play would have been a favourite of social organisations . 
 The Indonesian literary critic Jakob Sumardjo likewise notes money as the central issue of Allah jang Palsoe , writing that the play shows individuals doing anything to earn it — even sacrificing their values . He writes that the corrupting nature of money remains present in the best of times , and considers Kwee Tek Hoay 's message to have been too heavily based in morality rather than considerations of social and human factors . As a result , he writes , readers are brought to understand the lust for money as a " human illness " which must be overcome : they should follow the example of Tan Kioe Gie , not Tan Kioe Lie . John Kwee of the University of Auckland , citing Gie 's departure from Kamadjoean , suggests that this was a challenge directed at the Chinese Malay press , then becoming increasingly commercial . 
 Allah jang Palsoe also contains themes unrelated to money . The sinologist Thomas Rieger notes the presence of a Chinese national identity , pointing to Gie as a young man " excelling in all Confucianist values " , leaving his comfortable job rather than becoming an apologist for the Dutch colonial government to the detriment of his ethnic Chinese peers . Another sinologist , Myra Sidharta , looks at Kwee Tek Hoay 's view of women . She writes that his depiction of an ideal woman was not yet fully developed in Allah jang Palsoe , though she finds Houw Nio to be a depiction of how a woman should not act : selfish and addicted to gambling . 
 In a preface to his 1926 drama Korbannja Kong @-@ Ek ( The Victim of Kong @-@ Ek ) , Kwee Tek Hoay wrote that he had drawn inspiration from the realist Norwegian playwright Henrik Ibsen in that work , having read and reread the author 's plays . Damono finds signs of Ibsen 's influence already present in Allah jang Palsoe . He compares the stage directions in Allah jang Palsoe to those in Ibsen 's Hedda Gabler and finds them to be similar in their level of detail . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The script for Allah jang Palsoe was released by the Batavia @-@ based publisher <unk> Koen Bie in mid @-@ 1919 . This edition included a foreword from the author , four illustrations of recommended stage decor , a number of performance guidelines , and a brief outline of the state of the theatre among the ethnic Chinese . Kwee Tek Hoay paid for this printing , a run of 1 @,@ 000 copies , out of his own pocket and saw large financial losses . The stage play was republished in 2006 , using the Perfected Spelling System , as part of the first volume of the Lontar Foundation 's anthology of Indonesian stage dramas . 
 Allah jang Palsoe was well received and broadly adopted . Troupes were allowed to perform the play as a charity opera , though proceeds were to go to the Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan branch in Bogor . One performance is recorded as garnering 10 @,@ 000 gulden . According to an advertisement , by 1930 the play had been performed " tens of times " and was popular with ethnic Chinese theatre troupes . 
 Kwee Tek Hoay received numerous letters from fans of Allah jang Palsoe , spurring him to continue writing . Considering the play too difficult for native troupes to stage , when one such troupe , the Union Dalia Opera , requested permission to perform it , Kwee Tek Hoay instead wrote a new story for them . This later became his best @-@ selling novel Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang ( The Rose of Cikembang ) . Another of Kwee Tek Hoay 's stage dramas , Korbannja Kong @-@ Ek , was inspired by a friend , who wrote him a letter asking for another comforting and educational play after reading Allah jang Palsoe . 
 In 1926 Kwee Tek Hoay wrote that , after Allah jang Palsoe , the quality of stage performances in the Indies had increased noticeably . Nio notes that the quantity of stage plays by ethnic Chinese authors likewise increased . Though not many were ultimately published , the body of work pioneered by Allah jang Palsoe included plays by Kwee Tek Hoay ( Korbannja Kong @-@ Ek , Mait <unk> , <unk> Hari <unk> ) , Lauw Giok Lan ( Pendidikan jang <unk> ) , Tio Ie Soei ( Jan Tio ) , and Tjoa Tjien Mo ( Beng Lee Koen , Hsi Shih ) . 
 Sumardjo writes that , though Allah jang Palsoe was published seven years before the Rustam Effendi 's <unk> ( generally considered the first canonic Indonesian stage drama ) , Kwee Tek Hoay 's writing shows all the hallmarks of a literary work . Though the drama is not considered part of the Indonesian literary canon , performances have continued into the 21st century . In May 2003 , the Jakarta @-@ based <unk> put on an abridged performance directed by E. <unk> . Another Jakarta @-@ based troupe , Teater <unk> , has included it in their repertoire . 
 = Warner and Swasey Observatory = 
 The Warner and Swasey Observatory is the astronomical observatory of Case Western Reserve University . Named after Worcester R. Warner and Ambrose Swasey , who built it at the beginning of the 20th century , it was initially located on Taylor Road in East Cleveland , Ohio , USA . The observatory , which at that time housed a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ inch ( 24 cm ) refractor , was donated in 1919 to the Case School of Applied Science . The newer 24 @-@ inch ( 61 cm ) Burrell Schmidt telescope was built in 1939 . 
 Due to rising light pollution in Cleveland , a new station in Geauga County 's Montville Township was established in 1950s . Named after Jason John Nassau , the station initially housed the Burrell telescope , which was later moved to Kitt Peak National Observatory . Instead of Burrell the station was equipped with the 36 @-@ inch robotic telescope . In 2008 Nassau Station was sold to the Geauga Park District and subsequently incorporated into its Observatory Park . 
 The observatory currently operates the old 9 @.@ 5 @-@ inch refractor ( now known as the rooftop telescope ) at the university 's University Circle campus , and the Burrell Schmidt telescope at Kitt Peak National Observatory in Arizona . The old site on Taylor Road was sold in 1983 . 
 = = History = = 
 The observatory was originally built by <unk> R. Warner and Ambrose Swasey , owners of Warner & Swasey Company , which made precision instruments and telescopes in the late 19th and early 20th centuries . They became trustees of the Case School of Applied Science ( later renamed to Case Institute of Technology ) , and built an observatory in East Cleveland , which they gave to the school in 1919 . This original observatory building was located on Taylor Road four miles east of the university campus and housed a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ inch refractor , and was dedicated in 1920 . The building was designed by the firm of Walker and Weeks . In subsequent years the observatory grew to house several more telescopes and instruments , such as the 24 @-@ inch Burrell Schmidt telescope , as well as an astronomical library and public lecture hall . 
 In the 1950s , it became apparent that the light pollution from Cleveland was beginning to make cutting @-@ edge research impossible from the East Cleveland site . A new site was constructed 30 miles to the east in Geauga County , known today as the Nassau Station , and the Burrell Schmidt telescope was moved to this location . In order to compensate for the move , a 36 @-@ inch telescope was soon installed at the Taylor Road facility . 
 In 1978 , the Astronomy Department of Case Western Reserve University made a deal with the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy ( AURA ) to build a new observatory at Kitt Peak National Observatory to house the Burrell Schmidt . The telescope was moved from Ohio to Arizona in May 1979 , and in 1980 the 36 @-@ inch reflector on Taylor Road was moved to the Nassau Station . This meant no further astronomical work was done at the Taylor Road facility , and as a result the faculty and resources of the original observatory were moved to the main campus of Case Western Reserve University in 1982 . The Taylor Road facility was sold in 1983 , was abandoned , and remained neglected until 2005 when it was sold to a couple who planned to convert the building into a residence . The plans stalled when its new owner was convicted of mortgage fraud and sent to prison in 2007 . 
 = = Telescopes = = 
 = = = Burrell Schmidt Telescope = = = 
 The 24 @-@ inch Burrell Schmidt Telescope was originally built in 1939 by Warner & Swasey Company of Cleveland , Ohio and was housed at the Taylor Road facility . It is currently housed at Kitt Peak National Observatory near Tucson , Arizona . The telescope recently had its optics upgraded with a very wide field of view CCD array , which is much more sensitive than the photographic plates . It is the instrument used today by the Case astronomers . 
 = = = Nassau Station Robotic Observatory = = = 
 The Nassau Station , originally constructed in the 1950s , currently houses a 36 @-@ inch reflecting telescope . It is named after observatory director Jason John Nassau , who was a prominent astronomer at the time . Work was carried out in the 1990s to make the telescope capable of remote viewing , making it one of the first telescopes to be used in this manner . However , it was seldom used by Case astronomers due to increased light pollution from Cleveland and the enhanced capabilities of the Burrell Schmidt . As a result , the observatory was left unused for several years until 2008 , when it was sold to the Geauga Park District . The park district reopened the facility as part of its Observatory Park on June 16 , 2012 . The park was designated as a dark sky park by the International Dark Sky Association . 
 = = = Rooftop Telescope = = = 
 The Rooftop Telescope is a 9 @.@ 5 @-@ inch refractor that was originally constructed in 1894 by Warner and Swasey for their own use . The telescope was the first instrument of the Warner and Swasey Observatory and was originally used at the Taylor Road facility , but was put into storage when the Astronomy Department of Case Western Reserve University was relocated to the A. W. Smith building on the main campus . In 1986 the telescope was reinstalled in a new dome on the roof of the A. W. Smith building . 
 The telescope remains in excellent condition today and is available for use by all students , faculty , and staff at CWRU once they go through a seminar on proper telescope use . It is also often used for public observing nights by the university 's Physics and Astronomy Club . 
 = = Research = = 
 Observers using the Warner and Swasey Observatory have made important contributions to astronomical research . An early example is work carried out by the observatory 's then director , Jason Nassau , on the classification of carbon stars and M @-@ type stars in 1949 ; more recently , observations made using the Burrell Schmidt telescope led to the discovery of the galaxy Andromeda VIII in 2003 . This galaxy orbits the more famous Andromeda Galaxy , and was previously undiscovered due to its position in front of the bright disk of the parent galaxy . The Burrell Schmidt has also recently been used to image the intracluster light in the Virgo Supercluster . The intracluster light is a thousand times fainter than the night sky , and was observed after combining seventy images of the cluster which were taken with the Burrell Schmidt telescope . 
 = Russula brevipes = 
 Russula brevipes is a species of mushroom commonly known as the short @-@ stemmed russula or the stubby brittlegill . It is widespread in North America , and was reported from Pakistan in 2006 . The fungus grows in a mycorrhizal association with trees from several genera , including fir , spruce , Douglas @-@ fir , and hemlock . Fruit bodies are white and large , with convex to funnel @-@ shaped caps measuring 7 – 30 cm ( 3 – 12 in ) wide set atop a thick stipe up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) long . The gills on the cap underside are closely spaced and sometimes have a faint bluish tint . Spores are roughly spherical , and have a network @-@ like surface dotted with warts . 
 The mushrooms of Russula brevipes often develop under masses of conifer needles or leaves of broadleaved trees , and fruit from summer to autumn . Forms of the mushroom that develop a bluish band at the top of the stipe are sometimes referred to as variety acrior . Although edible , Russula brevipes mushrooms have a bland or bitter flavor . They become more palatable once parasitized by the ascomycete fungus Hypomyces lactifluorum , a bright orange mold that covers the fruit body and transforms them into lobster mushrooms . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Russula brevipes was initially described by American mycologist Charles Horton Peck in 1890 , from specimens collected in Quogue , New York . It is classified in the subsection <unk> , a grouping of similar Russula species characterized by having whitish to pale yellow fruit bodies , compact and hard flesh , abundant lamellulae ( short gills ) , and the absence of clamp connections . Other related Russula species with a similar range of spore ornamentation heights include Russula delica , R. <unk> , and R. <unk> . 
 There has been considerable confusion in the literature over the naming of Russula brevipes . Some early 20th @-@ century American mycologists referred to it as Russula delica , although that fungus was described from Europe by Elias Fries with a description not accurately matching the North American counterparts . Fries 's concept of R. delica included : a white fruit body that did not change color ; a smooth , shiny cap ; and thin , widely spaced gills . To add to the confusion , Rolf Singer and later Robert Kühner and Henri Romagnesi described other species they named Russula delica . Robert Shaffer summarized the taxonomic conundrum in 1964 : 
 Russula delica is a species that everybody knows , so to speak , but the evidence indicates that R. delica sensu Fries ( 1838 ) is not R. delica sensu Singer ( 1938 ) , which in turn is not R. delica sensu Kühner and Romagnesi ( 1953 ) … It is best to use R. brevipes for the North American collections which most authors but not Kühner and Romagnesi ( 1953 ) , call R. delica . The name , R. brevipes , is attached to a type collection , has a reasonably explicit original description , and provides a stable point about which a species concept can be formed . 
 Shaffer defined the Russula brevipes varieties acrior and <unk> in 1964 from Californian specimens . The former is characterized by a greenish @-@ blue band that forms at the top of the stipe , while the latter variety has large spores . The nomenclatural database Index Fungorum does not consider these varieties to have independent taxonomical significance . In a 2012 publication , mycologist Mike Davis and colleagues suggest that western North American Russula brevipes comprise a complex of at least four distinct species . According to MycoBank , the European species Russula <unk> is synonymous with R. brevipes , although Index Fungorum and other sources consider them distinct species . 
 The specific epithet brevipes is derived from the Latin words brevis " short " and pes " foot " , hence " short @-@ footed " . Common names used to refer to the mushroom include short @-@ stemmed russula , short @-@ stalked white russula , and stubby brittlegill . 
 = = Description = = 
 Fully grown , the cap can range from 7 to 30 cm ( 3 to 12 in ) in diameter , whitish to dull @-@ yellow , and is funnel @-@ shaped with a central depression . The gills are narrow and thin , decurrent in attachment , nearly white when young but becoming pale yellow to buff with age , and sometimes forked near the stipe . The stipe is 3 – 8 cm long and 2 @.@ 5 – 4 cm thick . It is initially white but develops yellowish @-@ brownish discolorations with age . The mushroom sometimes develops a pale green band at the top of the stipe . The spore print is white to light cream . 
 Spores of R. brevipes are egg @-@ shaped to more or less spherical , and measure 7 @.@ 5 – 10 by 6 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 5 µm ; they have a partially reticulate ( network @-@ like ) surface dotted with warts measuring up to 1 µm high . The cap cuticle is arranged in the form of a cutis ( characterized by hyphae that run parallel to the cap surface ) comprising interwoven hyphae with rounded tips . There are no cystidia on the cap ( pileocystidia ) . 
 The variant R. brevipes var. acrior Shaffer has a subtle green shading at the stipe apex and on the gills . R. brevipes var. <unk> has spores measuring 9 – 14 by 8 – 12 µm . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 The subalpine waxy cap ( Hygrophorus subalpinus ) is somewhat similar in appearance to R. brevipes but lacks its brittle flesh , and it has a sticky , glutinous cap . The Pacific Northwest species Russula <unk> also resembles R. brevipes , but has an acrid taste and smaller fruit bodies . Another lookalike , R. <unk> , has gills that often fork near the stipe attachment . R. <unk> is quite similar to R. brevipes , but has narrower spores measuring 6 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 5 by 4 @.@ 5 – 5 µm , and it does not have the pale greenish band that sometimes develops in the latter species . The European look @-@ alike R. delica is widely distributed , although rarer in the northern regions of the continent . Similar to R. brevipes in overall morphology , it has somewhat larger spores ( 9 – 12 by 7 – 8 @.@ 5 µm ) with a surface ornamentation featuring prominent warts interconnected by a zebra @-@ like patterns of ridges . The milk @-@ cap mushroom Lactifluus piperatus can be distinguished from R. brevipes by the production of latex when the mushroom tissue is cut or injured . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 It is a common ectomycorrhizal fungus associated with several hosts across temperate forest ecosystems . Typical hosts include trees in the genera Abies , Picea , Pseudotsuga , and Tsuga . The fungus has been reported in Pakistan 's Himalayan moist temperate forests associated with Pinus <unk> . Fruit bodies grow singly or in groups ; fruiting season occurs from summer to autumn . In western North America , where the mushroom is quite common , it is encountered most frequently in late autumn . The mushrooms are usually found as " <unk> " — low , partially emerged mounds on the forest floor , and have often been partially consumed by mammals such as rodents or deer . 
 Studies have demonstrated that geographically separated R. brevipes populations ( globally and continentally ) develop significant genetic differentiation , suggesting that gene flow between these populations is small . In contrast , there was little genetic differentiation observed between populations sampled from a smaller area ( less than approximately 1000 meters ) . R. brevipes is one of several Russula species that associates with the myco @-@ heterotrophic orchid <unk> abortivum . 
 = = Edibility = = 
 Russula brevipes is a non @-@ descript edible species that tends to assume the flavors of meats and sauces it is cooked with . It is one of several Russula species harvested in the wild from Mexico 's <unk> @-@ Popo <unk> National Park and sold in local markets in nearby <unk> . The mushrooms are suitable for pickling due to their crisp texture . 
 Fruit bodies are commonly parasitized by the ascomycete Hypomyces lactifluorum , transforming them into an edible known as a lobster mushroom . In this form , the surface of the fruit body develops into a hard , thin crust dotted with minute pimples , and the gills are reduced to blunt ridges . The flesh of the mushroom — normally brittle and crumbly — becomes compacted and less breakable . 
 = = = Bioactive compounds = = = 
 <unk> lactones are a diverse group of biologically active compounds that are being investigated for their antiinflammatory and antitumor activities . Some of these compounds have been isolated and chemically characterized from Russula brevipes : <unk> , lactarorufin @-@ A , and 24 @-@ ethyl @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ diene @-@ 3β , 5α , <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 = Architecture of Scotland in the Middle Ages = 
 The architecture of Scotland in the Middle Ages includes all building within the modern borders of Scotland , between the departure of the Romans from Northern Britain in the early fifth century and the adoption of the Renaissance in the early sixteenth century , and includes vernacular , ecclesiastical , royal , aristocratic and military constructions . The first surviving houses in Scotland go back 9500 years . There is evidence of different forms of stone and wooden houses exist and earthwork hill forts from the Iron Age . The arrival of the Romans from about led to the abandonment of many of these forts . After the departure of the Romans in the fifth century , there evidence their reoccupation and of the building of a series of smaller " nucleated " constructions sometimes utilising major geographical features , as at Dunadd and Dumbarton . In the following centuries new forms of construction emerged throughout Scotland that would come to define the landscape . 
 Medieval vernacular architecture utilised local building materials , including cruck constructed houses , turf walls and clay , with a heavy reliance on stone . Medieval parish church architecture was typically simpler than in England , but there were grander ecclesiastical buildings in the Romanesque and Gothic styles . From the early fifteenth century , the introduction of Renaissance styles included the selective use of Romanesque forms in church architecture , as in the nave of Dunkeld Cathedral . Castles arrived in Scotland with the introduction of feudalism in the twelfth century . Initially these were wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , but many were replaced by stone castles with a high curtain wall . In the late Middle Ages , new castles were built , some on a grander scale , and others , particularly in the borders , as simpler tower houses . Gunpowder weaponry led to the use of gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls adapted to resist bombardment . There was a phase of Renaissance palace building from the late fifteenth century , beginning at Linlithgow . 
 = = Background = = 
 The earliest surviving houses in Scotland go back around 9500 years , and the first villages 6000 years ; Skara Brae on the Mainland of Orkney is the earliest preserved example in Europe . <unk> , or roundhouses , each built on artificial islands , date from the Bronze Age , and stone buildings called Atlantic roundhouses and larger earthwork hill forts from the Iron Age . After the arrival of the Romans from about 71 AD hey appear to have been largely abandoned .. The Romans build military forts like that at Trimontium , and a continuous fortification between the Firth of Forth and the Firth of Clyde known as the Antonine Wall , built in the second century AD . Beyond Roman influence , there is evidence of wheelhouses and underground souterrains . After the departure of the Romans in the third century , there is evidence of the reoccupation of Iron Age forts and of the building of a series of smaller " nucleated " constructions , sometimes utilising major geographical features , as at Dunadd and Dumbarton . 
 = = Vernacular buildings = = 
 Medieval vernacular architecture in rural environments made use of local materials and styles . As in England , cruck construction was used , employing pairs of curved timbers to support the roof ; however they were usually hidden from view . In rural areas there was extensive use of turf to fill in the walls , sometimes on a stone base , but they were not long lasting and had to be rebuilt frequently , perhaps as often as every two or three years . In some regions , including the south @-@ west and around Dundee , solid clay walls were used , or combinations of clay , turf and straw , rendered with clay or lime to make them weatherproof . With a lack of long span structural timber , the most common building material was stone , employed in both mortared and dry stone construction . Different regions used broom , heather , straw , turfs or reeds for roofing . 
 From the twelfth century , burghs , towns that were granted certain legal privileges from the Crown , developed , particularly on the east coast with distinctive urban building patterns . They were typically surrounded by a palisade , and many had a castle . They usually had a market place , with a widened high street or junction , often marked by a mercat cross . There were houses for the nobles , burgesses and other significant inhabitants , which were often built in a relatively elaborate style and by the end of the period some would have slate roofs or tiles . Very little has survived of the houses of the urban poor . They were probably largely located in the <unk> , away from the main street frontages . From Aberdeen and Perth there is evidence of nearly forty buildings dating from the twelfth to the fourteenth centuries , with walls of planks or wattles . 
 = = Churches = = 
 The introduction of Christianity into Scotland from Ireland from the sixth century led to the construction of basic masonry @-@ built churches , beginning on the west coast and islands . Medieval parish church architecture in Scotland was typically much less elaborate than in England , with many churches remaining simple oblongs , without transepts and aisles , and often without towers . In the Highlands they were often even simpler , many built of rubble masonry and sometimes indistinguishable from the outside from houses or farm buildings . However , from the eighth century , more sophisticated buildings emerged . Early Romanesque ashlar masonry produced block @-@ built stone buildings , like the eleventh century round tower at Brechin Cathedral and the square towers of Dunblane Cathedral and The Church of St Rule . 
 After the eleventh century , as masonry techniques advanced , ashlar blocks became more rectangular , resulting in structurally more stable walls that could incorporate more refined architectural moulding and detailing that can be seen in corbelling , buttressing , lintels and arching . At the same time there were increasing influences from English and continental European designs . These can be seen in the Romanesque chevron pattern on the piers in the nave of Dunfermline Abbey ( 1130 – 40 ) , which were modelled on details from Durham Cathedral . St Magnus Cathedral in Orkney , begun in 1137 , may have employed masons that had worked at Durham . The arrival of the new monastic orders in Scotland from the twelfth century led to a boom in ecclesiastical building using English and continental forms , including abbeys at Kelso , Holyrood , Jedburgh and St Andrews . 
 In the thirteenth century , the east end of Elgin Cathedral incorporated typical European Gothic mouldings and tracery . In the fifteenth century continental builders are known to have been working in Scotland . French master @-@ mason John Morrow was employed at the building of Glasgow Cathedral and the rebuilding of Melrose Abbey , both considered fine examples of Gothic architecture . The interiors of churches were often elaborate before the Reformation , with highly decorated sacrament houses , like the ones surviving at Deskford and Kinkell . The carvings at Rosslyn Chapel , created in the mid @-@ fifteenth century , elaborately depicting the progression of the seven deadly sins , are considered some of the finest in the Gothic style . Late Medieval Scottish churches also often contained elaborate burial monuments , like the Douglas tombs in the town of Douglas . 
 The impact of the Renaissance on ecclesiastical architecture can be seen in the re @-@ adoption of low @-@ massive church building with round arches and pillars , in contrast to the Gothic perpendicular style that was particularly dominant in England in the late Medieval era . It may have been influenced by close contacts with Rome and the Netherlands , and was perhaps a conscious reaction against English forms in favour of continental ones . It can be seen in the nave of Dunkeld Cathedral , begun in 1406 , the facade of St Mary 's , Haddington from the 1460s and in the chapel of Bishop Elphinstone 's Kings College , Aberdeen ( 1500 – 09 ) . About forty collegiate churches were established in Scotland in the late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries . Many , like Trinity College , Edinburgh , showed a combination of Gothic and Renaissance styles . The early sixteenth century saw crown steeples built on churches with royal connections , symbolising imperial monarchy , as at St. Giles Cathedral , Edinburgh . 
 = = Castles = = 
 Scotland is known for its dramatically placed castles , many of which date from the late medieval era . Castles , in the sense of a fortified residence of a lord or noble , arrived in Scotland as part of David I 's encouragement of Norman and French nobles to settle with feudal tenures , particularly in the south and east , and were a way of controlling the contested lowlands . These were primarily wooden motte @-@ and @-@ bailey constructions , of a raised mount or motte , surmounted by a wooden tower and a larger adjacent enclosure or bailey , both usually surrounded by a fosse ( a ditch ) and palisade , and connected by a wooden bridge . They varied in size from the very large such as the Bass of Inverurie , to more modest designs like Balmaclellan . In England many of these constructions were converted into stone " keep @-@ and @-@ bailey " castles in the twelfth century , but in Scotland most of those that were in continued occupation became stone castles of " enceinte " from the thirteenth century , with a high embattled curtain wall . The need for thick and high walls for defence forced the use of economic building methods , often continuing the tradition of dry @-@ stone rubble building , which were then covered with a lime render , or harled for weatherproofing and a uniform appearance . In addition to the baronial castles there were royal castles , often larger and providing defence , lodging for the itinerant Scottish court and a local administrative centre . By 1200 these included fortifications at Ayr and Berwick . 
 In the wars of Scottish Independence , Robert I adopted a policy of castle destruction , rather than allow fortresses to be easily retaken and then held by the English , beginning with his own castles at Ayr and Dumfries , and including Roxburgh and Edinburgh . After the Wars of Independence , new castles began to be built , often on a grander scale as " livery and maintenance " castles , to house retained troops , like Tantallon , Lothian and Doune near Stirling , rebuilt for Robert Stewart , Duke of Albany in the fourteenth century . Gunpowder weaponry fundamentally altered the nature of castle architecture , with existing castles being adapted to allow the use of gunpowder weapons by the incorporation of " keyhole " gun ports , platforms to mount guns and walls being adapted to resist bombardment . Ravenscraig , Kirkcaldy , begun about 1460 , is probably the first castle in the British Isles to be built as an artillery fort , incorporating " D @-@ shape " bastions that would better resist cannon fire and on which artillery could be mounted . 
 = = Tower houses = = 
 The largest number of late medieval fortifications in Scotland built by nobles , about 800 , were of the tower house design . Smaller versions of tower houses in southern Scotland were known as peel towers , or pele houses . The defences of tower houses were primarily aimed to provide protection against smaller raiding parties and were not intended to put up significant opposition to an organised military assault , leading historian Stuart Reid to characterise them as " defensible rather than defensive " . They were typically a tall , square , stone @-@ built , crenelated building ; often also surrounded by a barmkyn or bawn , a walled courtyard designed to hold valuable animals securely , but not necessarily intended for serious defence . They were built extensively on both sides of the border with England , and James IV 's forfeiture of the Lordship of the Isles in 1494 led to an immediate burst of tower building across the region . 
 = = Palaces = = 
 The extensive building and rebuilding of royal palaces in the Renaissance style probably began under James III and accelerated under James IV . These works have been seen as directly reflecting the influence of Renaissance styles . Linlithgow was first constructed under James I , under the direction of master of work John de Waltoun , and was referred to as a palace , apparently the first use of this term in the country , from 1429 . This was extended under James III and began to correspond to a fashionable quadrangular , corner @-@ towered Italian signorial palace of a palatium ad modem castri ( a castle @-@ style palace ) , combining classical symmetry with neo @-@ chivalric imagery . There is evidence of Italian masons working for James IV , in whose reign Linlithgow was completed , and other palaces were rebuilt with Italianate proportions . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Scotland is known for its dramatically placed castles and towers , which have become an accepted part of a romantic landscape . Castles , tower houses , peel towers and royal palaces of the period all contributed to the development of the unique style known as the Scots baronial that would be used for estate houses in Scotland in the sixteenth century , and which would be revived and used extensively from the nineteenth century , including the royal residence at Balmoral and then exported across the world . The Reformation in the mid @-@ sixteenth century would lead to the rejection of many features of Medieval churches , resulting in the widespread destruction of Medieval church furnishings , ornaments and decoration , and would usher in new architectural forms . However , they would be revived from the 1850s to the 1890s , when large Gothic revival churches were built in considerable numbers for all the major denominations . 
 = Italian cruiser Stromboli = 
 Stromboli was a protected cruiser of the Italian Regia Marina ( Royal Navy ) built in the 1880s . She was the second member of the Etna class , which included three sister ships . She was named for the volcanic island of Stromboli , and was armed with a main battery of two 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) and six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) guns , and could steam at a speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) . Her career was relatively uneventful ; the only significant action in which she took part was the campaign against the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 . She returned to Italy in 1901 and spent the rest of her career in reserve or as an ammunition ship , apart from a brief stint in active service in 1904 . Stromboli was stricken from the naval register in 1907 and sold for scrapping in 1911 . 
 = = Design = = 
 Stromboli was 283 feet 6 inches ( 86 @.@ 4 m ) between perpendiculars , with a beam of 42 feet 6 inches ( 13 @.@ 0 m ) . She had a mean draft of 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) and displaced between 3 @,@ 373 – 3 @,@ 474 long tons ( 3 @,@ 427 – 3 @,@ 530 t ) . Her crew numbered 12 officers and 296 men . The ship had two horizontal compound steam engines , each driving a single propeller , with steam provided by four double @-@ ended cylindrical boilers . Stromboli was credited with a top speed of 17 knots ( 31 km / h ; 20 mph ) from 6 @,@ 252 indicated horsepower ( 4 @,@ 662 kW ) . She had a cruising radius of 5 @,@ 000 nautical miles ( 9 @,@ 300 km ; 5 @,@ 800 mi ) at a speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The main armament of the ships consisted of two Armstrong 10 @-@ inch ( 254 mm ) , 30 @-@ caliber breech @-@ loading guns mounted in barbettes fore and aft . She was also equipped with six 6 @-@ inch ( 152 mm ) , 32 @-@ caliber , breech @-@ loading guns that were carried in sponsons along the sides of the ship . For anti @-@ torpedo boat defense , Stromboli was fitted with five 57 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 2 in ) 6 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns and five 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) 1 @-@ pounder Hotchkiss guns . Stromboli was also armed with four 14 @-@ inch ( 356 mm ) torpedo tubes . One was mounted in the bow underwater and the other three were above water . She was protected with an armored deck below the waterline with a maximum thickness of 1 @.@ 5 inches ( 38 mm ) . The conning tower had .5 in ( 13 mm ) worth of armor plating . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Stromboli was laid down at the Venice shipyard on 27 September 1883 and her finished hull was launched on 4 February 1886 . Following the completion of fitting @-@ out work , she was commissioned into the Italian fleet on 21 March 1888 . Stromboli and her sisters Vesuvio and Ettore Fieramosca participated in the 1893 naval maneuvers as part of the Active Squadron . The following year , the ship took part in the annual fleet maneuvers in the 1st Division of the Active Squadron , along with the ironclad battleship Re Umberto and the torpedo cruiser Goito . <unk> and Ettore Fieramosca next participated in the 1896 naval maneuvers as part of the Active Squadron . During this period , she was assigned to the Flying Squadron , along with the armored cruiser Marco Polo and the protected cruiser Liguria . The ships were tasked as a training squadron and were also responsible for responding to any crises that might arise . 
 In 1899 Stromboli was deployed to the Far East . She was joined by Vesuvio and Ettore Fieramosca , sent there in 1900 to assist the Eight @-@ Nation Alliance in putting down the Boxer Rebellion in China . All three ships were assigned to the Cruising Squadron in Chinese waters in 1901 . That year , Stromboli returned to Italy and was placed in reserve , before returning to active service in 1904 . That year she was in active service for seven months ; she spent the rest of the year with a reduced crew , as was standard practice in the Italian fleet at the time . She later served as an ammunition ship before being struck from the Navy List on 21 March 1907 and sold for scrap in 1911 . 
 = Yamsay Mountain = 
 Yamsay Mountain is a large shield volcano in the Cascade Range of south @-@ central Oregon , located about 35 miles ( 56 km ) east of Crater Lake on the border between Klamath County and Lake County . It is part of the Cascade Volcanic Arc but is located in a mountain range 30 to 50 miles ( 50 to 80 km ) behind the main Cascade volcanic front . The best known members of this enigmatic arc are the massive shields of Newberry Volcano , about 55 miles ( 89 km ) farther north in Oregon , and Medicine Lake Volcano , about 80 miles ( 130 km ) south in Northern California . Yamsay is the highest volcano in the eastern arc , almost 300 feet ( 90 m ) higher than Newberry and Medicine Lake . 
 A central part of Klamath mythology , the mountain offers activities such as hiking and horseback riding . Historically , the area around it has been inhabited by Native American tribes and settlers . Until the 1970s , a fire lookout tower sat on the summit of the mountain , and its foundation remains to this day . 
 Life in the Cascades is quite diverse . The western half of the range features lush vegetation , and the eastern portion is drier . The range supports many animals , including both endemic and endangered species . 
 = = Geography and geology = = 
 Like other volcanoes in the Cascades Range , Yamsay was produced by subduction of the oceanic Juan de Fuca Plate under the North American Plate . Annual convergence between the two continues at a rate of 1 @.@ 6 inches ( 4 cm ) per year . The Cascades make up the majority of the North American West Coast volcanoes ; they have been volcanically active for about 36 million years . The rock making up the Cascades is slightly older , dated between 55 and 42 million years old . In an attempt to organize the volcanoes by age , scientists typically divide them into two provinces : the High Cascades – the younger volcanoes – and the Western Cascades , comprising the older volcanoes . 
 Yamsay , along with the Simcoe volcanic complex , Medicine Lake Highlands , and Newberry Volcano , make up a wayward range of shield volcanoes between 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) and 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) east of the main Cascade Range . Volcanism at these centers is unlike other eruptions in the Cascades , and it does not stem from fissures as would Basin and Range volcanism . The volcanoes appear to be isolated from the major volcanic ranges in the Northwestern United States , although scientists group them as part of the Cascades . 
 Recent volcanism in the Cascades , lasting from 7 to 2 mya , produced largely basaltic and basaltic andesite @-@ based material ( up to 50 percent ) . On the eastern side of the High Cascades , however , volcanoes erupted dacite , andesite , and rhyolite . These materials made up several types of eruptions : lava flows , domes , and pyroclastic flows . In the most recent volcanic activity , andesite , basalt , and rhyolite have been erupted from High Cascades volcanoes , particularly the Three Sisters , Broken Top , Mount Hood , Mount Jefferson , and Crater Lake . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Yamsay is a corruption of the Klamath ( a Native American tribe of Southern Oregon ) name <unk> , a form of <unk> , meaning " north wind . " This mountain was supposed to be the home of <unk> , the supreme being of Klamath mythology . Historically , the area by the mountain was inhabited by Klamath , Modoc , and <unk> Bands , all of the Snake Paiute people . The <unk> lived east of Yamsay Mountain , near modern @-@ day Lakeview . Their group inhabited 22 million acres ( 89 @,@ 000 km2 ) of land in Oregon and California . Traders entered the area at some point between 1825 and 1827 , where they worked as trappers for the Hudson 's Bay Company . After routes opened up in 1846 , Fort Klamath was built ( in 1863 ) . 
 The city of Klamath Falls ( southeast of Yamsay ) sprang up in the 1920s and featured the fastest @-@ growing population in Oregon . Contributors to this new growth and development included the creation of the Southern Pacific Railroad , completed in 1909 . This opened the area for logging and timber business , which became the focus of the profit of the area . 
 The mountain features a United States Forest Service fire lookout tower with an 80 @-@ foot ( 24 m ) steel tower , built on the summit of Yamsay in 1929 . It was removed after the 1970s , and only remnants of the foundation remain today . A dirt road was built to the summit to service the lookout , but this was abandoned after the tower was removed . The upper 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) now form a hiking trail to the summit . 
 = = Climate and ecology = = 
 The Cascade Range is dramatically different in climate from west to east . The west side is heavily forested and features trees such as Douglas firs , western hemlock , Pacific silver firs , and Alaska yellow cedars . East of the Cascades , where Yamsay lies , the climate becomes much drier , even arid . Precipitation significantly declines and vegetation becomes more sparse , with lodgepole pine , white fir , ponderosa pine , and juniper . To the south , chaparral plants such as <unk> and bitterbrush prevail . 
 Diverse life exists within the range , including endangered species like Larch Mountain Salamanders and spotted owls . Amphibians like salamanders and frogs are common , as are birds . Mammals in the area consist of elk , mountain lions , deer , and black bears . Eastern Cascades fish include Lost River suckers and short suckers , which are both endemic species . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 The Fremont National Recreation Trail passes through the area . It offers tourists excellent views of other Oregon Cascades landmarks , such as Mount Bachelor , Mount Shasta , the Three Sisters , and Mount Thielsen . Other activities along the trail include hiking and horseback riding up the mountain from the recreation area located at an elevation between 6 @,@ 500 and 8 @,@ 196 feet ( 1 @,@ 981 and 2 @,@ 498 m ) . 
 = Hurricane Fred ( 2009 ) = 
 Hurricane Fred was one of the easternmost forming major hurricanes in the North Atlantic basin since satellite observations became available . Forming out of a strong tropical wave on September 7 , 2009 near the Cape Verde Islands , Fred gradually organized within an area of moderate wind shear . The following day , decreasing shear allowed the storm to intensify and develop well @-@ organized convective banding features . Later on September 8 , Fred attained hurricane intensity and underwent rapid intensification overnight , attaining its peak intensity as a strong Category 3 hurricane with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 29 inHg ) . Shortly after reaching this intensity , the hurricane began to weaken as wind shear increased and dry air hampered convective development . 
 Throughout September 10 , Fred maintained Category 2 status before weakening to a Category 1 hurricane . Continued weakening took place on September 11 as convection became fully disorganized . Later that day , Fred weakened to a tropical storm and by September 12 , no convection remained around the center of the former hurricane , leaving an exposed low @-@ level circulation . The storm degenerated into a remnant @-@ low later that day , corresponding with the final advisory from the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) . The remnants of Fred persisted for nearly a full week , traveling west @-@ northwest across the Atlantic basin . The remnants finally dissipated on September 19 . Prior to becoming a tropical depression , the precursor to Fred produced moderate to heavy rainfall in the southern Cape Verde Islands , leading to two flight cancellations and several delays . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Hurricane Fred originated from a strong tropical wave that moved off the west coast of Africa on September 6 . Environmental conditions ahead of the system favored development and the system was forecast to slowly develop into a tropical cyclone . The following day , the wave tracked south of the Cape Verde Islands ; however , it was close enough to bring showers and gusty winds to the southern islands . By this time , the National Hurricane Center anticipated the system to organize into a tropical depression within 24 hours . While passing near Cape Verde , a broad area of low pressure developed within the tropical wave . Following further development , the NHC declared that the low strengthened into a tropical depression , the seventh of the 2009 season , and issued their first advisory on it . Upon being classified a tropical depression , the system was located roughly 160 mi ( 260 km ) south of the southernmost Cape Verde Islands . 
 Upon being classified a tropical depression , the NHC noted that the center of circulation was difficult to locate and the mid @-@ level circulation was displaced from the low @-@ level circulation . The cyclone tracked slightly north of due west in response to a small ridge to the north . Moderate wind shear initially displaced convective activity to the west . Several hours after being classified , the NHC upgraded the depression to Tropical Storm Fred ; this was the first use of the name Fred in the Atlantic basin after it replaced Fabian which was retired in 2003 . This followed the development of convective banding features along the periphery of the storm and strong shower and thunderstorm activity forming over the center of Fred . The system continued to organize , with the banding features becoming well @-@ defined within hours and strong outflow developing around the storm . 
 By the afternoon of September 8 , an eye began to develop within a central dense overcast . Later that day , Fred intensified into a Category 1 hurricane with winds estimated at 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) . By the morning of September 9 , satellite imagery depicted that Fred had undergone rapid intensification and attained Category 2 status . This resulted from the formation of a 12 mi ( 19 km ) wide eye due to low wind shear and high sea surface temperatures . This intensification continued for several more hours , ending with Fred attaining satellite @-@ estimated its peak intensity as a solid Category 3 hurricane with winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and an estimated barometric pressure of 958 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 29 inHg ) , making it the second strongest storm of the season . 
 Hours after attaining its peak intensity , Fred began to weaken as clouds began to fill the eye . By this time , the hurricane was beginning to turn toward the northwest as a subtropical ridge to the north weakened . Continued weakening took place as dry air started to erode convection along the southern edge of the system and the eye was no longer present on satellite imagery and wind shear also increased . Convection gradually became elongated in response to the shear and outflow was mostly restricted to the northeast region of the hurricane . By September 10 , the mid @-@ level circulation center was displaced from the low @-@ level circulation center . On September 11 , the convective pattern of Fred had no organized shape to it and the NHC downgraded the hurricane to a tropical storm . <unk> shear and dry air finally took their toll on September 12 . By that time , no deep convection was associated with the main circulation of Fred , leaving the center fully exposed . The storm degenerated into a remnant @-@ low later that day , corresponding with the final advisory from the National Hurricane Center . 
 On September 13 , despite being in an extremely hostile environment with very high wind shear , convection redeveloped near the center of Fred , and regeneration into a tropical cyclone was seen as a possibility . Two days later , the NHC noted that environmental conditions could become marginally favorable for redevelopment of the system . On September 16 , the circulation of Fred became less defined and only intermittent convection persisted around the system . By September 17 , the remnant circulation became increasingly disorganized and the system dissipated later that day without regenerating into a tropical cyclone . However , several hours later , a new area of low pressure formed in association with the remnants of Fred roughly 525 mi ( 845 km ) south of Bermuda . The remnant low finally dissipated on September 19 , roughly 520 mi ( 835 km ) southwest of Bermuda . 
 Remnant moisture from Hurricane Fred contributed to the 2009 Georgia ( U.S. state ) floods , which caused 10 fatalities and produced damages estimated at $ 250 million 
 = = Historical perspective and impact = = 
 In the past 158 years that the Atlantic hurricane basin has been thoroughly studied , there was only one other storm prior to Hurricane Fred , to attain Category 3 intensity south of 30 ° N and east of 35 ° W. This storm was Hurricane Frances in 1980 . Frances attained major hurricane status farther south and east than Fred ; however , Fred was the strongest of the two , peaking with estimated winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a minimum pressure of 958 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 29 inHg ) . Just over a year later , this record was broken by Hurricane Julia which attained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) , along with a pressure of 948 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 99 inHg ) , at 17 @.@ 7 ° N and 32 @.@ 2 ° W , becoming the easternmost forming Category 4 on record . In one of the NHC 's discussions on Hurricane Fred , it was mentioned that due to the unusual location of a storm of its intensity , it would likely have gone unnoticed prior to the advent of satellite imagery in the 1960s . 
 Several hours before being declared a tropical depression , the precursor to Fred produced moderate rainfall and gusty winds across the southern Cape Verde Islands . In the city of Praia , Cape Verde , only a trace of rain , less than 0 @.@ 1 in ( 2 @.@ 5 mm ) fell on September 7 and sustained winds reached 25 mph ( 35 km / h ) . The increased winds and heavy rains led to the cancellation of two flights and several others were delayed . 
 = Dog of Death = 
 " Dog of Death " is the nineteenth episode of The Simpsons ' third season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 12 , 1992 . In the episode , Santa 's Little Helper falls ill and the Simpson family must make budget cuts in order to pay for his operation . Although the dog 's life is saved , the family begins to feel the strain of their sacrifices and starts treating him badly , causing him to run away . Santa 's Little Helper ends up in the possession of Mr. Burns , who trains him to become a vicious attack dog . Several days later , Bart stumbles upon the trained Santa 's Little Helper and is attacked , but the dog eventually recognizes his old friend and stops . 
 The episode was written by John Swartzwelder and directed by Jim Reardon . The writers enjoyed the previous episodes centered on Santa 's Little Helper and decided to create another one , which resulted in " Dog of Death " . The episode features numerous references to popular culture , including the films The Incredible Journey and A Clockwork Orange , and the short story The Lottery . Since airing , the episode has received positive reviews from television critics . It acquired a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 2 and was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week it aired . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Springfield is " in the grip of lottery fever " with a $ 130 million jackpot and , as a result , no one in the Simpson family notices that their pet dog , Santa 's Little Helper , has become ill . Once the dog is discovered to be sick , the family rushes him to the animal hospital , where they learn that he needs an emergency operation to cure gastric dilatation volvulus which will cost $ 750 . Homer is saddened to tell his children , Bart and Lisa , that the family cannot afford the operation . However , after seeing how much everyone loves the dog , especially Bart , he decides to find a way to pay for it . 
 Everyone in the family has to create a lot of budget cuts in their daily routine , such as Homer having to give up on buying beer and Marge having to cook with lower @-@ quality food and forgo her weekly lottery ticket . Bart must get his haircuts at a local barber school , Lisa can no longer get her volumes of " Encyclopedia <unk> " and Maggie 's clothes have to last a little bit longer . They eventually save up enough money for the operation , which is a success . The family is joyous that their dog is well again , but soon begins to feel the strain of their sacrifices . As a result , the morale of the family suffers and they take their annoyance out on Santa 's Little Helper . Feeling unwanted , he runs away from home and goes off on an adventure , only to be captured , taken to the dog pound , and adopted by Mr. Burns , who trains him to be one of his vicious attack hounds . After a long brainwashing process , consisting of the Ludovico technique , Santa 's Little Helper is turned into a bloodthirsty killer . 
 The family begins to regret all the disgusting things they said about their dog , and Bart goes from house to house asking if anyone has seen him . When he arrives at Burns ' mansion , Santa 's Little Helper , along with other vicious dogs , tries to attack him . However , when remembering all the good times they had , Santa 's Little Helper snaps out of his brainwashed state and protects Bart from the dog pack , before returning to the Simpson family , who shower him with love . Before the show ends , they put in subtitles saying " No dogs were harmed in the filming of this episode " and " A cat got sick and somebody shot a duck but that 's it " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Dog of Death " was written by long @-@ time writer John Swartzwelder and directed by Jim Reardon . The producers decided to create another episode centered on Santa 's Little Helper as they enjoyed the previous ones , particularly season one 's " Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire " , in which the Simpson family receives him . Reardon commented that one of the hardest feats with the episode was to make Santa 's Little Helper not express any human expressions , as the staff preferred animals on the show to behave exactly the way they do in real life . The plot of " Dog of Death " was based on an experience Swartzwelder had with his own dog that also suffered from bloat . However , unlike the events in the episode , Swartzwelder 's dog did not receive treatment as the operation was too expensive and the dog was too old . The Gold Coast Bulletin 's Ryan <unk> commented that the Simpson family 's dilemma with the cost of the veterinary procedure is a " very real " dilemma that many families " who normally don 't budget for a pooch 's bung knee " face . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Dog of Death " features a number of references to popular culture and famous dogs . Santa 's Little Helper 's adventure resembles the plot of the 1963 film The Incredible Journey . The scene in which Mr. Burns brainwashes Santa 's Little Helper with the Ludovico technique is a parody of Stanley Kubrick 's film A Clockwork Orange , including the way Santa 's Little Helper 's eyes are held open while he is forced to watch a film featuring dog abuse , such as dogs being physically assaulted and getting their heads slammed by falling toilet lids . Ludwig van Beethoven 's ninth symphony is heard during the sequence . In another scene , the dog Lassie is referenced when Santa 's Little Helper rescues a child from a burning building . Homer claims that Santa 's Little Helper will be going to Doggie Heaven , while Richard Nixon 's dog Checkers and Adolf Hitler 's dog Blondi will be going to Doggie Hell . The doctor that performs the surgery on Santa 's Little Helper is based on the main character in the Ben Casey television series . 
 " Dog of Death " also parodies lottery advertisements . In one commercial featured in the episode , an announcement states : " The state lottery , where everybody wins , " while a tiny disclaimer at the bottom of the screen can be seen saying : " Actual odds of winning , one in 380 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . " During the peak of the lottery fever in Springfield , news anchor Kent Brockman announces on television that people hoping to get tips on how to win the jackpot have borrowed every available copy of Shirley Jackson 's book The Lottery at the local library . One of them is Homer , who throws the book into the fireplace after Kent reveals that " Of course , the book does not contain any hints on how to win the lottery . It is , rather , a chilling tale of conformity gone mad . " In her book Shirley Jackson : Essays on the Literary Legacy , Bernice Murphy comments that this scene displays some of the most contradictory things about Jackson : " It says a lot about the visibility of Jackson 's most notorious tale that more than 50 years after its initial creation it is still famous enough to warrant a mention in the world 's most famous sitcom . The fact that Springfield 's citizenry also miss the point of Jackson 's story completely [ ... ] can perhaps be seen as an indication of a more general misrepresentation of Jackson and her work . " 
 The episode contains several references to previous episodes of The Simpsons . For instance , Santa 's Little Helper gets picked up by a car on a street called " Michael Jackson Expressway " , a reference to the season three premiere episode " Stark Raving Dad " , in which Mayor Quimby had the expressway renamed in honor of an expected visit by Michael Jackson . In another scene , Ned Flanders is seen wearing his " Assassin " running shoes from the season two episode " Bart 's Dog Gets an F " . The flyer Homer replaces with the " lost pet " notice is Principal Skinner 's " Have you seen my body ? " flyer from " Bart the Murderer " . Lisa references Nixon 's dog Checkers . In addition , the veterinarian is a reference to Vince Edwards , who played Ben Casey on the 1960s drama of the same name . Also , among the books that end up in the Simpsons ' fireplace are The Lottery by Shirley Jackson , Fahrenheit 451 by Ray Bradbury , Fatherhood by Bill Cosby , and a book entitled " Canine Surgery " . Fatherhood was heavily referenced in the episode " Saturdays of Thunder " earlier this season . The scene in which Mr. Burns and Smithers brainwash Santa 's Little Helper is a parody of Stanley Kubrick 's 1971 film A Clockwork Orange with Beethoven 's " Ode to Joy " . The film uses footage of a kind that would aggravate a dog : a dog being hit with a rolled @-@ up newspaper , a shoe kicking a water dish , a kitten playing with a ball of string , a tank running over a doghouse , a dog being hit on the head by a falling toilet seat , and finally " footage " of Lyndon Johnson holding his dog up in the air by the ears , which actually occurred . Music from Peter and the Wolf , a children 's story composed by Sergei Prokofiev , is played over the wanderings of Santa 's Little Helper through Springfield 's outer domains . This episode also references several controversies about Michael Jackson ; for example , Kent Brockman 's butler tells Kent that his pet llama bit Ted Kennedy , and Mr. Burns is sleeping in an iron lung as part of his longevity treatment . This episode shows the first time where someone other than Homer says " Doh ! " . Lisa exclaims it when she is assigned to do a book report on Copernicus and she realizes she does not have any reference books . In addition , the doctor , who was played by Hank Azaria , and the music that plays when he desperately attempts to save the hamster , is a reference to Ben Casey . One of the places Santa 's Little Helper voyages to , Swartzwelder County , where he rescues a baby from a burning house , is a reference to the writer of this episode , John Swartzwelder . In this episode , Mr. Burns ' mansion is again on the corner of Croesus and Mammon streets , which is a reference to a biblical demon that symbolizes greed and to the incredibly rich king of Lydia Croesus . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Dog of Death " first aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 12 , 1992 . The episode finished 19th in the ratings that week , and beat its main competitor , The Cosby Show ( NBC ) , which finished 28th . " Dog of Death " acquired a Nielsen rating of 14 @.@ 2 , equivalent to approximately 13 @.@ 1 million viewing households , which made The Simpsons the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network the week the episode aired . Since airing , " Dog of Death " has received positive reviews from television critics . Tom Adair of The Scotsman considers it to be a classic episode of the show , and Mark <unk> of UGO 's <unk> named it one of his personal favorites from season three . 
 The episode 's reference to A Clockwork Orange was named the tenth greatest film reference in the history of the show by Total Film 's Nathan Ditum . Nate Meyers of Digitally Obsessed gave " Dog of Death " a 3 / 5 rating and commented that people who like dogs will enjoy the episode , in part because of Mr. Burns ' attack dog training program , which Meyers called a " brilliant reference to A Clockwork Orange . " He added that the episode is unlikely to satisfy devoted fans , and the relationship between the family and Santa 's Little Helper will not " register " to casual viewers ; " Still , there are enough laughs ( especially in the animal hospital ) to keep the audience entertained . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson also praised the parody of A Clockwork Orange , describing it as " possibly the funniest Clockwork Orange parody I 've ever seen . " Jacobson added that the episode as a whole offers " a terrific program . [ ... ] From the cracks about the lottery and public hysteria that open the program to the calamities that befall the family when Santa 's Little Helper gets sick to the bizarre escapades that greet the pooch when he splits , ' Dog of Death ' provides a hilarious piece . " 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , praised several scenes from the episode , including Homer 's dream of winning the lottery , Mr. Burns ' brainwashing of Santa 's Little Helper , and the closing line of the episode that " No dogs were harmed in the filming of this episode . A cat got sick , and someone shot a duck . But that 's it . " Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict commented that Santa 's Little Helper 's " twisted stomach means the family must budget themselves to pay for the surgery , and the results are some of the best lines in the history of the show . From ' lousy chub night ' to ' <unk> , snouts , ' the hard knock life seems to enliven Homer into one sarcastic bastard . " Mikey Cahill of the Herald Sun named this episode 's chalkboard gag , " I saw nothing unusual in the teacher 's lounge " , the third best chalkboard gag in the show 's history . 
 While reviewing the episode in 2011 , Nathan Rabin of The A.V. Club noted that " perhaps because he ’ s a fucking dog , Santa ’ s Little Helper is never developed as fully as the other characters , so the requisite episode @-@ ending orgy of sentimentality when Santa 's Little Helper is joyously reunited with Bart feels a little cheap and unearned . " 
 = Director Park = 
 Director Park ( officially Simon and Helen Director Park ) is a city park in Portland in the U.S. state of Oregon . Opened in 2009 at a cost of $ 9 @.@ 5 million , it covers a 700 @-@ space underground parking garage , which connects underground to the Fox Tower and the Park Avenue West Tower . Located in downtown on Southwest Park Avenue , the nearly half @-@ acre urban park lacks any natural areas and contains little vegetation . 
 Features at the park include a fountain , artworks , a cafe , and a distinctive glass canopy . Director Park was designed by Laurie Olin of the design firm <unk> , and the Portland @-@ based architectural firm ZGF Architects . The park is part of what had originally been planned as a corridor of consecutive public parks stretching across downtown Portland . This plan included what are today the South Park Blocks and the North Park Blocks . Proposals to connect the two sets of park blocks arose in the 1970s , and in 1998 businessman Tom Moyer made a proposal for what became Director Park . Planning began in the mid @-@ 2000s , and construction began in 2008 . 
 = = History = = 
 Daniel H. Lownsdale reserved the Park Blocks for public use in his 1848 platting of Portland , but didn 't actually donate land to the city . As historian E. Kimbark MacColl stated , " By no stretch of the imagination could he be cited as a ' philanthropist . ' He was greedy like most of his partners .... The record is clear : Daniel Lownsdale was a visionary but shifty character whose land speculation helped to spawn more litigation in Portland than in any other western city of comparable size . " Chet Orloff wrote an editorial in 2001 stating " six crucial blocks were lost to greed , government reluctance , poor estate planning and an adverse court decision . " 
 The park land was previously used for surface parking , and contained an early " food cart institution " , the Snow White House <unk> . 
 Developer Tom Moyer wanted to redevelop the block since the 1970s . The City Club of Portland held a significant meeting in 1992 about the fate of the Central Park Blocks , also called the Commercial Park Blocks . Moyer and the PDC opposed " the downtown parking magnate " Greg Goodman 's plans to turn the block into a 550 @-@ space 12 @-@ story parking structure in 1995 , which was to be called the Park Avenue Plaza . Neil Goldschmidt said the parking structure would be " like putting lipstick on a dead corpse " and Bill Naito said that a " 12 @-@ story garage won 't go away . This is a chance to do something special . We should try to do something special every decade . " 
 Moyer proposed the park in February 1998 , in a move later described as Moyer 's " march to reunite " the North and South Park Blocks . Both the Portland Development Commission and the Portland Parks Foundation ( Moyer , Goldschmidt ) were in favor of Portland Planning Director Gil Kelley 's 2001 recommendation for the area , which favored a new midtown Park Block as well as " thematically consistent development " along the blocks . The foundation raised $ 500 @,@ 000 from 20 patrons , and had an agreement from building owner Joe Weston to donate a building to make way for the park blocks . 
 Others , including the Portland chapter of American Institute of Architects , Vera Katz , Laurie Olin , and Michael Powell ( of Powell 's Books ) were against the plan , with Powell saying " I was sort of under the impression that people came downtown to work and shop , not to gain a rural experience " . By 2004 , the idea to reunite the Park Blocks through midtown was dead , due to Neil Goldschmidt moving out of the spotlight during his sex abuse scandal , Vera Katz 's disapproval of the plan , and because Moyer was " tired of swimming upstream " against the city council . 
 The park was originally titled South Park Block 5 . It was designed by Laurie Olin and ZGF Architects . Olin also designed Bryant Park in New York , as well as the redesigns of Pershing Square in Los Angeles and Columbus Circle in New York . ZGF and Olin had competed against the team of Robert Murase , <unk> Architects , and Christian Moeller . The budget in 2006 was $ 2 @.@ 1 million , which included renovations to O 'Bryant Square and Ankeny Park ( which have not been renovated , as of 2010 ) . 
 Developer Tom Moyer had previously donated $ 1 million and asked the park be named Marilyn Moyer Park , after his deceased wife . Moyer also donated the surface space for the park , using the space underground for 700 spaces of additional parking , connecting the parking of Moyer 's Fox Tower and Park Avenue West Tower . 
 During a time of budget shortfalls , the city , the public steering committee ( headed by Chet Orloff ) , and Tom Moyer were willing to give away naming rights in exchange for further funding . Jordan Schnitzer , a local developer , donated $ 1 @.@ 97 million for the plaza and asked city commissioners to name it for his maternal grandparents , Simon and Helen Director . Simon was born in Russia , Helen was born in Poland , and they met in Portland in 1916 . Since plans for reconnecting the midtown Park Blocks had been squelched due to Moyer 's announcement of Park Avenue West Tower , which " drove a stake through its heart " , the Park Blocks Foundation , started by Goldschmidt and Moyer but headed by Jim Westwood by 2007 , suspended conversations to donating Park Blocks Foundation cash to build the surface of Park Block 5 . 
 With Schnitzer 's funding , the budget increased to $ 5 @.@ 5 million when construction began in May 2008 . The park , originally expected to be completed by late 2008 , was dedicated on October 27 , 2009 , with a performance by <unk> . 
 The total cost was nearly $ 9 @.@ 5 million , with $ 4 @.@ 5 million from the Portland Development Commission , $ 1 @.@ 9 million from the City of Portland , and $ 2 @.@ 9 million in private donations , mainly from Schnitzer and Moyer . In June 2015 , it was announced that the park needed $ 790 @,@ 000 in repairs to replace the wooden beams in the glass canopy with steel beams . 
 = = Design = = 
 The park is paved in light granite and includes a 1 @,@ 000 square feet ( 93 m2 ) glass canopy with space for a cafe , meeting Moyer 's requirement that 30 % of the space be devoted to commercial activity . It is <unk> on 9th Avenue and 10th Avenue , allowing pedestrians to take a greater priority , and for the avenues to be closed for larger events . 
 In 2011 , Director Park was one of five finalists for the Urban Land Institute 's Amanda Burden Urban Open Space Award . The award is meant to " [ recognize ] an outstanding example of a public open space that has enriched and revitalized its surrounding community . " The other four finalists were Portland 's Jamison Square , Houston 's Discovery Green and Raymond and Susan <unk> Pavilion , and St. Louis ' Citygarden , the last of which ultimately won the prize on May 19 , 2011 . 
 The wood beams under the glass canopy were determined to be defective in 2014 , and a plan was made to replace them in September 2015 with steel beams . ZGF agreed to pay $ 602 @,@ 000 to replace the wood beams , with the city paying an additional $ 188 @,@ 000 to upgrade to steel beams . 
 = = Park operations = = 
 The cafe Violetta was run by local restaurateur Dwayne <unk> . Elephant 's in the Park , a branch of the local chain Elephants Delicatessen , replaced Violetta as the cafe tenant early in 2012 . As of 2015 , Elephants pays $ 23 @,@ 292 in rent per year . The park will cost an estimated $ 475 @,@ 000 to run per year . 
 = Declan Napier = 
 Declan Napier is a fictional character from the Australian Network Ten soap opera Neighbours , played by James Sorensen from 2007 to 2010 , and Erin Mullally from 2010 to 2011 . In January 2010 it was announced that Sorensen had quit the role of Declan and the decision to recast was taken , with Mullally making his first on @-@ screen appearance on 3 May 2010 . In October 2010 , it was announced the character was to leave Neighbours and he made his final appearance on 15 March 2011 . 
 The character was originally portrayed as a " teenage tearaway " but later settled down . He has been involved with some of the series ' most controversial storylines including teenage pregnancy which caused an upset among conservative family groups , coping with his wife 's death and a relationship with fellow character Kate Ramsay which was initially received as distasteful and unbelievable with Australian viewers . Declan has also been popularised whilst Sorensen played him for his ' good looks ' and physical appearance , subsequently being branded as one of the show 's most popular characters . 
 = = Character creation and casting = = 
 In 2007 , Neighbours suffered a significant decline in ratings and plans were made to take the series into a ' back to basics ' approach where storylines would become less controversial and return to the focus on relationships and family dynamics . It was at this point that the character of Declan was created and actress Jane Hall would play his on @-@ screen mother Rebecca Napier . The characters were to create a family unit for then , already existing character Oliver Barnes ( David Hoflin ) . 
 James Sorensen was cast as Declan in 2007 and his character appeared the same year . After he had played the character for nearly three years Sorensen decided to quit the series to pursue a career outside of acting . Instead of the character departing the series Five confirmed that a decision had been made to recast the role . 
 Erin Mullally was cast in the role and began filming immediately after Sorensen 's departure from the production . In a statement from the press office at Five , they stated : " As the character of Declan is extremely popular , and with some sensational storylines planned , it was decided that the character would be recast " Sorensen expressed his delight that his character would continue as a part of the series saying : " I 'm really happy the character 's going to continue because the producers and writers have given Declan some fantastic storylines . I 'm really proud he 's become as popular as he has . " At the time it was noted that recasts have occurred repeatedly throughout the history of the programme , creator of Neighbours , Reg Watson previously explained why he thought recasts were quintessential in the show saying : " I always believed it was a pity , when actors chose to leave a serial that the character should go as well . A lot of time and money is invested in the character so we decided to recast if the character was important to the future of the storyline and the show itself . " It was this explanation that backed up Declan 's recast . Sorensen also explained that the hand @-@ over process would be simple adding : " It 'll be nothing over the top . I 'm Declan one day and the next day it 's Erin . Pretty simple . That 's how it works , I can 't continue , so Erin comes in and picks up the baton . I think it 's easier for the viewers to accept when it 's a simple change @-@ over . " The recast had also upset fans of the character under the portrayal of Sorensen , in response to this he said : " Erin will come in and play his version of Declan , he can 't play it exactly as I do and I and the producers would never expect him to do it any other way . All I can say to the Declan supporters is that Erin will be terrific , give him a go , you 'll be surprised . " 
 Sorensen also felt that it would be strange to see Declan played by Mullally , saying : " Of course it will be strange to see someone playing the part that I started and basically created , it 's been my life . It 's not just being Declan at the studio , I get ' Declan ' on the street , at restaurants , everywhere . Declan is me so to hand it over is difficult . " He also felt humble that viewers thought the character would not be the same played by another actor , adding : " I 'm very humbled that a lot of people think that – I can understand why fans would feel that way because I starred as Declan for the past three years and that 's all anyone knows . " 
 Mullally later stated he did not know he was auditioning for a recast , he also stated that he wasn 't sure if he could be successful in the role to start with . He also watched hours of footage of previous episodes to get an idea of how to portray Declan , then making a statement to Declan fans reading : " I 'm sure that initially people will be quite confronted by a new face with the same character name – I 'm not fooling myself about that . But hopefully people will come to accept it . " Mullally has compared the two versions of Declan saying " One of the writers said to me in a meeting the other day that the changeover between James and me can be best described as James playing Declan as very strong , macho . He liked to get into things and was very proactive . " The new Declan is more grown up , quite mature and savvy . He thinks with his head and knows what he wants and doesn 't have to use brute force to get it . " During Rebecca 's vision , Thomas Smith portrayed a six @-@ year @-@ old Declan . 
 In October 2010 , it was announced that Mullally was to leave Neighbours along with three other members of the cast , Matthew Werkmeister ( Zeke Kinski ) , Jane Hall ( Rebecca Robinson ) and Alia and Gabriella De Vercelli ( India Napier ) . On his decision to leave , Mullally said " I 've had an absolute ball playing Declan , the guy has been through so much , he needs a rest . I 've made so many new friends but it will be my ' daughters ' Alia and Gabriella ( de Vercelli ) I 'll really miss , it has been wonderful to watch them grow and develop and be a part of their lives . " 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Declan 's personality has evolved through his given storylines . He was once a " teenage tearaway " but over time had to face the harsh realities life has thrown at him , subsequently maturing . Channel Ten publicity describe in depth many of his identity changes . They stated that he has a " dark side " but has learnt to nurture it through his relationship with Bridget Parker ( Eloise Mignon ) . He is also branded as disenfranchised and disillusioned as a result of being the product of a struggling single parent family . Declan has learnt to mask his dark side with cocky persona and confidence in his abilities . Branded as a charmer , when he gets close to girls dark side pushed them away . The official website also states that they portrayed the character in his early stages as a " modern day Robin Hood " , as he would commit petty crimes and gain finances to help his mother run her household . This soon fazed out and Declan 's relationship with Bridget helped mature him as a character . They also stated that they knew Declan was not a bad boy at heart and decided to show this . He was later seen facing up to life as a single parent which changed him even more and he accepted his responsibilities . 
 = = = Teenage pregnancy = = = 
 A high profile storyline for the character was when he got his girlfriend Bridget pregnant . The storyline progressed and saw the couple decide to have the child . This caused controversy and an ' outcry ' from conservative family groups in Australia who accused the programme of using the characters to normalise teenage pregnancy . Speaking on behalf of the groups , Pro @-@ Family Perspectives director Angela Conway said : " [ Teenage pregnancy ] is not something that should be considered the norm , programmes like Neighbours can make the behaviours that lead to teenage pregnancy seem normal and acceptable . A lot of kids just aren 't ready to get their head around details of explicit sexuality . " Neighbours executive producer Susan Bower was quick to defend her character 's storyline stating : " I am quite sure a lot of people are not happy with this storyline . We decided we would show the ramifications on the teenagers ' lives . " Mignon added that the storyline between Declan and Bridget was not shallow , trite , vulgar , further adding she wouldn 't have liked to film the storyline if it was and branded it as showing emotional spectrum of pregnancy justice . Critics slammed the show , noting that Neighbours is a G @-@ rated show , and the storyline could lead to more promiscuity and teenage pregnancies among young viewers . The storyline continued regardless of the controversy and Declan became a father , and shortly after Bridget died in a car accident . Declan was left as a single parent . 
 = = = Relationship with Kate Ramsay = = = 
 The character later became the center of disapproval from viewers , who felt Declan was moving on too fast after Bridget 's death when he developed feelings for Kate Ramsay ( Ashleigh Brewer ) . Sorensen then backed the storyline , wanting his character to move on stating : " It 's a difficult situation . Declan was truly in love with Bridget . He was one of the lucky ones to have found his soul mate early in life , but at the same time , he has to move on and live his life . " further adding : " A lot of people do think it 's too soon for another relationship . But I can assure you that it 's done very tastefully . " He then added an explanation to how Declan feels , adding : " He feels as though he 's cheated on Bridget and that he hasn 't mourned for long enough to be able to move on without showing proper respect to the love of his life . He 's left confused and upset . " As scenes from the storyline began to air Brewer made comment on the storyline reassuring viewers adding : " I think they 'll be okay with it ... I think they 'll be accepting . It 's done very tastefully and very slowly . The two characters don 't rush anything . " 
 Declan was then portrayed as having even more trouble battling his feelings for Kate , but tried hard not to forget Bridget . Of this Sorensen explained " I 'm glad that , some months down the track , all wasn 't forgotten . It 's such a sad situation . Declan really does like Kate and she feels the same way about him . But his heart won 't let him move on . " After the couple began dating it attracted a bigger mixed response from viewers , many felt it was still too soon after Bridget . Sorensen then spoke out once more defending his character stating : 
 The storyline then carried on progressing and viewers saw the two characters grow closer until they started a relationship , despite the mixed response received from fans of Declan and Bridget . 
 In August 2010 , Declan and Kate 's relationship ended when Kate chose to break up with him after he began pushing her away . Declan starts a new job and he later lies to his family in front of her . Mullally said " Declan 's been pushing Kate away , he has so much going on in his life . He 's holding on to these massive pieces of information that he feels he can 't share with anyone – not even Kate . " When Kate sees Declan lying to his mother , she believes that he is not the boy she fell for and does not know if she can trust him . Mullally said that Declan is not prepared for the moment Kate breaks up with him and he is confused . Declan goes to Ringo Brown 's ( Sam Clark ) bucks night where he meets Kate 's rival , Candace Carey ( <unk> Urquhart ) , who makes it clear that she is attracted to him . Declan and Candace later share a kiss , which Kate sees . Mullally said " Candace gets talking to Declan and is there for him , he wants comfort and makes that split @-@ second decision to kiss her . He doesn 't think about the consequences " . Declan does not know Kate saw them together and Mullally added that he hoped they could move on as they " really do work as a couple " . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Declan was raised by single mother , Rebecca . They moved around a lot as Rebecca was running away from her abusive partner , and Declan 's father , Richard ( Blair Venn ) . Declan knew nothing about Richard , other than the fact that Rebecca referred to him as a " monster " . Rebecca often struggles to pay the bills and Declan turned to crime to raise money . 
 = = = 2007 – 11 = = = 
 Declan meets Mickey Gannon ( Fletcher O 'Leary ) and tries to help him out . Rebecca is revealed to be Oliver Barnes ' mother and Declan eventually gets to meet his brother . Rebecca starts dating Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) and she and Declan move into Ramsay Street . Declan meets Richard and discovers that he raped Rebecca . Declan tries to drown Richard on a fishing trip . When it is revealed that Richard has kidney failure , Declan offers to give Richard one of his kidneys , so he can be kept alive to be punished for what he did to Rebecca . Rebecca refuses to give her permission and Oliver donates his instead . Richard 's health grows worse and he dies . Declan and Rebecca attend his funeral . 
 Declan begins to spend time with Bridget Parker and they go joyriding together . Bridget is banned from seeing him after they are pursued by the police , but she sneaks out to meet Declan . They argue and Bridget leaves . She is then hit by a car and is paralysed down one side of her body . Declan becomes a suspect and he hides at Lassiter 's Hotel . He is kidnapped by Nick Thompson ( Marty Grimwood ) and Laura Davidson ( Jodi Flockhart ) , who want money from Paul . Laura eventually frees Declan and he is found by Rebecca , Paul and Oliver . Bridget believes Declan cannot handle her disability and she starts dating Josh Taylor ( Liam Hemsworth ) . At an illegal dance party , Bridget , Josh and Declan become trapped when the roof falls in . Declan manages to carry Josh out before coming back for Bridget . He tells her that he does not have a problem with her disability and they start a relationship . Bridget discovers that she is pregnant and when she tells Declan , he runs away . He is arrested and kisses a football groupie , but he later returns and commits to Bridget and the baby . When Declan tries to rescue Elle Robinson 's ( Pippa Black ) cat , he receives an electric shock . This makes him think about his life and he proposes to Bridget , who accepts . A few months later , Declan and Bridget marry in front of their friends . 
 Bridget gives birth to her and Declan 's daughter , India ( Alia and Gabriella De Vercelli ) . Shortly after , Bridget dies from injuries sustained in a car crash . Declan initially blames Stephanie Scully ( Carla Bonner ) for not fixing the Parker family 's car properly . However , he discovers that Johnno Brewer ( Damien Aylward ) tampered with the car thinking it belonged to Lucas Fitzgerald ( Scott Major ) . Declan develops feelings for Kate Ramsay and he accompanies her to the Deb Ball . During <unk> week , he kisses her , which leaves him feeling guilty for betraying Bridget . Rebecca tells him that it is okay to move on and Declan asks Kate on a date . They eventually begin dating . Donna Freedman ( Margot Robbie ) tells Declan to declare his feelings for Kate , as Kate does not know how he feels . Declan then calls Kate his girlfriend . Declan does not get on well with his step @-@ brother , Andrew ( Jordan Smith ) , and when Andrew steals Declan 's ideas for Neighbour Day , they fight . Declan moves in with Kate for a few days , but later returns home . Kate later decides that she is ready to sleep with Declan for the first time . 
 Declan discovers that Paul is having financial difficulties and tells Rebecca . Paul gets into a dispute with a builder and tampers with the scaffolding at his site . Declan follows Paul and becomes angry with him . Donna is injured at the site and Paul decides to frame Declan by doctoring the CCTV footage . Declan finds out and asks Toadfish Rebecchi ( Ryan Moloney ) to help him . Toadie tells Declan that Paul has embezzled money from Lassiter 's Hotel and Declan tells Diana Marshall ( Jane Badler ) . Diana comes to Erinsborough and Declan tells her he made a mistake to protect Rebecca . Diana does not believe him and she finds the evidence of Paul 's embezzlement . Paul asks Declan to take his place as manager of Lassiter 's for six months and Declan and Diana team up to bring Paul down . Declan neglects Kate and she ends their relationship . He later kisses Candace Carey , which Kate witnesses . Paul discovers Diana and Declan 's plan and threatens Declan . Paul is later pushed from the mezzanine of Lassiter 's Hotel . Declan is questioned by Detective Mark Brennan ( Scott McGregor ) over the accident . Declan and Kate sleep together , but Kate tells him that it was a mistake . Declan encourages Rebecca to divorce Paul , but she tells him that Paul knows everything . Declan tells her that they need to leave . When Kate finds them packing , Declan tells her that he pushed Paul . However , he is covering for his mother . 
 Declan is devastated when his best friend , Ringo , dies . Kate tells Declan that they will not get back together and Declan is not happy when she starts dating Mark . He lies to her that Mark threatened and punched him . When Kate discovers that he lied , she tells him to stay away . Declan realises that Rebecca is not happy with Paul and he confronts his step @-@ father . Paul tells him that he will tell Mark that Rebecca pushed him , if she tries to leave . Declan discovers that Rebecca has been having an affair with Michael Williams ( Sandy Winton ) and warns her to be careful . Rebecca leaves Paul after she gets an affidavit from him and she , Declan and India move into a hotel . Paul becomes manager of Lassiter 's again and demotes Declan . When he verbally attacks Rebecca , Declan quits his job and he moves in with Kate . Declan calls Oliver , who arrives to help Rebecca escape Paul . Declan tells Rebecca that he and India are leaving with Oliver and Rebecca later makes the decision to leave with them . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character has been popular in terms of his appearance . Nick Levine of media reporting website Digital Spy claimed in a section aimed specifically at gay readers , that Declan ( played by Sorensen at the time ) was one of the main reasons to tune into Neighbours after its move in the UK to Five . Levine was commenting on the character 's appearance and favoured the character different occasions branding him as ' something nice to look at ' and has commented that he is a ' <unk> ' . 
 ATV New Network also said that the reason Declan is so popular with viewers was because of Sorensen 's acting abilities and good looks . Both Five and Sorensen spoke out about how the character is one of Neighbours ' most popular characters . Channel Five 's Holy Soap website praised the character 's heroism in scenes where he rescued wheelchair @-@ bound Josh during the dance party roof collapse , they also said it is one of the character 's most memorable scenes . 
 Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture included Declan in her February 2009 feature about soap characters she loathes because of his behavior upon finding out Bridget is pregnant . She said " Don 't go all <unk> on us , Napier . You got your girlfriend pregnant , deal with it . " 
 = New York State Route 240 = 
 New York State Route 240 ( NY 240 ) is a 51 @.@ 64 @-@ mile ( 83 @.@ 11 km ) state highway in western New York in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with NY 242 in the Ellicottville community of Ashford in northern Cattaraugus County . Its northern terminus is at a junction with NY 324 and Interstate 290 ( I @-@ 290 ) in Amherst in northern Erie County . The route passes through the villages of Springville and Orchard Park , where it meets NY 39 and U.S. Route 20A ( US 20A ) , respectively . Much of NY 240 between Concord and Aurora follows the west branch of Cazenovia Creek . The northern part of NY 240 in Erie County , named Harlem Road , is a major north – south route through the suburbs east of the city of Buffalo . 
 From its southern terminus at NY 242 to the hamlet of Glenwood in the town of Colden , NY 240 is a state highway in name only as the roadway is maintained by the highway departments of Cattaraugus and Erie counties . Within Cattaraugus County , NY 242 is co @-@ designated as County Route 32 ( CR 32 ) . CR 32 is the only route that has a marked concurrency with a state route in the county . At the county line , it becomes County Route 198 and , later , County Route 30 before becoming state @-@ maintained in Glenwood . A section between CR 198 and CR 30 is also designated as part of CR 27 . 
 NY 240 was first designated in the renumbering of state highways in New York in 1930 from NY 39 in Springville to NY 18 near downtown Buffalo . The portion between Springville and Ashford was a section of NY 62 and Harlem Road was unnumbered . The section south of CR 16 in West Valley was a portion of NY 242 . NY 240 instead used Abbott Road and South Park Avenue to get to Buffalo , which got extended to NY 5 in the 1930s . NY 240 was realigned south to Ellicottville in the mid @-@ 1960s , after numerous bypasses and realignments had been done by the State of New York Department of Public Works . NY 240 was realigned onto Harlem Road c . 1962 . The former alignment to Buffalo is now designated as NY <unk> , a reference route . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Cattaraugus County = = = 
 NY 240 begins at an intersection with NY 242 in the town of Ellicottville along the western leg of a railroad wye near Beaver Meadows Creek . NY 240 proceeds northward alongside Beaver Meadows Creek co @-@ designated as County Route 32 ( CR 32 ; West Valley Road ) . The routes proceed northward through Ellicottville as a two @-@ lane roadway through dense forestry , bending northward along the creek and a nearby railroad track . The dense forestry remains for several miles , before bending northeast into an intersection with Fancy Tract Road . NY 240 and CR 32 continue northeast as the dense woods retreat for residences before bending northwest away from Beaver Meadows Creek . After bending northward once more , the routes cross through large fields and past several houses along West Valley Road . 
 Continuing north , NY 240 and CR 32 intersect with the eastern terminus of CR 75 ( Beaver Meadows Road ) . The routes continue winding northward , crossing the town line into the town of Ashford at Town Line Road . At that junction , the routes bend northwest again , passing a stretch of residences before intersecting with the western terminus of CR 16 ( <unk> Hill Road ) . At CR 16 , NY 240 and CR 32 bend north , becoming a residential street as it enters the hamlet of West Valley . In West Valley , the routes intersect with the terminus of CR 53 ( Ashford Hill Road ) . 
 Through West Valley , the route remains residential , quickly leaving the hamlet . North of West Valley , NY 240 and CR 32 intersect with the eastern terminus of CR 86 ( Thornwood Drive ) . Crossing through another long stretch of residences , the routes cross a railroad track at @-@ grade , where they turn to the northwest , paralleling the tracks until turning north and away once again . NY 240 and CR 32 bend northwest at Fox Valley Road , intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 86 @-@ 2 ( Buttermilk Road ) and the eastern terminus of CR 55 ( <unk> Road ) in Ashford . After CR 55 , the routes bend northwest once again , crossing as a two @-@ lane road through wide fields . 
 At <unk> Road , NY 240 and CR 32 make a large bend to the west , crossing through Ashford before turning northeast and northwest . On the northwestern stretch , the route remains rural , crossing an intersection with Bond Road , where the route turns north along West Valley Road . NY 240 and CR 32 continue north through Ashford , intersecting with Beech Tree Road , where they cross Cattaraugus Creek just west of the Bigelow Bridge . After crossing the bridge , NY 240 enters Erie County and the town of Concord . 
 = = = Erie County = = = 
 = = = = Concord to Glenwood = = = = 
 Upon crossing into Erie County and the town of Concord , NY 240 remains county @-@ maintained , now co @-@ designated as unsigned CR 198 . Now known as South Vaughn Street , the route proceeds northwest , intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 62 ( Cattaraugus Road ) . After this junction , NY 240 and CR 198 wind northeast through Concord as a two @-@ lane rural road . The route bends northward , entering the village of Springville , where it intersects with NY 39 ( East Main Street / Creek Road ) . After Springville , NY 240 and CR 198 re @-@ enter the town of Concord , returning the two @-@ lane rural roadway it was prior to entering Springville . Intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 412 ( North Street ) , the routes continue north through Concord , intersecting with CR 410 ( Middle Road ) . 
 NY 240 and CR 198 continue northward as a two @-@ lane rural roadway in Concord , remaining with the moniker of Vaughn Street . More residences parallel the routes as they continue northward , entering a five @-@ way intersection with CR 49 , CR 490 ( Genesee Road ) and CR 432 ( Sibley Road ) . This intersection serves as the northern terminus as CR 198 , while NY 240 proceeds northeast as CR 27 , now under the moniker of Allen Road . A short distance later , NY 240 intersects forks to the northwest on CR 30 as Glenwood – East Concord Road while CR 27 continues northeast on Allen Road . NY 240 and CR 30 proceed northward through Concord , soon bending northwest through dense fields before returning to railroad tracks nearby . 
 Crossing over the west branch of Cazenovia Creek , NY 240 and CR 30 continue north through Concord , bending northwest into an intersection with CR 563 ( Foote Road ) . The routes bend northward through the hamlet of <unk> , paralleling the creek and railroad track before entering the town of Colden . In Colden , NY 240 and CR 30 become a two @-@ lane residential street surrounded by dense woods in the nearby hills . After another bend to the northwest , the routes enter the hamlet of Glenwood . In Glenwood , NY 240 intersects with the western terminus of CR 240 ( Holland – Glenwood Road ) , which doubles as the northern terminus of CR 30 , as NY 240 is state @-@ maintained north of this junction . 
 = = = = Glenwood to Orchard Park = = = = 
 Paralleling the railroad tracks , NY 240 winds northwest through Colden as State Road , a two @-@ lane road through dense woods . The woods changeover to wide fields as it winds northwest , passing west of Walter Kummer Town Park before entering the hamlet of Colden . In the hamlet , NY 240 intersects with the termini of CR 222 ( Boston – Colden Road ) and CR 562 ( Heath Road ) . After this intersection , NY 240 darts several directions while winding northward as a two @-@ lane residential street through the town of Colden . At the junction with CR 400 ( Knapp Road ) , the route changes names to Davis Road before winding northeast into the hamlet of West Falls . Now in the town of Aurora , NY 240 runs along the creek as Davis Road , intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 372 ( Behm Road ) . 
 Continuing north through Aurora , NY 240 runs along the creek as a two @-@ lane road , entering the hamlet of <unk> . In <unk> , the western terminus of CR 47 ( Mill Road ) intersects the residential NY 240 . A short distance to the north , NY 240 turns west on Ellicott Road , remaining the two @-@ lane residential road through the town of Aurora . After crossing the railroad tracks again , the route enters the hamlet of Loveland , within the town of Orchard Park . The route runs westward for several miles , intersecting with the northern terminus of CR 442 ( Cole Road ) . Just west of CR 442 , NY 240 enters a junction with CR 369 ( South Freeman Road ) and CR 371 ( <unk> Road ) . 
 At this junction , NY 240 bends straight northwest , crossing through Orchard Park as a two @-@ lane residential road . After <unk> Street , the route makes a short bend to the west , intersecting with NY 277 ( Chestnut Ridge Road ) . The right @-@ of @-@ way of NY 240 continues west as New Armor – <unk> Road , reaching US 219 ( the Southern Expressway ) a short distance later . NY 240 turns north on a concurrency with NY 277 , proceeding northeast through Orchard Park . After changing monikers to South Buffalo Street , NY 240 and NY 277 pass west of the Orchard Park Country Club and cross over a railroad line . After the railroad tracks , the routes enter downtown Orchard Park , becoming a two @-@ lane commercial street before intersecting with US 20A ( Quaker Street ) in the center of the village . 
 = = = = Orchard Park to West Seneca = = = = 
 North of US 20A , NY 240 and NY 277 continue north along North Buffalo Road , intersecting with the eastern terminus of CR 177 ( New Taylor Road ) . Crossing through the hamlet of <unk> Corners , NY 240 and NY 277 bend northwest , intersecting with CR 369 once again . After another northward stint , the two routes intersect with CR 460 ( <unk> Road ) , which is the eastern continuation of NY 179 . Now known as Orchard Park Road , NY 240 and NY 277 proceed north past residential homes as it intersects with US 20 ( Southwestern Boulevard ) and CR 200 ( Lake Avenue ) . 
 Continuing north from US 20 , NY 277 forks to the north along Union Road , while NY 240 proceeds northwest along Orchard Park Road . For a short distance , NY 240 serves as a two @-@ lane commercial boulevard , switching over to a residential street at Dover Drive . Now in the town of West Seneca , NY 240 retains its Orchard Park Road moniker , passing several condominium complexes on both sides of the highway . Paralleling Cazenovia Creek once again , NY 240 enters another commercial section , intersecting with CR 137 ( Ridge Road ) . Proceeding northwest again , NY 240 then crosses over a former railroad grade and a current railroad alignment near several industrial buildings . 
 At the intersection with Slade Avenue , NY 240 and Orchard Park Road turn north at Slade Road , which connects to the New York State Thruway 's exit 55 at CR 137 . NY 240 proceeds north through West Seneca , passing several residences and businesses before crossing over Cazenovia Creek into a large residential district . In this large residential district , NY 240 intersects with NY 16 , which connects to NY 400 ( Aurora Expressway ) a short distance to the east . NY 240 proceeds north as Harlem Road , paralleling the New York State Thruway just past exit 54 , which serves as the northern terminus of NY 400 . Crossing under NY 400 , NY 240 crosses over more railroad tracks and intersects with CR 109 ( Indian Church Road ) . 
 = = = = West Seneca to Amherst = = = = 
 Proceeding north through West Seneca , NY 240 proceeds north , crossing an intersection with CR 534 ( Mineral Springs Road ) . At this junction , the residential street turns over to commercial as NY 240 crosses over Buffalo Creek just west of the mouth of Cayuga Creek . After crossing over Buffalo Creek , NY 240 enters the town of Cheektowaga . In Cheektowaga , NY 240 immediately intersects with NY 354 ( Clinton Street ) before bending northeast around exit 53 of the Thruway . Just northeast of exit 53 , NY 240 crosses under the Thruway mainline , intersecting with the western terminus of CR 315 ( <unk> Street ) . 
 North of CR 315 , NY 240 runs north through a large residential section of Cheektowaga , passing houses on both sides of the road for six blocks , including a junction with CR 207 ( William Street ) . Passing just east of the village of Sloan , NY 240 proceeds northward along Harlem Road over a railroad yard owned by CSX Transportation . After crossing over the yard , NY 240 enters an interchange with NY 130 ( Broadway ) via two ramps . After crossing over NY 130 , NY 240 crosses over another railroad yard , passing several large industries near an intersection with Walden Avenue . NY 240 continues north through Cheektowaga , remaining a two @-@ lane residential boulevard , passing east of Cheektowaga Town Park . 
 After crossing an intersection with Genesee Street , NY 240 continues north through Cheektowaga , passing east of Buffalo Cemetery and west of Pine Lawn Cemetery . A short distance north , the route passes east of Ridge Lawn Cemetery , crossing under NY 33 ( the Kensington Expressway ) . Near the underpass , NY 240 intersects with several ramps from the expressway . After NY 33 , the route passes east of Mount Calvary Cemetery before entering a large residential neighborhood . Continuing north through Cheektowaga , NY 240 becomes a two @-@ lane residential street , intersecting with CR 141 ( Cleveland Drive ) at a rotary . Continuing northward , NY 240 enters the town of Amherst , where it enters two more <unk> , with CR 290 ( Wehrle Drive ) and CR 208 ( Kensington Avenue ) . 
 NY 240 continues north through Amherst as a two @-@ lane residential boulevard with the Harlem Road moniker . The route remains residential for several blocks , intersecting with NY 5 ( Main Street ) . Passing east of the hamlet of Snyder , NY 240 passes several commercial businesses before becoming residential again north of that junction . The route remains residential for a distance to the intersection with Campus Lane , where it enters exit 6 of I @-@ 290 ( the Youngmann Expressway ) . A block to the north of I @-@ 290 , NY 240 intersects with NY 324 ( Sheridan Drive ) . This intersection serves as the northern terminus of NY 240 . 
 = = History = = 
 NY 240 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to an alignment extending from NY 39 east of Springville to NY 18 southeast of downtown Buffalo . Instead of turning north onto Harlem Road as it does today , NY 240 continued northwest on Potter and Abbott Roads to South Park Avenue ( then NY 18 ) . At the time , the portion of modern NY 240 south of Cattaraugus Street in Springville was designated as part of NY 62 while the portion south of CR 16 in West Valley was also part of NY 242 . NY 242 was moved onto its modern routing between Ashford and Machias by the following year while NY 62 was mostly renumbered to NY 75 c . 1932 . 
 US 219 was extended into New York c . 1935 , overlapping NY 75 between Ashford and Springville . The overlap with NY 75 was eliminated by 1940 when NY 75 was truncated northward to US 62 in Hamburg . In the mid @-@ 1950s , US 219 was shifted westward onto a new highway between Ellicottville and Springville ; however , NY 240 was not extended south to Ashford over its former routing until the mid @-@ 1960s . In the Buffalo area , NY 240 was extended northwestward along South Park Avenue to Main Street , which carried NY 5 at the time , in the late 1930s . It was altered c . 1962 to follow Harlem Road across Cazenovia Creek to Seneca Street , where it ended at NY 16 . NY 240 was extended northward along Harlem Road to NY 324 in Amherst in the mid @-@ 1960s . The portion of NY 240 's former routing on Potter Road between the Buffalo city line and Harlem Road is now NY <unk> , an unsigned reference route . 
 On July 6 , 2014 , the New York State Department of Transportation announced the extension of the Western New York <unk> Scenic Byway , a scenic byway through Erie County from Orchard Park to Springville , into Cattaraugus County . The new extension would involve US 219 from NY 39 in Springville to the Great Valley town line and NY 240 down to NY 39 and NY 242 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = 1st Parachute Battalion ( Australia ) = 
 The 1st Parachute Battalion was a parachute infantry battalion of the Australian Army . Raised for service during the Second World War , it was formed in early 1943 from volunteers for airborne training . Despite achieving a high level of readiness , the battalion did not see action during the war and was disbanded in early 1946 . 
 = = History = = 
 Like the British Army , Australia did not have a parachute operations capability at the outbreak of the Second World War ; however , the demonstration of the effectiveness of such forces by the Germans in the early stages of the conflict soon provided the impetus for their development . Efforts to raise an operational parachute capability in the Australian Army began in November 1942 , with 40 volunteers being selected for initial training with the newly formed Paratroop Training Unit . The first descents were made at Tocumwal in New South Wales , with the initial parachute courses consisting of four jumps . By March 1943 enough personnel had been trained for the Army to consider forming a full parachute battalion . As a result , the 1st Parachute Battalion was raised at this time at Royal Australian Air Force Base Richmond near Sydney , New South Wales . 
 Initially , raised on a reduced scale of only two rifle companies , the battalion 's personnel were mainly drawn from volunteers from other Army units — mostly the independent companies that had been set up in 1941 – 42 to carry out irregular warfare — and as a result , most of the battalion 's personnel had seen active service prior to being accepted . These volunteers completed their parachute training with 1st Parachute Training Unit before joining the battalion , and upon completion of their training qualified to wear the maroon beret , which was adopted by the 1st Parachute Battalion as a symbol of their elite status . In April 1943 , while based at <unk> Farm , the battalion raised a troop of engineers . Consisting of six officers and 51 other ranks , the 1st Parachute Troop , Royal Australian Engineers , was specially trained to undertake clandestine demolitions work alongside the battalion 's rifle companies . 
 As the battalion was to be Australia 's first airborne unit it required extensive training . Consequently , in addition to basic parachute training at Richmond , the battalion also trained in jungle warfare at Canungra in Queensland . In September 1943 , Major John Overall , formerly of the 2 / 13th Field Company , Royal Australian Engineers , was appointed as commanding officer . Throughout this time training continued in the demolitions , tactics and parachuting , and as no reserve parachutes were used several fatalities occurred . A third rifle company was formed in October 1943 and by January 1944 the battalion was at full strength . Following company and battalion level exercises the battalion was declared ready for operations in May 1944 and moved to Mareeba airstrip in North Queensland . A fourth rifle company was formed in June 1944 . In August 1944 the battalion gained its own organic indirect fire support when it was joined by the parachute qualified 1st Mountain Battery , Royal Australian Artillery , equipped with short 25 Pounder guns . 
 In late 1944 , the battalion was alerted to begin preparations for operations in Borneo as part of the Borneo campaign . As well as preparing for airborne operations , the battalion also conducted amphibious training in late January and early February 1945 as part of a possible role in the amphibious landing at Balikpapan . The battalion was not used in this operation , however , due to a shortage of suitable aircraft . A few months later , the battalion was also warned to prepare for a mission to rescue thousands of Allied prisoners held by the Japanese at Sandakan in North Borneo . This operation , codenamed Operation Kingfisher , was controversially also cancelled due to a lack of aircraft , and the prisoners were subsequently killed by the Japanese in what subsequently became known as the Sandakan Death Marches . The disappointment of not being deployed to Borneo caused significant frustration within the battalion , with many soldiers requesting transfers to other infantry units such as Z Special Unit . Many of these requests were denied , however , as the battalion had been instructed to prepare to operate alongside British paratroopers in the planned liberation of Singapore that was to have taken place later in 1945 as part of Operations Zipper and <unk> . 
 The war ended before these operations took place , however , and following the Japanese surrender the battalion was ordered to prepare to deploy to Singapore for garrison duties . While an advance party of 120 men arrived in Singapore on 9 September , the rest of the battalion remained in Australia . The unit contributed an honour guard to the main surrender ceremony . Afterwards , a further 75 men were sent out to join them and together this force performed general garrison and policing duties before returning to Australia in January 1946 . Orders were received to disband the battalion on 29 January 1946 , and these were carried out the following day at Sydney . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The 1st Parachute Battalion was organised with the following sub units : 
 Battalion Headquarters 
 Battalion Headquarters Company 
 'A ' Company 
 <unk> ' Company 
 <unk> ' Company ( from October 1943 ) 
 'D ' Company ( from June 1944 ) 
 1st Parachute Troop , Royal Australian Engineers 
 1st Mountain Battery ( from August 1944 ) . 
 = Cowboy Style = 
 " Cowboy Style " is a song recorded by Australian recording artist and songwriter Kylie Minogue , for her sixth studio album Impossible Princess ( 1997 ) . The song was released as the fourth and final single on 18 August 1998 through Mushroom . Minogue co @-@ wrote the track with Steve Anderson and Dave Seaman while Brothers in Rhythm produced it . Backed by guitars , synthesisers and drum instruments , " Cowboy Style " is a Celtic pop track in which Minogue sings about her relationship with Stephane Sednaoui . Critical response to " Cowboy Style " was positive ; some critics praised the song 's composition , Minogue 's song writing and highlighted it as a career stand out track . Released in Australia and New Zealand , the song charted at number thirty @-@ nine on the Australian Singles Chart . 
 Minogue promoted " Cowboy Style " by performing it on her Intimate and Live Tour from June to August 1998 . One of the live performances , directed by Michael Williams , was used as the music video . She later performed it on her Fever Tour ( 2002 ) and Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour ( 2006 ) . The song was later included in the track list of Minogue 's compilation albums Confide in Me ( 2002 ) and Confide in Me : The Irresistible Kylie ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Cowboy Style " was written by Minogue , Steve Anderson and Dave Seaman , and was one of the first songs composed for the album . Minogue wrote the song prior to being in a relationship with French photographer Stephane Sednaoui with different lyrical context , but it was completed while she was dating . Of the song , Minogue said " the way you start a new relationship with someone , they can bring out so many emotions within you and makes you question yourself a bit more . " The title " Cowboy Style " comes from when she first met Sednaoui in person , where she recalled him looking " unusual " and felt like he was " the new cowboy coming into town " . 
 Following the weak commercial performance of her previous single " Breathe " , Minogue left Deconstruction Records . While performing on her Intimate and Live concert tour in Australia , Minogue confirmed that she would release " Cowboy Style " as the fourth single in Australia and New Zealand by Mushroom Records . The single 's artwork was shot during the Intimate and Live tour by Simon Emmert , which featured Minogue with a leather bra and a cowboy hat on . Idolator listed the artwork as one of " Kylie 's Best Single Covers " , saying " Leather bra and a cowboy hat . Enough said . " An unedited shot of the cover was featured in her Kylie photo album book , released in August 1999 . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Cowboy Style " was recorded at Real World Studios , Sarm West and DMC Studios in London , England and was mixed by Alan Bremner at Real World . Instrumentally , Greg Bones and Anderson played the guitar , Johnnie Hardie played the fiddle , and all other instrumentals played by Anderson . " Cowboy Style " is a Celtic pop song that lasts a duration of four minutes and forty @-@ four seconds . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine commented that " Cowboy Style features a tribal percussion break and a string quartet that sounds more Celtic than country . " Online music critic Adrian Denning compared the song to the work of Icelandic recording artist and songwriter Björk . Nick Levine from Digital Spy said " Oh , and in ' Cowboy Style ' , it has a track that manages to sound a little bit Celtic and a little bit Middle Eastern . Pete Waterman must have wept . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Cowboy Style " received favorable reviews from music critics . Chris True from Allmusic highlighted the song as an album stand out . Michael R. Smith from The Daily Vault compared the song in retrospect to American singer Madonna 's song " Don 't Tell Me " , writing ; " " Cowboy Style " is everything a country @-@ tinged song like Madonna ’ s " Don ’ t Tell Me " should have been . It ’ s the one track that left me wanting more of the same - extended remixes , at the very least . ” A reviewer from Who Magazine was positive towards the track , stating " An almost Eastern feel under a free @-@ flowing melody . Classic poppy Kyles . " C. Adams from Herald Sun commended the track by saying " Cowboy Style manages to border from country music and remain cool . " Gary James from Entertainment Focus praised all her written tracks and selected " Say Hey " , " Too Far " , " Cowboy Style " and " Limbo " for her being able to portray an " sense of claustrophobia and uncertainty . " 
 John Mangan from The Age was positive in his review , saying the song is a " funky hoe @-@ down sound " . A reviewer from the publication The Backlot listed the song at number eleven on their " Kylie Minogue 's Best Songs , In Honor of Her Birthday " and said " This stylistic mishmash ( featuring a deep Celtic sound that , maybe , Alison Krauss could fiddle along with ) is a hard @-@ driving , <unk> , sexualized quest for freedom . How do you deal with the fact that Kylie sings , " I am frightened , I ’ m aroused , I ’ m enlightened to the now ' and totally sells it ? " Online critic Adrian Denning from his website <unk> said " Too Far flows well into the impressive , eastern flavored Cowboy Style . Either one of these two songs would have made better singles than the ones eventually chosen , by the way . ” Sputnikmusic highlighted the track as an album stand out , commenting " Cowboy Style a funky western jam that might possibly get country fans to do a line dance , this is the mother to Madonna ’ s " Don ’ t Tell Me " . Kylie ’ s creativity to mix her style with a genre that can be a put off to the masses is a surprise and one of the albums highlights . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 " Cowboy Style " entered at thirty @-@ nine on 18 October 1998 , the lowest single that week . It is the lowest charting single from the Impossible Princess album . " Cowboy Style " was Minogue 's lowest charting single overall until her Towa Tei collaboration " GBI ( German Bold Italic ) " , which was released two months after , at number fifty on the chart . It was also her lowest charting solo single in Australia until it was surpassed by her digital single " Put Your Hands Up ( If You Feel Love ) " from Aphrodite ( 2010 ) at fifty , and her physical single " Into the Blue " from Kiss Me Once ( 2014 ) which peaked at number forty @-@ six , her worst performing lead single there . 
 = = Promotion and live performances = = 
 The music video for " Cowboy Style " was directed by Michael Williams and taped at a sound check at one of the Intimate and Live shows in June 1998 . The music video was dubbed with the radio edit , and it was featured on the CD single . The music video was released on the DVD version of Greatest Hits 87 – 99 in June 2003 . Minogue performed " Cowboy Style " on the Australian morning TV series Hey Hey It 's Saturday . This was her fourth consecutive performance that had aired on the TV series that featured performances of all her Impossible Princess singles . 
 Minogue included the song on the set list for her 1998 concert tour Intimate and Live . The performance was recorded on 30 June and 1 July at Capitol Theatre in Sydney , and appeared on the related CD and DVD . The live version also appeared on her promotional single " Dancing Queen " . " Cowboy Style " was included on her 2002 Australian and European tour Fever Tour . The performance featured Minogue standing on a level of staircases and has Minogue in a bright @-@ pink sleeveless jacket with white cargo pants . The performance was recorded on 4 May 2002 at Manchester Arena in Manchester , England , and was released on 4 November that same year . The song 's most recent performance was on the Showgirl : The Homecoming Tour in 2006 . The performance was recorded on 12 November 2006 in Sydney , Australia and was released as a double CD set . 
 = = Other usage = = 
 " Cowboy Style " was released in mid @-@ 1997 in the UK on a cassette tape with all other album tracks as part of a promotional release and a CD sampler . " Cowboy Style " has been featured on many of Minogue 's compilation albums . Its first appearance was on her 2002 BMG greatest hits compilation album Confide in Me , a compilation consisting majority off her singles and tracks from her Deconstruction period ; Heather Phares from Allmusic praised the Impossible Princess tracks including " Cowboy Style " . It then appeared on her 2003 compilation album Greatest Hits : 87 – 99 , and her 2004 album Artist Collection , which included most of her Impossible Princess era . It appeared on the first disc of Confide in Me : The Irresistible Kylie released in July 2007 by UK independent label Music Club and her K25 : Time Capsule by Warner Music Australia . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 These are the formats and track listings of major single releases of " Cowboy Style " . 
 CD <unk> 
 " Cowboy Style " ( Radio Edit ) – 3 : 51 
 " Love Takes Over Me " ( Single version ) – 4 : 09 
 " Cowboy Style " music video 
 Promotional CD 
 " Cowboy Style " ( Radio Edit ) – 3 : 51 
 " Love Takes Over Me " ( Single version ) – 4 : 09 
 Digital music video download 
 " Cowboy Style " ( music video ) – 3 : 51 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 Kylie Minogue – Vocals , songwriting , vocal production 
 Steve Anderson – Songwriting , guitar , drums , keyboards 
 David Seaman – Songwriting , guitar , drums 
 Greg Bones – Guitar 
 Alan Bremner – Engineer , mixing production 
 Paul Wright – Engineer 
 Johnnie Hardie – fiddle 
 Stephane Sednaoui – Photographer , designer 
 Farrow Design – Cover sleeve programmer 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Mike Mondo = 
 Michael " Mike " S. Brendli ( born March 26 , 1983 ) is an American professional wrestler . He is best known by his ring name Mike Mondo and for his time as Spirit Squad member Mikey in World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . He worked also in Ring of Honor and Ohio Valley Wrestling . 
 After training at the Critical Mass Wrestling School , he debuted in June 2002 and began working for several independent promotions as Mike Mondo , Livewyre , or El Livewyre . His earliest success came in the New York Wrestling Connection promotion , where he won the NYWC Heavyweight Championship on two occasions between 2003 and 2005 . In February 2005 , he signed a contract with WWE , and was assigned to the Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) developmental territory . In OVW , he formed the Spirit Squad faction with four other wrestlers . 
 The Spirit Squad debuted on the Raw brand in January 2006 , and quickly won the World Tag Team Championship in April . They held the championship for seven months , before losing it in early November . They were taken off television in late 2006 . He returned to OVW in 2007 , before being moved to the Florida Championship Wrestling ( FCW ) territory in September . He competed in FCW until his WWE release in June 2008 . He then returned to the independent circuit , and later returned to OVW , where he won both the OVW Television Championship and the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship in 2009 . He went on to win the OVW Heavyweight Championship for the first time in mid @-@ 2010 and the second time in early 2011 . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = Independent Circuit ( 2002 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Brendli began training at the Critical Mass Pro Wrestling wrestling school during his freshman year of college . He debuted in June 2002 , and wrestled on the independent circuit , both in New York and in New Jersey . Brendli first became known as " Livewyre " , occasionally competing under a mask as " El Livewyre " . Brendli also competing in Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) during this time , making his debut in September 2003 . He appeared in several dark matches prior to the television tapings against wrestlers including Tank Toland , Joey Matthews , and Carly Colón . 
 = = = New York Wrestling Connection ( 2003 @-@ 2005 ) = = = 
 Most of his early success was in the New York Wrestling Connection promotion , where he had a nine @-@ month undefeated streak . Competing as " Livewire " Mike Mondo he won the NYWC Heavyweight Championship from " Superstar " Dickie Rodz on June 7 , 2003 , holding it for approximately two months , until he vacated it . On March 26 , 2005 , he defeated Joey Matthews to win the NYWC Heavyweight Championship for the second time , and later successfully retained the championship against Mikey Whipwreck . Mondo lost the championship to Matt Striker on April 30 , after holding it for just over a month . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = Ohio Valley Wrestling ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 Brendli signed a World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) developmental contract in February 2005 , and was assigned to OVW full @-@ time . First he acted as a manager , then became a full @-@ time wrestler and a member of the Bolin Services faction led by Kenny " The King " Bolin . He competed in a tournament for the OVW Television Championship , but lost in the first round to Alexis Laree . Embarrassed by losing to a female wrestler , Mondo issued an open challenge to any woman backstage , and a result , lost to Victoria . 
 In late summer 2005 , Mondo feuded with Brent Albright after attacking Albright during a match with Da Beast and injuring his eye . Albright obtained revenge on Mondo , however , defeating him by submission at the television tapings on September 7 . Throughout the end of 2005 , Mondo continued to team with various members of Bolin Services , mainly Johnny Jeter and Da Beast . In December 2005 , Mondo debuted a character , where he pretended to be a <unk> , and competed under a mask as " El Mondo " . He won several dark matches using the El Mondo gimmick , before losing to CM Punk in a televised match . 
 = = = = Spirit Squad ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = = 
 In late 2005 , Mondo joined the Spirit Squad , a faction of five wrestlers using the in @-@ ring personas of male cheerleaders , as Mikey . Brendli has described being in the Spirit Squad as " the most fun " he 's had in his career . Mikey and Kenny began appearing in dark matches and at live events using the Spirit Squad gimmick , and on January 2 , 2006 , Mikey lost to Chavo Guerrero . On January 23 , 2006 , they had their WWE television debut as a group , appearing on Raw and helping Jonathan Coachman win a Royal Rumble qualifying match against Jerry " The King " Lawler by distracting Lawler and performing cheers for Coachman . They later became a part of the ongoing scripted feud between WWE chairman Vince McMahon and Shawn Michaels . The heel ( villainous ) McMahon brought in the Squad to attack Michaels on numerous occasions , including placing them in multiple handicap matches . 
 They also wrestled in the tag team division , and on April 3 , on Raw , Mikey and Kenny defeated Kane and The Big Show to win the World Tag Team Championship , with help from the other Spirit Squad members . After winning the championship , all five members of the Spirit Squad were recognized as the champions , allowing any combination of them to defend the championship . 
 In May , McMahon signed another handicap match , with the Spirit Squad facing Michaels . The Spirit Squad instead attacked Michaels before the match had started , and Triple H came out to help them . As a result of feeling disrespected by the Squad , however , Triple H helped Michaels instead . This led to Triple H and Michaels reforming D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) and they began a feud with the Spirit Squad . DX played various sophomoric jokes on the Squad and the McMahons , as well as defeating the Spirit Squad in handicap tag team matches at Vengeance and a clean sweep in an elimination handicap match at Saturday Night 's Main Event . 
 At the same time as their feud with DX and their alignment with McMahon , the Squad also wrestled other teams in Raw 's tag division over their World Tag Team Championship , successfully defending the championship against the teams of Jim Duggan and Eugene , Charlie Haas and Viscera , and Snitsky and Val Venis . They then entered a lengthy feud with The Highlanders , whom they eventually defeated to retain the championship at the Unforgiven pay @-@ per @-@ view in September . The Squad as a whole later began a losing streak with Johnny , Mikey , and Mitch losing singles matches to Ric Flair on consecutive episodes of Raw . After two consecutive losses to the debuting Cryme Tyme tag team , Kenny attacked Mikey on the October 23 episode of Raw and announced that he was going to defeat Flair . With the help of the other Spirit Squad members , Kenny was successful , despite Flair being accompanied to the ring by his own reinforcements ( Dusty Rhodes , Sgt. Slaughter , and Roddy Piper ) . It was then announced that Flair and a legend , selected by interactive voting , would wrestle the team for the World Tag Team Championship at the Cyber Sunday pay @-@ per @-@ view in early November . The fans chose Piper , and he and Flair defeated Kenny and Mikey to win the championship . 
 The group disbanded on the November 27 episode of Raw , when they were defeated in a five @-@ on @-@ three handicap match by DX and Flair . In a backstage segment later that episode , DX placed all members into a crate stamped " OVW , Louisville , Kentucky " , a reference to the developmental territory from which all the Squad members had come . 
 = = = = Return to developmental territories ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 Brendli , under the name Mikey Mondo , appeared at the January 17 OVW taping along with Nick Nemeth and teamed with Mike Kruel in a match against Seth Skyfire , Shawn Spears , and Cody Runnels . The pair teamed up for a while as The Frat Boys , and later The Frat Pack , but they had disbanded by late March 2007 . Mondo moved into singles competition , and picked up wins over Steve Lewington , Boris <unk> , and Colt Cabana , among others . In June 2007 , he started a feud with Shawn Spears over the OVW Television Championship , but failed to capture it on several occasions . A one @-@ night reunion with Nemeth followed , before he began dubbing himself " The Professional " Mike Mondo and began feuding with Atlas <unk> . 
 In September 2007 , Mondo was moved to the Florida Championship Wrestling ( FCW ) developmental territory and defeated Chris Gray in his debut there . He once again reformed his tag team with Nemeth , and they wrestled against teams including Hade Vansen and Chris Gray , and the New Generation Hart Foundation of Teddy Hart and TJ Wilson . At the start of 2008 , however , they split and began feuding , competing against each other both in singles and tag team matches . Having dubbed himself " Mighty Mikey " , he went to wrestle Ted DiBiase , Jr . , Sinn <unk> , Heath Miller , and Jack Gabriel throughout the early part of 2008 . On June 13 , 2008 , WWE announced that Brendli had been released from his contract . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2008 ) = = = 
 After his WWE release , Brendli returned to competing on the independent circuit , and , in an interview in December 2008 , said he plans to wrestle in Mexico and Japan . He competed for several independent promotions , including Division I Pro Wrestling and Ward Family Entertainments , where he reprised his feud with Rory McAllister of the former WWE tag team , The Highlanders . He also returned to the New York Wrestling Connection on September 20 , 2008 , at Draw The Line , where he teamed with Mikey Whipwreck in a losing effort to Rob Eckos and Frederick of Hollywood . Brendli made it to the semi final of the 17th annual ECWA Super 8 Tournament before losing to eventual winner Damian Dragon 
 = = = Return to OVW ( 2009 – 2012 ) = = = 
 In early 2009 , he returned to Ohio Valley Wrestling ( OVW ) both to wrestle and to be an assistant trainer . On February 7 , 2009 , he defeated Idol Stevens and Johnny Punch in a triple threat match to become the new OVW Television Champion . On March 21 , Brendli failed a drugs test at an OVW event , and was suspended by the Kentucky Boxing and Wrestling Authority . He lost the OVW Television Championship to Jamin <unk> on May 9 . After postponing two hearings , he was suspended for six months and fined US $ 100 on June 29 . On November 21 , 2009 , Mondo teamed with Turcan Celik to defeat Moose and <unk> for the OVW Southern Tag Team Championship . They held the championship for a week , before losing it to The Network on November 28 . On May 29 , 2010 , at All or Nothing , Mondo won the OVW Heavyweight Championship by defeating Beef Wellington . He later lost the championship to James Thomas on June 16 . On March 5 , 2011 , Mondo regained the OVW Heavyweight Championship by winning a three @-@ way ladder match , also involving Cliff Compton and " Low Rider " Matt Barela . Mondo was stripped of the championship on May 4 , after attacking OVW president Danny Davis . On November 2 , at OVW 's episode 637 , Christian Mascagni prevented Mondo from winning an eight @-@ man melee , costing him a match for the OVW Heavyweight Championship . 
 = = = Ring of Honor ( 2010 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Mondo appeared at Ring of Honor ( ROH ) ' s Bluegrass Brawl event on July 22 , where he lost to Delirious . He returned to ROH at the Ring of Honor Wrestling television tapings on December 9 and 10 , defeating Grizzly Redwood the first night , before losing to Colt Cabana on December 10 . 
 In late 2011 , Brendli returned to Ring of Honor as a full @-@ time member , under his ' Mike Mondo ' personality . After a string of losses to begin his full @-@ time ROH career , he eventually defeated Matt Taven . He then feuded with T.J. Perkins , whom he defeated in their first match together , but lost the second . Making his ROH pay @-@ per @-@ view debut at Border Wars , he teamed with the Young Bucks to lose to Perkins and The All Night Express of Kenny King and Rhett Titus . Following a draw with Davey Richards in May and a win over Mike Bennett at Best in the World 2012 : Hostage Crisis , he had his first title opportunity when he unsuccessfully challenged Kevin Steen for the ROH World Heavyweight Championship . Mondo won a ROH World Television Championship number one contendership six @-@ man mayhem match , and faced Adam Cole for the championship at Death Before Dishonor X : State of Emergency in a losing effort . Following the loss , Mondo defeated Kyle O 'Reilly in a qualifying match for the 2012 Survival of the Fittest tournament , but lost in the final to Jay Lethal . At Glory By Honor XI : The Unbreakable Hope , Mondo lost to Mike Bennett , suffering a leg injury in the process which sidelined him for several months . 
 Mondo returned in March 2013 , forming a tag team partnership with Grizzly Redwood and starting a feud with <unk> .. At Supercard of Honor VII , Mondo , B.J. Whitmer , Caprice Coleman , Cedric Alexander , and Mark Briscoe lost to five members of S.C.U.M. 
 = = = Chikara ( 2014 ) = = = 
 . Brendli participated in Chikara 's 2014 King of Trios tournament under his Spirit Squad character , and teamed with Johnny and Kenny . After a win over Sinn Bodhi and the Odditorium ( Qefka the Quiet and Sir Oliver Grimsly ) on September 19 , the Spirit Squad was eliminated from the tournament in the second round on September 20 by the Golden Trio ( Dasher Hatfield , Icarus , and Mark Angelosetti ) . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2015 ) = = = 
 on January 17 , 2015 . The Spirit Squad ( Mikey and Kenny ) defeated The Heart Throbs ( Antonio and Romeo ) . on February 28 , 2015 Mondo defeated Rex Lawless to win the NYWC Fusion <unk> on March 6 , 2015 at a Boston Wrestling Marathon event , Mikey and Kenny competed in a tag team gauntlet match which was won by Christopher Daniels and Frankie Kazarian . On March 7 , 2015 at a Boston Wrestling Marathon event , Mondo faced Biff <unk> in a losing effort . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Brendli played football in middle and high school . Brendli is good friends with his former Spirit Squad teammate Nick Nemeth ( better known as Dolph Ziggler ) , and the two lived together in Florida until 2008 . On June 1 , 2008 , Brendli was arrested for driving under the influence in Florida . He was released the next day after posting US $ 500 bail . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Facebuster 
 Running sitout crucifix powerbomb 
 Senton bomb 
 Managers 
 Kenny Bolin 
 Da Beast 
 Spirit Squad 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Spirit Squad 
 Nicknames 
 " The Giant Killer " 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 New York Wrestling Connection 
 NYWC Fusion Championship ( 1 time ) 
 NYWC Heavyweight Championship ( 3 times ) 
 NYWC Hall of Fame ( Class of 2016 ) 
 Ohio Valley Wrestling 
 OVW Heavyweight Championship ( 2 times ) 
 OVW Southern Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with Turcan Celik 
 OVW Television Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Sixth OVW Triple Crown Champion 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 PWI ranked him # 135 of the best 500 singles wrestlers of the year in the PWI 500 in 2013 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) – with The Spirit Squad 
 = My Heart Is Calling = 
 " My Heart Is Calling " is a song recorded by American recording artist Whitney Houston for the 1996 film The Preacher 's Wife . It was released on June 10 , 1997 as the third and final single from the accompanying soundtrack . The song was written and produced solely by Babyface . Musically , the song is an R & B ballad , with gospel music and funk influences , and the lyrics speak about meeting someone special . " My Heart Is Calling " received mainly positive reviews from music critics , who commended Houston 's soulful performance . It peaked at number 77 on the United States Billboard Hot 100 , and number 35 on Billboard Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " My Heart Is Calling " was written and produced solely by Babyface . It is a moderately paced R & B ballad , composed with " a beat " . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , the song is written in the key of G major . The beat of the song is set in common time , and moves at a tempo of 104 beats per minute . It has the sequence of Em7 – D / F ♯ – G – Am7 as its chord progression . Houston 's vocals in the song span from the note of D3 to the high note of E5 . According to Ted Cox , the author of the book Whitney Houston , the song sees Houston developing the low end of her range . Lyrically , " My Heart Is Calling " is a love song . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " My Heart Is Calling " garnered mostly positive reviews from music critics . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly viewed the song as a " dance @-@ floor " ballad , while Elysa Gardner of Los Angeles Times noted that the song was influenced by both gospel music and funk genres . She also wrote that the song explores Houston 's more soulful side . Billboard magazine also noted the song has an " unusually saucy groove " . According to Bob Waliszewski of Plugged In , " Houston exuberantly captures the joy of meeting a special someone " through the song . 
 Billboard reviewed the song favorably , writing that it is " a wonderfully refreshing release that smartly side @-@ steps her tried @-@ and @-@ true balladry in favor of a credible foray into jeep @-@ funk territory . " Steve Jones of USA Today wrote that " [ the ] Babyface @-@ produced My Heart Is Calling ; [ ... ] have a spiritual feel . [ They ] help maintain a thematic cohesiveness that most soundtracks lack these days . " Similarly , Elysa Gardner of Los Angeles Times also reviewed the song favorably , writing that " Houston shows her soulful side with equal panache , even if she has a tendency to overdo the obligatory vocal gymnastics at times . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " My Heart Is Calling " debuted at number 81 on the US Billboard Hot 100 , issue dated July 5 , 1997 . Two weeks later , the song peaked at number 77 on the chart . The following week , it dropped out of the chart . On the R & B / Hip @-@ Hop charts , the song debuted at number 43 , on the week dated June 28 , 1997 . The following week , the song ascended to number 35 , a position which became its peak . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 2011 Budweiser Shootout = 
 The 2011 Budweiser Shootout was a stock car race and the first exhibition event of the 2011 NASCAR Sprint Cup Series . It was held on February 12 , 2011 at the Daytona International Speedway in Daytona Beach , Florida . The 75 @-@ lap race was won by Kurt Busch for the Penske Racing team . Jamie McMurray finished second and Ryan Newman came in third . 
 Pole position driver Dale Earnhardt , Jr. maintained his lead through the first corner , but Clint Bowyer , who started seventh on the grid , led the first lap . On the 25th lap , the first caution was given , as Jeff Burton became the leader . During the caution all the teams made a pit stop . Two laps later , an accident involving several racecars prompted the second caution to be given . On lap 63 , Newman became the leader . He maintained the lead until the final lap , when Denny Hamlin passed him below the yellow line ( out of bounds line ) , as Busch passed him on the other side . Hamlin passed Newman below the yellow line giving the win to Kurt Busch . 
 There were four cautions and 28 lead changes among ten different drivers throughout the course of the race . It was Busch 's first win in the 2011 season , as well as his first win at a track that uses restrictor plates , such as Daytona International Speedway and Talladega Superspeedway . A total of 80 @,@ 000 people attended the race , while 7 @.@ 8 million watched it on television . 
 = = Report = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The track , Daytona International Speedway , is one of six superspeedways to hold NASCAR races . The standard track at Daytona International Speedway is a four @-@ turn superspeedway that is 2 @.@ 5 miles ( 4 @.@ 0 km ) long . The track 's turns are banked at 31 degrees , while the front stretch , the location of the finish line , is banked at 18 degrees . 
 The Budweiser Shootout was created by Busch Beer brand manager Monty Roberts as the Busch Clash in 1979 . The race , designed to promote Busch Beer , invites the fastest NASCAR drivers from the previous season to compete . The race is considered a " warm @-@ up " for the Daytona 500 . It was renamed the Bud Shootout in 1998 . The name changed to the Budweiser Shootout in 2001 , and it was rebranded the Sprint Unlimited in 2013 . 
 A total of thirty drivers were eligible to compete in the race , including previous Sprint Cup Series champions , past winners of the race , rookie of the year winners , previous year pole position winners , the participants of the 2010 Chase for the Sprint Cup , and the winners of the Daytona 500 and Coke Zero 400 . The race was 75 laps long , with two segments of 25 and 50 laps . In between the segments there was a pit stop that lasted ten minutes . During the pit stop , teams were able to change tires , add fuel , and make normal chassis adjustments , but they were not be allowed to change springs , shock absorbers or rear @-@ ends . Also , all the work was done in either the garage or on pit road . The caution laps , as well as the green flag laps was scored in the race . Kevin Harvick was the defending race winner . 
 = = = Practice and qualifying = = = 
 Two practice sessions were held before the race , which was on Friday afternoon . The first session lasted 45 minutes , while the second lasted 60 minutes . Dale Earnhardt , Jr. was quickest with a time of 45 @.@ 031 seconds in the first session , less than five hundredths of a second faster than Mark Martin . Jimmie Johnson with a quickest time of 45 @.@ 082 seconds was third , ahead of Clint Bowyer , Kyle Busch , and Jeff Burton . Ryan Newman was seventh , still within a second of Earnhardt 's time . In the second and final practice session , Joey Logano was quickest with a fastest time of 44 @.@ 316 seconds . Busch followed in second , ahead of Michael Waltrip and Bobby Labonte . Greg Biffle was fifth quickest , with a time of 44 @.@ 787 . Denny Hamlin , Jeff Gordon , Kevin Harvick , Carl Edwards , and Matt Kenseth rounded out to the first ten positions . Also in the final practice session , a caution came out because the flood lights ( that light the track for racing ) in the first and third turns were turned off . 
 For qualifying , the 24 drivers that appeared to race chose their starting positions by a draw . Earnhardt chose the pole position , ahead of Tony Stewart , Edwards , Hamlin , and Kahne who rounded out the first five positions . Labonte chose sixth place , while Bowyer chose seventh , ahead of Newman and Derrike Cope in eighth and ninth . Waltrip , Biffle , Gordon , Juan Pablo Montoya , and Jamie McMurray chose the next five positions . Burton , who chose fifteenth , was followed by Kevin Conway , Kurt Busch , Harvick , Kenseth , and Martin in the first 20 positions . Kyle Busch , Logano , Johnson , and Regan Smith chose the last four positions in the race . 
 = = = Race = = = 
 The 2011 Budweiser Shootout was the first exhibition race of the season , and was televised live in the United States on Fox which began at 8 : 10 p.m. EST . The conditions on the grid were dry before the race , the air temperature at 51 ° F ( 11 ° C ) with clear skies expected . Country music singer Laura Bell Bundy began pre @-@ race ceremonies , performing the national anthem . Bob Hadley of Westside Baptist Church in Daytona Beach , Florida then delivered the invocation , and actress Amber Heard gave the command for drivers to start their engines . 
 Earnhardt retained his pole position lead into the first corner , but by the conclusion of the first lap , Bowyer was leading . Bowyer remained the leader for the next four laps with assistance from Earnhardt . On the sixth lap , Kahne drove to pit road because of problems with his racecar . On the following lap , Stewart and Hamlin began to draft with each other while in the third and fourth positions . By lap nine , Johnson had moved up 16 positions into the fifth position . One lap later , Burton , with assistance from Earnhardt , moved up to the first position , but on lap 11 , Earnhardt reclaimed the lead . On the twelfth lap , Stewart became the leader , but after one lap Burton reclaimed the first position as Edwards moved up to second . On the 14th lap , Burton remained the leader , ahead of Edwards and Kurt Busch . Afterward , Earnhardt fell to fifth . However , he moved up to the second position on the following lap while drafting with Kyle Busch to become the leader on lap 17 . Kyle Busch became the fourth different leader in the race . 
 On the 20th lap , Burton , with assistance from Edwards moved to first and second , as Waltrip had a highest speed of 206 miles per hour ( 332 km / h ) . On lap 22 , Busch became the leader , but after leading one lap , Earnhardt took over the lead position . Three laps later , the first caution was given as a break during the race . Also on the same lap , Burton became the leader . Just after the caution was given , all the teams pitted . After ten minutes the racecars returned to the track for the restart . Burton remained the leader , ahead of Harvick , Kenseth , Earnhardt , and Johnson . On the 27th lap , the second caution was given because of an accident involving Earnhardt , Montoya , Smith , Edwards , and Logano . Two laps later , Johnson , Bowyer , and Hamlin pit for new tires . Before the restart on lap 34 , it was announced that both Edwards and Earnhardt were out of the race . At the lap 34 restart , Burton remained the leader . On lap 36 , the third caution was given because of an accident involving Kyle Busch , and Martin . During the caution , Hamlin pitted . 
 At lap 39 , Burton remained the leader . On the following lap , Gordon became the leader , but after one lap , they were passed by Harvick and Burton . On the 42nd lap , Kyle Busch drove to the garage . Four laps later , Johnson , with assistance from Biffle , became the leader . On lap 48 , Waltrip collided into the wall , prompting the fourth caution to be given . One lap later , it was announced that Kyle Busch was out of the race . At the lap 50 restart , Johnson remained the leader . Two laps later , Burton became the leader , after having assistance from Bowyer . On the 56th lap , Johnson reclaimed the lead , but after one lap , Kurt Busch passed him for the first position . On lap 59 , Burton became the leader , as Hamlin moved to second . Four laps later , Newman became the leader , after assistance from Hamlin . On lap 70 , Newman remained the leader ahead of Hamlin , Kurt Busch , and McMurray . On the final lap , Hamlin moved below the yellow line and became the leader , as Kurt Busch and McMurray were passing them . After Hamlin passed below the yellow line , Kurt Busch became the leader because Hamlin was not scored . McMurray scored second , while Newman finished third , ahead of Johnson and Biffle in fourth and fifth . Gordon , Harvick , Burton , Bowyer , and Labonte rounded out the top ten finishers in the race . 
 = = = Post @-@ race = = = 
 Kurt Busch appeared in victory lane after his victory lap to start celebrating his first win of the season , and his first on any restrictor plate track such as Daytona International <unk> and Talladega Superspeedway , in front of a crowd of 80 @,@ 000 people ; earning $ 203 @,@ 000 for the victory . Following his celebration he said , " McMurray was the man [ Saturday night ] . He stayed with us . He stayed true . I can 't thank him enough for doing that . I hope it was the show the fans wanted to see . " He also commented , " What an unbelievable experience , this two @-@ car draft . I had no idea what to expect going in . I was just going to take it one lap at a time and see how it played out . I wanted to learn as the race went on how this Shell / <unk> Dodge raced . " 
 McMurray , who finished second in the race , <unk> , " It 's completely different plate racing than we 've ever had . I hope it was exciting for the fans to watch . But from the driver 's seat , it was actually really exciting to push two @-@ by @-@ two and do the side draft . It is awesome the runs you were able to get , so I hope the fans enjoyed it . " In the post race press conference , Hamlin , who passed Newman below the yellow line , described his misfortune , " That yellow line is there to protect us and the fans in the stands , and I just chose to take the safer route . A win in the Shootout is not worth sending the 39 [ Newman ] through the grandstands . For me , as fast as we 're running , if I got into his left rear , that car will go airborne . " Edwards who was involved in the largest accident in the race , " We were three- or four @-@ wide back there , and I was going between the 88 and the 78 , and I don 't think the 78 knew I was in there . He kept coming down , and I just had enough of my car in there . I laid up against the 88 and then the 78 got me in the right @-@ front , but that 's just everybody trying to get the best position they can so we can go out there and race . " 7 @.@ 8 million people watched the race on television . 
 = = Results = = 
 = = = Qualifying = = = 
 = = = Race Results = = = 
 = Amber 31422 = 
 " Amber 31422 " is the fifth episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . It first aired on November 4 , 2010 in the United States . The third season spent its time alternating between the prime and parallel universes , and " Amber 31422 " was set in the latter . Olivia , still trapped in the Other Side and brainwashed , investigates the Rose brothers , who are able to do the seemingly impossible : escape from an amber @-@ like substance used to contain fringe events . 
 The episode was written by Josh Singer and Ethan Gross , and directed by David Straiton . An estimated 4 @.@ 97 million viewers watched " Amber 31422 " , which up to that point were the lowest ratings of the season . Critics were generally positive , and many praised the cast 's performances as well as the Rose brothers ' storyline . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Olivia is still trapped in the parallel universe , under Walternate 's ( a doppelgänger of Walter Bishop ) conditioning to believe she is her doppelgänger from Over There and part of its Fringe team . Throughout the episode , she willingly participates in Walternate 's tests in a sensory @-@ deprivation tank located on Liberty Island to stimulate her Cortexiphan abilities . One test is successful , as she temporarily finds herself in a gift shop on Liberty Island in the prime universe . Meanwhile , hallucinations of FBI consultant and colleague Peter continue to bother Olivia . 
 The Fringe team is alerted to an incident at a quarantine site , where the amber encasing the site has been cut into and a body has been removed . They identify the missing body as Joshua Rose , a former bank robber . Joshua had previously caught Fringe Division 's attention as he used a molecular destabilization device to break into banks , triggering quarantine @-@ level events . Colonel Broyles is privately cautioned by Walternate that those trapped in amber are still alive , a fact he does not want to be made public for fear of their outcry . Broyles relays this to his team , requesting they find Rose and bring him in as quickly as possible . 
 At Joshua 's apartment , they discover he has a twin brother Matthew and equipment used for a negative matter ring . Their investigation is cut short as they are forced to evacuate from a rigged bomb which destroys the apartment as they flee . Lee and Francis were unable to hear the bomb , but Olivia could , possibly indicating that she retains the enhanced hearing demonstrated in " Night of Desirable Objects . " They travel to Matthew 's home in the suburbs , meeting the brother , his wife , and their children . Matthew professes to no knowledge of the location of his brother . Olivia is suspicious of Matthew 's behavior but does not explore further . Olivia 's suspicion is shown to be correct as Matthew is revealed to have been the one trapped in the amber , having tried to come warn his brother about the quarantine . Joshua , having posed as Matthew for the last few years , was the one that freed him and spoke to Fringe . The brothers switch places again when Olivia requests a more detailed identity check from Matthew , which he passes successfully . 
 Believing Joshua will attempt another break @-@ in but will avoid putting innocents in danger , Olivia has Fringe Division statistician Astrid identify three remotely located banks and decides to investigate them . Olivia finds the bank that Joshua has targeted and discovers his device in a subway tunnel , but he knocks her out before she can investigate further . As he energizes the molecular <unk> , Fringe Division detects the event and converges on the bank . Matthew eventually finds Joshua , again trying to warn him off , but quickly realizes Joshua has purposely entered the bank to be trapped in the amber . Joshua believes this to be the only way to force the Fringe team to end their investigation . Matthew escapes the quarantine while Fringe agents Charlie and Lincoln rescue Olivia in time before the amber sets in . Olivia returns to Matthew the next day and confirms the case is closed , but not before collecting a skin sample that , should she ever need it , conclusively proves that it was Matthew in the amber before . 
 As the episode ends , Olivia 's hallucination of Peter points out to her that there is a way to tell if she is from the prime universe : by confirming her memories of her niece Ella , who did not survive birth in the parallel universe . During Olivia 's final test in the tank , she is again able to cross over to the gift shop in the prime universe . She is able to recall Ella 's phone number and calls her , but is brought back to the parallel universe shortly after Ella answers . As she is removed from the tank , she lies , telling Walternate the test did not work . 
 = = Production = = 
 Co @-@ executive producer Josh Singer and story editor Ethan Gross co @-@ wrote the episode , while David Straiton served as the director . The third season spent its time alternating between the prime and parallel universes , and " Amber 31422 " was set in the latter . 
 " Amber 31422 " was the first project guest actors and brothers Shawn Ashmore and Aaron Ashmore had worked on together in fifteen years . Shawn said in an interview that " it ’ s usually because the stuff that came along is kind of hokey , but I think the quality of Fringe is really high and the episode is done well and our characters are intelligent . We ’ re going to have some fun . " Holly <unk> guest starred as Danielle Rose , while recurring guest actors Amy Madigan and Ryan McDonald returned as Marilyn Dunham and Brandon Fayette , respectively . Seth Gabel and former series regular Kirk Acevedo reprised their characters Lincoln Lee and Charlie Francis , Fringe Division agents from the Other Side . 
 The episode was scheduled to air three weeks after the previous episode , as the Major League Baseball playoffs were underway until November 11 at the latest , though the lack of a sixth and seventh game at the World Series allowed the episode to air a week earlier , on November 4 . As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Amber 31422 " , with the intention of having " students learn about the process of fossilization and identification of species from incomplete information . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the parallel universe , Lincoln Lee mentions that it was Cary Grant , and not Humphrey Bogart , who starred in The Maltese Falcon . After Olivia arrives late to a crime scene , Lincoln chides her for driving on the " Nixon Parkway , " a reference to former president Richard Nixon . The tank Walternate uses to submerge Olivia has been noted by some critics to closely resemble a similar device in the 1980 science fiction film Altered States , which also starred Fringe actress Blair Brown . Walternate tells Broyles he first began the amber protocol on October 17 , 1989 , which was the same day as the 1989 Loma Prieta earthquake in our side 's San Francisco Bay region . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Amber 31422 " was watched by an estimated 4 @.@ 97 million viewers in the United States . The episode had a season low rating of 1 @.@ 8 / 5 among viewers 18 – 49 , which was down 10 % from the previous episode that aired on October 14 . Between Fringe and its lead @-@ in show Bones , Fox finished in third place for the night . The Fringe episode 's low ratings have been attributed by critics to the unexpected end to the 2010 World Series , which caused Fringe to air a week earlier than expected . Den of Geek columnist Billy Grifter attributed the low ratings to the parallel universe focus , commenting " if you weren 't a fan beforehand , you 'll not be able to follow what 's going on now . For those of us that did step onto the Fringe elevator early , it 's a great ride , but I can see that it 's a difficult proposition to attract new viewers . " Time shifted viewing increased the episode 's ratings by 44 percent among adults , resulting in a rise from 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 6 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . Noel Murray of A.V. Club graded the episode with a B- , explaining that " after four solid weeks of good @-@ to @-@ great episodes , Fringe delivered its first semi @-@ dud of season three " because the case @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week was " dull " and " <unk> " , and the dialogue was " too flat and too earnest " . Despite this , Murray thought the episode was " essential viewing " for Fringe fans due to certain revelations , such as how people are actually alive in the amber , and also because it moved the plot closer to an Olivia @-@ Altlivia confrontation . Conversely , the Los Angeles Times ' Andrew Hanson thought it was a good episode , writing " This is what I love about Fringe . Not only do they have the cool science , they also have the moral questions that go along " . Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly thought the episode was " enthralling , " and he enjoyed the brothers ' " nice emotional story , " and praised Anna Torv 's acting . TV Squad reviewer Jason Hughes enjoyed the parallel universe , and in particular the character of Lincoln Lee , believing he was " too rich a character to just abandon " once the series stopped alternating between universes . 
 Fearnet 's Alyse Wax wrote , " I definitely think that this was the best " over there " episode they have had so far . They had an actual case , rather than still setting up who these doppelgangers are . " HitFix writer Ryan McGee thought the initial twist over the brothers ' identities " was fun " , though it " grew old quickly " . He praised the series for not " dragging out " Olivia discovering her true identity , explaining " While episodes set Over There are delicious fun , having Olivia unaware for a long stretch would have strained credibility and perhaps damaged audience opinion of her character ’ s integrity . " Writing for Den of Geek , Billy Grifter commented , " I have three words for the latest Fringe episode , and they 're all ' brilliant ' . Season three has moved gracefully , like a big cat stalking its prey , from the outset , playing a flipside game where we cleverly alternate between our universe and an alternate one where Olivia is currently resident . " Grifter praised the Ashmore brothers ' acting as well as their characters ' storylines , calling their switch " a nice twist that 's cleverly played " . 
 = HIV = 
 The human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) is a <unk> ( a subgroup of retrovirus ) that causes HIV infection and over time acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) . AIDS is a condition in humans in which progressive failure of the immune system allows life @-@ threatening opportunistic infections and cancers to thrive . Without treatment , average survival time after infection with HIV is estimated to be 9 to 11 years , depending on the HIV subtype . Infection with HIV occurs by the transfer of blood , semen , vaginal fluid , pre @-@ ejaculate , or breast milk . Within these bodily fluids , HIV is present as both free virus particles and virus within infected immune cells . 
 HIV infects vital cells in the human immune system such as helper T cells ( specifically CD4 + T cells ) , macrophages , and dendritic cells . HIV infection leads to low levels of CD4 + T cells through a number of mechanisms , including <unk> of abortively infected T cells , apoptosis of uninfected bystander cells , direct viral killing of infected cells , and killing of infected CD4 + T cells by CD8 cytotoxic lymphocytes that recognize infected cells . When CD4 + T cell numbers decline below a critical level , cell @-@ mediated immunity is lost , and the body becomes progressively more susceptible to opportunistic infections . 
 = = Virology = = 
 = = = Classification = = = 
 HIV is a member of the genus <unk> , part of the family Retroviridae . Lentiviruses have many morphologies and biological properties in common . Many species are infected by lentiviruses , which are characteristically responsible for long @-@ duration illnesses with a long incubation period . Lentiviruses are transmitted as single @-@ stranded , positive @-@ sense , enveloped RNA viruses . Upon entry into the target cell , the viral RNA genome is converted ( reverse transcribed ) into double @-@ stranded DNA by a virally encoded reverse transcriptase that is transported along with the viral genome in the virus particle . The resulting viral DNA is then imported into the cell nucleus and integrated into the cellular DNA by a virally encoded integrase and host co @-@ factors . Once integrated , the virus may become latent , allowing the virus and its host cell to avoid detection by the immune system . Alternatively , the virus may be transcribed , producing new RNA genomes and viral proteins that are packaged and released from the cell as new virus particles that begin the replication cycle anew . 
 Two types of HIV have been characterized : HIV @-@ 1 and HIV @-@ 2 . HIV @-@ 1 is the virus that was initially discovered and termed both LAV and HTLV @-@ III . It is more virulent , more infective , and is the cause of the majority of HIV infections globally . The lower infectivity of HIV @-@ 2 compared to HIV @-@ 1 implies that fewer of those exposed to HIV @-@ 2 will be infected per exposure . Because of its relatively poor capacity for transmission , HIV @-@ 2 is largely confined to West Africa . 
 = = = Structure and genome = = = 
 HIV is different in structure from other retroviruses . It is roughly spherical with a diameter of about 120 nm , around 60 times smaller than a red blood cell . It is composed of two copies of positive single @-@ stranded RNA that codes for the virus 's nine genes enclosed by a conical capsid composed of 2 @,@ 000 copies of the viral protein p24 . The single @-@ stranded RNA is tightly bound to nucleocapsid proteins , <unk> , and enzymes needed for the development of the virion such as reverse transcriptase , proteases , ribonuclease and integrase . A matrix composed of the viral protein <unk> surrounds the capsid ensuring the integrity of the virion particle . 
 This is , in turn , surrounded by the viral envelope , that is composed of the lipid bilayer taken from the membrane of a human cell when the newly formed virus particle buds from the cell . The viral envelope contains proteins from the host cell and relatively few copies of the HIV Envelope protein , which consists of a cap made of three molecules known as glycoprotein ( <unk> ) 120 , and a stem consisting of three gp41 molecules which anchor the structure into the viral envelope . The Envelope protein , encoded by the HIV env gene , allows the virus to attach to target cells and fuse the viral envelope with the target cell membrane releasing the viral contents into the cell and initiating the infectious cycle . As the sole viral protein on the surface of the virus , the Envelope protein is a major target for HIV vaccine efforts . Over half of the mass of the trimeric envelope spike is N @-@ linked glycans . The density is high as the glycans shield the underlying viral protein from neutralisation by antibodies . This is one of the most densely glycosylated molecules known and the density is sufficiently high to prevent the normal maturation process of glycans during biogenesis in the endoplasmic and Golgi apparatus . The majority of the glycans are therefore stalled as immature ' high @-@ mannose ' glycans not normally present on secreted or cell surface human glycoproteins . The unusual processing and high density means that almost all broadly neutralising antibodies that have so far been identified ( from a subset of patients that have been infected for many months to years ) bind to or , are adapted to cope with , these envelope glycans . 
 The molecular structure of the viral spike has now been determined by X @-@ ray crystallography and cryo @-@ electron microscopy . These advances in structural biology were made possible due to the development of stable recombinant forms of the viral spike by the introduction of an <unk> disulphide bond and an isoleucine to proline mutation in gp41 . The so @-@ called <unk> trimers not only reproduce the antigenic properties of the native viral spike but also display the same degree of immature glycans as presented on the native virus . Recombinant trimeric viral spikes are promising vaccine candidates as they display less non @-@ neutralising epitopes than recombinant monomeric gp120 which act to suppress the immune response to target epitopes . 
 The RNA genome consists of at least seven structural landmarks ( LTR , TAR , RRE , PE , SLIP , CRS , and INS ) , and nine genes ( gag , pol , and env , tat , rev , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and sometimes a tenth <unk> , which is a fusion of tat env and rev ) , encoding 19 proteins . Three of these genes , gag , pol , and env , contain information needed to make the structural proteins for new virus particles . For example , env codes for a protein called gp160 that is cut in two by a cellular protease to form gp120 and gp41 . The six remaining genes , tat , rev , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ( or <unk> in the case of HIV @-@ 2 ) , are regulatory genes for proteins that control the ability of HIV to infect cells , produce new copies of virus ( replicate ) , or cause disease . 
 The two Tat proteins ( p16 and <unk> ) are transcriptional <unk> for the LTR promoter acting by binding the TAR RNA element . The TAR may also be processed into microRNAs that regulate the apoptosis genes ERCC1 and <unk> . The Rev protein ( <unk> ) is involved in shuttling RNAs from the nucleus and the cytoplasm by binding to the RRE RNA element . The <unk> protein ( <unk> ) prevents the action of <unk> ( a cellular protein that <unk> <unk> to <unk> in the single stranded viral DNA and / or interferes with reverse transcription ) . The <unk> protein ( <unk> ) arrests cell division at G2 / M. The Nef protein ( p27 ) down @-@ regulates CD4 ( the major viral receptor ) , as well as the MHC class I and class II molecules . 
 Nef also interacts with <unk> domains . The <unk> protein ( p16 ) influences the release of new virus particles from infected cells . The ends of each strand of HIV RNA contain an RNA sequence called the long terminal repeat ( LTR ) . Regions in the LTR act as switches to control production of new viruses and can be triggered by proteins from either HIV or the host cell . The Psi element is involved in viral genome packaging and recognized by Gag and Rev proteins . The SLIP element ( <unk> ) is involved in the frameshift in the Gag @-@ Pol reading frame required to make functional Pol . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The term viral tropism refers to the cell types a virus infects . HIV can infect a variety of immune cells such as CD4 + T cells , macrophages , and microglial cells . HIV @-@ 1 entry to macrophages and CD4 + T cells is mediated through interaction of the virion envelope glycoproteins ( gp120 ) with the CD4 molecule on the target cells and also with chemokine <unk> . 
 <unk> ( M @-@ tropic ) strains of HIV @-@ 1 , or non @-@ syncytia @-@ inducing strains ( NSI ; now called R5 viruses ) use the β @-@ chemokine receptor CCR5 for entry and are , thus , able to replicate in macrophages and CD4 + T cells . This CCR5 coreceptor is used by almost all primary HIV @-@ 1 isolates regardless of viral genetic subtype . Indeed , macrophages play a key role in several critical aspects of HIV infection . They appear to be the first cells infected by HIV and perhaps the source of HIV production when CD4 + cells become depleted in the patient . Macrophages and microglial cells are the cells infected by HIV in the central nervous system . In tonsils and adenoids of HIV @-@ infected patients , macrophages fuse into multinucleated giant cells that produce huge amounts of virus . 
 T @-@ tropic isolates , or syncytia @-@ inducing ( SI ; now called X4 viruses ) strains replicate in primary CD4 + T cells as well as in macrophages and use the α @-@ chemokine receptor , CXCR4 , for entry . Dual @-@ tropic HIV @-@ 1 strains are thought to be transitional strains of HIV @-@ 1 and thus are able to use both CCR5 and CXCR4 as co @-@ receptors for viral entry . 
 The α @-@ chemokine SDF @-@ 1 , a ligand for CXCR4 , suppresses replication of T @-@ tropic HIV @-@ 1 isolates . It does this by down @-@ regulating the expression of CXCR4 on the surface of these cells . HIV that use only the CCR5 receptor are termed R5 ; those that use only CXCR4 are termed X4 , and those that use both , <unk> . However , the use of coreceptor alone does not explain viral tropism , as not all R5 viruses are able to use CCR5 on macrophages for a productive infection and HIV can also infect a subtype of myeloid dendritic cells , which probably constitute a reservoir that maintains infection when CD4 + T cell numbers have declined to extremely low levels . 
 Some people are resistant to certain strains of HIV . For example , people with the CCR5 @-@ <unk> mutation are resistant to infection with R5 virus , as the mutation stops HIV from binding to this coreceptor , reducing its ability to infect target cells . 
 Sexual intercourse is the major mode of HIV transmission . Both X4 and R5 HIV are present in the seminal fluid , which is passed from a male to his sexual partner . The virions can then infect numerous cellular targets and disseminate into the whole organism . However , a selection process leads to a predominant transmission of the R5 virus through this pathway . How this selective process works is still under investigation , but one model is that spermatozoa may selectively carry R5 HIV as they possess both <unk> and CCR5 but not CXCR4 on their surface and that genital epithelial cells preferentially sequester X4 virus . In patients infected with subtype B HIV @-@ 1 , there is often a co @-@ receptor switch in late @-@ stage disease and T @-@ tropic variants appear that can infect a variety of T cells through CXCR4 . These variants then replicate more aggressively with heightened virulence that causes rapid T cell depletion , immune system collapse , and opportunistic infections that mark the advent of AIDS . Thus , during the course of infection , viral adaptation to the use of CXCR4 instead of CCR5 may be a key step in the progression to AIDS . A number of studies with subtype B @-@ infected individuals have determined that between 40 and 50 percent of AIDS patients can harbour viruses of the SI and , it is presumed , the X4 phenotypes . 
 HIV @-@ 2 is much less pathogenic than HIV @-@ 1 and is restricted in its worldwide distribution . The adoption of " accessory genes " by HIV @-@ 2 and its more promiscuous pattern of coreceptor usage ( including CD4 @-@ independence ) may assist the virus in its adaptation to avoid innate restriction factors present in host cells . Adaptation to use normal cellular machinery to enable transmission and productive infection has also aided the establishment of HIV @-@ 2 replication in humans . A survival strategy for any infectious agent is not to kill its host but ultimately become a commensal organism . Having achieved a low pathogenicity , over time , variants more successful at transmission will be selected . 
 = = = Replication cycle = = = 
 = = = = Entry to the cell = = = = 
 The HIV virion enters macrophages and CD4 + T cells by the adsorption of glycoproteins on its surface to receptors on the target cell followed by fusion of the viral envelope with the cell membrane and the release of the HIV capsid into the cell . 
 Entry to the cell begins through interaction of the trimeric envelope complex ( gp160 spike ) and both CD4 and a chemokine receptor ( generally either CCR5 or CXCR4 , but others are known to interact ) on the cell <unk> gp120 binds to integrin <unk> activating LFA @-@ 1 the central integrin involved in the establishment of virological synapses , which facilitate efficient cell @-@ to @-@ cell spreading of HIV @-@ 1 . The gp160 spike contains binding domains for both CD4 and chemokine receptors . 
 The first step in fusion involves the high @-@ affinity attachment of the CD4 binding domains of gp120 to CD4 . Once gp120 is bound with the CD4 protein , the envelope complex undergoes a structural change , exposing the chemokine binding domains of gp120 and allowing them to interact with the target chemokine receptor . This allows for a more stable two @-@ pronged attachment , which allows the N @-@ terminal fusion peptide gp41 to penetrate the cell membrane . Repeat sequences in gp41 , <unk> , and <unk> then interact , causing the collapse of the extracellular portion of gp41 into a hairpin . This loop structure brings the virus and cell membranes close together , allowing fusion of the membranes and subsequent entry of the viral capsid . 
 After HIV has bound to the target cell , the HIV RNA and various enzymes , including reverse transcriptase , integrase , ribonuclease , and protease , are injected into the cell . During the microtubule @-@ based transport to the nucleus , the viral single @-@ strand RNA genome is transcribed into double @-@ strand DNA , which is then integrated into a host chromosome . 
 HIV can infect dendritic cells ( DCs ) by this CD4 @-@ CCR5 route , but another route using mannose @-@ specific C @-@ type lectin receptors such as DC @-@ SIGN can also be used . DCs are one of the first cells encountered by the virus during sexual transmission . They are currently thought to play an important role by transmitting HIV to T @-@ cells when the virus is captured in the mucosa by DCs . The presence of <unk> @-@ 1 , which occurs naturally in neurons , is believed to prevent the infection of cells by HIV . 
 HIV @-@ 1 entry , as well as entry of many other retroviruses , has long been believed to occur exclusively at the plasma membrane . More recently , however , productive infection by pH @-@ independent , clathrin @-@ dependent endocytosis of HIV @-@ 1 has also been reported and was recently suggested to constitute the only route of productive entry . 
 = = = = Replication and transcription = = = = 
 Shortly after the viral capsid enters the cell , an enzyme called reverse transcriptase liberates the single @-@ stranded ( + ) RNA genome from the attached viral proteins and copies it into a complementary DNA ( cDNA ) molecule . The process of reverse transcription is extremely error @-@ prone , and the resulting mutations may cause drug resistance or allow the virus to evade the body 's immune system . The reverse transcriptase also has ribonuclease activity that degrades the viral RNA during the synthesis of cDNA , as well as DNA @-@ dependent DNA polymerase activity that creates a sense DNA from the antisense cDNA . Together , the cDNA and its complement form a double @-@ stranded viral DNA that is then transported into the cell nucleus . The integration of the viral DNA into the host cell 's genome is carried out by another viral enzyme called integrase . 
 This integrated viral DNA may then lie dormant , in the latent stage of HIV infection . To actively produce the virus , certain cellular transcription factors need to be present , the most important of which is NF @-@ κB ( NF kappa B ) , which is upregulated when T @-@ cells become activated . This means that those cells most likely to be killed by HIV are those currently fighting infection . 
 During viral replication , the integrated DNA provirus is transcribed into RNA , some of which then undergo RNA splicing to produce mature mRNAs . These mRNAs are exported from the nucleus into the cytoplasm , where they are translated into the regulatory proteins Tat ( which encourages new virus production ) and Rev. As the newly produced Rev protein accumulates in the nucleus , it binds to full @-@ length , <unk> copies of virus RNAs and allows them to leave the nucleus . Some of these full @-@ length RNAs function as new copies of the virus genome , while others function as mRNAs that are translated to produce the structural proteins Gag and <unk> . Gag proteins bind to copies of the virus RNA genome to package them into new virus particles . 
 HIV @-@ 1 and HIV @-@ 2 appear to package their RNA differently . HIV @-@ 1 will bind to any appropriate RNA . HIV @-@ 2 will preferentially bind to the mRNA that was used to create the Gag protein itself . 
 = = = = Recombination = = = = 
 Two RNA genomes are <unk> in each HIV @-@ 1 particle ( see Structure and genome of HIV ) . Upon infection and replication catalyzed by reverse transcriptase , recombination between the two genomes can occur . Recombination occurs as the single @-@ strand ( + ) RNA genomes are reverse transcribed to form DNA . During reverse transcription the nascent DNA can switch multiple times between the two copies of the viral RNA . This form of recombination is known as copy @-@ choice . Recombination events may occur throughout the genome . From 2 to 20 events per genome may occur at each replication cycle , and these events can rapidly shuffle the genetic information that is transmitted from parental to progeny genomes . 
 Viral recombination produces genetic variation that likely contributes to the evolution of resistance to anti @-@ retroviral therapy . Recombination may also contribute , in principle , to overcoming the immune defenses of the host . Yet , for the adaptive advantages of genetic variation to be realized , the two viral genomes packaged in individual infecting virus particles need to have arisen from separate progenitor parental viruses of differing genetic constitution . It is unknown how often such mixed packaging occurs under natural conditions . 
 Bonhoeffer et al. suggested that template switching by the reverse transcriptase acts as a repair process to deal with breaks in the ssRNA genome . In addition , Hu and Temin suggested that recombination is an adaptation for repair of damage in the RNA genomes . Strand switching ( copy @-@ choice recombination ) by reverse transcriptase could generate an undamaged copy of genomic DNA from two damaged ssRNA genome copies . This view of the adaptive benefit of recombination in HIV could explain why each HIV particle contains two complete genomes , rather than one . Furthermore , the view that recombination is a repair process implies that the benefit of repair can occur at each replication cycle , and that this benefit can be realized whether or not the two genomes differ genetically . On the view that that recombination in HIV is a repair process , the generation of recombinational variation would be a consequence , but not the cause of , the evolution of template switching . 
 HIV @-@ 1 infection causes chronic ongoing inflammation and production of reactive oxygen species . Thus , the HIV genome may be vulnerable to oxidative damages , including breaks in the single @-@ stranded RNA . For HIV , as well as for viruses generally , successful infection depends on overcoming host defensive strategies that often include production of genome @-@ damaging reactive oxygen . Thus , <unk> et al. suggested that recombination by viruses is an adaptation for repair of genome damages , and that recombinational variation is a byproduct that may provide a separate benefit . 
 = = = = Assembly and release = = = = 
 The final step of the viral cycle , assembly of new HIV @-@ 1 virions , begins at the plasma membrane of the host cell . The <unk> <unk> ( gp160 ) goes through the endoplasmic reticulum and is transported to the Golgi complex where it is cleaved by <unk> resulting in the two HIV envelope glycoproteins , gp41 and gp120 . These are transported to the plasma membrane of the host cell where gp41 anchors gp120 to the membrane of the infected cell . The Gag ( <unk> ) and Gag @-@ Pol ( <unk> ) <unk> also associate with the inner surface of the plasma membrane along with the HIV genomic RNA as the forming virion begins to bud from the host cell . The budded virion is still immature as the gag <unk> still need to be cleaved into the actual matrix , capsid and nucleocapsid proteins . This cleavage is mediated by the also packaged viral protease and can be inhibited by antiretroviral drugs of the protease inhibitor class . The various structural components then assemble to produce a mature HIV virion . Only mature virions are then able to infect another cell . 
 = = = Spread within the body = = = 
 HIV is now known to spread between CD4 + T cells by two parallel routes : cell @-@ free spread and cell @-@ to @-@ cell spread , i.e. it employs hybrid spreading mechanisms . In the cell @-@ free spread , virus particles bud from an infected T cell , enter the blood / extracellular fluid and then infect another T cell following a chance encounter . HIV can also disseminate by direct transmission from one cell to another by a process of cell @-@ to @-@ cell spread . Two pathways of cell @-@ to @-@ cell transmission have been reported . Firstly , an infected T cell can transmit virus directly to a target T cell via a virological synapse . Secondly , an antigen presenting cell ( APC ) can also transmit HIV to T cells by a process that either involves productive infection ( in the case of macrophages ) or capture and transfer of virions in trans ( in the case of dendritic cells ) . Whichever pathway is used , infection by cell @-@ to @-@ cell transfer is reported to be much more efficient than cell @-@ free virus spread . A number of factors contribute to this increased efficiency , including polarised virus budding towards the site of cell @-@ to @-@ cell contact , close apposition of cells which minimizes fluid @-@ phase diffusion of virions , and clustering of HIV entry receptors on the target cell to the contact zone . Cell @-@ to @-@ cell spread is thought to be particularly important in lymphoid tissues where CD4 + T lymphocytes are densely packed and likely to frequently interact . <unk> imaging studies have supported the concept of the HIV virological synapse in vivo . The hybrid spreading mechanisms of HIV contribute to the virus 's ongoing replication against antiretroviral therapies . 
 = = = Genetic variability = = = 
 HIV differs from many viruses in that it has very high genetic variability . This diversity is a result of its fast replication cycle , with the generation of about 1010 virions every day , coupled with a high mutation rate of approximately 3 x 10 − 5 per nucleotide base per cycle of replication and <unk> properties of reverse transcriptase . 
 This complex scenario leads to the generation of many variants of HIV in a single infected patient in the course of one day . This variability is compounded when a single cell is simultaneously infected by two or more different strains of HIV . When simultaneous infection occurs , the genome of progeny virions may be composed of RNA strands from two different strains . This hybrid virion then infects a new cell where it undergoes replication . As this happens , the reverse transcriptase , by jumping back and forth between the two different RNA templates , will generate a newly synthesized retroviral DNA sequence that is a recombinant between the two parental genomes . This recombination is most obvious when it occurs between subtypes . 
 The closely related simian immunodeficiency virus ( SIV ) has evolved into many strains , classified by the natural host species . SIV strains of the African green monkey ( <unk> ) and sooty mangabey ( <unk> ) are thought to have a long evolutionary history with their hosts . These hosts have adapted to the presence of the virus , which is present at high levels in the host 's blood but evokes only a mild immune response , does not cause the development of simian AIDS , and does not undergo the extensive mutation and recombination typical of HIV infection in humans . 
 In contrast , when these strains infect species that have not adapted to SIV ( " heterologous " hosts such as rhesus or <unk> macaques ) , the animals develop AIDS and the virus generates genetic diversity similar to what is seen in human HIV infection . Chimpanzee SIV ( SIVcpz ) , the closest genetic relative of HIV @-@ 1 , is associated with increased mortality and AIDS @-@ like symptoms in its natural host . SIVcpz appears to have been transmitted relatively recently to chimpanzee and human populations , so their hosts have not yet adapted to the virus . This virus has also lost a function of the Nef gene that is present in most <unk> . For non @-@ pathogenic SIV variants , Nef suppresses T @-@ cell activation through the CD3 marker . Nef ’ s function in non @-@ pathogenic forms of SIV is to downregulate expression of inflammatory cytokines , MHC @-@ 1 , and signals that affect T cell trafficking . In HIV @-@ 1 and SIVcpz , Nef does not inhibit T @-@ cell activation and it has lost this function . Without this function , T cell depletion is more likely , leading to immunodeficiency . 
 Three groups of HIV @-@ 1 have been identified on the basis of differences in the envelope ( env ) region : M , N , and O. Group M is the most prevalent and is subdivided into eight subtypes ( or clades ) , based on the whole genome , which are geographically distinct . The most prevalent are subtypes B ( found mainly in North America and Europe ) , A and D ( found mainly in Africa ) , and C ( found mainly in Africa and Asia ) ; these subtypes form branches in the phylogenetic tree representing the lineage of the M group of HIV @-@ 1 . <unk> with distinct subtypes gives rise to circulating recombinant forms ( <unk> ) . In 2000 , the last year in which an analysis of global subtype prevalence was made , 47 @.@ 2 % of infections worldwide were of subtype C , 26 @.@ 7 % were of subtype A / <unk> _ AG , 12 @.@ 3 % were of subtype B , 5 @.@ 3 % were of subtype D , 3 @.@ 2 % were of <unk> _ AE , and the remaining 5 @.@ 3 % were composed of other subtypes and <unk> . Most HIV @-@ 1 research is focused on subtype B ; few laboratories focus on the other subtypes . The existence of a fourth group , " P " , has been hypothesised based on a virus isolated in 2009 . The strain is apparently derived from gorilla SIV ( <unk> ) , first isolated from western lowland gorillas in 2006 . 
 HIV @-@ 2 ’ s closest relative is SIVsm , a strain of SIV found in sooty <unk> . Since HIV @-@ 1 is derived from SIVcpz , and HIV @-@ 2 from SIVsm , the genetic sequence of HIV @-@ 2 is only partially homologous to HIV @-@ 1 and more closely resembles that of SIVsm . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 Many HIV @-@ positive people are unaware that they are infected with the virus . For example , in 2001 less than 1 % of the sexually active urban population in Africa had been tested , and this proportion is even lower in rural populations . Furthermore , in 2001 only 0 @.@ 5 % of pregnant women attending urban health facilities were counselled , tested or receive their test results . Again , this proportion is even lower in rural health facilities . Since donors may therefore be unaware of their infection , donor blood and blood products used in medicine and medical research are routinely screened for HIV . 
 HIV @-@ 1 testing is initially by an enzyme @-@ linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) to detect antibodies to HIV @-@ 1 . Specimens with a nonreactive result from the initial ELISA are considered HIV @-@ negative unless new exposure to an infected partner or partner of unknown HIV status has occurred . Specimens with a reactive ELISA result are retested in duplicate . If the result of either duplicate test is reactive , the specimen is reported as repeatedly reactive and undergoes confirmatory testing with a more specific supplemental test ( e.g. , western blot or , less commonly , an immunofluorescence assay ( IFA ) ) . Only specimens that are repeatedly reactive by ELISA and positive by IFA or reactive by western blot are considered HIV @-@ positive and indicative of HIV infection . Specimens that are repeatedly ELISA @-@ reactive occasionally provide an indeterminate western blot result , which may be either an incomplete antibody response to HIV in an infected person or nonspecific reactions in an uninfected person . 
 Although IFA can be used to confirm infection in these ambiguous cases , this assay is not widely used . In general , a second specimen should be collected more than a month later and retested for persons with indeterminate western blot results . Although much less commonly available , nucleic acid testing ( e.g. , viral RNA or <unk> DNA amplification method ) can also help diagnosis in certain situations . In addition , a few tested specimens might provide inconclusive results because of a low quantity specimen . In these situations , a second specimen is collected and tested for HIV infection . 
 Modern HIV testing is extremely accurate . A single screening test is correct more than 99 % of the time . The chance of a false @-@ positive result in standard two @-@ step testing protocol is estimated to be about 1 in 250 @,@ 000 in a low risk population . Testing post exposure is recommended initially and at six weeks , three months , and six months . 
 The latest recommendations of the CDC show that HIV testing must start with an immunoassay combination test for HIV @-@ 1 and HIV @-@ 2 antibodies and p24 antigen . A negative result rules out HIV exposure , while a positive one must be followed by an HIV @-@ 1 / 2 antibody differentiation immunoassay to detect which is present . This gives rise to four possible scenarios : 
 1 . HIV @-@ 1 ( + ) & HIV @-@ 2 ( - ) : HIV @-@ 1 antibodies detected 
 2 . HIV @-@ 1 ( - ) & HIV @-@ 2 ( + ) : HIV @-@ 2 antibodies detected 
 3 . HIV @-@ 1 ( + ) & HIV @-@ 2 ( + ) : HIV antibodies detected 
 4 . HIV @-@ 1 ( - ) or indeterminate & HIV @-@ 2 ( - ) : Nucleic acid test must be carried out to detect the acute infection of HIV @-@ 1 or its absence . 
 An updated algorithm published by the CDC in June 2014 recommends that diagnosis starts with the p24 antigen test . A negative result rules out infection , while a positive one must be followed by an HIV @-@ 1 / 2 antibody differentiation immunoassay . A positive differentiation test confirms diagnosis , while a negative or indeterminate result must be followed by nucleic acid test ( NAT ) . A positive NAT result confirms HIV @-@ 1 infection whereas a negative result rules out infection ( false positive p24 ) . 
 = = Research = = 
 HIV / AIDS research includes all medical research that attempts to prevent , treat , or cure HIV / AIDS , as well as fundamental research about the nature of HIV as an infectious agent and AIDS as the disease caused by HIV . 
 Many governments and research institutions participate in HIV / AIDS research . This research includes behavioral health interventions , such as research into sex education , and drug development , such as research into microbicides for sexually transmitted diseases , HIV vaccines , and antiretroviral drugs . Other medical research areas include the topics of pre @-@ exposure prophylaxis , post @-@ exposure prophylaxis , circumcision and HIV , and accelerated aging effects . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Discovery = = = 
 AIDS was first clinically observed in 1981 in the United States . The initial cases were a cluster of injection drug users and gay men with no known cause of impaired immunity who showed symptoms of Pneumocystis carinii pneumonia ( PCP ) , a rare opportunistic infection that was known to occur in people with very compromised immune systems . Soon thereafter , additional gay men developed a previously rare skin cancer called Kaposi 's sarcoma ( KS ) . Many more cases of PCP and KS emerged , alerting U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ( CDC ) and a CDC task force was formed to monitor the outbreak . The earliest retrospectively described case of AIDS is believed to have been in Norway beginning in 1966 . 
 In the beginning , the CDC did not have an official name for the disease , often referring to it by way of the diseases that were associated with it , for example , lymphadenopathy , the disease after which the discoverers of HIV originally named the virus . They also used Kaposi 's Sarcoma and Opportunistic Infections , the name by which a task force had been set up in 1981 . In the general press , the term GRID , which stood for gay @-@ related immune deficiency , had been coined . The CDC , in search of a name , and looking at the infected communities coined " the 4H disease , " as it seemed to single out homosexuals , heroin users , hemophiliacs , and Haitians . However , after determining that AIDS was not isolated to the gay community , it was realized that the term GRID was misleading and AIDS was introduced at a meeting in July 1982 . By September 1982 the CDC started using the name AIDS . 
 In 1983 , two separate research groups led by Robert Gallo and Luc Montagnier independently declared that a novel retrovirus may have been infecting AIDS patients , and published their findings in the same issue of the journal Science . Gallo claimed that a virus his group had isolated from a person with AIDS was strikingly similar in shape to other human T @-@ lymphotropic viruses ( <unk> ) his group had been the first to isolate . Gallo 's group called their newly isolated virus HTLV @-@ III . At the same time , Montagnier 's group isolated a virus from a patient presenting with swelling of the lymph nodes of the neck and physical weakness , two classic symptoms of AIDS . Contradicting the report from Gallo 's group , Montagnier and his colleagues showed that core proteins of this virus were immunologically different from those of HTLV @-@ I. Montagnier 's group named their isolated virus lymphadenopathy @-@ associated virus ( LAV ) . As these two viruses turned out to be the same , in 1986 , LAV and HTLV @-@ III were renamed HIV . 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Both HIV @-@ 1 and HIV @-@ 2 are believed to have originated in non @-@ human primates in West @-@ central Africa , and are believed to have transferred to humans ( a process known as zoonosis ) in the early 20th century . 
 HIV @-@ 1 appears to have originated in southern Cameroon through the evolution of SIV ( cpz ) , a simian immunodeficiency virus ( SIV ) that infects wild chimpanzees ( HIV @-@ 1 descends from the SIV ( cpz ) endemic in the chimpanzee subspecies Pan troglodytes troglodytes ) . The closest relative of HIV @-@ 2 is SIV ( <unk> ) , a virus of the sooty mangabey ( Cercocebus atys atys ) , an Old World monkey living in <unk> West Africa ( from southern Senegal to western Côte d 'Ivoire ) . New World monkeys such as the owl monkey are resistant to HIV @-@ 1 infection , possibly because of a genomic fusion of two viral resistance genes . HIV @-@ 1 is thought to have jumped the species barrier on at least three separate occasions , giving rise to the three groups of the virus , M , N , and O. 
 There is evidence that humans who participate in bushmeat activities , either as hunters or as bushmeat vendors , commonly acquire SIV . However , SIV is a weak virus , and it is typically suppressed by the human immune system within weeks of infection . It is thought that several transmissions of the virus from individual to individual in quick succession are necessary to allow it enough time to mutate into HIV . Furthermore , due to its relatively low person @-@ to @-@ person transmission rate , it can only spread throughout the population in the presence of one or more of high @-@ risk transmission channels , which are thought to have been absent in Africa prior to the 20th century . 
 Specific proposed high @-@ risk transmission channels , allowing the virus to adapt to humans and spread throughout the society , depend on the proposed timing of the animal @-@ to @-@ human crossing . Genetic studies of the virus suggest that the most recent common ancestor of the HIV @-@ 1 M group dates back to circa 1910 . Proponents of this dating link the HIV epidemic with the emergence of colonialism and growth of large colonial African cities , leading to social changes , including a higher degree of sexual promiscuity , the spread of prostitution , and the concomitant high frequency of genital ulcer diseases ( such as syphilis ) in nascent colonial cities . While transmission rates of HIV during vaginal intercourse are typically low , they are increased many fold if one of the partners suffers from a sexually transmitted infection resulting in genital ulcers . Early 1900s colonial cities were notable due to their high prevalence of prostitution and genital ulcers to the degree that as of 1928 as many as 45 % of female residents of eastern Leopoldville were thought to have been prostitutes and as of 1933 around 15 % of all residents of the same city were infected by one of the forms of syphilis . 
 An alternative view holds that unsafe medical practices in Africa during years following World War II , such as unsterile reuse of single use syringes during mass vaccination , antibiotic , and anti @-@ malaria treatment campaigns , were the initial vector that allowed the virus to adapt to humans and spread . 
 The earliest well documented case of HIV in a human dates back to 1959 in the Belgian Congo . The virus may have been present in the United States as early as the mid @-@ to @-@ late 1950s , as a sixteen @-@ year @-@ old male presented with symptoms in 1966 died in 1969 . 
 = Elsa ( Disney ) = 
 Queen Elsa of Arendelle is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 53rd animated film Frozen . She is voiced primarily by Broadway actress and singer Idina Menzel . At the beginning of the film , she is voiced by Eva Bella as a young child and by Spencer Lacey Ganus as a teenager . 
 Created by director Chris Buck , Elsa is loosely based on the title character of The Snow Queen , a Danish fairytale by Hans Christian Andersen . In the Disney film adaptation , she is introduced as the princess of the fictional Scandinavian kingdom of Arendelle , heiress to the throne and the elder sister of Princess Anna ( Kristen Bell ) . Elsa has the magical ability to create and manipulate ice and snow . She inadvertently sends Arendelle into an eternal winter on the evening of her coronation . Throughout the film , she struggles first with controlling and concealing her abilities and then with liberating herself from her fears of unintentionally harming others , especially her younger sister . 
 The Snow Queen character , neutral but cold @-@ hearted in the original fairytale and villain in numerous adaptations of the character , proved difficult to adapt to film due to her transparent depiction . Several film executives , including Walt Disney , attempted to build on the character , and a number of scheduled film adaptions were shelved when they could not work out the character . Buck and his co @-@ director , Jennifer Lee , were ultimately able to solve the dilemma by depicting Elsa and Anna as sisters . As much as Anna ’ s struggle is external , Elsa ’ s is internal . This led to Elsa being gradually rewritten as a sympathetic , misunderstood character . 
 Elsa has enjoyed a largely positive reception from reviewers , who praised her complex characterization and vulnerability . Menzel was also widely praised for her vocal performance of Elsa , especially that of her performance of the song " Let It Go " , with critics frequently calling her a " powerhouse " . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Origins and concept = = = 
 Attempts were made as early as 1937 by Walt Disney to adapt Hans Christian Andersen 's fairy tale , The Snow Queen , into a film . The tale focuses on two children , one named Gerda , who served as the basis for Princess Anna , and the other named Kai , who is " cursed with negativity " after his heart is pierced with a shard of glass from an enchanted mirror and is later kidnapped by the Snow Queen . However , Disney struggled with creating a believable , multi @-@ dimensional adaption of the fairy tale 's title character , who was intended to be a villain . In the story , she is described as " a woman , dressed in garments of white gauze , which looked like millions of starry snow @-@ flakes linked together . She was fair and beautiful , but made of ice — shining and glittering ice . Still she was alive and her eyes sparkled like bright stars , but there was neither peace nor rest in their glance . " Disney was unable to find a way to make the Snow Queen more real and eventually abandoned film plans . 
 Several film executives later made efforts towards the project , including Paul and Gaëtan Brizzi , Dick Zondag , Glen Keane , and Dave Goetz . In 2011 , director Chris Buck began work on another attempted adaption and also faced challenges with the Snow Queen character . Producer Peter Del Vecho explained that this was primarily because she was not relatable and too isolated , having no personal connections . As a result , they could not explain her motivations . After several changes were proposed , someone on the writing team suggested making the Snow Queen Anna 's sister . " Once we realized that these characters could be siblings and have a relationship , everything changed , " Del Vecho relayed . 
 The Snow Queen , now given the name Elsa , continued to be cast as a villain , and Disney released the following synopsis for Frozen in May 2013 : 
 When Anna is cursed by her estranged sister , the cold @-@ hearted Snow Queen , Anna 's only hope of reversing the curse is to survive a perilous but thrilling journey across an icy and unforgiving landscape . Joined by a rugged , thrill @-@ seeking outdoorsman , his one @-@ antlered reindeer and a hapless snowman , Anna must race against time , conquer the elements and battle an army of menacing snowmen if she ever hopes to melt her frozen heart . 
 Earlier manuscripts included more antagonistic actions by Elsa , such as intentionally cursing Arendelle with an eternal winter . Additionally , she is shown creating an army of snowmen similar to the original Snow Queen 's army of snowflakes ; the comedic character of Olaf was at the time written as a smaller snowman who was cast out by Elsa for being too <unk> . Within two months , however , scripts were altered to give emphasis to her lack of control over her powers . Olaf was reduced to the only snowman created by Elsa , and he instead serves as a reminder of the sisters ' childhood friendship . In the final version , Elsa creates a single giant snow creature that Olaf nicknames " Marshmallow " to act as a guard after being branded as a monster for her powers . According to director Jennifer Lee , the character ultimately became more of a composite of both Kai and the Snow Queen , enhancing her increasingly sympathetic portrayal . Del Vecho added , " There are times when Elsa does villainous things but because you understand where it comes from , from this desire to defend herself , you can always relate to her . " 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Eva Bella and Spencer Lacey Ganus were cast to portray Elsa as a young child and as a teenager , respectively . Actress and singer Megan Mullally was originally cast to voice an adult <unk> but was replaced by Idina Menzel , a Broadway actress and singer best known for performing as Elphaba in Wicked . Menzel already knew Kristen Bell , who voiced Anna , and had previously auditioned for a lead role in the 2010 Walt Disney film Tangled . She was not cast for the part , but the casting director recorded her singing and later showed the recording to Frozen 's film executives . Menzel was surprised when she was subsequently asked to audition , and she received the role after reading the script out loud . In interviews , she acknowledged similarities between Elsa , her then @-@ current role , and Elphaba , her previous role . Namely , she said , they were both very powerful and very misunderstood individuals . She further said that she related to the characters , having hidden her singing talent from her peers at school . " I didn 't want to alienate anyone , " she explained . " If everyone was singing along in the car to a Madonna song , I didn 't join in because when we 're younger we 're afraid of sticking out or showing off , when in fact we should own those things that make us really unique . " 
 Director Chris Buck believed that Menzel 's vocals would help in the portrayal of the character , saying , " Idina has a sense of vulnerability in her voice . She plays a very strong character , but someone who lives in fear — so we needed someone who could portray both sides of the character , and Idina was just amazing . " Menzel was unaccustomed to working with animated films and being required to portray her character 's feelings with her voice alone , though she did not find it particularly challenging . While recording , she was able to " play " with her voice , trying various tones to establish the ranges in Elsa 's emotions . For example , Menzel wanted there to be a difference between the ways she sounded when she was being bold and when she was angry . She would also physically restrict her hands from moving as she recorded the film 's early scenes in order to project how her character was " so afraid to move and feel anything that it would come out and hurt people " . 
 During production , Menzel and Jonathan Groff , who portrays Kristoff , went to the animation studio to explain to the animators how they were approaching their characters . Animators asked Menzel questions about her singing , observed how she breathed as she sang live , and made <unk> of her recording sessions ; they then animated Elsa 's breathing to match Menzel 's breathing , for further realism . Her voice supplied inspiration for Elsa 's most prominent song , " Let It Go " . According to composer Robert Lopez , Menzel 's vocal range was able to clearly convey Elsa 's " low , vulnerable , fragile side " as well as her power and self @-@ realization . Menzel commented that it was " an honor " to have the song and that she enjoyed recording it . " It 's a collision of a bunch of forces that are all coming together in the right way , " she explained . " The character , what she is singing and what she is experiencing ; beautiful lyrics , beautiful melody and a little bit of me . " Buck and Lee were also surprised by how compatible Menzel and Kristen Bell 's voices were . At one point during a table read , they sang a ballad ( later revealed as " Wind Beneath My Wings " ) back and forth to one another with so much sentiment that it reportedly left everyone who was present with tears in their eyes . Subsequently , Lee wanted Menzel and Bell to be in the same room when they were recording the important emotional scenes of the film . 
 = = = Design and characterization = = = 
 Following the casting of Idina Menzel , Elsa 's characterization underwent several alterations . According to Menzel , she was originally scripted as a one @-@ dimensional antagonist but was gradually revised as a more vulnerable , multifaceted figure . Menzel further described her character as " extremely complicated and misunderstood " . Director Jennifer Lee stated that Elsa is largely driven by fear throughout the film , while Menzel added that she was also struggling with her potential to be " a strong , powerful , extraordinary woman " . Executive producer and animator John Lasseter became very " protective of Elsa " and was adamant about portraying her in a more favorable , sympathetic light . Writer and director Jennifer Lee stated on Twitter that Elsa 's body language and mannerisms were " intentional to show anxiety and depression " . In July 2013 , Disney released images of the film 's main characters along with outlines of their roles in the story . Elsa received the following description : 
 From the outside , Elsa looks poised , regal and reserved , but in reality , she lives in fear as she wrestles with a mighty secret — she was born with the power to create ice and snow . It 's a beautiful ability , but also extremely dangerous . Haunted by the moment her magic nearly killed her younger sister Anna , Elsa has isolated herself , spending every waking minute trying to suppress her growing powers . Her mounting emotions trigger the magic , accidentally setting off an eternal winter that she can 't stop . She fears she 's becoming a monster and that no one , not even her sister , can help her . 
 Elsa 's supervising animator was Wayne Unten , who asked for that role because he was fascinated by her complexity . Unten carefully developed Elsa 's facial expressions in order to bring out her fear as contrasted against Anna 's fearlessness . For their work on designing and animating Elsa , Unten and three other Disney Animation employees later won an award for Outstanding Animated Character in an Animated Feature Motion Picture at the 2013 Visual Effects Society Awards : Joy Johnson , character technical director ( rigging ) ; Alexander Alvarado , look development artist ( Disney 's job title for texture artists ) ; and Chad Stubblefield , modeling supervisor . FX technical director Yoo Jae @-@ hyun worked for a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half on creating Elsa 's ice @-@ based special effects , including effects associated with her dress . 
 Producers identified the scene in which Elsa sings " Let It Go " as a pivotal point in the character 's development . The scene depicts her choice to " let go " of her fear of using her powers . Character design supervisor Bill Schwab said , " Before ' Let It Go ' , Elsa is really buttoned up , her hair is up — everything is perfect . During the song , she gives herself permission to be who she is and everything changes — her hair is more wild , her gown is magical . She 's finally free — even if she is all alone . " Animators designed Elsa 's appearance to reflect her metamorphosis ; in the beginning , she is shown primarily in restrictive and confining outfits . Menzel said that , after accepting her abilities , Elsa 's appearance becomes " very vampy " , continuing , " She 's quite sexy for Disney , I have to say — they 're pushing the limits there a little bit ! But there 's a gleam in her eye and a supermodel walk that goes with it and , for me , it was fun to be a blonde because I 'm not in real life . " In a January 2014 interview with John August and Aline Brosh McKenna , Lee disclosed that Lasseter personally helped with conceptualizing Elsa 's physical transformation : " [ M ] y favorite thing about it ... is the actual model for doing it was John Lasseter .... he was a huge help in talking through how we translate that emotional journey ... with the animation ... [ H ] e got up and he ’ s like , .... ' her hair goes , and she transforms , and she struts , ' and he ’ s doing it . He ’ s acting it out . " 
 The scene was also a pivotal point in the development of Elsa 's character and was initially planned to depict her becoming evil . Robert Lopez , who composed the song with his wife , Kristen Anderson @-@ Lopez , explained , " Elsa was going to go from being this perfect princess that had tried to keep her personality down her whole life to saying , ' Screw it . I 'm gonna be me . ' " They had wanted to use the song as a way to gain a better understanding of the character and what she would be like if she was no longer living in fear , which ultimately resulted in her becoming much more complex . The final lyrics and Menzel 's " ability to be so fragile and vulnerable and then break into this powerhouse voice " turned the plot around and led to Elsa being revised as a " good " character . She initially attempts to suppress her powers in order to avoid hurting others , particularly Anna , and when she is no longer able to do so , she banishes herself from the kingdom to protect those around her . Lead writer Paul Briggs said that Anna 's support is what Elsa needs most when her secret is exposed . " The strength of the family bond is what makes this story so powerful , " he explained , " because it 's her sibling who 's willing to look beyond her powers and stand between her and the world if that 's what it takes . " 
 Elsa 's appearance had to be redesigned following her transition from antagonist to protagonist . She was originally drawn in a style similar to other Disney villains , with blue skin and spiky black hair . A few months after the film 's release , visual development artist Claire Keane ( the daughter of Disney Legend Glen Keane ) published early concept art of Elsa that was modeled after the singer Amy Winehouse . At the time , she was imagined as having blue " bouffant " hair as well as " a deep , soulful voice and dramatic mood swings " . Lasseter reportedly influenced the creation of the character 's much softer final appearance , particularly in regards to her very thick platinum blonde hair , which animators found difficult to design . Art director Michael Giaimo said that while a number of strategies were proposed for Elsa 's hair , Lasseter would push the animation team to continue making improvements , saying , " It 's not aspirational enough . We want people to feel like this hair is a beautiful statement . " During a research trip , producers found that " there are lots of braids " worn by women in Norway ; they then hired a stylist from New York named " Danilo " who helped to create a style that would reflect that while still being " a little different " . A new animation program called Tonic was invented to assist with the task , and the character 's hair ultimately required 420 @,@ 000 CGI threads . By contrast , Anna was given roughly 140 @,@ 000 hairs while Rapunzel from Tangled had only required 27 @,@ 000 CGI threads for her hair . 
 = = = = Abilities = = = = 
 Since Elsa is introduced as a young child at the beginning of the film , animators wanted the first glimpse of her powers to reflect her innocent and fanciful state of mind at the time . This included giving her first snowflakes a simple design . Her snow and ice patterns later become more intricate and complex when she is an adult . Co @-@ effects supervisor Marlon West elaborated , " When Elsa finally lets go and really starts owning her <unk> abilities , we wanted the ice and snow that she make to get across the idea that Elsa has now grown up and become this beautiful , elegant , confident and powerful young woman . " 
 Her ice castle , which she creates while singing " Let It Go " , was designed to illustrate the maturing of her powers as well as to be " a manifestation of her feelings to the world " . The palace is initially beautiful ; however , after she is made aware of the destruction she has inadvertently caused , and as she is increasingly vilified and hunted by others , it becomes darker and more distorted , with jagged icicles forming on the walls . The film 's design team was uncertain about how it should look and drew out designs for various ice castles filled with snow . Lasseter suggested basing the structure and patterns on snowflakes . For example , an enormous snowflake would serve as the foundation , and the palace would be hexagon @-@ shaped . Lasseter also wanted snowflake patterns to influence the manner in which Elsa creates the palace . " Snowflakes are these tiny little ice crystals that form in mid @-@ air . And when there are changes in temperature and humidity , these snowflakes start growing in a pattern that 's known as branching and plating , " said co @-@ effects supervisor Dale Mayeda . " [ Lasseter ] said ' You know , when Elsa builds her ice palace , it would be so amazing if — every step of the way as this castle forms out of thin air — it 's just branching and plating , branching and plating all along the way . " 
 Fifty animators worked on the scene in which the castle is built , and one frame required 30 hours to render . They later extended similar techniques to Elsa 's clothing . While the traditional Norwegian rosemaling was the inspiration for her costuming early in the film , her ice gown was designed similarly to her palace , with snowflakes heavily influencing the style . Her cape itself is a large snowflake . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Frozen = = = 
 Elsa , princess of Arendelle and heiress to the throne , is born with the ability to create and control ice and snow . As a child , she uses her abilities to create a winter wonderland to play in with her younger sister and best friend , Princess Anna . One night , Elsa accidentally harms Anna with her powers . The king and queen of Arendelle hurriedly take Anna to a tribe of mountain trolls to be healed . While healing Anna , the trolls inform the royals present that Elsa 's abilities will grow , becoming both beautiful and very dangerous so she must learn to control them . While the trolls erase Anna 's memory of the incident and of her elder sister 's powers in general , Elsa is traumatized by the event . The king and queen take steps to control and hide Elsa 's ice powers : the castle gates are locked , Elsa is shut away in her bedroom for most of the time , she is given gloves to help suppress her powers and is told to hold in her emotions as well . Nonetheless her powers continue to grow even stronger and so she becomes fearful of harming those she cares about most . Meanwhile , her sister Anna is less happy and confused by the loss of contact with her elder sister and tries , without success , to coax her out of her room . When the sisters grow into teenagers , the ship in which the king and queen are sailing is capsized in a storm and they drown , leaving Anna and Elsa feeling even more lonely . 
 Three years pass , and Elsa , now of age , is set to formally succeed her father as the monarch of Arendelle . Though she is afraid of opening the castle to the large crowds , her coronation goes on relatively peacefully . However , at the reception party , Anna asks for Elsa 's blessing to marry Prince Hans of the Southern Isles , whom Anna had met earlier that day . Elsa refuses to bless Hans 's offer to marry Anna ; he is someone she barely knows , prompting an argument between the two . Being so upset Elsa accidentally reveals her power . Upon the guests ' and her subjects ' horror and being accused of sorcery and called a monster , Elsa flees the castle and retreats into the icy mountains . In the process , her emotions unleash an " eternal " winter throughout Arendelle . While there , she decides to embrace , finally , all her powers and builds an enormous ice palace where she believes she can live freely without fear of hurting people . She also rebuilds her childhood snowman , Olaf , and unknowingly brings him to life . 
 Anna , determined to find Elsa and bring her back , travels through the mountains , encountering Olaf and a mountain man named Kristoff . They reach the ice palace , where Anna attempts to persuade Elsa to return home and mend their relationship . When Elsa ultimately resists ( due to her memory of hurting Anna as a child with her powers resurfacing ) Anna tells her about the state that Arendelle and all its people was left in . Horrified , Elsa lashes out and accidentally freezes Anna 's heart . Now even more horrified at the prospect of hurting her sister and people with her powers Elsa forces Anna , Kristoff and Olaf out by creating a gigantic snow creature ( called Marshmallow by Olaf ) , that is a symbol of her desire to be alone so as to be able to use her powers without hurting anyone . After this , her ice castle evidently becomes darker and more grotesque , reflecting her torment and re @-@ ignited fears . Meanwhile , Anna becomes weaker day by day and Kristoff takes her back to the trolls , who tell them that only an " act of true love " can save her life . 
 Hans and a group of soldiers attack the now ugly ice palace . Elsa seizes two soldiers who attempt to assassinate her . Hans convinces her to spare them to prove that she is not a monster . However , she is knocked unconscious and taken to her castle 's dungeon . Hans visits her and urges her to end the winter but she admits that she has no idea know how to . After he leaves , she is able to break free from the chains by freezing them and escapes the cell , though her fears trigger a massive blizzard . Anna returns to the castle , believing that a romantic kiss from Hans will be the " act of true love " to save her . Instead , he informs her that his offer of marriage ( engagement ) had been the first step of a plot to get him the throne of Arendelle . Olaf tells Anna that Kristoff is in love with her and she believes that his kiss will cure her . They rush to find Kristoff . Hans confronts Elsa and tells her that she has killed Anna . Devastated , Elsa collapses and the blizzard stops suddenly . Hans approaches her and swings his sword to kill her , but Anna turns away from an approaching Kristoff with her last bit of strength and blocks Hans ' attack as she freezes solid . 
 Moments later , Anna begins to thaw , as her choice to save her sister rather than herself constituted the necessary " act of true love " . Elsa realizes that love is the key to controlling her powers and is able to end the kingdom 's eternal winter . Summer returns to Arendelle , Elsa regains the throne and is able to use and safely control her powers , while the sisters ' bond is restored . She exiles Hans back to the Southern Isles to face punishment from his family and cuts off trade with the Duke of Weselton 's town for his earlier behavior towards her . 
 = = = Frozen Fever = = = 
 Nearly a year after the events of the first film , Elsa tries to make Anna 's 19th birthday as perfect as possible a way of making up for the years they spent apart . To do so , she works heavily with Kristoff , Sven and Olaf to make this a reality . Upon making sure that her surprise party in the palace courtyard is ready , she leaves Kristoff in charge while she goes to get Anna . However , Elsa starts to come down with a cold as she leads Anna on a treasure hunt to find all the gifts that have been made for her . Without realizing it , each sneeze she makes creates small snowmen called " <unk> " , which create trouble for Kristoff , Sven and Olaf . As Anna notices Elsa 's cold getting worse , she tries in vain to get Elsa to stop exerting herself , even taking medicine from Oaken in case Elsa gets sicker . Unfortunately , Elsa 's cold cause her to become very tired and behave in a seemingly intoxicated @-@ like manner , and she nearly falls from Arendelle 's clock tower only for Anna to save her . Upon finally admitting to Anna that she is indeed sick after the previous incident , she allows Anna to escort her home feeling she has ruined everything , and finds that the party has gone off successfully for Anna ( as well as discovering her <unk> creations ) , and still slightly intoxicated , she ends the party by accidentally sneezing into the birthday bugle horn , which inadvertently sends a gigantic snowball all the way to the Southern Isles and hits the now @-@ demoted Hans , causing him to fall into a pile of horse manure . Afterwards , Anna tells a now bed @-@ ridden Elsa that she has given her the best birthday ever by letting her take care of her . 
 = = = Once Upon a Time = = = 
 Elsa appears as a recurring character in the fourth season of the television series Once Upon a Time , where she is portrayed by Georgina Haig . 
 At the end of the show 's third season finale , " There 's No Place Like Home " , Emma Swan ( Snow White and Prince Charming 's daughter ) and Captain Hook accidentally bring back an urn from Rumplestiltskin 's vault after their excursion into the past . The urn releases a blue liquid that coalesces into Elsa . She takes off her glove and destroys the urn with an icy blast . She strides out of the barn , leaving a trail of frozen ground . In the fourth season premiere , " A Tale of Two Sisters " , Elsa 's story is shown in the present day as well as flashbacks taking place two years after the events of the film . In the past , she discovers that her and Anna 's parents set off not on a diplomatic mission , but on a journey to Misthaven — the ' Enchanted Forest ' where most of Storybrooke 's fairy @-@ tale residents came from — to discover more about Elsa 's powers , with Anna travelling to Misthaven to find out more about her parents ' voyage . In the present , Elsa is frightened by her sudden exposure into the town of modern @-@ day Storybrooke and re @-@ conjures Marshmallow for protection . Marshmallow is defeated by Regina Mills ( the Evil Queen ) , while Elsa discovers a necklace she gave long ago to Anna in Mr. Gold 's ( Rumplestiltskin 's ) shop , leaving her resolved to learn what happened to her sister . 
 As the season progresses , Elsa befriends series protagonist Emma Swan , Emma and the series ' central cast resolving the help Elsa find Anna . The group eventually discovers that a figure named the Snow Queen ( a more faithful adaptation of the original fairy tale 's character ) is somehow responsible for Elsa 's trapping in her urn , a woman with similar powers to Elsa . They soon discover that the Snow Queen is Elsa 's aunt , Ingrid , who was forgotten from Arendelle when Elsa 's mother , Gerda , used the power of the troll king to erase <unk> memory of her , not wishing for the world to remember how Ingrid accidentally killed their third sister . Ingrid soon discovered a prophecy that stated she would one day have the love of her sisters again . With Ingrid 's sisters dead however , she believed she would be forced to create new sisters . For this , she chose Emma and Elsa . Ingrid had stalked Emma her entire life in preparation for the prophecy to become true , and manipulated events in Arendelle to bring Elsa to her . Being convinced that she could only gain their love when she was the only one left , she obtained a mirror capable of bringing out the worst in people ( the mirror coming directly from The Snow Queen fairy tale ) . If a piece of the mirror were to get in <unk> eye , they would see nothing but hatred in the world . Ingrid had planned to use this on everyone in Storybrooke ( dubbed the Spell of Shattered Sight ) , forcing all of its citizens to kill each other while she , Emma , and Elsa remained immune . Ingrid had also used this to her advantage on Anna , forcing Anna to trap Elsa in the urn they originally found Elsa in . 
 Back in Arendelle , Anna ( who has woken up from the spell ) tried to track down a device known as a wishing star , which will have the power to bring her and Kristoff to wherever Elsa is . It was apparently the necklace Elsa had given Anna long ago , Elsa using it to bring Anna and Kristoff to Storybrooke . However , the Spell of Shattered Sight had already begun , and the only ones immune to it were Elsa , Emma , and Anna ( Anna because it was already used on her a while ago ) . Tracking down a note written by Elsa and Anna 's mother right before her death , the three bring it to Ingrid . It reads that Gerda forgave Ingrid for all that had transpired and still loved her , Ingrid realizing this was what the prophecy meant by regaining her sister 's love . Realizing there is no point in killing the town now , the Snow Queen kills herself using the mirror , which deactivates the curse , though a bit of it remained in Storybrooke , reinstating the town line , making it impossible to return to town if you are to leave it . 
 With the help of Rumpelstiltskin , they are able to discover a door that will lead back to Arendelle , though they will not be able to return , as the door will disappear after its use . Anna and Kristoff depart , while Elsa and Emma share a tearful goodbye before returning to Arendelle with her little sister to attend the long @-@ awaited wedding between Anna and Kristoff . Elsa also accidentally shrunk Ariel when <unk> attacked . 
 With the introduction of Frozen characters , the season 4 of Once Upon a Time saw a 31 @-@ percent increase in ratings from the autumn of 2013 ( 9 @.@ 3 million viewers ) , marking its best ratings in almost two years . 
 = = = Frozen holiday special = = = 
 Elsa will appear in a Frozen holiday special along with Anna , Kristoff , Sven , and Olaf , scheduled to air on ABC in 2017 . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 = = = = Merchandise = = = = 
 In December 2013 , Disney began releasing " Musical Magic Elsa and Anna Dolls " , which played their signature songs that appear in the film . Numerous other doll versions of Elsa were released for purchase , including fashion doll sets , mini dolls , plush dolls , and Elsa @-@ as @-@ a @-@ toddler dolls . A dress up costume for children was modeled after Elsa 's ice gown along with gloves similar to ones she wears in the film . Together with Anna , she was depicted on various Frozen @-@ inspired dishware such as plates and coffee mugs . Other Elsa @-@ inspired merchandise includes luggage , nightgowns , and home décor . Additionally , simplified versions of the film were adapted to children 's storybooks , including one with voice audio and another called A Sister More Like Me that was illustrated by Brittney Lee . Elsa and Anna also both appear as playable characters in Disney Infinity through the use of their corresponding figurines . 
 In early 2014 , most Frozen merchandise , including dolls and dresses , were sold out nearly everywhere , including Disney stores and theme parks . In early November 2014 , Disney announced that it had sold over three million Frozen costumes in North America alone , of which Elsa was the no . 1 best @-@ selling Disney costume of all time , followed by Anna at no . 2 . Hallmark created a Queen Elsa Christmas tree ornament after much interest was expressed when the Olaf ornament was announced in 2014 . 
 = = = = Theme parks = = = = 
 In November , before the release of Frozen , Anna and Elsa began making appearances at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts in Florida and California through meet and greets . In Walt Disney World , the attractions were set up in the Norway Pavilion of Epcot in recognition of the Scandinavian cultural elements that went into the film 's design . In Disneyland , a winter @-@ themed cottage was set up in the Fantasyland section , with a talking audio @-@ animatronic Olaf sitting on the cottage roof . In February 2014 , these meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions were extended indefinitely , with wait time to meet the princesses frequently exceeding two hours , which is longer than any previous Disney characters . Additionally , Elsa , Anna , and Olaf were given a Frozen @-@ themed float for Disneyland Paris ' Disney Magic on Parade . On March 9 , 2014 , the three made appearances again on their own Frozen parade float in Festival of Fantasy Parade at Magic Kingdom theme park . On April 20 , 2014 , Anna and Elsa moved from Epcot to the Princess Fairytale Hall at Magic Kingdom , with wait time to see the characters amounted to three hours , compared to Cinderella 's and Rapunzel 's 15 minutes . 
 Elsa 's performance of " Let It Go " became the central feature in Disney California Adventure 's Winter Dreams , a 30 @-@ minute , winter @-@ themed adaption of the nighttime show World of Color , which showcases scenes from Disney films . Disneyland Paris ' nighttime spectacular , Disney Dreams ! , also added Elsa 's performance of " Let It Go " to their attractions , and she was given a similar role during the Magic Kingdom show , Celebrate the Magic , with her singing interspersed with scenes from the movie . 
