 On May 16 , 2014 , it was announced that Disneyland would debut a Frozen pre @-@ parade featuring Elsa , Anna and Olaf . It premiered June 13 , 2014 , and preceded performances of Mickey 's <unk> Parade . From July 5 to September 1 , 2014 , as part of ' Frozen ' Summer Fun show at Disney 's Hollywood Studios , Anna and Elsa will appear in a horse @-@ drawn sleigh making their way down Hollywood Boulevard , alongside Kristoff and skaters , skiers and ice cutters in the Anna and Elsa 's Royal Welcome section . The sisters will also make appearances in For the First Time in Forever : A " Frozen " Sing @-@ Along Celebration , where they are joined by royal historians to retell the history of Arendelle ; and " Frozen " Fireworks Spectacular alongside Kristoff and Olaf , a fireworks display set to the music of Frozen . In response to strong demand , Disney Parks subsequently announced on August 7 that Frozen Summer Fun would be extended to September 28 . 
 On August 19 , 2014 , it was initially announced that Elsa & Anna 's Boutique ( replacing Studio Disney 365 ) would open mid @-@ September in Downtown Disney at the Disneyland Resort . The opening date was later changed to October 6 , 2014 , and the store name was changed to " Anna & Elsa 's Boutique " . The location includes products inspired by Anna , Elsa , and Olaf . 
 While there had not been any official announcements from Disney regarding a coronation for Anna and Elsa , it had been announced in late August 2014 that a special character meal would be held by a group of travel agents in the morning of September 24 , 2014 . While not officially organized by Disney , the event , called My Royal Coronation , would feature the official Anna and Elsa characters owned by Disney with assistance from the company . On September 12 , 2014 , Walt Disney World announced that a Frozen attraction was scheduled to open in early 2016 at Epcot 's World Showcase in the Norway pavilion , replacing the park 's Maelstrom ride . The attraction features the kingdom of Arendelle with music and scenes from the film , as well as meet @-@ and @-@ greets with Anna and Elsa . Anna , Elsa , Kristoff , and Olaf will make appearances in Mickey ’ s Once Upon a Christmastime Parade , offered during Mickey ’ s Very Merry Christmas Party at Magic Kingdom in November and December 2014 ( from November 7 to December 31 ) . Also starting from November , every night Elsa will use her powers to transform Cinderella Castle into an ice palace . 
 On November 13 , 2014 , prior to " A Sparkling Christmas " Evert , Anna and Elsa began meet @-@ and @-@ greet sessions at Hong Kong Disneyland . 
 Beginning December 20 , 2014 , the Anna and Elsa meet and greet at Disneyland Resort was moved from Disneyland park to a new location in the Disney Animation Building called " Anna and Elsa ’ s Royal Welcome " in Disney California Adventure . In addition , the Storybook Land Canal Boats at Disneyland were updated to include the village of Arendelle from the film , including Anna and Elsa 's castle and Elsa 's ice palace . Officially starting January 7 , 2015 , Elsa began making appearances alongside Anna and Kristoff at Disney California Adventure in " For the First Time in Forever — A Frozen Sing @-@ Along Celebration " in Hollywood Land as part of the park 's " Frozen Fun " event . Also starting January 7 , Anna and Elsa are making appearances in a Frozen play at the Royal Theatre in Disneyland park . 
 Beginning May 22 , 2015 , Disneyland debuted a new nighttime parade called " Paint the Night " , which includes a Frozen float featuring Anna , Elsa , and Olaf , as part of the park 's 60th anniversary celebration . 
 = = = = Cosplay = = = = 
 Elsa has become very popular in the cosplaying community . One of the best cosplayers currently , Anna Faith , is well known for cosplaying as Elsa at charities , comic @-@ cons , and other events . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 The character of Elsa was widely praised by reviewers for her multifaceted , evolving personality . Matt Goldberg of Collider.com commented that she was " an incredibly sympathetic character " while Deepanjana Pal of First Post ( India ) praised the decision to rewrite her as a protagonist and said , " Elsa is no evil , frosty vision of twisted and toxic maternity like the original Snow Queen . She 's a young woman in difficult circumstances , frightened , trying to understand her abilities and burdened by expectation and convention . It 's easy to sympathise with her and marvel at her ability when she builds her spectacular palace in the mountains . Next to her , Anna is very much a child who needs to grow up and she does in the course of the film . " Stuff.co.nz 's James <unk> compared her " humiliation and exile " to that of Simba in The Lion King . Katherine Webb , a reviewer for Wall St. Cheat Sheet , said that the scenes depicting Elsa gaining confidence and individuality delivered " an exciting message to send to young girls looking for a new princess role model " . Gary Wright of <unk> state " Her mental anguish and uncontrollable powers define modern feminism . Elsa represents the boundless female <unk> strong and graceful , with the power to change the world . " 
 Travis Bean of Cedar Falls Times suggested that Elsa 's ice powers , a " personal oddity " that made her self @-@ conscious , as well as her selflessness in withdrawing into isolation in order to avoid hurting others allowed children to connect more with the plot of Frozen . Laurie Levy from Chicago Now wrote that her young grandchildren " admired Elsa for being smart , strong , magical , and powerful " and did not care that she had no romantic subplot . Magdalena <unk> , a film critic for The Heights , opined that Elsa 's relationship with Anna was the most important part of the movie , and Stephen Holden of The New York Times liked that , in departure from traditional Disney formula , it was a sibling 's love rather than romantic love that was able to " thaw the icy heart of the frightened Elsa " . Tony Hicks of San Jose Mercury News wrote , " [ Anna 's ] confusion and Elsa 's anguish as she shuts herself away from the world — and her sister — is palatable . " Emma <unk> of Christian Post opined that together the sisters were Disney 's " most lovable and charismatic characters yet " , and Debbie Lynn Elias of Culver City Observer commented , " Elsa and Anna are like two sides of a coin , both strong , albeit one through power and confidence and the other through clumsy <unk> and love . " 
 Several reviewers commented that Elsa was more interesting than Anna , Frozen 's primary protagonist . ABS @-@ CBN writer Fred <unk> described Elsa as " an incredible character with a unique and interesting predicament because of the powers she possessed " and expressed the opinion that Frozen should have focused more on her rather than Anna . Samra Muslim of The Express Tribune wrote that it was her presence that kept viewers " hooked " throughout the movie , elaborating , " Her character is complex and sympathetic and deserved to be explored even further . Instead the story revolves more around the relationship of the two sisters and Anna who is the typical , feisty , charming Disney heroine and her love trysts — instead of the alluring Elsa . " 
 The character was not devoid of criticism . Charlotte O 'Sullivan from the London Evening Standard gave a more negative assessment of Elsa , saying that she " resembles one of those brittle mentors on The X Factor . Purple eyeshadow , tiny waist , kitten heels " . Anna Smith of The Guardian disliked that both Elsa and Anna were drawn with slender figures and large eyes as is typical of Disney princesses . Slate 's Dana Stevens wrote that " it 's impossible not to thrill to Elsa 's surging sense of power " but criticized the choice to illustrate her growing confidence by changing her appearance ; Stevens further expressed concern that the switch from the character 's modest coronation gown to " a slinky , slit @-@ to @-@ the @-@ thigh dress with a transparent snowflake @-@ patterned train and a pair of silver @-@ white high heels " and a hairstyle that suggested " come @-@ hither bad @-@ girl seduction " was overly sexual . Christy Lemire compared Elsa to Carrie White , another well @-@ known fictional female who unleashes magical powers when agitated . 
 = = = = " Let It Go " = = = = 
 Idina Menzel also received praise for her singing , with Amon <unk> of Cine Vue saying her voice " positively soars in these musical ballads " . Reviewers frequently focused on her performance of " Let It Go " , described by Entertainment Weekly 's Marc Snetiker as " an incredible anthem of liberation " in which Elsa decides to no longer fear her powers . Various critics said that Menzel had been a " powerhouse " during the scene ; Linda Barnard from The Star commented that Menzel " can shatter icicles with her powerful voice " . 
 Matt <unk> of The Rochester City Newspaper wrote , " Menzel should be credited for providing as much power and passion to this performance as she did in her most famous role . " Donald Clark of Irish Times added , " Elsa 's flight to the glaciers triggers a song that , in its defiant paean to self @-@ reliance , could play comfortably beside camp showtune anthems such as I Am What I Am and Don 't Rain on My Parade . The opening and closing choruses of Let It Go end with a sly , spat @-@ out refrain : ' The cold never bothered me anyway ! ' You go , girl . " Nasim <unk> of The Oxford Student continued , " Menzel , especially , steals the show with her performance of ' Let It Go ' . Her Wicked @-@ esque belting out works perfectly with such an incredible animated sequence — the building of the ice castle really demonstrates the prowess of Disney animation , and results in , arguably , one of the most spectacular power ballads seen by any animated character , ever . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 In December 2013 , Elsa and Anna were both nominated for Best Animated Female by the Alliance of Women Film Journalists , with only Anna winning the award , a few weeks later . Elsa won all three awards out of three nominations at the 2013 Visual Effects Society Awards , including Outstanding Animated Character in an Animated Feature Motion Picture , Outstanding Created Environment in an Animated Feature Motion Picture for her ice palace , and Outstanding FX and Simulation Animation in an Animated Feature Motion Picture for her blizzard . Her signature song , " Let It Go " , won Best Original Song at the Academy Awards , the Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards and the Critics ' Choice Awards , and also received Golden Globe Award , the Satellite Awards , the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award , and the Houston Film Critics Society Award nominations . 
 Time ranked Elsa as the most influential fictional character of 2014 . 
 = Threshold issues in Singapore administrative law = 
 Threshold issues are legal requirements in Singapore administrative law that must be satisfied by applicants before their claims for judicial review of acts or decisions of public authorities can be dealt with by the High Court . These include showing that they have standing ( locus standi ) to bring cases , and that the matters are amenable to judicial review and justiciable by the Court . 
 Depending on the interest that the applicant seeks to represent , standing can be categorized as either private or public standing . Applicants must establish they have private standing if they seek to represent personal interests . In contrast , an applicant who seeks to represent the interests of a larger group or the public at large must establish he or she has public or representative standing . Where private standing is concerned , the Singapore courts have not yet directly addressed the issue of the standing required to obtain a declaration in an administrative law case , but where constitutional claims are concerned the Court of Appeal held that three elements must exist : ( 1 ) the applicant must have a real interest in bringing the case , ( 2 ) there must be a real controversy between the parties to the case , and ( 3 ) a personal right possessed by the applicant must have been violated . The Court also suggested that the same test applied to applications for prerogative orders . The legal position on public standing in administrative law cases is indeterminate as , to date , no applicant has sought to rely on public standing to obtain leave for judicial review . In constitutional law cases , the Court has drawn a distinction between public and private rights , and held that people will not have standing to vindicate public rights unless they have suffered special damage and have genuine private interests to protect or further . 
 For a decision by a body to be amenable to judicial review , United Kingdom and Singapore law requires the decision to have some public element , and not to relate exclusively to private law matters . The public element is determined by considering if the body 's power stems from a legal source ( the " source test " ) , or if the nature of the body is that it is carrying out some public function ( the " nature test " ) . If the power exercised by a body has a legislative source , it will ordinarily be amenable to judicial review in the absence of compelling reasons to the contrary , but this is not an invariable rule and decisions without a sufficient public element will not be amenable to review . The latter is also the result when a body is regarded has having acted pursuant to a contract between it and the aggrieved party , rather than having exercised its statutory powers . 
 The subject @-@ matter of a dispute must be justiciable before the High Court will hear the case . A decision by an executive authority will generally be considered non @-@ justiciable if the decision requires the intricate balancing of various competing policy considerations , and judges are ill @-@ equipped to decide the case because of their limited training , experience and access to materials ; if a judicial pronouncement could embarrass another branch of government or tie its hands in the conduct of affairs traditionally falling within its purview ; or if the decision involves the exercise of a prerogative power that the democratically elected branches are entrusted to take care of . Nonetheless , a dispute may prima facie involve a non @-@ justiciable area but the courts may decide that there is a justiciable matter within it , or the courts may be able to isolate a pure question of law from what is seemingly a non @-@ justiciable issue . Because of the principle that all powers have legal limits , the Attorney @-@ General 's exercise of prosecutorial discretion and the power to pardon or grant clemency to convicted persons exercised by the President on the Cabinet 's advice are both justiciable in exceptional cases , for instance , where the powers have been exercised unconstitutionally or in bad faith . 
 = = Introduction = = 
 Before an administrative law claim can be heard on the merits by the High Court , the applicant must satisfy a number of legal requirements which may be called " threshold issues " . These include showing that he or she has standing ( locus standi ) to bring the case , and that the matter is amenable to judicial review and justiciable by the Court . 
 = = Standing = = 
 Standing , or locus standi ( Latin for " a place to stand " ) , is a threshold requirement that an applicant must satisfy before a court will permit him or her to proceed with a claim for judicial review . Depending on the facts of the case , the applicant has to establish one of the two categories of standing . The applicant seeks to establish private standing when he or she purports to represent his or her own interests . In contrast , the applicant seeks to establish public or representative standing when he or she purports to represent the interests of a larger group of people , or the public at large . Standing is a mixed question of fact and law , which the court determines based on legal principles . 
 The doctrine of standing prevents applicants from burdening the court with frivolous or vexatious claims . This minimizes disruption in the administrative process . When an administrative decision by a public authority is challenged , implementation of the decision by the authority may be delayed . Therefore , the courts want to restrict access to applicants who have a genuine interest in challenging the decision . Furthermore , since the courts ' resources are limited , restricting access to genuine claims ensures that judicial resources are appropriately allocated . 
 = = = Private standing = = = 
 = = = = Declarations = = = = 
 One of the remedies that may be sought by an applicant for judicial review is a declaration , which is a pronouncement by a court stating the legal position between the parties to an action , based on the facts that have been presented to the court . The Singapore courts have not yet directly addressed the issue of the standing required to apply for a declaration in an administrative law case , but it is possible they may adopt the test laid down in constitutional law cases . In Tan Eng Hong v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2012 ) , the Court of Appeal held that three elements must exist for a person have standing to bring a constitutional challenge : ( 1 ) he or she must have a real interest in bringing the case , ( 2 ) there must be a real controversy between the parties to the case , and ( 3 ) a personal right possessed by the applicant must have been violated . 
 = = = = Prerogative orders = = = = 
 In Singapore , an applicant must have a " sufficient interest " in the subject of the application to have standing to apply for a prerogative order , that is , a mandatory , prohibiting or quashing order . Previously , the rule of standing for mandatory orders was stricter than the rule applicable to prohibiting and quashing orders . To apply for a mandatory order , an applicant had to show a specific legal right in the matter . In contrast , an applicant only had to show that " there had been an abuse of power which inconvenienced someone " to apply for a prohibiting or quashing order . This rule of standing for prohibiting and quashing orders was relatively easy to satisfy because such orders were often used to ensure good standards of public administration . 
 However , the United Kingdom courts gradually adopted a single sufficient interest test for all prerogative orders . In R. v. Commissioners of Customs and Excise , ex parte Cook ( 1969 ) , for example , the High Court used a sufficient interest test to determine whether an applicant had standing to apply for a mandatory order . Singapore followed the UK 's move towards a uniform test for all prerogative orders . In Re Lim Chor Pee , ex parte Law Society of Singapore ( 1986 ) , the Court of Appeal endorsed the sufficient interest test for mandatory orders . In that case , the Law Society of Singapore had applied for a mandamus ( now known as a mandatory order ) to ensure that the Disciplinary Committee heard and investigated all six charges levied against an advocate and solicitor . The Court , applying the decision of the House of Lords in R. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners , ex parte National Federation of Self @-@ Employed and Small Businesses Ltd . ( 1981 ) , held that the test for standing was whether the applicant had a sufficient interest in the subject matter , and not whether he or she had a specific legal right . 
 In Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts ( 1995 ) , which was a constitutional challenge rather than an administrative law claim , the High Court noted that the sufficient interest test for standing applies to mandatory , prohibiting and quashing orders . It also held that the sufficiency of the applicant 's interest should be judged in relation to the subject matter of the application . On the other hand , when the case came before the Court of Appeal in Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts ( 1996 ) , that court held : 
 If a constitutional guarantee is to mean anything , it must mean that any citizen can complain to the courts if there is a violation of it . ... A 
 citizen should not have to wait until he is prosecuted before he may assert his constitutional rights . ... If a citizen does not have sufficient interest to see that his constitutional rights are not violated , then it is hard to see who has . 
 In Tan Eng Hong , the Court of Appeal stated that the same test for standing applies to both declarations and prerogative orders , and read the statements from Chan Hiang Leng Colin quoted above as an implicit acceptance that an applicant must demonstrate the violation of a right personal to him or her to have standing . 
 The Chief Justice of Singapore , Chan Sek Keong , suggested extrajudicially during a 2010 lecture that Singapore courts may not apply the sufficient interest test with the same rigour as the UK courts . A more stringent application of the sufficient interest test would be in line with the green @-@ light approach that the courts adopt in administrative law . Under this approach , the Government commits itself to good administrative practices while the courts play a supporting role by articulating clear rules for the executive to adhere to . Accordingly , the courts may adopt a more discriminating standing test to discourage litigation that will unnecessarily curtail the executive 's ability to carry out good governance . 
 = = = Public standing = = = 
 Public or representative standing is standing possessed by an applicant who brings a case on behalf of a larger group of people , or even in the interest of the general public . The applicant need not show that a personal right or interest has been infringed . As long as the represented individuals have , or the public has , sufficient interest in the matter , the applicant will be held to have adequate standing to pursue the case . 
 Whether public standing ought to be accorded at all has been a subject of considerable academic and judicial controversy . It has been regarded by one academic commentator as the litmus test of how liberal the standing rules within a legal regime are . Common justifications for allowing this form of standing include the need to vindicate the rule of law and the need to challenge particularly serious illegality where no individual is peculiarly affected by it . Political accountability alone is said not to serve as a sufficient check on administrative action , and there would be a " grave lacuna in the law " if no one has sufficient standing to challenge such action before the courts . 
 On the other hand , proponents of a more " closed " and restrictive system of rules of standing point towards the need for increased certainty in the law , as well as the possibility of abuse of process and the conventional argument that there will be an unstoppable flood of litigation . Additionally , it is argued that allowing more applications by persons with weak claims to standing may curtail the efficiency of the executive in practising good governance , as resources would have to be channelled to defending lawsuits . It may also delay the implementation of administrative decisions , potentially resulting in substantial damage to stakeholders involved . 
 = = = = Position in the United Kingdom = = = = 
 Cases in the United Kingdom were previously inconsistent upon the issue of permitting representative standing . Nevertheless , it may now be confidently said that the UK courts recognize , in principle , the doctrine of representative standing , and will apply it in suitable cases . 
 = = = = = Narrow approach = = = = = 
 In R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment , ex parte Rose Theatre Trust Co . ( 1989 ) , the High Court of England and Wales adopted a narrow and more restrictive approach to public standing . Justice Konrad <unk> held that to have standing , an applicant must expressly or impliedly have " a greater right or expectation than any other citizen of this country to have that decision taken lawfully " . On the facts , an individual interested in seeing the remains of a historically significant theatre in London called The Rose preserved and made accessible to the public lacked sufficient interest to challenge the Secretary of State for the Environment 's decision not to list the theatre as a protected monument under the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Areas Act 1979 . The applicant , a trust company formed by a number of such people , did not have any greater claim to standing than its individual members . Despite the fact that this decision could potentially leave an unlawful act by a minister <unk> , the judge considered that : 
 ... the law does not see it as a function of the courts to be there for every individual who is interested in having the legality of an administrative decision litigated . Parliament could have given such a wide right of access to the court but it has not done so . ... We all expect our decision makers to act lawfully . We are not all given by Parliament the right to apply for judicial review . 
 In the event that a person lacks standing , there is a possibility that he or she may be able to ask the Attorney @-@ General to allow him or her to bring a relator action . In this scenario , the Attorney @-@ General would be the nominal plaintiff in the judicial review proceedings , but the case would actually be conducted by the individual . Bringing a relator action is one means of circumventing the requirement of standing on the part of the individual applicant , because the Attorney @-@ General has an interest in upholding the law for the public benefit . 
 However , the Attorney @-@ General may not consent to lend his name to a relator action . This matter lies entirely within his discretion , and his decision is not considered reviewable by the courts . In addition , it has been forcefully argued that since the Attorney @-@ General is the principal legal advisor of the executive , it is overly idealistic to expect his consent to an action against the Government . This makes a relator action an uncertain , and hence an unsatisfactory , means of obtaining relief . 
 = = = = = Broad approach = = = = = 
 In the United Kingdom at present , the mainstream approach towards representative standing is broad and liberal . The focus is on whether illegality or some other ground of review can be shown , rather than the applicant 's relationship to the illegality complained of . If some unlawfulness can be demonstrated , the courts tend to grant a remedy even where the applicant is not directly affected by the executive decision . 
 In R. v. Inspectorate of Pollution , ex parte Greenpeace ( No. 2 ) ( 1993 ) , representative standing was accorded to the environmental campaign group Greenpeace that had challenged a decision about the terms on which the authorities allowed a company to test a nuclear power plant at Sellafield in Cumbria , England . Justice Philip Otton considered that Greenpeace had sufficient representative standing : 
 The fact that there are 400 @,@ 000 supporters in the United Kingdom carries less weight than the fact that 2 @,@ 500 of them come from the Cumbria region . I would be ignoring the blindingly obvious if I were to disregard the fact that those persons are inevitably concerned about ( and have a genuine perception that there is ) a danger to their health and safety from any additional discharge of radioactive waste even from testing . I have no doubt that the issues raised by this application are serious and worthy of determination by this court . 
 The high @-@ water mark of according representative standing can be found in R. v. Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , ex parte World Development Movement Ltd . ( 1994 ) . In this case the applicant , a non @-@ partisan pressure group called the World Development Movement , challenged the decision of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs to award a grant under the Overseas Development and Co @-@ operation Act 1980 on the basis that it was ultra vires and a misuse of public funds . Representative standing was accorded despite the contention that , unlike Greenpeace , neither the applicant nor its members had any direct personal interest in the case , and were merely seeking to act in the interest of potential overseas aid recipients . In giving his judgment , Lord Justice of Appeal Christopher Rose identified the following factors as relevant to ascertaining whether representative standing should be accorded : 
 The importance of vindicating the rule of law . 
 The importance of the issue raised . 
 The likely absence of any responsible challenger . 
 The nature of the breach of duty against which relief is sought . 
 The role of the applicants in giving advice , guidance and assistance with regards to the subject matter of the dispute . 
 In addition , it also appears that an applicant 's subjective motivation is relevant to whether he or she should be recognized as having public standing . If a case is brought out of ill @-@ will or some other improper purpose , the courts will be reluctant to recognize that the applicant has standing , even if there is a public interest in the case being heard . 
 Peter Cane has distinguished between cases where the courts have found that an applicant has standing to represent identifiable individuals ( associational standing ) , and cases where the applicant purports to represent the public interest ( public interest standing ) . Under this analysis , ex parte Greenpeace may be regarded as an example of the former , and ex parte World Development Movement the latter . In 1994 , the Law Commission recommended that there should be a two @-@ track system for standing . An applicant should have standing in one of two situations : either in his or her personal capacity , in which case a remedy lies ex <unk> <unk> ( " from a debt of justice " , that is , as a matter of right ) ; or at the discretion of the court if it considers that it is in the public interest to accord standing . 
 = = = = Position in Singapore = = = = 
 No Singapore cases have yet recognized the standing of applicants who have had no direct personal interest in the subject @-@ matter being litigated . In Chan Hiang Leng Colin , the High Court appeared to accept in theory that every citizen prima facie has the right to apply for mandatory , prohibiting or quashing orders in order to prevent an abuse of power by a public authority , though the Court has discretion to refuse to grant them . In doing so , the applicant may claim to be regarded as a public benefactor , rather than a meddlesome busybody . This seems to support the proposition that a citizen may bring a suit even where he or she has no direct interest in the subject matter of litigation . The court has discretion to accord him or her standing if it considers it in the public interest to do so . Justice Judith Prakash cited the following comments of Lord Justice Hubert Parker in R. v. Thames Magistrates ' Court , ex parte Greenbaum ( 1957 ) regarding quashing orders : 
 Anybody can apply for it – a member of the public who has been inconvenienced , or a particular party or person who has a particular grievance of his own . If the application is made by what for convenience one may call a stranger , the remedy is purely discretionary . Where , however , it is made by a person who has a particular grievance of his own whether as a party or otherwise , then the remedy lies ex <unk> <unk> ... 
 She added : " It was not necessary that the applicant had to have a particular grievance arising out of the order complained about . It was sufficient that there had been an abuse of power which inconvenienced someone . " 
 On the other hand , in Tan Eng Hong the Court of Appeal drew a distinction between public rights which are " held and vindicated by public authorities " and a private right which is " held and vindicated by a private individual " . It took the view that " [ i ] f a public right was involved , the applicant must show that he had suffered special damage as a result of the public act being challenged and that he had a genuine private interest to protect or further " . Relying on this , in Jeyaretnam Kenneth Andrew v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2012 ) the High Court held that the applicant , who was an ordinary citizen , had no standing to challenge the constitutionality of a contingent loan of US $ 4 billion offered by the Monetary Authority of Singapore to the International Monetary Fund to assist the latter in dealing with an ongoing financial crisis and to promote global economic and financial stability . Such a restrictive approach to standing is consistent with the green @-@ light approach to administrative law adopted by the Singapore courts . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 For a decision by a body to be amenable to judicial review , United Kingdom and Singapore law requires the decision to have some public element , and not to relate exclusively to private law matters . The public element is determined by considering if the body 's power stems from a legal source ( the " source test " ) , or if the nature of the body is that it is carrying out some public function ( the " nature test " ) . 
 There is much debate whether a public – private divide in administrative law is necessary . It has been contended that such a division has " turned the law in the wrong direction , away from flexibility of procedure and towards a rigidity reminiscent of the bad old days ... " . Peter Leyland and Gordon Anthony have suggested that a more desirable alternative presents itself in Northern Ireland , where the test for amenability to review is dependent on the " public interest " in the issue . Thus , the public – private divide does not function at the expense of the legitimate interests of individuals . 
 = = = Decisions with a public element = = = 
 = = = = Position in the United Kingdom = = = = 
 In Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service ( 1983 ) , Lord Diplock stated that for a decision to be susceptible to judicial review , the decision @-@ maker must be empowered by public law , and the ultimate source of power is nearly always a statute or subordinate legislation . However , this " source test " ignores many situations where decisions are not dependent on legal rules laid down by the State . This has become an increasing worry in the modern polity as more privatized utilities and private bodies perform governmental functions that could potentially escape any form of scrutiny . 
 This has led to the development of the " nature test " . In R. v. Panel on Take @-@ overs and Mergers , ex parte Datafin plc . ( 1986 ) , In this case , the issue was whether a body discharging functions that are quasi @-@ judicial in nature and which wields considerable de facto public powers is amenable to judicial review . The Panel on Take @-@ overs and Mergers is an unincorporated association and does not derive its power directly from a legal source such as legislation . Rather , it is an informal body which has adopted a self @-@ regulatory code to govern its members . However , Sir John Donaldson , the Master of the Rolls , observed that the Panel possesses " immense power de facto by devising , promulgating , amending and interpreting the City Code on Take @-@ overs and Mergers " and its decisions could lead to sanctions which indirectly affect the rights of citizens . Lord Justice Timothy Lloyd acknowledged that the source test is usually decisive , but disagreed that it is the sole test to determine whether a public body is subject to judicial review . He explained that it is instead helpful to look at the nature of the power – whether the body in question exercises public law functions or if the exercise of its functions has public law consequences . 
 There remains some uncertainty whether the source test or nature test ought to be the determining test . It appears , though , that the impact of Datafin remains qualified in the light of other decisions where the source of the power was held to be the determining factor . It is also worth noting that the effect of the nature test is greatly restricted in practice due to the insistence on the difference between contractual and governmental powers . Where there is a contractual relationship between an aggrieved person and the body making a decision affecting the person , this tends to place the dispute on the private law side of the public – private divide , making the decision not amenable to judicial review . 
 = = = = Position in Singapore = = = = 
 Similar to the United Kingdom 's position , judicial review in Singapore is confined to matters of public law , and the applicable tests are the source test and nature test . The Datafin decision was applied by the Singapore Court of Appeal in Public Service Commission v. Lai Swee Lin Linda ( 2001 ) , where the respondent , an employee with the Land Office , had the probationary period of her employment extended without prior warning . Her employment contract was later terminated . She complained to various statutory bodies , and ultimately to the Public Service Commission ( " PSC " ) , but was unsuccessful in having her employment reinstated . She then sought leave from the High Court to apply for judicial review against the PSC . In the course of its judgment , the Court of Appeal accepted that the source test is one of the tests that can be relied on to determine whether a decision by a body is amenable to judicial review . In addition , it noted that Datafin had held that the source test is not the only applicable test . However , the Court did not embark on a discussion of the nature test because it found that when the respondent 's employer had made the decisions concerning her employment , it had acted pursuant to her contractual terms of service and had not exercised its statutory powers . Thus , the decisions were not susceptible to judicial review . It did not invariably follow that when a statutory body makes a decision it is exercising a statutory power . 
 In UDL Marine ( Singapore ) Pte . Ltd. v. Jurong Town Corp. ( 2011 ) , Lai Swee Lin Linda was acknowledged to be the leading authority in Singapore on determining the amenability to judicial review . The High Court said that both the source test and nature test applied in Singapore . In the case , the Jurong Town Corporation ( " JTC " ) had leased land to UDL Marine and had declined to renew the lease after its term expired . UDL Marine challenged this decision . The Court held that even though the Jurong Town Corporation Act conferred on JTC the power to lease land , it did not prescribe the terms on which JTC could lease land and the considerations to be taken into account . JTC 's exercise of power to lease land was a private act as it " was not something a private individual would not be capable of doing " . The Court added that even though there was an element of public interest , JTC 's decisions had not been " sufficiently of a public nature " . In granting and renewing leases , it had been acting just like a private landlord . 
 In the case of <unk> Wai Kong v. Singapore Exchange Securities Trading Ltd . ( 2012 ) , the High Court identified various factors to determine if the decision by Singapore Exchange Securities Trading Ltd . ( " SGX @-@ ST " ) to reprimand a director of a company listed on the Singapore Exchange was properly characterized as a public function . These factors include the extent to which the SGX @-@ ST is interwoven into the legislative and regulatory matrix , whether the reprimand function has a statutory underpinning , and the nature of the reprimand function . Even though the SGX @-@ ST is not a statutory board , it is an approved exchange under section 16 of the Securities and Futures Act , which provides that it must take into account the interests of both the investing and general public when discharging its obligations . Also , SGX @-@ ST is a vital part of the institutional ecosystem of Singapore 's financial sector . Its function to publicly reprimand a listed company 's director may potentially result in adverse implications on the company 's business reputation and the director 's continued service on board committees and directorships of other listed companies . For these reasons , the nature test was satisfied . 
 The Court of Appeal clarified in <unk> Singh s / o Kirpal Singh v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2013 ) that if the power exercised by a body has a legislative source , this will " ordinarily mean that it is amenable to judicial review in the absence of compelling reasons to the contrary " . However , this is not an invariable rule , and there are situations in which a statutory power is not amenable to judicial review . Examples of these include the powers and duties conferred or imposed on corporations by the Companies Act , and on trustees by the Trustees Act . The Court cited with approval the following passage from R. ( Beer ( trading as Hammer Trout Farm ) ) v. Hampshire Farmers ' Markets Ltd . ( 2003 ) : 
 It seems to me that the law has now been developed to the point where , unless the source of power clearly provides the answer , the question whether the decision of a body is amenable to judicial review requires a careful consideration of the nature of the power and function that has been exercised to see whether the decision has a sufficient public element , flavour or character to bring it within the purview of public law . It may be said with some justification that this criterion for amenability is very broad , not to say question @-@ begging . But it provides the framework for the investigation that has to be conducted . ... [ Emphasis added . ] 
 However , the Court also said : " Where there is a compelling reason which indicates the absence of such a public element in what is nonetheless a statutory power or duty , there would be no good reason to subject the exercise of such a power or duty , which may already be governed by private law obligations and remedies , to public law remedies in judicial review proceedings . " [ Emphasis added . ] 
 It has been suggested that the Court of Appeal 's judgment can be interpreted in one of two ways : that the exercise of a power is not amenable to judicial review either if it has no public element altogether , or if it has an insufficient public element . Neither of these interpretations is without complications . As regards the first interpretation , it may be difficult to conceive of an exercise of statutory power that has no public element at all . If the second interpretation is correct , there is doubt as to the level of sufficiency required for the exercise of a power to be amenable to judicial review as the Court did not explain this . 
 = = = = Exceptions = = = = 
 = = = = = Decisions relating to the internal procedures of Parliament = = = = = 
 It is clearly established that the courts exercise a self @-@ denying ordinance in relation to interfering with the proceedings of Parliament . Section 5 of the Parliament ( Privileges , Immunities and Powers ) Act states : 
 There shall be freedom of speech and debate and proceedings in Parliament , and such freedom of speech and debate and proceedings shall not be liable to be impeached or questioned in any court , commission of inquiry , committee of inquiry , tribunal or any other place whatsoever out of Parliament . 
 Section 5 is based on Article 9 of the United Kingdom 's Bill of Rights 1689 : " [ T ] he <unk> of Speech and Debates or Proceedings in Parlyament ought not to be impeached or questioned in any Court or Place out of Parlyament . " On the basis of this provision , and for other reasons , a long line of authorities in the Commonwealth have held that courts are precluded from impeaching or questioning the freedom of speech and debates or proceedings in Parliament . This is so even if the legal action is brought by , and not against , a member of the legislature . Immunity also extends to independent persons appointed by Parliament exercising their duties in relation to Parliament 's activities . In Prebble v. Television New Zealand Ltd . ( 1994 ) , the Privy Council held that if any exceptions were made unless in the most extreme circumstances , members of the legislature would not know if there would subsequently be challenges to what they are saying in Parliament . Therefore , members would not have the confidence to state fully and freely what they have to say . 
 The Privy Council identified one of the extreme circumstances as that which occurred in Wright & Advertiser Newspapers Limited v. Lewis ( 1990 ) . In this case , the Supreme Court of South Australia held that an action may proceed against a legislator accused of libel where the whole subject matter of the alleged libel relates to the legislator 's conduct in the legislature so that the effect of parliamentary privilege is to exclude virtually all the evidence necessary to justify the libel . If such an action is not allowed to proceed , not only will there be injustice to the defendant , but there will also be a real danger that the media will be forced to abstain from the truthful disclosure of the legislator 's misbehaviour in Parliament . This would be a most serious <unk> into freedom of speech since justification would be impossible . 
 = = = = = Decisions of the High Court and Court of Appeal = = = = = 
 While the High Court has inherent power to judicially review the decisions of inferior courts and other administrative bodies , one High Court judge may not judicially review a decision of another High Court judge , nor may the High Court judicially review decisions of the Court of Appeal . 
 The Court of Appeal does not possess the jurisdiction and power to entertain applications for supervision of a decision made by a Subordinate Court as it has " no jurisdiction or power to hear any proceeding other than an appeal against a decision made by the High Court in the exercise of its original jurisdiction " . Neither may the Court judicially review High Court decisions . This is because the Court of Appeal is a statutory creation , and section 3 ( b ) of the Supreme Court of Judicature Act states that it exercises only " appellate civil and criminal jurisdiction " . 
 = = = = = Issues over which judicial review has been excluded = = = = = 
 Even when a decision made by a body possesses some public element , judicial review of the decision may be ousted where a statute expressly excludes the court 's power to review administrative decisions . However , the effectiveness of an ouster clause depends on the facts of each individual case . Examples of statutory ouster clauses in Singapore are section 8B ( 2 ) of the Internal Security Act , and section 47 of the Industrial Relations Act . The latter provision stipulates that any determination by the Industrial Arbitration Court is " final and conclusive " and " shall not be subject to any Quashing Order , Prohibiting Order , Mandatory Order or injunction in any court on any account " . 
 = = = = = Decisions without legal effect = = = = = 
 It has been held in Singapore that decisions by a public authority without any legal effect are not amenable to judicial review . In Tan Eng Chye v. Director of Prisons ( 2004 ) , a case concerning an application for an order of certiorari to quash the certification by a prison medical officer that the applicant was fit to undergo a caning punishment , the High Court held that not every act of or conduct by a public servant is justiciable by way of a judicial review . The Court agreed with Lord Diplock in the GCHQ case that : 
 For a decision to be susceptible to judicial review the decision @-@ maker must be empowered by public law ( and not merely , as in arbitration , by agreement between private parties ) to make decisions that , if validly made , will lead to administrative action or abstention from action by an authority endowed by law with executive powers , which have one or other of the consequences , mentioned in the preceding paragraph . 
 In addition , the decision must have consequences which affect some person ( or body of persons ) other than the decision @-@ maker , although it may affect him or her too : 
 It must affect such other person either : 
 ( a ) by altering rights or obligations of that person which are enforceable by or against him in private law ; or 
 ( b ) by depriving him of some benefit or advantage which either ( i ) he had in the past been permitted by the decision @-@ maker to enjoy and which he can legitimately expect to be permitted to continue to do so until there has been communicated to him some rational grounds for withdrawing it on which he had been given an opportunity to comment ; or ( ii ) he has received assurance from the decision @-@ maker will not be withdrawn ... 
 The Court held that the report made by the prison medical officer was obviously a decision but that alone did not make him a " decision @-@ maker " in the sense explained by Lord Diplock . This was because the officer 's report that the appellant was fit for caning did not have legal effect – the District Court judge was duty bound to impose the sentence of caning irrespective of what the officer might have said in his report . Hence , it was not a case for judicial review at all . The Court also said that another example of non @-@ decision @-@ making conduct was a police officer arresting a person suspected of committing an offence . 
 This approach was also adopted in Comptroller of Income Tax v. ACC ( 2010 ) . The Court of Appeal held it is trite law that a quashing order will not lie unless a public authority has done something that a court can quash or , in other words , deprive of legal effect . It observed that " a decision need not in itself have a direct legal effect or consequence before it can be quashed . A decision which operates as a prerequisite to or a step in a process capable of altering rights , interests or liabilities may also be the subject of a quashing order . " The Court eventually concluded that , " a quashing order will only lie against decisions which have some form of actual or ostensible legal effect , whether direct or indirect . A mere opinion clearly does not fall within this category . " 
 At present , the approach in Singapore to decisions without legal effect is less liberal than that in the United Kingdom . It has been said that the English courts " now take a broad view and it is no longer necessary for a claimant to demonstrate that a decision or action has direct legal consequences upon the claimant " . For instance , these courts have expanded the scope of matters that fall within the remit of judicial review challenges to encompass even press releases and policy guidance issued by public authorities . This is illustrated by the case of R. ( <unk> ) v. Secretary of State for Health ( 2006 ) , in which guidance issued by the Department of Health , alleged to be unlawful and in contravention of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights , was amenable to judicial review . Cases of this kind may be explainable on the basis that the actions in question have some indirect legal effect . 
 = = = Decisions having only private effect = = = 
 Private associations and country clubs have no obvious public law function , yet the courts exercise judicial review over their decisions and proceedings , such as hearings relating to disciplinary matters and those held to decide if persons should be deprived of their memberships in the associations , to ensure that they are fair and comply with the requirements of natural justice . It has been suggested that the courts ' jurisdiction in such matters depends on contract . The rules of an association form a contract between the members of the association themselves , and the need for hearings to be conducted in accordance with natural justice is an implied term in the contract . Accordingly , the courts are merely enforcing the contract rather than exercising a judicial review function . 
 The jurisdiction of the courts in reviewing the decisions of such domestic tribunals is of a limited nature . The Court of Appeal of England and Wales held in Dawkins v. Antrobus ( 1881 ) that before a member is expelled from a club for committing an offence against the club 's constitution , the member has to be given proper notice of the meeting , an opportunity to attend the meeting , and an opportunity to be heard . Moreover , the charges made against him and the proceedings must be conducted bona fide , fairly , and in the honest exercise of the powers given to the meeting by the club . However , these conditions having been fulfilled , " the court has no right to consider whether or not what was done by the meeting was right or whether or not what was decided was reasonable " . The court will not resolve factual issues as these are within the scope of the tribunal 's inquiry . 
 In Singapore , the position is similar . It was held by the Court of Appeal in Singapore Amateur Athletics Association v. <unk> bin <unk> ( 1993 ) that : 
 The function of the courts is to see that the rules of natural justice have been observed , and that the decision has been honestly arrived at . The court has no power to review the evidence for the purpose of deciding whether the tribunal came to a right conclusion . It is not the function of the court when exercising such supervisory jurisdiction to resolve issues of fact which are within the proper sphere of the tribunal 's inquiry . 
 The extent of the duty to act fairly varies greatly from case to case . Basic norms of fairness in the conduct of disciplinary proceedings need to be observed more strictly where the vocational future of a person is at stake , where there is an express duty on an association to make a decision only after conducting a hearing or an inquiry , and where the exercise of disciplinary powers may deprive a person of his or her property rights or impose a penalty on him or her . 
 = = Justiciability = = 
 A legal issue must be justiciable before the High Court will grant an applicant leave to apply for judicial review . Justiciability recognizes the limited capabilities of the courts . It delineates certain issues which fall beyond the purview of judicial review because those matters are unsuited for adjudication , due to the nature of the litigation process and judicial expertise . The doctrine is based on an understanding of the separation of powers and the need to find the right constitutional balance between the courts and the executive . For example , matters of policy or subjective preference , and polycentric public policy issues , are better left in the hands of an elected body of persons . 
 However , justiciability is a concept that eludes precise categorization or definition , and this has caused disquiet amongst some critics . The implication is that there may be some unfairness where questionable executive action remains unchallenged . Nonetheless , the concept of justiciability is useful in determining the likelihood of whether an executive action is within the purview of judicial review . 
 = = = Position in the United Kingdom = = = 
 = = = = Prerogative powers and the supervisory role of the courts = = = = 
 The royal prerogative refers to the exceptional powers and privileges only personally exercisable by the monarch . These important rights , immunities and privileges arguably belong to the Crown , which uses them for the performance of its constitutional duties and the governing of the country . Important prerogatives include : 
 legislative powers exercised through orders in council ( a form of delegated legislation ) ; 
 powers in relation to the conduct of foreign affairs , in particular the making of treaties and declarations of war ; 
 powers in respect of the organization and disposition of the armed forces ; 
 the power to confer certain honours ; 
 the power required by the government in times of emergency , particularly during wartime ; and 
 certain powers in respect of the administration of justice . 
 These powers were generally devolved to the prime minister and ministers . The matters are political by nature and call for political judgment rather than judicial control . Thus , Parliament is the most appropriate forum for debate and the best qualified to control the executive . However , in practice , parliamentary accountability of ministers is not entirely effective . The prerogative powers that the government officials exercise on behalf of the Crown , coupled with a weak system of checks and balances between the Parliament and the executive , can lead to an abuse of those powers which may be detrimental to the people . The possibility of such abuse , coupled with the way administrative law and judicial review evolved since the 1960s – a period of judicial activism – led courts in the United Kingdom to take an increasing interest in the manner in which prerogative powers had been exercised . 
 = = = = Evolution towards <unk> = = = = 
 Traditionally , the regulation of executive action was met with judicial reluctance to intervene . Certain types of governmental discretion , exercised using prerogative powers , were regarded as beyond the scope of judicial scrutiny because they involved issues of substantive policy . However , developments focused on the substance of the issues at hand , rather than merely accepting that the prerogative power is non @-@ justiciable per se . Simply put , the focus shifted from the source of the power to the subject matter . 
 In Chandler v. Director of Public Prosecutions ( 1962 ) , Lord Devlin stated : " It is the duty of the courts to be as alert now as they have always been to prevent any abuse of the prerogative . " Lord Denning , the Master of the Rolls , applied a similar reasoning in Laker Airways Ltd. v. Department of Trade ( 1976 ) and held that prerogative powers were as reviewable as any other power and could not be used by the Government to protect themselves when they were removing the protection granted to parties under a statute . He stated , obiter , as follows : 
 The law does not interfere with the proper exercise of discretion by the executive in those situations : but it can set limits by defining the bounds of the activity : and it can intervene if the discretion is exercised improperly or mistakenly . That is a fundamental principle of our constitution . ... Seeing that the prerogative is a discretionary power to be exercised for the public good , it follows that its exercise can be examined by the courts just as any other discretionary power which is vested in the executive . 
 In R. v. Criminal Injuries Compensation Board , ex parte Lain ( 1967 ) , it was held that the powers of the Board were in principle reviewable , despite it having been established under prerogative powers . This case was cited with approval in the GCHQ case , which reflects the modern position on the <unk> of prerogative powers in the United Kingdom . In this case , their Lordships unanimously held that executive action was not immune from judicial review merely because it was carried out in pursuance of a power derived from the common law ( or the prerogative ) rather than a statutory source . It was the subject @-@ matter that counted , not the source . In this case , the Government , through an order in council , banned employees of the Government Communications Headquarters from joining a trade union . The House of Lords held that this exercise of the prerogative was judicially reviewable , and the trade unions had a legitimate expectation of prior consultation before the ban was imposed . However , although the failure to consult the unions was unfair , this lapse from proper procedure was overridden by national security considerations and thus not justiciable . 
 In GCHQ , Lord Scarman cited the authority of ex parte Lain and R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department , ex parte <unk> ( 1977 ) in stressing that the modern law of judicial review had overwhelmed the old restrictions on the justiciability of the prerogative : 
 [ T ] he law relating to judicial review has now reached the stage where it can be said with confidence that , if the subject matter in respect of which prerogative power is exercised is justiciable , that is to say if it is a matter upon which the court can adjudicate , the exercise of the power is subject to review in accordance with the principles developed in respect of the review of the exercise of statutory power . ... Today , therefore , the controlling factor in determining whether the exercise of prerogative power is subject to judicial review is not its source but its subject matter . 
 The legal implications of GCHQ were that many areas once considered <unk> were now potentially open to judicial scrutiny by the United Kingdom courts , except for a list of prerogatives that Lord Roskill provided as being non @-@ reviewable " because their nature and subject matter are such as not to be amenable to the judicial process " . These included prerogative powers of treaty @-@ making , the defence of the realm , the prerogative of mercy , the granting of honours , the dissolution of parliament , and the appointment of ministers . Subsequent case law shows that this list has largely been accepted , and there is indication that the judges have continued to move with a degree of circumspection , and sometimes even in reaction against such developments . However , in Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament v. Prime Minister ( 2002 ) , Justice Maurice Kay accepted that the ambit of the " forbidden areas " identified by Lord Roskill is not immutable , and had been reduced in some cases . 
 The attitude of the courts in the United Kingdom is summarized in the obiter comments of Lord Justice Simon Brown in R. v. Ministry of Defence , ex parte Smith ( 1995 ) : 
 To my mind only the rarest cases would today be ruled strictly beyond the court 's purview – only cases involving national security properly so called and where in addition the courts really do lack the expertise or material to form a judgment on the point at issue . 
 = = = Position in Singapore = = = 
 = = = = Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs = = = = 
 Justiciability was applied as a threshold issue in Singapore in Chng Suan Tze v. Minister for Home Affairs ( 1988 ) . Here , the appellants were arrested for allegedly being involved in a Marxist conspiracy to undermine the Government , and were issued detention orders under section 8 ( 1 ) ( a ) of the Internal Security Act . The respondents submitted that " as the subject matter in ss 8 and 10 of the ISA relates to matters of national security the court is precluded from reviewing the exercising of such discretion since matters of national security should be left to those responsible for it . " The Court of Appeal agreed with this submission , stating that while an exercise of discretion is generally subject to judicial review on objective grounds , a court will be precluded from reviewing a decision that was made for national security purposes . This position was consistent with the holdings in The Zamora ( 1916 ) and the GCHQ case . 
 The Court added that there is a need for the decision @-@ maker to adduce evidence in court to prove that considerations of national security are involved . A mere assertion by the decision @-@ maker that a matter involves national security does not preclude the court 's judicial function of determining whether the decision was in fact based on grounds of national security . In other words , national security cannot be raised as a plea in bar to prevent the court from considering an application at all . However , what the court cannot do is decide what action national security requires . This is to be left solely to those responsible for it . 
 On the facts , the Court held that a plain reading of section 8 of the ISA suggests that where a decision is made that it is " necessary " to detain someone " with a view to preventing that person from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Singapore " , the decision will clearly be based on national security considerations . Whether detention is necessary is a matter solely for the executive 's judgment . However , the courts can still review the decision in terms of whether the exercise of discretion fell within the scope of section 8 . 
 = = = = Lee Hsien Loong v. Review Publishing Co . Ltd. and subsequent developments = = = = 
 The law relating to justiciability was discussed comprehensively by Judicial Commissioner Sundaresh Menon in the High Court decision Lee Hsien Loong v. Review Publishing Co . Ltd . ( 2007 ) . After examining a line of cases , the judge laid down the following principles . 
 = = = = = Principles concerning justiciability = = = = = 
 First , there are provinces of executive decision @-@ making that are and should be immune from judicial review . This is reflected the doctrine of separation of powers embedded in Singapore 's Westminster constitutional framework . Secondly , the span of executive decisions immune from judicial review include those involving matters of " high policy " , such as the dissolution of Parliament , the conduct of foreign affairs , the making of treaties , matters pertaining to war and the deployment of armed forces , and national defence . <unk> should be accorded to the executive branch in respect of decisions concerning these matters . The High Court examined three cases which fall comfortably within this class . In The Fagernes ( 1927 ) the Court of Appeal of England and Wales considered the question of determining territorial boundaries , and held that " any definitive statement from the proper representative of the Crown as to the territory of the Crown must be treated as conclusive " . <unk> <unk> A. M. Luther v. James <unk> & Co . ( 1921 ) and Civil Aeronautics Administration v. Singapore Airlines Ltd . ( 2004 ) involved the recognition of sovereign status . It was held in Singapore Airlines that " a question such as that which arises in the present case , whether an entity is a State so as to enjoy sovereign immunity in Singapore , is eminently a matter within the exclusive province of the Executive to determine , as what are involved in the question are not only matters of fact but also matters of policy " . 
 Thirdly , apart from issues of foreign affairs and national defence , there are other areas that are non @-@ justiciable such as the interpretation of international treaties operating solely on the international plane . This is illustrated by Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament , in which it was held that for the court to assume jurisdiction in such areas would be an " exorbitant arrogation of <unk> power " , as the court could not presume that its ruling would bind other states . Another non @-@ justiciable area is where the legislature has made it clear that a particular question is reserved to the executive to answer , as in Singapore Airlines which noted that section 18 of the State Immunity Act requires those claiming sovereign immunity from lawsuits to first obtain certification from the Singapore Government . In such situations , it is not for the court to disregard the executive 's judgment . 
 Judicial Commissioner Menon rejected a highly rigid and categorical approach to determining the justiciability of an issue , because the theory of the separation of powers is to be interpreted and applied sensibly . The intensity of the review depends on the context behind it and upon common sense . This was the approach taken in <unk> v. Environment Agency ( 2002 ) which noted that " one context will shade into another " . He highlighted four principles that bear noting when determining whether an issue is justiciable : 
 Subject matter . First , the justiciability of an issue depends on the subject matter at hand and not the source of decision @-@ making power . This was the principle stated in GCHQ and reiterated in Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament . Where the executive has the best access to available materials , its views should be decisive or at least highly persuasive . It was acknowledged in Singapore Airlines that there may be matters of fact not in the public domain which may be known only to the executive . Where sensitive facts are concerned , Singapore 's adversarial system is undesirable as parties must adduce evidence at a trial . Furthermore , not all pertinent facts might be presented before the court . 
 Ability of judges to balance competing policy considerations . Where the decision requires the intricate balancing of various competing policy considerations , judges may be ill @-@ equipped to decide because of their limited training , experience and access to materials . Thus , the courts should avoid reviewing the merits of such executive decisions . This was mentioned in GCHQ where Lord Diplock held that the type of evidence admissible in the judicial process and the way in which it is adduced tends to exclude from the attention of the court competing policy considerations which need to be weighed against one another . 
 Embarrassing or tying the hands of the executive . The court should abstain from interfering where a judicial pronouncement could embarrass another branch of government or tie its hands in the conduct of affairs traditionally falling within its purview . In Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament , the Divisional Court of England and Wales held that the applicant 's true purpose for seeking the court 's interpretation of a United Nations Security Council resolution was to limit the government 's freedom in relation to the use of military force and to exercise diplomatic pressure in advance . Thus , the matter should be regarded as non @-@ justiciable . 
 Areas entrusted to the democratically elected branches . The court should always exercise restraint and keep in mind the fact that the Singapore system of government operates within the framework of three co @-@ equal branches , and there are areas of prerogative power that the democratically elected branches are entrusted to take care of . <unk> explained that " the graver a matter of State and the more widespread its possible effects , the more respect will be given , within the framework of the constitution , to the democracy to decide its outcome " . In such instances , the executive and legislature are accountable to the electorate , not the judiciary . Those who are unsatisfied should sound their dissatisfaction in the ballot box . 
 In Lee Hsien Loong the appellants , which were in Hong Kong , challenged the jurisdiction of the High Court to hear a defamation suit brought by the respondents on the ground , among others , that the service of the writ should have been effected in accordance with the civil procedure convention set down in the Treaty of Judicial Assistance in Civil and Commercial Matters between the Republic of Singapore and the People 's Republic of China . Thus , although this was not a judicial review case , the Court had to consider the justiciability of determining whether the treaty applied to Hong Kong , and whether the Court could depart from the views of the executive branch on the matter which were stated in a letter issued by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs . The Court held that the present case did not involve the exercise of the sovereign or legislative prerogative in matters of high policy . Rather , it was concerned with the effect , and not the making , of the treaty or whether it was advisable . Thus , the letter from the Ministry was not an exercise of executive prerogative power , but merely a statement of opinion . 
 Furthermore , the appeal did not engage foreign policy considerations . The treaty was a civil convention between two countries and an agreement to render mutual judicial assistance , and had nothing to do with foreign affairs other than that it was made between state parties . It also did not involve the policing of government conduct in international affairs , because it only implicated the procedures private litigants had to take to serve writs on defendants residing in Hong Kong . When interpreting the treaty , the Court only had to determine the domestic legal obligations of the respondents seeking to serve a writ out of jurisdiction . Thus , the issue of whether the treaty applied to Hong Kong was justiciable , and the Ministry 's letter was not decisive on the matter . 
 = = = = = Justiciability of prosecutorial discretion = = = = = 
 Article 35 ( 8 ) of the Constitution of Singapore empowers the Attorney @-@ General to institute , conduct or discontinue any criminal proceedings . This provision confers wide discretionary powers upon the Attorney @-@ General . However , since unfettered discretion contradicts the rule of law , the Attorney @-@ General 's powers are not absolute and are subject to legal limits . In Law Society of Singapore v. Tan Guat Neo Phyllis ( 2008 ) , a three @-@ judge bench of the High Court consisting of Chief Justice Chan Sek Keong , Judge of Appeal Andrew Phang and Justice Andrew Ang held that although the prosecutorial power is a constitutional power , it is not absolute and its exercise can be challenged in " very exceptional case [ s ] " . 
 The Court held that it can judicially review the exercise of prosecutorial power and declare a prosecution to be unconstitutional for breach of constitutional power , for example , if a prosecution is brought in bad faith for an ulterior motive and not to punish an accused person for an offence he or she committed . A prosecution can also be found to have infringed the accused person 's constitutional rights . This may happen if law enforcement officers themselves commit crimes by using agents provocateur in a particularly egregious manner to entrap accused persons into committing crimes , and the Attorney @-@ General elects to prosecute only the accused persons but not the officers , as this may infringe the accused persons ' right to equality guaranteed by Article 12 ( 1 ) of the Constitution . 
 = = = = = Justiciability of the clemency power = = = = = 
 Traditionally at common law , the prerogative of mercy – that is , the power of the executive government to pardon or to grant clemency to a convicted criminal – was regarded as outside the courts ' supervisory jurisdiction and hence non @-@ justiciable . This changed with the Divisional Court 's decision in R. v. Secretary of State for the Home Department , ex parte Bentley ( 1993 ) , which held that the prerogative of mercy is reviewable in some circumstances . This case was considered by the Singapore Court of Appeal in Yong Vui Kong v. Attorney @-@ General ( 2011 ) , Chief Justice Chan expressing the opinion that the case " clearly decided that the prerogative of mercy would be reviewable if it were exercised based on an error of law ( in that case , the Home Secretary ’ s <unk> of the type of pardon which the Home Office could grant ) , or based on arbitrary and / or extraneous considerations " , though courts still cannot review the merits of any clemency decision . 
 In Yong Vui Kong , the Court described the clemency power in Singapore as vested exclusively in the executive , and thus not justiciable on the merits . Despite this , it is not an " extra @-@ legal " power that is beyond any legal constraints . Agreeing with Tan Guat Neo Phyllis , the Court held that the clemency power is subject to judicial review if it can be shown to have been exercised unconstitutionally , in bad faith or for extraneous purposes . In addition , the fact that Article 22P ( 2 ) of the Constitution stipulates specific procedural safeguards in death penalty cases indicates that the clemency power must be reviewable to ensure that these safeguards have been complied with . Article 22P ( 2 ) requires documents from the trial judge and the appellate court , and the Attorney @-@ General 's opinion on the case , to be sent to the Cabinet for consideration so that it can advise the President on the exercise of the clemency power . These procedural requirements imply that Cabinet has a constitutional duty to consider the documents in good faith before advising the President . If evidence is adduced to show that the Cabinet did not consider the offender 's case impartially and in good faith ( for example , it never met to discuss the case , or tossed a coin instead of properly considering the materials transmitted to it ) , Cabinet would have breached Article 22P ( 2 ) . In such a situation , the courts must be able to review the clemency decision . This conclusion is also mandated by the guarantee in Article 9 ( 1 ) of the Constitution that a person may not be deprived of either life or personal liberty save in accordance with law . 
 = = = = = Exceptions = = = = = 
 Even if the subject @-@ matter of a case is generally non @-@ justiciable , there are exceptions where the courts will still review the case . For instance , a dispute may prima facie involve a non @-@ justiciable area but , on a closer look , the courts may decide that there is a justiciable matter within it . In such a situation , the courts will intervene and review the case . An example of this was given by Judicial Commissioner Menon in Lee Hsien Loong : " [ W ] here what appears to raise a question of international law in fact bears on the application of domestic law , that is something the court may well find justiciable . " In Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament , the court similarly distinguished a pronouncement on the interpretation of a treaty generally , which is impermissible , from the consideration of " the application of an international treaty by reference to the facts of an individual case " which is allowed . Also , in R. v. Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , ex parte Everett ( 1988 ) , the Court of Appeal of England and Wales took the view that a decision by the Secretary of State exercised under the royal prerogative to deny a passport to a British citizen residing abroad raised a justiciable issue because it was not a high policy matter involving foreign affairs but " a matter of administrative decision , affecting the rights of individuals and their freedom of travel " . 
 Judicial Commissioner Menon also mentioned another exception to the justiciability rule : when the courts are able to isolate a pure question of law from what is seemingly a non @-@ justiciable issue . However , the judge did not explain this exception further , and it has not yet been applied or discussed in any other Singapore case . 
 = = = Cases = = = 
 = = = = Singapore = = = = 
 Re Lim Chor Pee , ex parte Law Society of Singapore [ 1985 – 1986 ] S.L.R. ( R. ) [ Singapore Law Reports ( Reissue ) ] 998 , Court of Appeal ( Singapore ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts [ 1995 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 627 , High Court ( Singapore ) ( " Chan Hiang Leng Colin ( H.C. ) " ) . 
 Chan Hiang Leng Colin v. Minister for Information and the Arts [ 1992 ] ICHRL 1 , [ 1996 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 294 , C.A. ( Singapore ) ( " Chan Hiang Leng Colin ( C.A. ) " ; the ICHRL neutral citation is incorrect as the case was decided in 1996 ) . 
 Public Service Commission v. Lai Swee Lin Linda [ 2001 ] 1 S.L.R. ( R. ) 133 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 Lee Hsien Loong v. Review Publishing Co . Ltd . [ 2007 ] SGHC 24 , [ 2007 ] 2 S.L.R. ( R. ) 453 , H.C. ( Singapore ) . 
 Tan Eng Hong v. Attorney @-@ General [ 2012 ] SGCA 45 , [ 2012 ] 4 S.L.R. 476 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 <unk> Singh s / o Kirpal Singh v. Attorney @-@ General [ 2013 ] SGCA 22 , C.A. ( Singapore ) . 
 = = = = Other jurisdictions = = = = 
 Gouriet v. H. M. Attorney @-@ General [ 1977 ] UKHL 5 , [ 1978 ] A.C. 435 , House of Lords ( UK ) . 
 R. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners , ex parte National Federation of Self @-@ Employed and Small Businesses Ltd . [ 1981 ] UKHL 2 , [ 1982 ] A.C. 617 at 631 , H.L. ( UK ) ( " IRC " ) . 
 Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [ 1983 ] UKHL 6 , [ 1985 ] A.C. 374 , H.L. ( UK ) ( " GCHQ " ) . 
 R. v. Panel on Take @-@ overs and Mergers , ex parte Datafin plc . [ 1987 ] Q.B. 815 , Court of Appeal ( England and Wales ) . 
 Government of Malaysia v. Lim Kit Siang [ 1988 ] 2 M.L.J. [ Malayan Law Journal ] 12 , Supreme Court ( Malaysia ) . 
 Prebble v. Television New Zealand Ltd . [ 1994 ] UKPC 4 , [ 1995 ] A.C. 321 , Privy Council ( on appeal from New Zealand ) . 
 = = = Other works = = = 
 Beatson , Jack ; Matthews , Martin ; Elliott , Mark ( 2005 ) , Beatson , Matthews and Elliott 's Administrative Law : Text and Materials , Oxford ; New York , N.Y. : Oxford University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 Cane , Peter ( 1995 ) , " Standing Up for the Public " , Public Law : 276 – 287 . 
 Chan , Sek Keong ( 2010 ) , " Judicial Review – From Angst to Empathy : A Lecture to Singapore Management University Second Year Law Students " , Singapore Academy of Law Journal 22 : 469 – 489 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 1 December 2011 . 
 Leyland , Peter ; Anthony , Gordon ( 2008 ) , " Filter Mechanisms : Rationing the Remedies Available " , Textbook on Administrative Law , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 438 – 452 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 921776 @-@ 2 . 
 Wade , William ; Forsyth , Christopher ( 2009 ) , Administrative Law ( 10th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 923161 @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 Beatson , Jack ( June 1998 ) , " The Need to Develop Principles of Prematurity and Ripeness for Review " , Judicial Review 3 ( 2 ) : 79 – 84 . 
 Cane , Peter ( 1999 ) , " Open Standing and the Role of Courts in a Democratic Society " ( PDF ) , Singapore Law Review 20 : 23 – 50 . 
 <unk> , Erwin ( 1990 ) , " A Unified Approach to Justiciability " , Connecticut Law Review 22 : 677 – 701 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 16 June 2010 . 
 Feldman , David ( January 1992 ) , " Public Interest Litigation and Constitutional Theory in Comparative Perspective " , Modern Law Review 55 ( 1 ) : 44 – 72 , doi : 10 @.@ 1111 / <unk> @-@ <unk> , JSTOR <unk> . 
 Finn , Chris ( 2002 ) , " The Justiciability of Administrative Decisions : A Redundant Concept ? " ( PDF ) , Federal Law Review 30 : 239 – 263 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 13 May 2013 . 
 Himsworth , Chris ( 2007 ) , Judicial Review of Political Questions : Questions of Justiciability [ paper delivered at the VII World Congress of the International Association of Constitutional Law , Athens , 11 – 15 June 2007 ] , Athens : Association of Greek <unk> , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 19 June 2013 . 
 Poole , Thomas ( 2010 ) , " Judicial Review at the Margins : Law , Power , and Prerogative " ( PDF ) , University of Toronto Law Journal 60 ( 1 ) : 81 – 108 , doi : 10 @.@ <unk> / <unk> , SSRN <unk> , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 8 March 2012 . 
 Tushnet , Mark V [ <unk> ] ( 2002 ) , " Law and Prudence in the Law of Justiciability : The Transformation and Disappearance of the Political Question Doctrine " , North Carolina Law Review 80 : 1203 – 1235 , archived from the original ( PDF ) on 2 May 2013 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Barak , Aharon ( 2006 ) , " Non @-@ justiciability , or ' Political Questions ' " , The Judge in a Democracy , Princeton , N.J. : Princeton University Press , pp. 177 – 189 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 . 
 Beatson , Jack ( 1998 ) , " Prematurity and Ripeness for Review " , in Forsyth , Christopher ; Hare , Ivan , eds . , The Golden <unk> and the Crooked Cord : Essays on Public Law in Honour of Sir William Wade QC , Oxford : Clarendon Press , pp. 221 – 252 , doi : 10 @.@ 1093 / acprof : oso / <unk> @.@ 003 @.@ 0011 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 Himsworth , Chris ( 1997 ) , " No Standing Still on Standing " , in Leyland , Peter ; Woods , Terry , eds . , Administrative Law Facing the Future : Old Constraints and New Horizons , Blackstone Press , pp. 200 – 220 , ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 689 @-@ 9 . 
 <unk> , Lorne [ Mitchell ] ( 2012 ) , Boundaries of Judicial Review : The Law of Justiciability in Canada ( 2nd ed . ) , Toronto : Carswell , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Wade , William ; Forsyth , Christopher ( 2009 ) , " Restriction of Remedies " , Administrative Law ( 10th ed . ) , Oxford : Oxford University Press , pp. 582 – 634 , ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ 923161 @-@ 4 . 
 = Thopha saccata = 
 Thopha saccata , commonly known as the double drummer , is the largest Australian species of cicada and reputedly the loudest insect in the world . Documented by the Danish zoologist Johan Christian Fabricius in 1803 , it was the first described and named cicada native to Australia . Its common name comes from the large dark red @-@ brown sac @-@ like pockets that the adult male has on each side of its abdomen — the " double drums " — that are used to amplify the sound it produces . 
 Broad @-@ headed compared with other cicadas , the double drummer is mostly brown with a black pattern across the back of its thorax , and has red @-@ brown and black underparts . The sexes are similar in appearance , though the female lacks the male 's tymbals and sac @-@ like covers . Found in sclerophyll forest in Queensland and New South Wales , adult double drummers generally perch high in the branches of large eucalypts . They emerge from the ground where they have spent several years as nymphs from November until March , and live for another four to five weeks . They appear in great numbers in some years , yet are absent in others . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Danish naturalist Johan Christian Fabricius described the double drummer as <unk> saccata in 1803 , the first description of an Australian cicada . The type locality was inexplicably and incorrectly recorded as China . It was placed in the new genus Thopha by French entomologists Charles Jean @-@ Baptiste <unk> and Jean Guillaume <unk> @-@ <unk> in their 1843 work Histoire naturelle des insectes <unk> ( " Natural History of Hemiptera Insects " ) . The generic name is derived from <unk> ( Hebrew : <unk> ) , meaning " drum " . They maintained it as native to China . The specific name is derived from the Latin <unk> , meaning " sac " or " bag " , and more specifically " <unk> " . 
 In 1838 , Félix Édouard Guérin @-@ Méneville pointed out that the double drummer is native to Australia and not China . John Obadiah Westwood designated it the type species of the genus in 1843 , and it is also the type species for the tribe <unk> . The common name is derived from the male cicada 's sac @-@ like tymbal covers ( " drums " ) on either side of its abdomen . 
 = = Description = = 
 The adult double drummer is the largest Australian species of cicada , the male and female averaging 4 @.@ 75 and 5 @.@ 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 87 and 2 @.@ 02 in ) long respectively . The thorax is 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) in diameter , its sides distended when compared with the thorax of other Australian cicadas . The forewings are 5 – 6 @.@ 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) long . The largest collected specimen has a wingspan of 15 @.@ 1 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) , while the average is 13 @.@ 3 cm ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) . The average mass is 4 @.@ 0 g ( 0 @.@ 14 oz ) . The sexes have similar markings , but males have large dark red @-@ brown sac @-@ like structures on each side of their abdomens . These cover the tymbals — specialised structures composed of vertical ribs and a tymbal plate , which is buckled to produce the cicada 's song . The head is much broader than that of other cicadas , and is broader than the pronotum behind it . The head , antennae and <unk> are black , with a narrow broken pale brown transverse band across the vertex just behind the ocelli . The eyes are black in young adult cicadas upon emerging , but turn brown with black <unk> at the posterior edge of the eye . The ocelli are deep red . The proboscis is 1 @.@ 26 cm ( 0 @.@ 50 in ) in length — very long compared with other Australian cicada species . The thorax is brown , becoming paler in older individuals . The pronotum is rusty brown with black anterior borders , while the mesonotum is a little paler with prominent black markings , with paired cone @-@ shaped spots with bases towards the front on either side of a median stripe ; lateral to these spots are a pair of markings resembling a " 7 " on the right hand side of the mesonotum and its reverse on the left . The abdomen is black between the tymbal covers and red @-@ brown and black more posteriorly . The underparts of the double drummer are red @-@ brown and black , and covered in fine silvery velvety hairs . The female 's ovipositor is very long , measuring 1 @.@ 76 cm ( 0 @.@ 69 in ) . The wings are vitreous ( transparent ) with light brown veins . They have an array of cuticular nanostructures — conical protuberances with a spacing and height of about 200 nm , tipped with a spherical cap with a radius of curvature of around 25 – 45 nm — on the transparent panes of their wings . These act as anti @-@ wetting and anti @-@ reflective surfaces . The legs are dark brown and have grey velvety hairs . 
 There is little variation in colour over its range , though occasional females are darker overall than average , with markings less prominent or absent . The double drummer is larger and darker overall than the northern double drummer ( T. <unk> ) ; the latter has a white band on the abdomen , while the former has black markings on the leading edge ( costa ) of the forewing extending past the basal cell . 
 Male cicadas make a noise to attract females , which has been described as " the sound of summer " . The song of the double drummer is extremely loud — reportedly the loudest sound of any insect — and can reach an <unk> volume in excess of 120 dB if there are large numbers of double drummers at close range . <unk> and <unk> , the song is said to resemble high @-@ pitched bagpipes . The sound of the buckling of the tymbal plate then resonates in an adjacent hollow chamber in the abdomen , as well as in the exterior air @-@ filled sacs , which act as Helmholtz resonators . 
 Singing can cease and restart suddenly , either rarely or frequently , and often ends abruptly . The song has been described as " Tar @-@ ran @-@ tar @-@ <unk> @-@ tar @-@ ran @-@ tar @-@ <unk> " , and consists of a series of pulses emitted at a rate of 240 – 250 a second . The tymbal covers are much larger than other species and also make the call louder and send it in a particular direction . There are two distinct phases of song , which the double drummer switches between at irregular intervals . One phase is a continuous call that can last for several minutes ; during this period the frequency varies between 5 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 2 kHz and 6 @.@ 0 – 7 @.@ 5 kHz 4 – 6 times a second . In the other phase , the song is interrupted by breaks of increasing frequency resulting in a staccato sound . These breaks can be mistaken for silence as the difference in volume is so great , though the song actually continues at a much lower volume . During this staccato phase , which lasts for several seconds , the frequency remains around 5 @.@ 75 – 6 @.@ 5 kHz . The frequency of the song is a high harmonic of the pulse repetition frequency , which makes for a particularly ringing sound . Double drummers congregate in groups to amplify their calls , which likely drives off potential bird predators . Male double drummers also emit a distress call — a sharp fragmented irregular noise — upon being seized by a predator . 
 = = Life cycle = = 
 The narrow spindle @-@ shaped eggs are laid in a series of slits cut by the mother 's ovipositor in branches or twigs , usually of eucalypts . On average about twelve eggs are laid in each slit , for a total of several hundred . These cuts can cause significant damage to the bark of tender trees . The eggs all hatch around 70 days later — usually within a day or two of one another — but take longer in cold or dry conditions . The larvae then fall to the ground and burrow into the soil . Though the timing of the double drummer 's life cycle is unknown , nymphs of cicadas in general then spend from four to six years underground . Unusual for Australian cicadas , double drummers emerge during the daytime . Emerging en masse generally , nymphs are covered in mud . This mud remains on their exuviae , which emerging cicadas leave at the bases or in burnt out hollows of eucalypts . Within a forest , successive broods may emerge in different locations each year . The cicada 's body and wings desiccate and harden once free of the exuvia . 
 The adult lifespan of the double drummer is about four or five weeks . During this time , they mate and reproduce , and feed exclusively on sap of living trees , sucking it out through specialised mouthparts . Female cicadas die after laying their eggs . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The double drummer has a disjunct distribution , found from northern tropical Queensland , near <unk> Flat and Cooktown south to Ingham and Sarina , and then from Gympie in southeastern Queensland to Moruya in southern New South Wales . It is found in areas of higher elevation in the northern segment of its range , as the climate there is similar to that in southeast Queensland . Walter Wilson Froggatt and Robert John <unk> erroneously included South Australia in its distribution . 
 Adults are present from November to early March , prolific in some years and absent in others . They are found in dry sclerophyll forest , preferring to alight and feed on large eucalypts with diameters over 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) and sparse foliage concentrated at a height between 10 and 25 m ( 33 and 82 ft ) , particularly rough @-@ barked species , apples ( Angophora ) and <unk> . Associated trees include the grey box ( Eucalyptus moluccana ) , snappy gum ( E. racemosa ) and narrow @-@ leaved apple ( Angophora bakeri ) in a study at three sites in western Sydney . At Hawks Nest in coastal swampy sclerophyll woodland , adults were observed mainly on swamp mahogany ( Eucalyptus robusta ) and sometimes blackbutt ( E. pilularis ) , as well as Allocasuarina littoralis and introduced pine ( Pinus radiata ) . Nymphs feed primarily on the roots of eucalypts . 
 The double drummer has not adapted well to city life ; distribution of the species in cities is limited to natural stands of large trees . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 In hotter weather , double drummers perch on the upper branches of trees , while on overcast or rainy days , they may be found lower down on trunks near the ground . Double drummers on tree trunks are skittish , and can fly off en masse if disturbed . Relative to other Australian cicadas they have excellent perception , fly at a moderate cruising speed of 2 @.@ 5 m / s ( 8 @.@ 2 ft / s ) , with a similarly moderate maximum speed of 4 @.@ 0 m / s ( 13 ft / s ) , and are exceptionally adept at landing . The double drummer has been known to fly out to sea , effectively on a one @-@ way trip as their bodies have later been found washed up on beaches . A swarm of double drummers were reported 8 km ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) off the coast of Sussex Inlet in January 1979 , in and around the boat of a local fisherman . 
 = = Predation = = 
 As the adult cicadas emerge in the daytime , large numbers are consumed by birds . Thopha cicadas have also been found in the stomachs of foxes . The double drummer is one of the large cicada species preyed on by the cicada killer wasp ( Exeirus lateritius ) , which stings and paralyses cicadas high in the trees . Their victims drop to the ground where the cicada @-@ hunter mounts and carries them , pushing with its hind legs , sometimes over a distance of 100 m ( 330 ft ) . They are then shoved into the hunter 's burrow , where the helpless cicada is placed on a shelf in an often extensive " catacomb " , to form food @-@ stock for the wasp grub growing from the eggs deposited within . 
 = = Interactions with humans = = 
 Schoolchildren climb trees to collect live cicadas and keep them as pets in shoeboxes . However , they cannot easily be kept for longer than a day or two , given that they need flowing sap for food . Live adults brought into classrooms by their captors would startle the class with their piercing sound . Poems dedicated to the double drummer appeared in the Catholic Press in 1933 and 1936 , describing bird predation and its life cycle to children . 
 = Bruno Maddox = 
 Bruno P. Maddox ( born 1969 ) is a British literary novelist and journalist who is best known for his critically lauded novel My Little Blue Dress ( 2001 ) and for his satirical magazine essays . 
 After graduating from Harvard University in 1992 , Maddox began his career reviewing books for The New York Times Book Review and The Washington Post Book World . In early 1996 , he was appointed to an editorship at Spy magazine and within a few months he was promoted to editor @-@ in @-@ chief , a position he held until the magazine shut down in 1998 . Maddox wrote My Little Blue Dress between 1999 and 2001 . Since its publication , he has focused on writing satirical essays for magazines such as GEAR and Travel + Leisure ; he also contributes a monthly humor column to Discover magazine called " Blinded by Science " , drawing on his early exposure to science and technology . Maddox is likewise a contributing editor to the American edition of The Week magazine . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Maddox was born in London in 1969 to former Nature editor , the late Sir John Maddox , a writer on science and nature , and Brenda Maddox , a biographer of Rosalind Franklin , W.B. Yeats , Nora Barnacle and several others . He has one sister , Bronwen Maddox , who became a journalist , was Chief Foreign Commentator of The Times and is now Editor and Chief Executive of Prospect Magazine . Maddox enjoyed a privileged life during his childhood and youth , because of his father 's position as editor of Nature , encountering some of the leading scientific thinkers of the day and enjoying dinners with figures such as James Watson and Sir Fred Hoyle . 
 Despite his family 's background in science , Maddox was interested in the humanities while he attended Westminster School , an independent boys ' school in London . Maddox went on to study English literature at Harvard University and graduated in 1992 . He published his only article in the student newspaper The Harvard Crimson during his senior year . He won the undergraduate Thomas Temple Hoopes Prize for his senior thesis " on the use of adjectives in restaurant menus " titled Maltese : A <unk> Theory of Reading . After graduation Maddox moved from Cambridge , Massachusetts to Moscow — where he worked for three weeks as the English @-@ language editor of a Russian magazine — and then to New York City , where he spent two years working odd jobs , including hand @-@ delivering celebrity invitations to local parties . 
 Maddox 's freelance writing career began in 1994 , when he became a book reviewer for The New York Times Book Review and The Washington Post , where he developed a reputation for writing scathing reviews that would later help him land a job as an editor at Spy magazine . Maddox described his book reviewing style as " pretty vicious " , and quipped that he " was a frustrated , twenty @-@ something guy , sitting in his bedroom venting existential rage on these nasty academics " . His last book review for The Washington Post was in late 1996 ; however , he continued reviewing for The New York Times up until 1998 , contributing only a couple of reviews thereafter . 
 At the beginning of the dot @-@ com boom , Maddox found full @-@ time work at an information technology company , where he worked for a year and a half . 
 = = <unk> of Spy magazine = = 
 In mid @-@ 1996 , Maddox was hired as a senior editor at Spy magazine , a satirical monthly , in New York City . Spy had ceased publication in 1994 but was quickly resuscitated under new ownership by Sussex Publishers Inc . , which reduced the magazine 's frequency from ten to six issues a year . At Spy , Maddox was assisted by deputy editor Adam Lehner , a satirist . In December 1996 , Maddox was promoted to editor @-@ in @-@ chief ; his editorial team included Jared Paul Stern and , beginning in late 1997 , future screenwriter William Monahan . 
 Maddox wanted to turn Spy into a national magazine rather than build on its legacy of covering stories that centered on New York . According to Maddox , two factors motivated the shift of target market . The magazine 's past objects of satire , the " cheesy villains who anointed themselves as targets " in the 1980s , were no longer on the national stage . Meanwhile , the " sins of the ' 90s [ were ] those of a private , quiet cultivation of a sense of purity " , and were harder to expose or ridicule . 
 In early 1998 , Sussex Publishers increased Spy 's frequency from six to nine issues a year in an effort to boost readership and ad pages . Spy 's paid circulation continued to drop during Maddox 's tenure , and in March 1998 , the magazine once again ceased publication . Sussex 's President and CEO John Colman concluded that " [ despite the ] great work by Bruno and his team , there just wasn 't the [ advertiser and consumer ] acceptance that we need to make it financially viable " . Maddox conceded that " a satirical magazine in New York in the late Nineties really had no function " , because " everyone was being very modest and coy " . 
 = = My Little Blue Dress = = 
 In 1999 , Maddox sold the advance rights to his first novel , My Little Blue Dress , to a German publisher based on a five @-@ page fax proposal he sent on the advice of his literary agent John Brockman . Within a week Brockman managed to sell the rights to the novel to publishers in an additional eight countries on the strength of the proposal alone . ( Maddox had not yet written even an initial manuscript . ) 
 My Little Blue Dress was published in 2001 by Viking Press , a Penguin Group imprint . The novel begins as a memoir of a hundred @-@ year @-@ old woman , but several chapters later reveals itself to be a spoof of the genre . The protagonist is a fictional Bruno Maddox who is desperately attempting to create a forgery of an old woman 's memoir in a single night . Several book reviewers avoided spoiling the novel 's satire but others gave away its premise , reasoning that the publisher " reveal [ s ] all on the book jacket anyway " . The novel 's intrigue lies in the mysterious reason compelling the fictional Maddox to forge a memoir . 
 Critics applauded My Little Blue Dress but also expressed some reservations . For example , Salon.com 's Maria Russo cautioned that the novel " is one of those ' don 't try this at home ' literary experiments that could easily have turned into an unreadable , pretentious disaster " , but concluded that Maddox " pulls it off with a kind of fearless pizzazz " . The New York Times ' Emily Barton conceded that " for all its blunders " , Maddox delivers " a winsome and vastly entertaining novel " . 
 In an interview , Maddox praised Bret Easton Ellis 's 1991 novel American Psycho , stating that he drew inspiration from protagonist Patrick Bateman 's long @-@ winded monologues about Phil Collins , restaurants , clothes , and how to remove blood from his carpets . 
 In 2001 , Maddox promoted his first novel on a joint book tour billed as the " Minor Novelists Tour " with his friend William Monahan , another former Spy editor , but it was interrupted by the 9 / 11 attacks . Monahan 's Light House : A Trifle was also published by a Penguin imprint . Several years later , Maddox gave some indication that he was working on a film adaptation of My Little Blue Dress , but it is unknown whether Maddox completed the script . 
 = = Recent essays = = 
 After the publication of My Little Blue Dress in 2001 , Maddox was reportedly working on a second novel set in California , where " everyone 's aspirational and deluded " and the " people are quite happy being waiters and dreaming of stardom " . As of 2009 , however , no manuscript has been forthcoming . 
 Since 2001 , Maddox has written numerous articles for popular magazines , such as the now @-@ defunct GEAR . Published one year after the 11 September 2001 attacks , his essay " Before It Was Real " describes the callousness of the terrorists who flew into the World Trade Center through the experience of playing a flight simulator game . Another example of Maddox 's work is his 2003 profile of Karl <unk> , leader of the Underground Literary Alliance , titled " The Angriest Book Club in America " and published in the fashion magazine BlackBook . <unk> later derided Maddox for distorting the Underground Literary Alliance in his BlackBook essay and summed up the article as " riddled with falsehoods " . 
 In late 2003 , Maddox began to contribute articles regularly to Travel + Leisure . His first article in the magazine was called " The Concorde , R.I.P. " , which chronicled his flight aboard the supersonic Concorde airplane before it was decommissioned ; it was later included in The Best Travel Writing 2005 , the second volume of the annual Travelers ' Tales series . In 2004 Maddox began working as a contributing editor for the American edition of The Week magazine and as of 2007 continues to contribute weekly to the print issue , handling sections including " Main Stories " , " Talking Points " , and " Only in America " . He also reviewed several books for The New York Post in 2004 and 2005 . 
 In 2006 , Maddox began contributing a regular humor column called " Blinded by Science " to Discover magazine . His writing draws upon his childhood exposure to science ; due to his father 's career , his family was immersed in science and he was regularly exposed to scientists at social events . Maddox 's first year 's columns earned him a nod as a finalist in the 2007 National Magazine Awards ' " Columns and Commentary " category . 
 Maddox 's Discover columns are occasionally criticized ; his essay " Fictional Reality " , in particular , has been controversial . Maddox declared science fiction obsolete in his essay " Fictional Reality " and was roundly criticized in the blogosphere , most notably by Scientific American 's J.R. Minkel . Maddox wrote that " fiction — all fiction — finally became obsolete as a delivery system for big ideas " as a result of the " scarcity of foreseeable future " , citing the decline of author Michael Crichton 's work as evidence . Minkel lambasted Maddox and pointed to author Neal Stephenson 's cutting @-@ edge work as proof to the contrary , venturing that " science fiction writers can dictate the future if they have the vim and vision " . 
 One of Maddox 's most recent Discover essays , " The James Watson Affair " , examines comments made by James Watson in an article in London 's Sunday Times which led to Watson 's suspension at the laboratory where he worked and his eventual retirement , and is skeptical of critics who found Watson 's comment about black employees " not that big a deal " yet charged him with racism for his proposition on black African intelligence ; in conclusion , Maddox derides the views held by several critics , stating that in comparison to Watson 's statements , " the most ignorant and hurtful idea of all , of course , is that the entire topic of race and genes and intelligence is off @-@ limits to all right @-@ thinking , compassionate people , just on principle " , which pejoratively assumes " that some races are innately and <unk> much less intelligent than others " . Maddox 's essay , although published in the March 2008 printed edition of Discover , has not been published online . 
 = = Style = = 
 Satire is evident in much of Maddox 's work , from his years as editor @-@ in @-@ chief for Spy magazine to his numerous articles in Travel + Leisure , and his novel My Little Blue Dress . Maddox 's satirical tendencies extend to his interviews and publicity materials . In one interview he made the preposterous claim that he once " spent 2 days being a personal assistant to a mafia boss in New York " . Maddox 's Penguin biography skewers his own career , claiming he " elevated [ Spy ] to within spitting distance of its former glory , then accidentally bankrupted it after two short years " , which led The Harvard Crimson , his alma mater 's student newspaper , to speculate that " Maddox himself had a hand in writing " it . Maddox 's popular science columns for Discover magazine impart his own personal views on science with a markedly humorous and skeptical bent . 
 = = Selected bibliography = = 
 Harvard University Thesis 
 — ( 1992 ) . Maltese : A <unk> Theory of Reading . Thesis ( A.B. , Honors in English and American Literature and Language ) — Harvard University , 1992 @.@ pp. 120 pages . 
 The Harvard Crimson 
 — ( 15 February 1991 ) . " Cabot Turns Trash Into Art : Superintendent Urges Residents on to <unk> Laurels " . The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 25 July 2007 . 
 Novel 
 — ( 2001 ) . My Little Blue Dress : A Novel . New York : Viking . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 670 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 GEAR magazine 
 — ( September 2002 ) . " Before It Was Real " . GEAR magazine . Archived from the original on 26 October 2009 . Retrieved 13 April 2007 . 
 BlackBook magazine 
 — . " The Angriest Book Club in America " , BlackBook magazine , Fall 2003 , no . 29 , Protest Issue , p . 186 ( also reprinted in the BlackBook anthology The revolution will be accessorized ) . 
 — ( 3 February 2008 ) . " Does Chloë Ever Bare All ? " . BlackBook magazine . 
 Travel + Leisure magazine 
 — ( October 2003 ) . " The Concorde , R.I.P. " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( March 2004 ) . " Just Back from Barbados : John Edward , psychic " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( August 2004 ) . " Just Back From the Isle of Man : Stephen Fry " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( December 2004 ) . " A Grown @-@ up 's Christmas in Wales " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( May 2005 ) . " Smoke Across the Water " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( August 2005 ) . " Tangerine Dreams " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( June 2006 ) . " A Room of One 's Own " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( September 2006 ) . " Rent Your Own Island " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( June 2007 ) . " The Suspicious Package " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( August 2007 ) . " <unk> Bangalore " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( April 2009 ) . " Hunter Wellington Rain Boots " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( April 2009 ) . " Europe 's Popular <unk> " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( June 2009 ) . " Stay with Royalty in British Castles " . Travel + Leisure . 
 — ( July 2010 ) . " The Allure of Restaurant Menus " . Travel + Leisure . 
 Discover magazine 
 " Blinded by Science " columns 
 — ( 27 April 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : In praise of the bolder world of the first Internet " . Discover . 
 — ( 29 May 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : What Were We Thinking ? " . Discover . 
 — ( 25 June 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : Nightmare of Divided Loyalties " . Discover . 
 — ( 12 July 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : The Way of All Flesh " . Discover . 
 — ( 1 August 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : The Last Days of Gossip " . Discover . 
 — ( 1 September 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : Hawking 's Exit Strategy " . Discover . 
 — ( 11 October 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : Who 's Freaky Now ? " . Discover . 
 — ( 3 November 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : Troubled in Twin Town " . Discover . 
 — ( 30 November 2006 ) . " Blinded by Science : Birding Brains " . Discover . 
 — ( 16 January 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : The Real Reason We Can 't Find bin Laden " . Discover . 
 — ( 12 February 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : Stuck in Creationism " . Discover . 
 — ( 12 March 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : The New Hypnosis " . Discover . 
 — ( 12 April 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : Addicted to Beef " . Discover . 
 — ( 23 May 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : IQ Is Dumb " . Discover . 
 — ( 1 June 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : The Math Behind Beauty " . Discover . 
 — ( 21 June 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : The Make @-@ Believe Mars " . Discover . 
 — ( 20 July 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : Fictional Reality " . Discover . 
 — ( 27 September 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : Google Taught Me How to Cut My Own Hair " . Discover . 
 — ( 11 October 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : Quasars Say Earth Is 1 / 2 a Pinkie Smaller " . Discover . 
 — ( 6 November 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : A Modest Proposal for Science : End It , Don 't Mend It " . Discover . 
 — ( 27 December 2007 ) . " Blinded by Science : The Science At the Very Soul of Cooking " . Discover . Archived from the original on 28 December 2007 . 
 — ( 22 February 2008 ) . " Blinded by Science : <unk> the Bogus Insomnia ' Epidemic ' " . Discover . 
 — ( March 2008 ) . " Blinded by Science : The James Watson affair has this writer wondering : Who are the real racists out there ? " . Discover . ( not available online ) 
 — ( 24 April 2008 ) . " Blinded by Science : Three Words That Could Overthrow Physics : ' What Is Magnetism ? ' " . Discover . 
 Post- " Blinded by Science " articles 
 — ( 22 July 2009 ) . " Why Ghost Hunters Is the Best Science Show on TV " . Discover . 
 — ( 27 October 2009 ) . " Darwin 's Great Blunder — and Why It Was Good for the World " . Discover . 
 — ( 3 August 2010 ) . " Humanity 's High Hopes for Our Robotic Offspring " . Discover . 
 GQ magazine 
 — ( February 2010 ) . " I Mourn for Porn " . GQ magazine. pp. 37 – 38 . Retrieved 2 February 2010 . 
 — ( June 2010 ) . " Have You Used the Huckabee Technique ? " . GQ magazine. p . 136 . Retrieved 27 May 2010 . 
 = Agnez Mo = 
 Agnes Monica Muljoto known by her stage name Agnez Mo ( born 1 July 1986 ) , is an Indonesian singer @-@ songwriter and actress . Born in Jakarta , she started her career in the entertainment industry at the age of six as a child singer . She has recorded three children 's albums and became a presenter of several children 's television programs . In 2003 , Mo released her first adult album entitled And the Story Goes , which catapulted her name back in the Indonesian music industry . Mo 's success in homeland encouraged her to set a target to get a career in the international music scene . On the second album released in 2005 , Whaddup A .. ' ? ! , she collaborated with American singer Keith Martin for single " I 'll Light a Candle " . Mo also took part in two Taiwanese drama series , The Hospital and Romance In The White House . 
 Mo won the award two years in a row for her performances in the Asia Song Festival in Seoul , South Korea , in 2008 and 2009 . With her third album , Sacredly Agnezious ( 2009 ) , she began to get involved as producer and songwriter . In 2010 , she was appointed as a judge on the talent show , Indonesian Idol . She signed a recording deal with The Cherry Party , a label ventured with Sony Music Entertainment . Mo has released two international singles , " Coke Bottle " ( featuring Timbaland and T.I. ) and " Boy Magnet " . 
 In addition to commercial success , Mo is a singer with the most number of awards in Indonesia . She has won dozens of trophies , including 17 Anugerah Musik Indonesia , 8 Panasonic Awards , 5 Nickelodeon Indonesia Kids ' Choice Awards , and 4 MTV Indonesia Awards . She achieved a Best Asian Artist Award on the 2012 Mnet Asian Music Awards in South Korea . In addition , she has been trusted to be anti @-@ drug ambassador in Asia as well as the ambassador of MTV EXIT in combating human trafficking . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Childhood and early career = = = 
 Agnes Monica Muljoto was born in Jakarta , Indonesia , to a family of Chinese ancestry . She is the youngest child of Jenny <unk> , a former table tennis player , and Ricky Muljoto , a former basketball player . Her older brother , Steve Muljoto , is her manager . She attended <unk> elementary school and Pelita Harapan junior / senior high school . Her talent in the performing arts has already seen in her childhood , especially in singing . She sang in church and was also sent to vocal courses . 
 Using Agnes Monica as her stage name , she entered the entertainment industry in 1992 with her first children 's album , Si <unk> . In 1995 , she released her second children 's album , Yess ! , which includes a duet with fellow Indonesian child singer , <unk> <unk> . Her last children 's album , Bala @-@ Bala , was released the following year . Agnes also became the host for several children 's programs , including Video Anak <unk> ( <unk> ) on <unk> , <unk> @-@ <unk> on RCTI , and Diva Romeo on Trans TV . She was awarded " Most Favorite Presenter of Children 's Program " at the Panasonic Awards in 1999 and 2000 for <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Agnes began acting as a teenager . Her first two roles were on the soap operas : Lupus <unk> and Mr. Hologram in 1999 . The next year , she starred in the TV series , Pernikahan Dini , which served as a turning point in her career by transforming her image from that of a child artist to one of a teenage artist . The production was well received by audiences , and she received the " Favorite Actress " award at the 2001 and 2002 Panasonic Awards , as well as the " Famous Actress " award at the 2002 SCTV Awards . In 2002 , Mo starred in three soap operas : <unk> Pertama , <unk> Daku Kau Ku <unk> , and Amanda . Due to her popularity , she became the highest @-@ paid teenage artist in Indonesia . 
 Agnes started her comeback in music industry with Melly Goeslaw penned songs " Pernikahan Dini " and " <unk> Hati " for the soundtrack of Pernikahan Dini . Both songs were featured on the 2001 compilation album , Love Theme . Agnes signed a record deal with Aquarius Musikindo and began working on her teen breakthrough album . She also collaborated with the Indonesian senior singer , Yana Julio , in the song " Awan dan Ombak " for his 2002 studio album , Jumpa Lagi . 
 = = = 2003 – 2006 : And The Story Goes , TV series , and Whaddup A .. ' ? ! = = = 
 On 8 October 2003 , Agnes released her first adult album , And the Story Goes , in which she worked with several famed Indonesian producers and songwriters , including Ahmad Dhani , Melly Goeslaw , and Titi DJ . The album production took a year and a half , including the audition process for the dancers . According to her record label , Aquarius Musikindo , the album sold 35 @,@ 000 copies before its official release . It was later certified double platinum after selling more than 300 @,@ 000 copies . Four singles were released from the album : " Bilang Saja " , " Indah " , " <unk> " and " Cinta Mati " ( featuring Ahmad Dhani ) . The album received ten nominations at the 2004 Anugerah Musik Indonesia — the highest music awards in Indonesia . She won three awards for " Best Pop Female Solo Artist " , " Best Dance / Techno Production Work " , and " Best Pop Duo / Group " for her duet with Dhani . She also won " Best Female Newcomer Artist " at the 2004 Anugerah Planet Muzik in Singapore . 
 In addition to promoting her debut album , Agnes also starred in several TV series during this time , playing the lead role in three : <unk> <unk> , Bunga Perawan , and <unk> . She won " Favorite Actress " at the 2003 Panasonic Awards and " Famous Actress " at 2004 SCTV Awards . A special episode of <unk> <unk> was shot on location in various popular tourist attractions around Melbourne , Australia . A local Latin @-@ Australian actor Maurice Ruiz was hired as a supporting actor to Agnes for the role as director to her music video during the episode . Agnez had the pleasure of filming in and visiting places like the Sovereign Hill gold mine in Ballarat , Puffing Billy Railway , a vintage steam train that runs through the Dandenong Ranges , as well as the Great Ocean Road an Australian Heritage Listed coastal road renowned for featuring The Twelve Apostles it is considered one of the world 's most scenic drives . 
 Agnes launched her second studio album , Whaddup A .. ' ? ! , on 10 December 2005 . It featured five singles : " Bukan <unk> Lagi " , " <unk> <unk> " , " Tak Ada Logika " , " Cinta Di Ujung Jalan " , and " Tak <unk> " . In addition to working with Indonesian musicians , such as Melly Goeslaw , Andi <unk> , and Erwin Gutawa , she also collaborated with American singer @-@ songwriter , Keith Martin . Martin wrote two English songs for the album , including the duet " I 'll Light a Candle " . To promote the album , Agnes held a concert tour known as <unk> in four Indonesian cities : Bandar Lampung , Surabaya , Bandung , and Makassar . 
 The album was commercially successful and she won two 2006 Anugerah Musik Indonesia for " Best Pop Female Solo Artist " and " Best R & B Production Work " . She also won the " Most Favorite Female " award at the 2006 MTV Indonesia Awards . She was nominated for " Favorite Artist Indonesia " award at the 2005 MTV Asia Awards ( beaten by Peterpan ) , but she grabs the youngest artist of all nominees in Asian category . Selling more than 450 @,@ 000 copies , the album was one of the top @-@ selling albums of 2006 and was certified triple platinum . 
 In 2005 , Agnes appeared in the Taiwanese drama , The Hospital , co @-@ starring with Jerry Yan , a member of the Taiwanese boyband , F4 . She also appeared with Peter Ho in several episodes of the Taiwanese drama , Romance in the White House , and starred in two Indonesian soap operas : Ku T 'lah Jatuh Cinta and Pink , both televised on <unk> . In 2006 , she starred in the RCTI soap opera , Kawin Muda . She also decided to take a break from her study in Pelita Harapan University that year to focus on her entertainment career . 
 = = = 2007 – 2010 : Sacredly Agnezious and Indonesian Idol = = = 
 In early 2007 , Agnes was appointed by the Drug Enforcement Administration ( DEA ) and the International Drug Enforcement Conference ( <unk> ) Far East Region as an Asian anti @-@ drug ambassador . On 15 May 2007 , she was an opening act for American R & B group , Boyz II Men , at a concert in <unk> <unk> , Jakarta , and on 23 June of that year , she held her first concert at Stadium Negara in Kuala Lumpur , Malaysia . She also guest starred in the finale of Asian Idol on 16 December 2007 , and performed the song " Get Up " . 
 In 2008 , Agnes began working on her third studio album . She released the first single , " <unk> " , earlier than she had planned . It became her best @-@ selling single , with sales of three million ringback tone downloads within nine months . The song received the " Most Favorite Female " award at the 2008 MTV Indonesia Awards and the " Best Female Solo Pop Artist " award at the 2009 Anugerah Musik Indonesia . In September 2008 , she released the second single , " Godai Aku Lagi " , which she wrote herself . She also released a mini album containing the two singles . That same year , she starred in two RCTI soap operas , <unk> and Kawin <unk> . 
 On 4 October 2008 , Agnes was invited as the Indonesian representative at the Asia Song Festival in Seoul , South Korea . She performed with 24 artists from 12 Asian countries at the Seoul World Cup Stadium . The event was broadcast to 30 countries . She performed two songs from her upcoming album , " Godai Aku Lagi " and " Shake It Off " . During the performance , she incorporated elements of Indonesian traditional dance from Bali . Her performance received positive responses from the Korean media and won the committee 's " Best Asian Artist Award " . The following year , she was invited again alongside 14 Asian artists and performed three songs : " Shake It Off " , " Temperature " , and Michael Jackson 's song , " Heal the World " . As was the case with her previous performance , Agnes received good reviews and earned the " Best Asian Artist Award " . 
 Agnes launched her third studio album on 1 April 2009 , Sacredly Agnezious . This time , she was involved more in the album production . She worked with the renowned musicians : Erwin Gutawa , <unk> , Pay , and DJ <unk> . She also acted as producer and songwriter . In addition to " <unk> " and " Godai Aku Lagi " , the album yielded two more singles : " <unk> " and " <unk> – <unk> " . At the 2010 Anugerah Musik Indonesia , she won three awards : " Best Pop Album " , " Best Female Pop Solo Artist " , and " Best of the Best Album " . On 23 May 2009 , she appeared as a guest star at the " Festival of Life " in Garuda <unk> Kencana , Bali . The celebration commemorated the 50 @-@ year anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Indonesia and Japan . 
 In 2010 , Agnes joined the judging panel of the season 6 of Indonesian Idol . That year , she was also appointed as an ambassador of the MTV EXIT ( End Exploitation and Trafficking ) organization , which combats human trafficking . In addition to her role as a spokesperson of MTV Exit Indonesia , she also performed at concerts in Surabaya and Jakarta . In late 2010 , Agnes was chosen as an international red carpet host for the annual American Music Awards On 21 November 2010 at the Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles . Several months after that appearance , she announced that she had signed to Sony / ATV Music Publishing and was working on her international debut in London and Los Angeles . 
 = = = 2011 – 2014 : Agnez Mo = = = 
 In early 2011 , Agnes recorded a duet version of " Said I Loved You ... But I Lied " with American singer Michael Bolton , for the Asian edition of his compilation album , Gems : The Duets Album . Her slogan " Dream , Believe , and Make it Happen " was used in a 2011 cultural conference to inspire young people organized by the US Embassy in Jakarta . She was chosen to perform for the 26th SEA Games 2011 Opening Ceremony , with KC Concepcion from the Philippines and the Malaysian singer , Jaclyn Victor . Their performance of " Together We Will Shine " was the highlight of the event . 
 Agnes ended her 10 @-@ year relationship with label Aquarius Musikindo by releasing her first greatest hits album , Agnes Is My Name , on 2 February 2011 . The album compiled ten hit singles of the past decade with two new songs , " Karena Ku <unk> " and " Paralyzed " . The album was sold via Indonesian chains of fast @-@ food restaurant KFC ( Kentucky Fried Chicken ) , where the CD was bundled with chicken package purchase . This marketing strategy boosted the album sales to one million copies within three months , earning her the Million Award . She followed it with two non @-@ album singles , " Rindu " and " Muda ( Le O Le O ) " ; the later was free to download for <unk> subscribers . 
 Agnes won Anugerah Musik Indonesia for Best Female Pop Artist category for two consecutive years , in 2011 with " Karena Ku <unk> " and in 2012 with " Paralyzed " . She was among the Worldwide Acts Asia Pacific nominees for the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards . In March 2012 , she was nominated for Favorite Asian Act at the 2012 <unk> Kids ' Choice Awards . Still in the same year , she won the Mnet Asian Music Awards for Best Asian Artist from Indonesia and the Shorty Awards for The Shorty Vox Populi Award . 
 Agnes starred in soap operas <unk> <unk> ( 2010 ) , Marisa ( 2011 ) and <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 2012 ) . In 2012 , Agnes returned as one of the judges for the season 7 of Indonesian Idol . The next year , she became a judge on NET 's talent show named after her , Nez Academy . In December 2012 , she gave the opening and closing speeches at UN Global Youth Forum and performed her unreleased song " Show a Little Love " with American rapper Timbaland . They also performed the song at the pre @-@ Grammy launch party in Los Angeles . 
 On 1 June 2013 , she released her fourth studio album , Agnez Mo , which introduced her new stage name instead of ' Agnes Monica ' . Produced by <unk> <unk> , it is her first album where she co @-@ wrote all the songs . The album was originally recorded as her demo which was sent out to record labels in the United States in order to secure a deal for her international debut . Although all songs were composed in English , the album was released for Indonesian market only . It was released digitally via <unk> Music ( bundled with local coffee brand , <unk> <unk> Api ) on June 2013 . Two months later , the album was released physically via <unk> . She also released her first @-@ ever " eau de perfume " line , Rêve , meaning " Dream " in French . 
 Mo landed her US record deal with The Cherry Party , a label ventured with Sony Music Entertainment . Her debut international single , " Coke Bottle " featuring Timbaland and T.I. , premiered in September 2013 in a hip hop radio station in Los Angeles , Power 106 FM . " Coke Bottle " was released digitally on 8 April 2014 , and was serviced to urban radio stations in the United States on 20 April . Despite being voted as MTV Iggy 's Song of the Summer , " Coke Bottle " failed to enter any Billboard charts . In November 2014 , it was announced that Mo joined the Wright Entertainment Group , a management owned by Johnny Wright who has handled some of the big names in the US entertainment industry . She embarked on the Keep Walking Tour in several cities across Indonesia . The tour was sponsored by whisky brand Johnnie Walker . 
 = = = 2015 – present : Upcoming album and The Voice Indonesia = = = 
 Mo produced two projects in Indonesia , The Freaks and Chloe X. The Freaks is a singing group which contains Indonesian young stars . The album which titled THE <unk> too , will contain 8 songs consisting of the group , duo , and solo . The first single from their collaboration titled " Jatuh Cinta Tak Ada Logika " is a mash @-@ up of two songs titled " Ku T 'lah Jatuh Cinta " and " Tak Ada Logika " . Besides The Freaks , Mo also produced her niece named Chloe X and wrote the single , " Vroom Vroom " . 
 On 20 September 2015 , Mo , together with The Wahid Institute and thousands of prominent figures and supporters , together read the Declaration of Peace Movement which titled the ' Oath of Love ' . This was held at Balai Kota Jakarta , as a celebration of International Peace Day . On 15 October 2015 , Mo released a single , entitled " I # AM Generation Of Love " which premiered in 250 radio in Indonesia . This song is a continuation of the Oath of Love campaign . On 17 October 2015 , Mo re @-@ launched her clothing line named <unk> . The brand name is taken from her " childhood nickname " , given by her father . 
 On 13 November 2015 , Mo released her second international single , " Boy Magnet " . It is available as a digital EP on iTunes , featuring remixes by John Dish , Xavi Alfaro , Hector Fonseca and Tommy Love . Mo 's international debut album is slated for release in early 2016 under The Cherry Party . 
 In 2016 , Agnez Mo joined the coaching panel of the season 2 of The Voice Indonesia . 
 On 29 April 2016 , Agnez Mo joined the coaching panel of The Voice Kids Indonesia with <unk> Romeo and <unk> . 
 = = Artistry = = 
 Mo has been noted as a powerful soprano with a vocal range spanning four octaves . Agnes ' songs can be classified as pop , R & B , or hip @-@ hop . She has stated that Aretha Franklin , Madonna , Michael Jackson , Fantasia , Brandy Norwood , Lauryn Hill , Christina Aguilera and Beyoncé have influenced her music . In addition to her singing skills , she is also known as a strong dancer and actress . She is the only Indonesian soloist with a personal dance group , known as <unk> . They auditioned during the development of her first album in 2003 . She has also written some of her songs and produced her own music videos . She has been described as a perfectionist with a variety of talents by Indonesian commentators . 
 Throughout her career , she has often been controversial in Indonesia . When she was a teenager , her frequent comments about her goal to break into the international market was viewed by some as a pompous proclamation . In 2010 , however , she began work on a debut English studio album . Consequently , her slogan " Dream , Believe , and Make it Happen " was used in a 2011 cultural conference to inspire young people organized by the US Embassy in Jakarta . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 Mo has become the most @-@ awarded Indonesian singer . Notable awards she has won , including 17 Anugerah Musik Indonesia , 8 Panasonic Awards , 5 Nickelodeon Indonesia Kids ' Choice Awards , and 4 MTV Indonesia Awards . She has also received many international awards , including 1 Anugerah Planet Muzik , 3 Asia Song Festival , 7 <unk> Music Awards , 1 Mnet Asian Music Awards , 1 Shorty Awards , 3 Social Star Awards , and 1 World Music Awards . For her contribution and support to Indonesian music , she was given the 2011 <unk> Bhakti Musik Indonesia ( <unk> ) award from The Minister of Culture and Tourism , and Association of Indonesian Singers , Songwriters and Music Record Producers . 
 = = Relationships and personal life = = 
 Mo is closed about her personal relationships and she often has said that having a boyfriend is not her priority in life . She also stated that personal relationships should remain private . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 Mo has conducted fundraising activities for victims of the 2004 Tsunami in Aceh and the 2006 earthquake in Java . In 2009 , Agnes visited Situ <unk> , where a dam failure had caused flooding . She also donated a sum of money to relief efforts and performed several of her songs for the victims . Agnes also helped to raise over Rp 400 million ( approx . US $ 44 @,@ 000 as of December 2011 ) for Persis , an association football team based in Surakarta , through a benefit concert held at the Diamond Convention Center in Surakarta . In 2011 , she participated at The Save A Teen Charity Concert in Jakarta , a benefit concert to raise money to help teenagers who have dropped out of school . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Si <unk> ( 1992 ) 
 Yess ! ( 1995 ) 
 Bala @-@ Bala ( 1998 ) 
 And the Story Goes ( 2003 ) 
 Whaddup A .. ' ? ! ( 2005 ) 
 Sacredly Agnezious ( 2009 ) 
 Agnez Mo ( 2013 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = = Cites sources = = 
 = Catholic Church = 
 The Catholic Church , also known as the Roman Catholic Church , is the largest Christian church , with more than 1 @.@ 27 billion members . As one of the oldest religious institutions in the world , it has played a prominent role in the history of Western civilisation . Headed by the Bishop of Rome , known as the Pope , its doctrines are summarised in the Nicene Creed . The Catholic Church is notable within Western Christianity for its sacred tradition and seven sacraments . 
 The Catholic Church teaches that it is the one true church founded by Jesus Christ , that its bishops are the successors of Christ 's apostles , and that the Pope is the successor to Saint Peter . The Catholic Church maintains that the doctrine on faith and morals that it declares as definitive is infallible . The Latin Church , the Eastern Catholic Churches and institutes such as the Jesuits , mendicant orders and enclosed monastic orders , reflect a variety of theological emphases in the Church . 
 Of the seven sacraments , the principal one is the Eucharist , celebrated liturgically in the Mass . The church teaches that through consecration by a priest the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ . The Catholic Church practises closed communion , with only baptised members in a state of grace ordinarily permitted to receive the Eucharist . 
 Mary is venerated in the Catholic Church as Queen of Heaven and honoured in numerous Marian devotions . The Catholic Church has defined four Marian dogmas : the Immaculate Conception , the dogma that Mary was conceived without original sin ; her status , as the mother of Jesus , of Mother of God ; her perpetual virginity ; and her bodily assumption into Heaven at the end of her earthly life . 
 Catholic spiritual teaching includes spreading the Gospel while Catholic social teaching emphasises support for the sick , the poor and the afflicted through the corporal works of mercy . The Catholic Church is the largest non @-@ government provider of education and medical services in the world . 
 From the late 20th century , the Catholic Church has been criticised for its doctrines on sexuality , its refusal to ordain women and its handling of sexual abuse cases . 
 = = Name = = 
 The word catholic is derived from the Greek word <unk> ( katholikos ) , which means " universal " . <unk> is associated with the adverb <unk> ( <unk> ) , a contraction of the phrase <unk> ' <unk> ( <unk> ' <unk> ) , which means " according to the whole " . 
 Catholic was first used to describe the church in the early 2nd century . The first known use of the phrase " the catholic church " ( he <unk> <unk> ) occurred in the letter from Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the <unk> , written about 110 AD . In the Catechetical Discourses of Saint Cyril of Jerusalem ( circa 350 ) , the name " Catholic Church " was used to distinguish it from other groups that also call themselves the church . 
 Since the East – West Schism of 1054 , the Eastern Church has taken the adjective " Orthodox " as its distinctive epithet , and the Western Church in communion with the Holy See has similarly taken " Catholic " , keeping that description also after the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century , when those that ceased to be in communion became known as Protestants . 
 The name " Catholic Church " is the most common designation used in official church documents . It is also the name which Pope Paul VI used when signing documents of the Second Vatican Council . However , documents produced both by the Holy See and by certain national episcopal conferences occasionally refer to the Church as the Roman Catholic Church . The Catechism of Pope Pius X , published in 1908 , also used the term " Roman " to distinguish the Catholic Church from other Christian communities which are not in full communion with the Holy See . 
 = = Organisation = = 
 The leadership of the Catholic Church is hierarchical , led by clergy who have received the sacrament of Holy Orders who are given formal jurisdictions of governance within the church . There are three levels of clergy , the episcopate ( bishops ) , whose members are given a geographical jurisdiction called a diocese or eparchy ; the presbyterate ( priests ) , who serve the bishops or other superiors , often by leading local parishes ; and the diaconate ( deacons ) , who serve the bishops and priests in a variety of ministerial roles . Ultimately leading the entire Catholic Church is the Bishop of Rome , commonly called the Pope , whose jurisdiction is called the Holy See . In parallel to the diocesan structure are a variety of religious institutes that function autonomously , often subject only to the authority of the Pope , though sometimes subject to the local bishop . Most religious institutes only have male or female members but some have both . Additionally , lay members aid many liturgical functions during worship services . 
 = = = Papacy , Holy See and Roman Curia = = = 
 The hierarchy of the Catholic Church is headed by the Bishop of Rome , known as the Pope ( Latin : papa ; " father " ) , who is the leader of the worldwide Catholic Church composed of the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches in full communion with the see of Rome . The current Pope , Francis , was elected on 13 March 2013 by papal conclave . 
 The office of the Pope is known as the papacy . The Catholic Church holds that Christ instituted the papacy upon giving the keys of Heaven to Saint Peter . His ecclesiastical jurisdiction is called the " Holy See " ( Sancta <unk> in Latin ) , or the " Apostolic See " ( meaning the see of the apostle Peter ) . Directly serving the Pope is the Roman Curia , the central governing body that administers the day @-@ to @-@ day business of the Catholic Church . The Pope is also Sovereign of Vatican City State , a small city @-@ state entirely <unk> within the city of Rome , which is an entity distinct from the Holy See . It is as head of the Holy See , not as head of Vatican City State , that the Pope receives ambassadors of states and sends them his own diplomatic representatives . 
 The position of cardinal is a rank of honour bestowed by popes on certain clergy , such as leaders within the Roman Curia , bishops serving in major cities and distinguished theologians . For advice and assistance in governing , the pope may turn to the College of Cardinals . 
 Following the death or resignation of a pope , members of the College of Cardinals who are under age 80 meet in a papal conclave to elect a successor . Although the conclave may elect any male Catholic as Pope , since 1389 only cardinals have been elected . 
 = = = Canon law = = = 
 The canon law of the Catholic Church is the system of laws and legal principles made and enforced by the hierarchical authorities to regulate the church 's external organisation and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics towards the church 's mission . In the Catholic Church , universal positive ecclesiastical laws , based upon either immutable divine and natural law , or changeable circumstantial and merely positive law , derive formal authority and promulgation from the office of pope who , as Supreme Pontiff , possesses the totality of legislative , executive and judicial power in his person . It has all the ordinary elements of a mature legal system : laws , courts , lawyers , judges , a fully articulated legal code , principles of legal interpretation and coercive penalties that are limited to moral coercion . 
 Canon law concerns the Catholic Church 's life and organisation and is distinct from civil law . In its own field it gives force to civil law only by specific enactment in matters such as the guardianship of minors . Similarly , civil law may give force in its field to canon law , but only by specific enactment , as with regard to canonical marriages . Currently , the 1983 Code of Canon Law is in effect primarily for the Latin Church . The distinct 1990 Code of Canons for the Eastern Churches ( <unk> , after the Latin initials ) applies to the autonomous Eastern Catholic Churches . 
 = = = Particular churches sui iuris = = = 
 The Catholic Church is made up of 24 autonomous particular churches , also known by the term " churches sui iuris " ( Latin : " of one 's own right " ) , each of which accepts the supreme authority of the Bishop of Rome on matters of doctrine . These churches are communities of Catholic Christians whose forms of worship reflect different historical and cultural influences rather than differences in doctrine . In general , each sui iuris church is headed by a patriarch or high @-@ ranking bishop , and has a degree of self @-@ governance over the particulars of its internal organisation , liturgical rites , liturgical calendar and other aspects of its spirituality . 
 The largest by far of the particular churches is the Latin Church , which reports over one billion members . The Latin Church is governed by the pope and the diocesan bishops directly appointed by him . It developed in southern Europe and North Africa , and spread throughout Western , Central and Northern Europe , before expanding to the rest of the world . The Latin Church is part of Western Christianity , a heritage of certain beliefs and customs originating in various European countries , some of which are inherited by many Christian denominations that trace their origins to the Protestant Reformation . 
 Relatively small in terms of adherents compared to the Latin Church , but important to the overall structure of the Church , are the 23 self @-@ governing Eastern Catholic Churches with a combined membership of 17 @.@ 3 million as of 2010 . The Eastern Catholic Churches follow the traditions and spirituality of Eastern Christianity and are composed of Eastern Christians who have always remained in full communion with the Catholic Church or who have chosen to reenter full communion in the centuries following the East – West Schism and earlier divisions . Some Eastern Catholic Churches are governed by a patriarch who is elected by the synod of the bishops of that church , others are headed by a major archbishop , others are under a metropolitan , and others are organised as individual eparchies . The Roman Curia has a specific department , the Congregation for the Oriental Churches , to maintain relations with them . The Pope does not generally appoint bishops or clergy in the Eastern Catholic Churches , deferring to their internal governance structures , but may intervene if he feels it necessary . 
 = = = Dioceses , parishes and religious institutes = = = 
 Individual countries , regions , or major cities are served by particular churches known as dioceses or eparchies , each overseen by a bishop . Each diocese is united with one of the worldwide sui iuris particular churches such as the Latin Church or one of the Eastern Catholic churches . In 2008 , the Catholic Church had 2 @,@ 795 dioceses . The bishops in a particular country are members of a national or regional episcopal conference . 
 Dioceses are divided into parishes , each with one or more priests , deacons or lay <unk> ministers . Parishes are responsible for the day to day celebration of the sacraments and pastoral care of the laity . 
 In the Latin Church , Catholic men may serve as deacons or priests by receiving sacramental ordination . Men and women may serve as extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion , as readers ( lectors ) ; or as altar servers . Historically , boys and men have only been permitted to serve as altar servers ; however since the 1990s , girls and women have also been permitted . 
 Ordained Catholics , as well as members of the laity , may enter into consecrated life either on an individual basis , as a hermit or consecrated virgin , or by joining an institute of consecrated life ( a religious institute or a secular institute ) in which to take vows confirming their desire to follow the three evangelical counsels of chastity , poverty and obedience . Examples of institutes of consecrated life are the Benedictines , the Carmelites , the Dominicans , the Franciscans , the Missionaries of Charity , the Legionaries of Christ and the Sisters of Mercy . 
 " Religious institutes " is a modern term encompassing both " religious orders " and " religious congregations " which were once distinguished in canon law . The terms " religious order " and " religious institute " tend to be used as synonyms colloquially . 
 = = = Membership = = = 
 Church membership in 2013 was 1 @.@ 254 billion , which is 17 @.@ 7 % of the world population , an increase from 437 million in 1950 and 654 million in 1970 . Since 2010 , the rate of increase was 1 @.@ 5 % with a 2 @.@ 3 % increase in Africa and a 0 @.@ 3 % increase in the Americas and Europe . 48 @.@ 8 % of Catholics live in the Americas , 23 @.@ 5 % in Europe , 16 @.@ 0 % in Africa , 10 @.@ 9 % in Asia and 0 @.@ 8 % in Oceania . Catholics represent about half of all Christians . 
 In 2011 , the Catholic Church had 413 @,@ 418 priests . The main growth areas have been Asia and Africa , with 39 % and 32 % increases respectively since 2000 , while the numbers were steady in the Americas and dropped by 9 % in Europe . In 2006 , members of consecrated life totalled 945 @,@ 210 ; 743 @,@ 200 of whom were female . As of 2009 , there were approximately 5 @,@ 100 bishops in the Latin and Eastern churches . 
 = = Doctrine = = 
 Catholic doctrine has developed over the centuries , reflecting direct teachings of early Christians , formal definitions of heretical and orthodox beliefs by ecumenical councils and in papal bulls , and theological debate by scholars . The Church believes that it is continually guided by the Holy Spirit as it discerns new theological issues and is protected infallibly from falling into doctrinal error when a firm decision on an issue is reached . 
 It teaches that revelation has one common source , God , and two distinct modes of transmission : Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition , and that these are authentically interpreted by the Magisterium . Sacred Scripture consists of the 73 books of the Catholic Bible , consisting of 46 Old Testament and 27 New Testament writings . Sacred Tradition consists of those teachings believed by the Church to have been handed down since the time of the Apostles . Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition are collectively known as the " deposit of faith " ( <unk> fidei ) . These are in turn interpreted by the Magisterium ( from magister , Latin for " teacher " ) , the Church 's teaching authority , which is exercised by the Pope and the College of Bishops in union with the Pope , the bishop of Rome . Catholic doctrine is authoritatively summarised in the Catechism of the Catholic Church , published by the Holy See . 
 = = = Nature of God = = = 
 The Catholic Church holds that there is one eternal God , who exists as a <unk> ( " mutual indwelling " ) of three <unk> , or " persons " : God the Father ; God the Son ; and God the Holy Spirit , which together are called the " Holy Trinity " . 
 Catholics believe that Jesus Christ is the " Second Person " of the Trinity , God the Son . In an event known as the Incarnation , through the power of the Holy Spirit , God became united with human nature through the conception of Christ in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary . Christ , therefore , is understood as being both fully divine and fully human , including possessing a human soul . It is taught that Christ 's mission on earth included giving people his teachings and providing his example for them to follow as recorded in the four Gospels . Jesus is believed to have remained sinless while on earth , and to have allowed himself to be unjustly executed by crucifixion , as sacrifice of himself to reconcile humanity to God ; this reconciliation is known as the Paschal Mystery . The Greek term " Christ " and the Hebrew " Messiah " both mean " anointed one " , referring to the Christian belief that Jesus ' death and resurrection are the fulfilment of the Old Testament 's messianic prophecies . 
 The Catholic Church teaches dogmatically that " the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from the Father and the Son , not as from two principles but as from one single principle " . It holds that the Father , as the " principle without principle " , is the first origin of the Spirit , but also that he , as Father of the only Son , is with the Son the single principle from which the Spirit proceeds . This belief is expressed in the Filioque clause which was added to the Latin version of the Nicene Creed of 381 but not included in the Greek versions of the creed used in Eastern Christianity . 
 = = = Nature of the church = = = 
 The Catholic Church teaches that it is the " one true church " , " the universal sacrament of salvation for the human race " , and " the one true religion " . According to the Catechism , the Catholic Church is further described in the Nicene Creed as the " one , holy , catholic , and apostolic Church " . These are collectively known as the Four Marks of the Church . The church teaches that its founder is Jesus Christ . The New Testament records several events considered integral to the establishment of the Catholic Church , including Jesus ' activities and teaching and his appointment of the apostles as witnesses to his ministry , suffering , and resurrection . The Great Commission , after his resurrection , instructed the apostles to continue his work . The coming of the Holy Spirit upon the apostles , in an event known as Pentecost , is seen as the beginning of the public ministry of the Catholic Church . The church teaches that all duly consecrated bishops have a lineal succession from the apostles of Christ , known as apostolic succession . In particular , the Bishop of Rome ( the Pope ) is considered the successor to the apostle Simon Peter , a position from which he derives his supremacy over the Church . 
 Catholic belief holds that the Church " is the continuing presence of Jesus on earth " and that it alone possesses the full means of salvation . Through the passion ( suffering ) of Christ leading to his crucifixion as described in the Gospels , it is said Christ made himself an oblation to God the Father in order to reconcile humanity to God ; the Resurrection of Jesus makes him the firstborn from the dead , the first among many brethren . By reconciling with God and following Christ 's words and deeds , an individual can enter the Kingdom of God . The Church sees its liturgy and sacraments as perpetuating the graces achieved through Christ 's sacrifice to strengthen a person 's relationship with Christ and aid in overcoming sin . 
 = = = Final Judgment = = = 
 The Catholic Church teaches that , immediately after death , the soul of each person will receive a particular judgement from God , based on their sins and their relationship to Christ . This teaching also attests to another day when Christ will sit in universal judgement of all mankind . This final judgement , according to the church 's teaching , will bring an end to human history and mark the beginning of both a new and better heaven and earth ruled by God in righteousness . 
 Depending on the judgement rendered following death , it is believed that a soul may enter one of three states of afterlife : 
 Heaven is a state of unending union with the divine nature of God , not ontologically , but by grace . It is an eternal life , in which the soul contemplates God in ceaseless <unk> . 
 Purgatory is a temporary condition for the purification of souls who , although destined for Heaven , are not fully detached from sin and thus cannot enter Heaven immediately . In Purgatory , the soul suffers , and is purged and perfected . Souls in purgatory may be aided in reaching heaven by the prayers of the faithful on earth and by the intercession of saints . 
 Final Damnation : Finally , those who persist in living in a state of mortal sin and do not repent before death subject themselves to hell , an everlasting separation from God . The Church teaches that no one is condemned to hell without having freely decided to reject God . No one is predestined to hell and no one can determine with absolute certainty who has been condemned to hell . Catholicism teaches that through God 's mercy a person can repent at any point before death , be illuminated with the truth of the Catholic faith , and thus obtain salvation . Some Catholic theologians have speculated that the souls of unbaptised infants and non @-@ Christians without mortal sin but who die in original sin are assigned to limbo , although this is not an official dogma of the Church . 
 While the Catholic Church teaches that it alone possesses the full means of salvation , it also acknowledges that the Holy Spirit can make use of Christian communities separated from itself to " impel towards Catholic unity " and " tend and lead toward the Catholic Church " , and thus bring people to salvation , because these separated communities contain some elements of proper doctrine , albeit <unk> with errors . It teaches that anyone who is saved is saved through the Catholic Church but that people can be saved outside of the ordinary means ( " ex opere <unk> " ) known as baptism of desire , and by pre @-@ baptismal martyrdom , known as baptism of blood , as well as when conditions of invincible ignorance are present , although invincible ignorance in itself is not a means of salvation . 
 = = = Virgin Mary and devotions = = = 
 Catholic Mariology deals with the doctrines and teachings concerning the life of the Mary , mother of Jesus , as well as the veneration of Mary by the faithful . Mary is held in special regard , declared the Mother of God ( Greek : <unk> , translit . Theotokos , lit . ' God @-@ bearer ' ) , and believed as dogma to have remained a virgin throughout her life . Further teachings include the doctrines of the Immaculate Conception ( her own conception without the stain of original sin ) and the Assumption of Mary ( that her body was assumed directly into heaven at the end of her life ) . Both of these doctrines were defined as infallible dogma , by Pope Pius IX in 1854 and Pope Pius XII in 1950 respectively , but only after consulting with the Catholic bishops throughout the world to ascertain that this is a Catholic belief . 
 Devotions to Mary are part of Catholic piety but are distinct from the worship of God . Practices include prayers and Marian art , music , and architecture . Several liturgical Marian feasts are celebrated throughout the Church Year and she is honoured with many titles such as Queen of Heaven . Pope Paul VI called her Mother of the Church because , by giving birth to Christ , she is considered to be the spiritual mother to each member of the Body of Christ . Because of her influential role in the life of Jesus , prayers and devotions such as the Hail Mary , the Rosary , the Salve Regina and the <unk> are common Catholic practices . Pilgrimages to the sites of several Marian apparitions affirmed by the Church , such as Lourdes , Fátima , and Guadalupe , are also popular Catholic devotions . 
 Devotions are " external practices of piety " which are not part of the official liturgy of the Catholic Church but are part of the popular spiritual practices of Catholics . Outside of Mariology , other devotional practices include the Stations of the Cross , the Sacred Heart of Jesus , the Holy Face of Jesus , the various scapulars , <unk> to various saints , pilgrimages and devotions to the Blessed Sacrament , and the veneration of saintly images such as the <unk> . The bishops at the Second Vatican Council reminded Catholics that " devotions should be so drawn up that they harmonize with the liturgical seasons , accord with the sacred liturgy , are in some fashion derived from it , and lead the people to it , since , in fact , the liturgy by its very nature far surpasses any of them . " 
 = = Sacraments = = 
 The Catholic Church teaches that it was entrusted with seven sacraments that were instituted by Christ . The number and nature of the sacraments were defined by several ecumenical councils , most recently the Council of Trent . These are Baptism , Confirmation , the Eucharist , Penance , Anointing of the Sick ( formerly called Extreme Unction , one of the " Last Rites " ) , Holy Orders and Holy Matrimony . Sacraments are visible rituals that Catholics see as signs of God 's presence and effective channels of God 's grace to all those who receive them with the proper disposition ( ex opere <unk> ) . The Catechism of the Catholic Church categorises the sacraments into three groups , the " sacraments of Christian initiation " , " sacraments of healing " and " sacraments at the service of communion and the mission of the faithful " . These groups broadly reflect the stages of people 's natural and spiritual lives which each sacrament is intended to serve . 
 The liturgies of the sacraments are central to the church 's mission . According to the Catechism : 
 In the liturgy of the New Covenant every liturgical action , especially the celebration of the Eucharist and the sacraments , is an encounter between Christ and the Church . The liturgical assembly derives its unity from the " communion of the Holy Spirit " who gathers the children of God into the one Body of Christ . This assembly transcends racial , cultural , social – indeed , all human affinities . 
 According to church doctrine , the sacraments of the church require the proper form , matter , and intent to be validly celebrated . In addition , the Canon Laws for both the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Church govern who may <unk> celebrate certain sacraments , as well as strict rules about who may receive the sacraments . Notably , because the Church teaches that Christ is present in the Eucharist , those who are conscious of being in a state of mortal sin are forbidden to receive the sacrament until they have received absolution through the sacrament of Reconciliation ( Penance ) . Catholics are normally obliged to abstain from eating for at least an hour before receiving the sacrament . Non @-@ Catholics such are ordinarily prohibited from receiving the Eucharist as well . 
 Catholics , even if they were in danger of death and unable to approach a Catholic minister , may not ask for the sacraments of the Eucharist , penance or anointing of the sick from someone , such as a Protestant minister , who is not known to be validly ordained in line with Catholic teaching on ordination . Likewise , even in grave and pressing need , Catholic ministers may not administer these sacraments to those who do not manifest Catholic faith in the sacrament . In relation to the churches of Eastern Christianity not in communion with the Holy See , the Catholic Church is less restrictive , declaring that " a certain communion in <unk> , and so in the Eucharist , given suitable circumstances and the approval of Church authority , is not merely possible but is encouraged . " 
 = = = Sacraments of Christian initiation = = = 
 = = = = Baptism = = = = 
 As viewed by the Catholic Church , Baptism is the first of three sacraments of initiation as a Christian . It washes away all sins , both original sin and personal actual sins . It makes a person a member of the Church . As a gratuitous gift of God that requires no merit on the part of the person who is baptised , it is conferred even on children , who , though they have no personal sins , need it on account of original sin . If a new @-@ born child is in a danger of death , anyone — be it a doctor , a nurse , or a parent — may baptise the child . Baptism marks a person permanently and cannot be repeated . The Catholic Church recognises as valid baptisms conferred even by people who are not Catholics or Christians , provided that they intend to baptise ( " to do what the Church does when she <unk> " ) and that they use the Trinitarian baptismal formula . 
 = = = = Confirmation = = = = 
 The Catholic Church sees the sacrament of confirmation as required to complete the grace given in baptism . When adults are baptised , confirmation is normally given immediately afterwards , a practice followed even with newly baptised infants in the Eastern Catholic Churches . In the West confirmation of children is delayed until they are old enough to understand or at the bishop 's discretion . In Western Christianity , particularly Catholicism , the sacrament is called confirmation , because it confirms and strengthens the grace of baptism ; in the Eastern Churches , it is called <unk> , because the essential rite is the anointing of the person with chrism , a mixture of olive oil and some perfumed substance , usually balsam , blessed by a bishop . Those who receive confirmation must be in a state of grace , which for those who have reached the age of reason means that they should first be cleansed spiritually by the sacrament of Penance ; they should also have the intention of receiving the sacrament , and be prepared to show in their lives that they are Christians . 
 = = = = Eucharist = = = = 
 For Catholics , the Eucharist is the sacrament which completes Christian initiation . It is described as " the source and summit of the Christian life " . The ceremony in which a Catholic first receives the Eucharist is known as First Communion . 
 The Eucharistic celebration , also called the Mass or Divine liturgy , includes prayers and scriptural readings , as well as an offering of bread and wine , which are brought to the altar and consecrated by the priest to become the body and the blood of Jesus Christ , a change called transubstantiation . The words of consecration reflect the words spoken by Jesus during the Last Supper , where Christ offered his body and blood to his Apostles the night before his crucifixion . The sacrament re @-@ presents ( makes present ) the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross , and perpetuates it . Christ 's death and resurrection gives grace through the sacrament that unites the faithful with Christ and one another , remits venial sin , and aids against committing moral sin ( though mortal sin itself is forgiven through the sacrament of penance ) . 
 = = = Sacraments of healing = = = 
 The two sacraments of healing are the Sacrament of Penance and Anointing of the Sick . 
 = = = = Penance = = = = 
 The Sacrament of Penance ( also called Reconciliation , Forgiveness , Confession , and Conversion ) exists for the conversion of those who , after baptism , separate themselves from Christ by sin . Essential to this sacrament are acts both by the sinner ( examination of conscience , contrition with a determination not to sin again , confession to a priest , and performance of some act to repair the damage caused by sin ) and by the priest ( determination of the act of reparation to be performed and absolution ) . Serious sins ( mortal sins ) should be confessed at least once a year and always before receiving Holy Communion , while confession of venial sins also is recommended . The priest is bound under the severest penalties to maintain the " seal of confession " , absolute secrecy about any sins revealed to him in confession . 
 = = = = Anointing of the sick = = = = 
 While chrism is used only for the three sacraments that cannot be repeated , a different oil is used by a priest or bishop to bless a Catholic who , because of illness or old age , has begun to be in danger of death . This sacrament , known as Anointing of the Sick , is believed to give comfort , peace , courage and , if the sick person is unable to make a confession , even forgiveness of sins . 
 The sacrament is also referred to as Unction , and in the past as Extreme Unction , and it is one of the three sacraments that constitute the last rites , together with Penance and Viaticum ( Eucharist ) . 
 = = = Sacraments at the service of communion = = = 
 According to the Catechism , there are two sacraments of communion directed towards the salvation of others : priesthood and marriage . Within the general vocation to be a Christian , these two sacraments " consecrate to specific mission or vocation among the people of God . Men receive the holy orders to feed the Church by the word and grace . Spouses marry so that their love may be fortified to fulfill duties of their state " . 
 = = = = Holy Orders = = = = 
 The sacrament of Holy Orders consecrates and <unk> some Christians to serve the whole body as members of three degrees or orders : episcopate ( bishops ) , presbyterate ( priests ) and diaconate ( deacons ) . The Church has defined rules on who may be ordained into the clergy . In the Latin Church , the priesthood is generally restricted to celibate men , and the episcopate is always restricted to celibate men . Men who are already married may be ordained in certain Eastern Catholic churches in most countries , and the personal <unk> and may become deacons even in the Western Church ( see Clerical marriage ) . But after becoming a Roman Catholic priest , a man may not marry ( see Clerical celibacy ) unless he is formally <unk> . 
 All clergy , whether deacons , priests or bishops , may preach , teach , baptise , witness marriages and conduct funeral liturgies . Only bishops and priests can administer the sacraments of the Eucharist , Reconciliation ( Penance ) and Anointing of the Sick . Only bishops can administer the sacrament of Holy Orders , which ordains someone into the clergy . 
 = = = = Matrimony = = = = 
 The Catholic Church teaches that marriage is a social and spiritual bond between a man and a woman , ordered towards the good of the spouses and procreation of children ; according to Catholic teachings on sexual morality , it is the only appropriate context for sexual activity . A Catholic marriage , or any marriage between baptised individuals of any Christian denomination , is viewed as a sacrament . A sacramental marriage , once consummated , cannot be dissolved except by death . The Church recognises certain conditions , such as freedom of consent , as required for any marriage to be valid ; In addition , the Church sets specific rules and norms , known as canonical form , that Catholics must follow . 
 The church does not recognise divorce as ending a valid marriage and allows state recognised divorce only as a means of protecting the property and well being of the spouses and any children . However , consideration of particular cases by the competent ecclesiastical tribunal can lead to declaration of the invalidity of a marriage , a declaration usually referred to as an annulment . Remarriage following a divorce is not permitted unless the prior marriage was declared invalid . 
 = = Liturgy = = 
 Among the 24 autonomous ( sui iuris ) churches , numerous liturgical and other traditions exist , called rites , which reflect historical and cultural diversity rather than differences in belief . In the definition of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches , " a rite is the liturgical , theological , spiritual , and disciplinary patrimony , culture and circumstances of history of a distinct people , by which its own manner of living the faith is manifested in each Church sui iuris " . 
 The liturgy of the sacrament of the Eucharist , called the Mass in the West and Divine Liturgy or other names in the East , is the principal liturgy of the Catholic Church . This is because it is considered the <unk> sacrifice of Christ himself . The most widely used is the Roman Rite , usually in its ordinary form promulgated by Paul VI in 1969 , but also in its authorised extraordinary form , the Tridentine Mass as in the 1962 edition of the Roman Missal . Eastern Catholic Churches have their own rites . The liturgies of the Eucharist and the other sacraments vary from rite to rite based on differing theological emphasis . 
 = = = Western rites = = = 
 The Roman Rite is the most common rite of worship used by the Catholic Church . Its use is found worldwide , originating in Rome and spreading throughout Europe , influencing and eventually supplanting local rites . The present ordinary form of Mass in the Roman Rite , found in the post @-@ 1969 editions of the Roman Missal , is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language , using an officially approved translation from the original text in Latin . An outline of its major liturgical elements can be found in the side bar . 
 In 2007 , Pope Benedict XVI affirmed the continued use of the 1962 Roman Missal as an extraordinary form of the Roman Rite ( " a Forma <unk> " ) , speaking of it also as an usus <unk> ( older use ) , and issued new permissive norms for its employment . An instruction issued four years later spoke of the two forms or usages of the Roman Rite approved by the pope as the ordinary form and the extraordinary form ( " the forma <unk> " and " the forma <unk> " ) . 
 The 1962 edition of the Roman Missal , published a few months before the Second Vatican Council opened , was the last that presented the Mass as standardised in 1570 by Pope Pius V at the request of the Council of Trent and that is therefore known as the Tridentine Mass . Pope Pius V 's Roman Missal was subjected to minor revisions by Pope Clement VIII in 1604 , Pope Urban VIII in 1634 , Pope Pius X in 1911 , Pope Pius XII in 1955 , and Pope John XXIII in 1962 . Each successive edition was the ordinary form of the Roman Rite Mass until superseded by a later edition . When the 1962 edition was superseded by that of Paul VI , promulgated in 1969 , its continued use at first required permission from bishops ; but Pope Benedict XVI 's 2007 motu proprio <unk> Pontificum allowed free use of it for Mass celebrated without a congregation and authorised parish priests to permit , under certain conditions , its use even at public Masses . Except for the scriptural readings , which Pope Benedict allowed to be proclaimed in the vernacular language , it is celebrated exclusively in liturgical Latin . 
 Since 2014 , clergy in the small personal <unk> set up for groups of former Anglicans under the terms of the 2009 document <unk> <unk> are permitted to use a variation of the Roman Rite called " Divine Worship " or , less formally , " <unk> Use " , which incorporates elements of the Anglican liturgy and traditions . 
 In the Archdiocese of Milan , with around five million Catholics the largest in Europe , Mass is celebrated according to the Ambrosian Rite . Other Latin Church rites include the <unk> and those of some religious institutes . These liturgical rites have an antiquity of at least 200 years before 1570 , the date of Pope Pius V 's Quo primum , and were thus allowed to continue . 
 = = = Eastern rites = = = 
 The Eastern Catholic Churches share common patrimony and liturgical rites as their counterparts , including Eastern Orthodox and other Eastern Christian churches who are no longer in communion with the Holy See . These include churches that historically developed in Russia , Caucasus , the Balkans , North Eastern Africa , India and the Middle East . The Eastern Catholic Churches are groups of faithful who have either never been out of communion with the Holy See or who have restored communion with it at the cost of breaking communion with their associates of the same tradition . 
 The rites used by the Eastern Catholic Churches include the Byzantine Rite , in its Antiochian , Greek and Slavonic varieties ; the Alexandrian Rite ; the Syriac Rite ; the Armenian Rite ; the Maronite Rite and the Chaldean Rite . Eastern Catholic Churches have the autonomy to set the particulars of their liturgical forms and worship , within certain limits to protect the " accurate observance " of their liturgical tradition . In the past some of the rites used by the Eastern Catholic Churches were subject to a degree of liturgical Latinisation . However , in recent years Eastern Catholic Churches have returned to traditional Eastern practices in accord with the Vatican II decree Orientalium Ecclesiarum . Each church has its own liturgical calendar . 
 = = Social and cultural issues = = 
 Catholic social teaching , reflecting the concern Jesus showed for the impoverished , places a heavy emphasis on the corporal works of mercy and the spiritual works of mercy , namely the support and concern for the sick , the poor and the afflicted . Church teaching calls for a preferential option for the poor while canon law prescribes that " The Christian faithful are also obliged to promote social justice and , mindful of the precept of the Lord , to assist the poor . " 
 Catholic teaching regarding sexuality calls for a practice of chastity , with a focus on maintaining the spiritual and bodily integrity of the human person . Marriage is considered the only appropriate context for sexual activity . Church teachings about sexuality have become an issue of increasing controversy , especially after the close of the Second Vatican Council , due to changing cultural attitudes in the Western world described as the sexual revolution . 
 The Church has also addressed stewardship of the natural environment , and its relationship to other social and theological teachings . In the document <unk> si ' , dated 24 May 2015 , Pope Francis critiques consumerism and irresponsible development , and laments environmental degradation and global warming . The pope expressed concern that the warming of the planet is a symptom of a greater problem : the developed world 's indifference to the destruction of the planet as humans pursue short @-@ term economic gains . 
 = = = Social services = = = 
 The Catholic Church is the largest non @-@ government provider of education and medical services in the world . In 2010 , the Catholic Church 's Pontifical Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers said that the Church manages 26 % of health care facilities in the world , including hospitals , clinics , orphanages , pharmacies and centres for those with leprosy . 
 Religious institutes for women have played a particularly prominent role in the provision of health and education services , as with orders such as the Sisters of Mercy , Little Sisters of the Poor , the Missionaries of Charity , the Sisters of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart , the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament and the Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul . The Catholic nun Mother Teresa of Calcutta , India , founder of the Missionaries of Charity , was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979 for her humanitarian work among India 's poor . Bishop Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo won the same award in 1996 for " work towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor " . 
 The Church is also actively engaged in international aid and development through organisations such as Catholic Relief Services , Caritas International , Aid to the Church in Need , refugee advocacy groups such as the Jesuit Refugee Service and community aid groups such as the Saint Vincent de Paul Society . 
 = = = Sexual morality = = = 
 Sexuality is considered integral to a person 's identity and ability to form lasting relationships . The Catholic Church calls all members to practice chastity according to their state in life . Chastity includes temperance , self @-@ mastery , personal and cultural growth , and divine grace . It requires refraining from lust , masturbation , fornication , pornography , prostitution and , especially , rape . Chastity for those who are not married requires living in continence , abstaining from sexual activity ; those who are married are called to conjugal chastity . 
 In the church 's teaching , sexual activity is reserved to married couples , whether in a sacramental marriage among Christians , or in a natural marriage where one or both spouses are unbaptised . Even in romantic relationships , particularly engagement to marriage , partners are called to practice continence , in order to test mutual respect and fidelity . Chastity in marriage requires in particular conjugal fidelity and protecting the fecundity of marriage . The couple must foster trust and honesty as well as spiritual and physical intimacy . Sexual activity must always be open to the possibility of life ; the church calls this the procreative significance . It must likewise always bring a couple together in love ; the church calls this the <unk> significance . 
 Contraception and certain other sexual practices are not permitted , although natural family planning methods are permitted to provide healthy spacing between births , or to postpone children for a just reason . Pope Francis said in 2015 that he is worried that the church has grown " obsessed " with issues such as abortion , same @-@ sex marriage and contraception and has criticised the Catholic Church for placing dogma before love , and for prioritising moral doctrines over helping the poor and marginalised . 
 = = = = Divorce and declarations of nullity = = = = 
 Canon law makes no provision for divorce between baptised individuals , as a valid , consummated sacramental marriage is considered to be a lifelong bond . However , a declaration of nullity may be granted when proof is produced that essential conditions for contracting a valid marriage were absent from the beginning — in other words , that the marriage was not valid due to some impediment . A declaration of nullity , commonly called an annulment , is a judgement on the part of an ecclesiastical tribunal determining that a marriage was invalidly attempted . In addition , marriages among unbaptised individuals may be dissolved with papal permission under certain situations , such as a desire to marry a Catholic , under Pauline or Petrine privilege . An attempt at remarriage following divorce without a declaration of nullity places " the remarried spouse [ … ] in a situation of public and permanent adultery " . An innocent spouse who lives in continence following divorce , or couples who live in continence following a civil divorce for a grave cause , do not sin . 
 Worldwide , diocesan tribunals completed over <unk> cases for nullity of marriage in 2006 . Over the past 30 years about 55 to 70 % of annulments have occurred in the United States . The growth in annulments has been substantial ; in the United States , 27 @,@ 000 marriages were annulled in 2006 , compared to 338 in 1968 . However , approximately 200 @,@ 000 married Catholics in the United States divorce each year ; 10 million total as of 2006 . Divorce is increasing in some predominantly Catholic countries in Europe . In some predominantly Catholic countries , it is only in recent years that divorce was introduced ( i.e. Italy ( 1970 ) , Portugal ( 1975 ) , Brazil ( 1977 ) , Spain ( 1981 ) , Ireland ( 1996 ) , Chile ( 2004 ) and Malta ( 2011 ) , while the Philippines and the Vatican City have no procedure for divorce ( the Philippines does , however , allow divorce for Muslims ) . 
 = = = = Contraception = = = = 
 The church teaches that sexual intercourse should only take place between a married man and woman , and should be without the use of birth control or contraception . In his encyclical Humanae vitae ( 1968 ) , Pope Paul VI firmly rejected all contraception , thus contradicting dissenters in the Church that saw the birth control pill as an ethically justifiable method of contraception , though he permitted the regulation of births by means of natural family planning . This teaching was continued especially by John Paul II in his encyclical Evangelium Vitae , where he clarified the Church 's position on contraception , abortion and euthanasia by condemning them as part of a " culture of death " and calling instead for a " culture of life " . 
 Many Western Catholics have voiced significant disagreement with the Church 's teaching on contraception . Catholics for Choice stated in 1998 that 96 % of U.S. Catholic women had used contraceptives at some point in their lives and that 72 % of Catholics believed that one could be a good Catholic without obeying the Church 's teaching on birth control . Use of natural family planning methods among United States Catholics purportedly is low , although the number cannot be known with certainty . As Catholic health providers are among the largest providers of services to patients with HIV / AIDS worldwide , there is significant controversy within and outside the church regarding the use of condoms as a means of limiting new infections , as condom use ordinarily constitutes prohibited contraceptive use . 
 Similarly , the Catholic Church opposes in <unk> fertilisation ( IVF ) , saying that the artificial process replaces the love between a husband and wife . In addition , it opposes IVF because it might cause disposal of embryos ; Catholics believe an embryo is an individual with a soul who must be treated as such . For this reason , the church also opposes abortion . 
 = = = = Homosexuality = = = = 
 The Catholic Church also teaches that " homosexual acts " are " contrary to the natural law " , " acts of grave depravity " and " under no circumstances can they be approved " , but that persons experiencing homosexual tendencies must be accorded respect and dignity . According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church , 
 The number of men and women who have deep @-@ seated homosexual tendencies is not negligible . This inclination , which is objectively disordered , constitutes for most of them a trial . They must be accepted with respect , compassion , and sensitivity . Every sign of unjust discrimination in their regard should be avoided … . 
 Homosexual persons are called to chastity . By the virtues of self @-@ mastery that teach them inner freedom , at times by the support of disinterested friendship , by prayer and sacramental grace , they can and should gradually and resolutely approach Christian perfection . 
 This part of the Catechism was quoted by Pope Francis in a 2013 press interview in which he remarked , when asked about an individual : 
 I think that when you encounter a person like this [ the individual he was asked about ] , you must make a distinction between the fact of a person being gay from the fact of being a lobby , because lobbies , all are not good . That is bad . If a person is gay and seeks the Lord and has good will , well who am I to judge them ? 
 This remark and others made in the same interview were seen as a change in the tone , but not in the substance of the teaching of the Church , which includes opposition to same @-@ sex marriage . Certain dissenting Catholic groups oppose the position of the Catholic Church and seek to change it . 
 = = = Women and ordination = = = 
 Women religious engage in a variety of occupations , from contemplative prayer , to teaching , to providing health care , to working as missionaries . While Holy Orders are reserved for men , Catholic women have played diverse roles in the life of the church , with religious institutes providing a formal space for their participation and convents providing spaces for their self @-@ government , prayer and influence through many centuries . Religious sisters and nuns have been extensively involved in developing and running the Church 's worldwide health and education service networks . 
 Efforts in support of the ordination of women led to several rulings by the Roman Curia or Popes against the proposal , as in Declaration on the Question of the Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood ( 1976 ) , <unk> <unk> ( 1988 ) and <unk> Sacerdotalis ( 1994 ) . According to the latest ruling , found in <unk> Sacerdotalis , Pope John Paul II affirmed that the Catholic Church " does not consider herself authorized to admit women to priestly ordination . " In defiance of these rulings , opposition groups such as Roman Catholic <unk> have performed ceremonies they affirm as sacramental ordinations ( with , reputedly , an <unk> male Catholic bishop in the first few instances ) which , according to canon law , are both illicit and invalid and considered mere simulations of the sacrament of ordination . The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith responded by issuing a statement clarifying that any Catholic bishops involved in ordination ceremonies for women , as well as the women themselves if they were Catholic , would automatically receive the penalty of excommunication ( latae sententiae , literally " with the sentence already applied " , i.e. automatically ) , citing canon 1378 of canon law and other church laws . 
 = = = Sex abuse cases = = = 
 From the 1990s , the issue of sexual abuse of minors by Catholic clergy and other church members has become the subject of civil litigation , criminal prosecution , media coverage and public debate in countries around the world . The Catholic Church has been criticised for its handling of abuse complaints when it became known that some bishops had shielded accused priests , transferring them to other pastoral assignments where some continued to commit sexual offences . 
 In response to the scandal , formal procedures have been established to help prevent abuse , encourage the reporting of any abuse that occurs and to handle such reports promptly , although groups representing victims have disputed their effectiveness . In 2014 , Pope Francis instituted the Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors for the safeguarding of minors . 
 = = History = = 
 The Christian religion is based on the teachings of Jesus Christ , who lived and preached in the 1st century AD in the province of Judea of the Roman Empire . Catholic doctrine teaches that the contemporary Catholic Church is the continuation of this early Christian community established by Jesus . Christianity spread throughout the early Roman Empire , despite persecutions due to conflicts with the pagan state religion . Emperor Constantine legalised the practice of Christianity in 313 , and it became the state religion in 380 . Germanic invaders of Roman territory in the 5th and 6th centuries , many of whom had previously adopted Arian Christianity , eventually adopted Catholicism to ally themselves with the papacy and the monasteries . 
 In the 7th and 8th centuries , expanding Muslim conquests following the advent of Islam led to an Arab domination of the Mediterranean that severed political connections between that area and northern Europe , and weakened cultural connections between Rome and the Byzantine Empire . Conflicts involving authority in the church , particularly the authority of the Bishop of Rome finally culminated in the East – West Schism in the 11th century , splitting the Church into the Catholic and Orthodox Churches . Earlier splits within the Church occurred after the Council of Ephesus ( 431 ) and the Council of Chalcedon ( 451 ) . However , a few Eastern Churches remained in communion with Rome , and portions of some others established communion in the 15th century and later , forming what are called the Eastern Catholic Churches . 
 Early monasteries throughout Europe helped preserve Greek and Roman classical civilisation . The Church eventually became the dominant influence in Western civilisation into the modern age . Many Renaissance figures were sponsored by the church . The 16th century , however , began to see challenges to the Church , in particular to its religious authority , by figures in the Protestant Reformation , as well as in the 17th century by secular intellectuals in the Enlightenment . Concurrently , Spanish and Portuguese explorers and missionaries spread the Church 's influence through Africa , Asia , and the New World . 
 In 1870 , the First Vatican Council declared the dogma of papal infallibility and the Kingdom of Italy annexed the city of Rome , the last portion of the Papal States to be incorporated into the new nation . In the 20th century , anti @-@ clerical governments around the world , including Mexico and Spain , persecuted or executed thousands of clerics and laypersons . In the Second World War , the Church condemned Nazism , and protected hundreds of thousands of Jews from the Holocaust ; its efforts , however , have been criticised as inadequate . After the war , freedom of religion was severely restricted in the Communist countries newly aligned with the Soviet Union , several of which had large Catholic populations . 
 In the 1960s , the Second Vatican Council led to several controversial reforms of the church liturgy and practices , an effort described as " opening the windows " by defenders , but leading to harsh criticism in several conservative circles . In the face of increased criticism from both within and without , the Church has upheld or reaffirmed at various times controversial doctrinal positions regarding sexuality and gender , including limiting clergy to males , and moral exhortations against abortion , contraception , sexual activity outside of marriage , remarriage following divorce without annulment , and against same @-@ sex marriage . 
 = = = Apostolic era and papacy = = = 
 The New Testament , in particular the Gospels , records Jesus ' activities and teaching , his appointment of the twelve Apostles and his Great Commission of the Apostles , instructing them to continue his work . The book Acts of Apostles , tells of the founding of the Christian church and the spread of its message to the Roman empire . The Catholic Church teaches that its public ministry began on Pentecost , occurring fifty days following the date Christ is believed to have resurrected . At Pentecost , the Apostles are believed to have received the Holy Spirit , preparing them for their mission in leading the church . The Catholic Church teaches that the college of bishops , led by the Bishop of Rome are the successors to the Apostles . 
 In the account of the Confession of Peter found in the Gospel of Matthew , Christ designates Peter as the " rock " upon which Christ 's church will be built . The Catholic Church considers the Bishop of Rome , the Pope , to be the successor to Saint Peter . Some scholars state Peter was the first Bishop of Rome . Others say that the institution of the papacy is not dependent on the idea that Peter was Bishop of Rome or even on his ever having been in Rome . Many scholars hold that a church structure of plural presbyters / bishops persisted in Rome until the mid @-@ 2nd century , when the structure of a single bishop and plural presbyters was adopted , and that later writers retrospectively applied the term " bishop of Rome " to the most prominent members of the clergy in the earlier period and also to Peter himself . On this basis , Oscar Cullmann , Henry Chadwick , and Bart D. Ehrman question whether there was a formal link between Peter and the modern papacy . Raymond E. Brown also says that it is anachronistic to speak of Peter in terms of local bishop of Rome , but that Christians of that period would have looked on Peter as having " roles that would contribute in an essential way to the development of the role of the papacy in the subsequent church " . These roles , Brown says , " contributed enormously to seeing the bishop of Rome , the bishop of the city where Peter died , and where Paul witnessed to the truth of Christ , as the successor of Peter in care for the church universal " . 
 = = = Antiquity and Roman Empire = = = 
 Conditions in the Roman Empire facilitated the spread of new ideas . The empire 's network of roads and waterways facilitated travel , and the Pax Romana made travelling safe . The empire encouraged the spread of a common culture with Greek roots , which allowed ideas to be more easily expressed and understood . 
 Unlike most religions in the Roman Empire , however , Christianity required its adherents to renounce all other gods , a practice adopted from Judaism ( see Idolatry ) . The Christians ' refusal to join pagan celebrations meant they were unable to participate in much of public life , which caused non @-@ Christians — including government authorities — to fear that the Christians were angering the gods and thereby threatening the peace and prosperity of the Empire . The resulting persecutions were a defining feature of Christian self @-@ understanding until Christianity was legalised in the 4th century . 
 In 313 , Emperor Constantine I 's Edict of Milan legalised Christianity , and in 330 Constantine moved the imperial capital to Constantinople , modern Istanbul , Turkey . In 380 the Edict of Thessalonica made Catholic Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire , a position that within the diminishing territory of the Byzantine Empire would persist until the empire itself ended in the fall of Constantinople in 1453 , while elsewhere the church was independent of the empire , as became particularly clear with the East – West Schism . During the period of the Seven Ecumenical Councils , five primary sees emerged , an arrangement formalised in the mid @-@ 6th century by Emperor Justinian I as the <unk> of Rome , Constantinople , Antioch , Jerusalem and Alexandria . In 451 the Council of Chalcedon , in a canon of disputed validity , elevated the see of Constantinople to a position " second in eminence and power to the bishop of Rome " . From c . 350 to c . 500 , the bishops , or popes , of Rome , steadily increased in authority through their consistent intervening in support of orthodox leaders in theological disputes , which encouraged appeals to them . Emperor Justinian , who in the areas under his control definitively established a form of <unk> , in which " he had the right and duty of regulating by his laws the minutest details of worship and discipline , and also of dictating the theological opinions to be held in the Church " , reestablished imperial power over Rome and other parts of the West , initiating the period termed the Byzantine Papacy ( 537 – 752 ) , during which the bishops of Rome , or popes , required approval from the emperor in Constantinople or from his representative in Ravenna for consecration , and most were selected by the emperor from his Greek @-@ speaking subjects , resulting in a " melting pot " of Western and Eastern Christian traditions in art as well as liturgy . 
 Most of the Germanic tribes who in the following centuries invaded the Roman Empire had adopted Christianity in its Arian form , which the Catholic Church declared heretical . The resulting religious discord between Germanic rulers and Catholic subjects was avoided when , in 497 , Clovis I , the Frankish ruler , converted to orthodox Catholicism , allying himself with the papacy and the monasteries . The Visigoths in Spain followed his lead in 589 , and the Lombards in Italy in the course of the 7th century . 
 Western Christianity , particularly through its monasteries , was a major factor in preserving classical civilisation , with its art ( see Illuminated manuscript ) and literacy . Through his Rule , Benedict of Nursia ( <unk> – 543 ) , one of the founders of Western monasticism , exerted an enormous influence on European culture through the appropriation of the monastic spiritual heritage of the early Church and , with the spread of the Benedictine tradition , through the preservation and transmission of ancient culture . During this period , monastic Ireland became a centre of learning and early Irish missionaries such as St Columbanus and St Columba spread Christianity and established monasteries across continental Europe . [ 1 ] 
 The massive Islamic invasions of the mid @-@ 7th century began a long struggle between Christianity and Islam throughout the Mediterranean Basin . The Byzantine Empire soon lost the lands of the eastern patriarchates of Jerusalem , Alexandria and Antioch and was reduced to that of Constantinople , the empire 's capital . As a result of Islamic domination of the Mediterranean , the Frankish state , centred away from that sea , was able to evolve as the dominant power that shaped the Western Europe of the Middle Ages . The battles of Toulouse and Poitiers halted the Islamic advance in the West . Two or three decades later , in 751 , the Byzantine Empire lost to the Lombards the city of Ravenna from which it governed the small fragments of Italy , including Rome , that acknowledged its sovereignty . The fall of Ravenna meant that confirmation by a no longer existent exarch was not asked for during the election in 752 of Pope Stephen II and that the papacy was forced to look elsewhere for a civil power to protect it . In 754 , at the urgent request of Pope Stephen , the Frankish king Pepin the Short conquered the Lombards . He then gifted the lands of the former <unk> to the pope , thus initiating the Papal States . Rome and the Byzantine East would delve into further conflict during the <unk> schism of the 860s , when Photius criticised the Latin west of adding of the <unk> clause after being excommunicated by Nicholas I. Though the schism was reconciled , unresolved issues would lead to further division . 
 = = = Medieval and Renaissance periods = = = 
 The Catholic Church was the dominant influence on Western civilisation from late antiquity to the dawn of the modern age . It was the primary sponsor of Romanesque , Gothic , Renaissance , Mannerist and Baroque styles in art , architecture and music . Renaissance figures such as Raphael , Michelangelo , Leonardo da Vinci , Botticelli , Fra Angelico , Tintoretto , Titian , Bernini and Caravaggio are examples of the numerous visual artists sponsored by the Church . 
 In the 11th century , the efforts of Hildebrand of <unk> led to the creation of the College of Cardinals to elect new Popes , starting with Pope Alexander II in the papal election of 1061 . When Alexander II died , Hildebrand was elected to succeed him , as Pope Gregory VII . The basic election system of the College of Cardinals which Gregory VII helped establish has continued to function into the 21st century . Pope Gregory VII further initiated the Gregorian Reforms regarding the independence of the clergy from secular authority . This led to the Investiture Controversy between the church and the Holy Roman Emperors , over which had the authority to appoint bishops and Popes . 
 In 1095 , Byzantine emperor Alexius I appealed to Pope Urban II for help against renewed Muslim invasions in the Byzantine – Seljuk Wars , which caused Urban to launch the First Crusade aimed at aiding the Byzantine Empire and returning the Holy Land to Christian control . In the 11th century , strained relations between the primarily Greek church and the Latin Church separated them in the East – West Schism , partially due to conflicts over papal authority . The Fourth Crusade and the sacking of Constantinople by renegade crusaders proved the final breach . 
 In the early 13th century mendicant orders were founded by Francis of Assisi and Dominic de Guzmán . The studia <unk> and studia <unk> of the mendicant orders played a large role in the transformation of Church sponsored cathedral schools and palace schools , such as that of Charlemagne at Aachen , into the prominent universities of Europe . Scholastic theologians and philosophers such as the Dominican priest Thomas Aquinas studied and taught at these studia . Aquinas ' Summa Theologica was an intellectual milestone in its synthesis of the legacy of Ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle with the content of Christian revelation . 
 A growing sense of church @-@ state conflicts marked the 14th century . To escape instability in Rome , Clement V in 1309 became the first of seven popes to reside in the fortified city of Avignon in southern France during a period known as the Avignon Papacy . The Avignon Papacy ended in 1376 when the Pope returned to Rome , but was followed in 1378 by the 38 @-@ year @-@ long Western schism with claimants to the papacy in Rome , Avignon and ( after 1409 ) Pisa . The matter was finally resolved in 1417 at the Council of Constance where the cardinals called upon all three claimants to the papal throne to resign , and held a new election naming Martin V pope . 
 In 1438 , the Council of Florence convened , which featured a strong dialogue focussed on understanding the theological differences between the East and West , with the hope of reuniting the Catholic and Orthodox churches . Several eastern churches reunited , forming the Eastern Catholic Churches . 
 = = = Age of discovery = = = 
 The Age of Discovery beginning in the 15th century saw the expansion of Western Europe 's political and cultural influence worldwide . Because of the prominent role the strongly Catholic nations of Spain and Portugal played in Western Colonialism , Catholicism was spread to the Americas , Asia and Oceania by explorers , conquistadors , and missionaries , as well as by the transformation of societies through the socio @-@ political mechanisms of colonial rule . Pope Alexander VI had awarded colonial rights over most of the newly discovered lands to Spain and Portugal and the ensuing <unk> system allowed state authorities , not the Vatican , to control all clerical appointments in the new colonies . In 1521 the Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan made the first Catholic converts in the Philippines . Elsewhere , Portuguese missionaries under the Spanish Jesuit Francis Xavier evangelised in India , China , and Japan . 
 = = = Protestant Reformation and Counter @-@ Reformation = = = 
 In 1517 , Martin Luther , an Augustinian friar in Germany , sent his Ninety @-@ Five Theses to several bishops . His theses protested key points of Catholic doctrine as well as the sale of indulgences . In Switzerland , Huldrych Zwingli , John Calvin and other Protestant Reformers further criticised Catholic teachings . These challenges developed into the European movement called the Protestant Reformation , which gave birth to a variety of Christian denominations known today collectively as Protestantism . The English Reformation during the reign of Henry VIII began as a political dispute . When the pope denied Henry 's petition for a declaration of nullity of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon , he had the Acts of Supremacy passed , making him head of Church of England , forming Protestant Anglicanism . 
 The Reformation led to clashes between the Protestant Schmalkaldic League and the Catholic Emperor Charles V and his allies . The first nine @-@ year war ended in 1555 with the Peace of Augsburg but continued tensions produced a far graver conflict — the Thirty Years ' War — which broke out in 1618 . In France , a series of conflicts termed the French Wars of Religion was fought from 1562 to 1598 between the Huguenots ( French Calvinists ) and the forces of the French Catholic League . A series of popes sided with and became financial supporters of the Catholic League . This ended under Pope Clement VIII , who hesitantly accepted King Henry IV 's 1598 Edict of Nantes , which granted civil and religious toleration to French Protestants . 
 The Council of Trent ( 1545 – 1563 ) became the driving force behind the Counter @-@ Reformation in response to the Protestant movement . Doctrinally , it reaffirmed central Catholic teachings such as transubstantiation and the requirement for love and hope as well as faith to attain salvation . In subsequent centuries , Catholicism spread widely across the world despite experiencing a reduction in its hold on European populations due to the growth of religious scepticism during and after the Enlightenment . 
 = = = Enlightenment and modern period = = = 
 From the 17th century onward , the Enlightenment questioned the power and influence of the Catholic Church over Western society . In the 18th century , writers such as Voltaire and the <unk> wrote biting critiques of both religion and the Catholic Church . One target of their criticism was the 1685 revocation of the Edict of Nantes by King Louis XIV , which ended a century @-@ long policy of religious toleration of Protestant Huguenots . The French Revolution of 1789 brought about a shifting of powers from the Church to the State , destruction of churches and the establishment of a Cult of Reason . In 1798 , Napoleon Bonaparte 's General Louis Alexandre Berthier invaded Italy , imprisoning Pope Pius VI , who died in captivity . Napoleon later re @-@ established the Catholic Church in France through the Concordat of 1801 . The end of the Napoleonic wars brought Catholic revival and the return of the Papal States . 
 In 1854 , Pope Pius IX , with the support of the overwhelming majority of Roman Catholic bishops , whom he had consulted from 1851 to 1853 , proclaimed the Immaculate Conception as a dogma . In 1870 , the First Vatican Council affirmed the doctrine of papal infallibility when exercised in specifically defined pronouncements . Controversy over this and other issues resulted in a breakaway movement called the Old Catholic Church . 
 Italian unification of the 1860s incorporated the Papal States , including Rome itself from 1870 , into the Kingdom of Italy , thus ending the papacy 's millennial temporal power . The pope rejected the Italian Law of Guarantees , which granted him special privileges , and to avoid placing himself in visible subjection to the Italian authorities remained a " prisoner in the Vatican " . This stand @-@ off , which was spoken of as the Roman Question , was resolved by the 1929 Lateran Treaties , whereby the Holy See acknowledged Italian sovereignty over the former Papal States and Italy recognised papal sovereignty over Vatican City as a new sovereign and independent state . 
 = = = Twentieth century = = = 
 A number of anti @-@ clerical governments emerged in the 20th century . 
 The 1926 Calles Law separating church and state in Mexico led to the Cristero War in which over 3 @,@ 000 priests were exiled or assassinated , churches desecrated , services mocked , nuns raped and captured priests shot . Following the 1917 Bolshevik Revolution , persecution of the Church and Catholics in the Soviet Union continued into the 1930s with the execution and exiling of clerics , monks and laymen , the confiscation of religious implements and closure of churches . In the 1936 – 39 Spanish Civil War , the Catholic hierarchy allied itself with Franco 's Nationalists against the Popular Front government , citing Republican violence against the Church . Pope Pius XI referred to these three countries as a " terrible triangle " . 
 After violations of the 1933 Reichskonkordat between the Church and Nazi Germany , Pope Pius XI issued the 1937 encyclical Mit brennender Sorge which publicly condemned the Nazis ' persecution of the Church and their ideology of neopaganism and racial superiority . The Church condemned the 1939 invasion of Poland that started World War II and other subsequent wartime Nazi invasions . Thousands of Catholic priests , nuns and brothers were imprisoned and murdered throughout the countries occupied by the Nazis , including Saints Maximilian Kolbe and Edith Stein . While Pope Pius XII has been credited with helping to save hundreds of thousands of Jews in the Holocaust , the Church has also been accused of encouraging centuries of antisemitism and not doing enough to stop Nazi atrocities . 
 Postwar Communist governments in Eastern Europe severely restricted religious freedoms . Although some priests and religious collaborated with Communist regimes , many were imprisoned , deported or executed and the Church was an important player in the fall of Communism in Europe . In 1949 , Communist victory in the Chinese Civil War led to the expulsion of all foreign missionaries . The new government also created the Patriotic Church whose unilaterally appointed bishops were initially rejected by Rome before many of them were accepted . In the 1960s , the Cultural Revolution saw the closure of all religious establishments . When Chinese churches eventually reopened , they remained under the control of the Patriotic Church . Many Catholic pastors and priests continued to be sent to prison for refusing to renounce allegiance to Rome . 
 = = = = Second Vatican Council = = = = 
 The Second Vatican Council in the 1960s introduced the most significant changes to Catholic practices since the Council of Trent four centuries before . Initiated by Pope John XXIII , this ecumenical council modernised the practices of the Catholic Church , allowing the Mass to be said in the vernacular ( local language ) and encouraging " fully conscious , and active participation in liturgical celebrations " . It intended to engage the Church more closely with the present world ( <unk> ) , which was described by its advocates as an " opening of the windows " . In addition to changes in the liturgy , it led to changes to the Church 's approach to ecumenism , and a call to improved relations with non @-@ Christian religions , especially Judaism , in its document Nostra aetate . 
 The council , however , generated significant controversy in implementing its reforms : proponents of the " Spirit of Vatican II " such as Swiss theologian Hans Küng said that Vatican II had " not gone far enough " to change church policies . Traditionalist Catholics , such as Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre , however , strongly criticised the council , arguing that its liturgical reforms led " to the destruction of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and the sacraments " , among other issues . Several teachings of the Catholic Church came under increased scrutiny both concurrent with and following the council ; among those teachings was the church 's teaching regarding the immorality of contraception . The recent introduction of hormonal contraception ( including " the pill " ) , which were believed by some to be morally different than previous methods , prompted John XXIII to form a committee to advise him of the moral and theological issues with the new method . Paul VI later expanded the committee 's scope to freely examine all methods , and the committee 's unreleased final report was rumoured to suggest permitting at least some methods of contraception . Paul did not agree with the arguments presented , and eventually issued Humanae vitae , saying it upheld the constant teaching of the church against contraception , expressly including hormonal methods as prohibited . A large negative response to this document followed its release . 
 = = = = John Paul II = = = = 
 In 1978 , Pope John Paul II , formerly Archbishop of Kraków in then @-@ Communist Poland , became the first non @-@ Italian Pope in 455 years . His 27 @-@ year pontificate was one of the longest in history . Mikhail Gorbachev , the president of the Soviet Union , credited the Polish Pope with hastening the fall of Communism in Europe . 
 John Paul sought to evangelise an increasingly secular world . He instituted World Youth Day as a " worldwide encounter with the Pope " for young people which is now held every two to three years . He travelled more than any other Pope , visiting 129 countries , and used television and radio as means of spreading the Church 's teachings . He also emphasised the dignity of work and natural rights of labors to have fair wages and safe conditions in <unk> <unk> , and also emphasised several church teachings , including moral exhortations against abortion , euthanasia , and against widespread use of the death penalty , in Evangelium Vitae . 
 = = = Twenty @-@ first century = = = 
 In 2005 , following the death of John Paul II , Pope Benedict XVI , head of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith under John Paul , was elected . He was known for upholding traditional Christian values against secularisation , and for liberalising use of the Tridentine Mass as found in the Roman Missal of 1962 . In 2012 , the 50th anniversary of Vatican II , an assembly of the Synod of Bishops discussed re @-@ evangelising lapsed Catholics in the developed world . Benedict resigned due to advanced age in 2013 , the first Pope to do so in nearly six hundred years . 
 Pope Francis succeeded Benedict in 2013 . In 2014 , the Third Extraordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops addressed the church 's ministry towards families and marriages and to Catholics in " irregular " relationships , such as those who divorced and remarried outside of the church without a declaration of nullity . 
 = Stańczyk ( painting ) = 
 Stańczyk ( Polish : Stańczyk w czasie balu na <unk> <unk> Bony wobec <unk> <unk> , English : Stańczyk during a ball at the court of Queen Bona in the face of the loss of Smolensk ) is a painting by Jan Matejko finished in 1862 . This painting was acquired by the Warsaw National Museum in 1924 . During World War II it was looted by the Nazis and subsequently seized by the Soviet Union , returned to Poland around 1956 . 
 It is one of Matejko 's most famous works and the one that launched him to fame . It has been described as one of the most recognizable paintings in the Warsaw National Museum , and is a flagship painting for the " Collection of Polish paintings prior to 1914 " . Its primary composition is the contrast between the solemn jester ( the titular Stańczyk ) and the lively ball going on in the background . The painting has created an image of Stańczyk that has become iconic , and widely recognized in Poland . 
 = = Stańczyk = = 
 Stańczyk , the male figure depicted in the painting , was the court jester when Poland was at the height of its political , economic and cultural power during the era of the Renaissance in Poland , during the reign of King Sigismund I the Old ( reigned 1506 – 1548 ) . He was a popular figure ; besides his fame as a jester he has been described as an eloquent , witty , and intelligent man , using satire to comment on the nation 's past , present , and future . Unlike jesters of other European courts , Stańczyk has always been considered as much more than a mere entertainer . Stańczyk 's fame and legend were strong in his own time and enjoyed a resurgence in the 19th century , and he remains well @-@ known to this day . 
 Scarcity of sources gave rise to four distinct hypotheses about Stańczyk in the 19th century : that he was entirely invented by Jan Kochanowski and his colleagues , that he was " perhaps a typical jester dressed by his contemporaries in an <unk> attire , perhaps a Shakespearean vision of 19th century writers , or perhaps indeed a grey eminence of the <unk> <unk> " . In any measure , consensus among modern scholars is that such a person indeed existed and even if he did not , the figure had a tremendous importance to Polish culture of later centuries , appearing in works of many artists of the 19th and 20th centuries . He appears in a work of , among others , Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz ( in Jan z <unk> . <unk> <unk> , 1825 ) and several works by Józef Ignacy Kraszewski ( 1839 , 1841 ) . 
 = = Content = = 
 The full title of the painting is Stańczyk w czasie balu na <unk> <unk> Bony wobec <unk> <unk> ( Stańczyk during a ball at the court of Queen Bona in the face of the loss of Smolensk ) . a 
 The primary composition of the painting is in the contrast between the solemn jester ( Stańczyk ) – obviously the focus of the painting – and the lively ball going on in the background . Stańczyk is shown sitting alone in a dark room , while a ball , hosted by the royal family , is in full swing in the neighbouring hall . His appearance is unlike that one would expect in a jester – gloomy , deep in thought . His seriousness is reinforced by his accessories : his <unk> lies discarded on the floor , whereas a holy medallion of the Black Madonna of Częstochowa can be seen on his torso . On the table lies a letter with the year 1514 and the name Smolensk , likely announcing that Poland has lost Smolensk ( now in Russia ) to the Grand Duchy of Muscovy , causing Stańczyk 's sorrow and reflection on his fatherland 's fate . The letter seems to have been discarded by some official , and only the jester realizes its significance – while the rulers are partying , celebrating the recent victory at the battle of Orsha , disregarding the bad news about Smolensk . Another symbol , a lute , symbol of glory , is being carried by a midget , stereotyped as a person of low stature and morale in Matejko 's time ; this suggests a decline of the Jagiellon dynasty 's fortunes . Through an open window , a comet is seen – a portent sign of ill fortune . 
 = = History , significance and historiography = = 
 Matejko was fascinated by Stańczyk from the times of his youth , and portrayed him in several of his works ( most notably , besides the painting discussed here , in Consecration of King Sigismund 's Bell , 1874 and Prussian Homage , 1882 ) . Working on this painting , Matejko was also inspired by the book Król <unk> by Seweryn <unk> , whose main character – a loner , living in the castle 's ruins , trying to reconcile past and present , and himself inspired by Stańczyk – likely influenced this painting . Completed in 1862 , when Matejko was twenty four years old , it is one of his most famous works and the one that launched him to fame . It is seen as a key painting for the understanding of Matejko 's style and intentions in his art . Matejko used his own face for Stańczyk , and with this work , began a series of paintings analyzing and interpreting the history of Poland through the figure of Stańczyk . 
 The painting is also seen as highly significant for the culture of Poland in general . It has been described as one of the most recognizable paintings in the Warsaw National Museum , and is a flagship painting for the " Collection of Polish paintings prior to 1914 " . The painting has created an image of Stańczyk that has become iconic , and has been repeated in other works such as the play <unk> ( 1901 ) of Stanisław Wyspiański . Matejko 's most famous paintings are usually large , group scenes ; individual scenes are less common in his work . 
 Upon its creation , the painting did not gather much attention , and was acquired by the Kraków Society of Friends of Fine Arts for a purpose of a gift lottery . It was subsequently won by a certain individual , <unk> , in whose possession it was slightly damaged . Upon Matejko 's raise to fame , the painting was rediscovered and applauded as a masterpiece , and acquired by the Warsaw National Museum in 1924 . During World War II it was looted by the Nazis . It was subsequently seized by the Soviet Union and returned to Poland around 1956 . 
 = Charles Stewart ( Canadian politician ) = 
 Charles Stewart , PC ( August 26 , 1868 – December 6 , 1946 ) was a Canadian politician who served as the third Premier of Alberta from 1917 until 1921 . Born in Strabane , Ontario , in Wentworth County , Stewart was a farmer who moved west to Alberta after his farm was destroyed by a storm . There he became active in politics and was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Alberta in the 1909 election . He served as Minister of Public Works and Minister of Municipal Affairs — the first person to hold the latter position in Alberta — in the government of Arthur Sifton . When Sifton left provincial politics in 1917 to join the federal cabinet , Stewart was named his replacement . 
 As premier , Stewart tried to hold together his Liberal Party , which was divided by the Conscription Crisis of 1917 . He endeavoured to enforce prohibition of alcoholic beverages , which had been enshrined in law by a referendum during Sifton 's premiership , but found that the law was not widely enough supported to be effectively policed . His government took over several of the province 's financially troubled railroads , and guaranteed bonds sold to fund irrigation projects . Several of these policies were the result of lobbying by the United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) , with which Stewart enjoyed good relations ; even so , the UFA was politicized during Stewart 's premiership and ran candidates in the 1921 election . Unable to match the UFA 's appeal to rural voters , Stewart 's government was defeated at the polls and he was succeeded as premier by Herbert Greenfield . 
 After leaving provincial politics , Stewart was invited to join the federal cabinet of William Lyon Mackenzie King , in which he served as Minister of the Interior and Mines . In this capacity he signed , on behalf of the federal government , an agreement that transferred control of Alberta 's natural resources from Ottawa to the provincial government — a concession he had been criticized for being unable to negotiate as Premier . He served in King 's cabinet until 1930 , when the King government was defeated , but remained a member of Parliament until he lost his seat in 1935 . He died in December 1946 in Ottawa . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Stewart was born on August 26 , 1868 , in Strabane , Ontario , on Wentworth County , to Charles and Catherine Stewart . Charles Sr. was a stonemason and farmer . As a child , Charles Jr. accompanied his father to Carlisle to hear Canadian Prime Minister Sir John A. Macdonald . According to family lore , Macdonald noticed the young future Premier and told him that he was a fine boy who would make a good politician someday . When Charles Jr. was 16 , he moved with his family to a farm near Barrie . Seven years later , on December 17 , 1891 , he married Jane Russell Sneath ; the pair had eight children . After marrying Sneath , he converted to her Church of England faith . 
 In 1892 , Charles Sr. died , leaving his son in charge of the family farm . Twelve years later , this farm was destroyed by a storm , and Stewart decided to move west , settling near Killam , Alberta in 1906 . His family endured a cold winter — the warmest place in their shack was on the kitchen table , so they kept the baby there — and in the spring their crops were destroyed by hail . As he was unsuccessful at farming , he supplemented his income using the stonemason 's skills he had learned from his father : he laid foundations for the Canadian Pacific Railway , worked on the High Level Bridge in Edmonton , and dug Killam 's town well . He later worked in real estate and as a farm implement dealer , earning enough to buy a new and larger homestead in 1912 . 
 Stewart was active in his local community : he was the first chair of the Killam School District , attended the first meeting of Killam ratepayers on January 19 , 1907 , and was involved in the incorporation of Killam in January 1908 . In 1909 , the Alberta Liberal Party , which had dominated provincial politics throughout Alberta 's short history , came seeking a candidate to run in the new riding of Sedgewick . Stewart agreed to run and was elected by acclamation in the 1909 election . 
 = = = Early political career = = = 
 At the time of Stewart 's acclamation , Premier Alexander Cameron Rutherford seemed unassailable : he controlled 36 of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta 's 41 seats ( Stewart 's being one ) , and his Liberals had just won nearly sixty percent of the vote in their re @-@ election bid . Months later , however , Rutherford and his government were embroiled in the Alberta and Great Waterways Railway scandal , and the Liberal Party was split . Initially , Stewart remained loyal to Rutherford , and went so far as to allege in the legislature that insurgent Liberal John R. Boyle had offered two members of the legislative assembly ( MLAs ) , who were also hotel keepers , immunity from prosecution for liquor violations if they would support a new government in which Boyle was Attorney @-@ General . As additional details of the scandal emerged , however , Stewart himself became an insurgent , and was pleased when Arthur Sifton replaced Rutherford as Premier . 
 In May 1912 , Sifton expanded his cabinet , and Stewart was made the province 's first Minister of Municipal Affairs . As was required by the custom of the day when an MLA was appointed to cabinet , he resigned his seat to run in a by @-@ election , in which he easily defeated Conservative William John Blair . In cabinet , he became known as an advocate of public ownership of utilities , which placed him more in sympathy with the Conservative opposition than with Sifton . Despite this position , he backed Sifton 's 1913 resolution to the Alberta and Great Waterways problem , which involved partnering with the private sector ; this vote marked the first time that the Liberal caucus was united on the railways question since before the scandal broke in 1910 . 
 In December 1913 , Sifton moved Stewart from Municipal Affairs into the Public Works portfolio ; in this capacity , Stewart played a major role in the incorporation of the Alberta Farmers ' Co @-@ operative Elevator Company , which was a farmer @-@ run co @-@ operative with a charter to own and operate grain elevators . 
 = = Premier = = 
 Shortly after the 1917 provincial election ( in which Stewart and the Liberals were both soundly re @-@ elected ) , Canada found itself embroiled in a conscription crisis . The federal Conservative government , led by Robert Borden , supported implementing conscription . The opposition Liberals , led by Wilfrid Laurier , nominally opposed conscription , but many English @-@ speaking Liberals in fact supported it . The crisis was resolved when Borden formed a Union government composed of Conservatives and pro @-@ conscription Liberals . Sifton , falling into the latter group , was chosen as Alberta 's representative in that government , and resigned as Premier in October 1917 . Lieutenant @-@ Governor Robert Brett , accepting Sifton 's choice of successor , asked Stewart to form a government . His only serious rival for the position of premier was Charles Wilson Cross , who opposed conscription and was therefore not a palatable choice for much of the Liberal establishment . 
 = = = Party division = = = 
 The Alberta and Great Waterways scandal had opened up a rift in the provincial Liberal Party , between those who remained loyal to Cross and Rutherford and those who did not , with the latter group being led by William Henry Cushing and Frank Oliver . Sifton had papered over , if not in fact healed , this rift , and it did not burst open again until the conscription crisis . This time , however , the fault lines were different : Cross and Oliver had put aside their longtime enmity to join in opposing conscription , and Sifton , who had been selected Premier in part because he was not identified with either faction in the old feud , was Alberta 's most prominent pro @-@ conscription Liberal . 
 Stewart was a supporter of conscription and of the Union government , but did not take any active part in the acrimonious 1917 federal election , which was fought on the issue . Several of his ministers were not so circumspect : Attorney @-@ General Cross , Education Minister Boyle , and Municipal Affairs Minister Wilfrid <unk> campaigned for the Laurier Liberals ; Public Works Minister Archibald J. McLean and Treasurer Charles R. Mitchell stayed out of the fray while leaving no doubt of their support for Union . During the first legislative session after this election , Stewart came under attack from members of his own party . Alexander Grant MacKay criticized his failure to take advantage of the recent conference of premiers to press for the transfer of rights over Alberta 's natural resources from the federal to the provincial government ( Sifton had made this a priority during the pre @-@ war years , but had largely ceased his advocacy on the breakout of hostilities ) , and James Gray Turgeon attacked the government 's policy of levying taxes for the support of soldiers ' dependants on the grounds that he considered it a federal responsibility . 
 Divisions within the provincial Liberals came to a head in August 1918 , when Stewart dismissed Cross as Attorney @-@ General . It later emerged that Cross had refused to fire two detectives in his department after Stewart had concluded that their work would be better done by the provincial police , and that Stewart had found Cross 's work to be generally poor . He had asked for Cross 's resignation , received no response , and rescinded the Order in Council appointing him . In an effort to secure Cross 's departure from politics , Stewart offered him the position of Alberta 's provincial agent in London , England ; Cross refused it , and Stewart was criticized for using appointments for political advantage . 
 = = = Prohibition and democratic reform = = = 
 Alberta had implemented prohibition in 1916 as the result of a referendum supported by the powerful United Farmers of Alberta ( UFA ) lobby group . By the time Stewart took office , it was becoming apparent that the policy was not being universally complied with : Conservative MLA George Douglas Stanley alleged that judges were often hungover when they sat in judgment of those accused of violating liquor laws , and Cross 's replacement as Attorney @-@ General , John Boyle , admitted that in his estimation 65 % of the province 's male population broke the Prohibition Act . In 1921 the government realized profits of $ 800 @,@ 000 on alcohol legally sold for " medicinal " purposes , and Boyle estimated bootleggers ' profits at nine times that figure . Stewart blamed the problems on insufficient public support for the law , but even as he did so it was clear that there was not enough support to repeal it . 
 Prohibition was not the only UFA @-@ endorsed policy to have been passed by Sifton 's government : indeed , the legislation that allowed for citizen @-@ initiated referenda of the sort that had led to prohibition was itself the result of UFA advocacy . Once Stewart became Premier , he committed to the introduction of another UFA @-@ favoured democratic reform — proportional representation . However , a committee formed to examine the possibility disintegrated over what historian Carrol Jaques calls " battles within the group and a general dislike of the concept " . 
 = = = Public works = = = 
 Railway development had dominated the premierships of Stewart 's predecessors and , while losing political potency as an issue , it was still a matter that demanded his attention . Though Sifton had established a railway policy in 1913 that was satisfactory to all wings of the Liberal Party , the outbreak of the First World War the following year had all but put an end to railway construction across Canada . Once peace came , Albertans living near promised but as yet unbuilt lines began to clamour for their completion . The private companies with whom the government had partnered , however , were in no position to undertake the construction . The Edmonton , Dunvegan and British Columbia Railway was taken over by the Canadian Pacific Railway , with a clause in the agreement requiring the provincial government to spend $ 1 million to improve the route , and the Alberta and Great Waterways was taken over by Stewart 's government directly ( J. D. McArthur , the line 's previous owner , retained an option to repurchase it , but it was never exercised ) . 
 Irrigation projects also occupied much of Stewart 's attention as Premier . As with railways , the First World War had disrupted planned irrigation projects , and Albertan farmers , especially those from the arid south , were eager to see them resumed . Specifically popular was a project to irrigate 500 @,@ 000 acres ( 200 @,@ 000 ha ) in Lethbridge County , but when bonds were issued to finance the project , they did not sell . Stewart sought federal backing of the bonds , but Prime Minister Arthur Meighen declined . Stewart reluctantly agreed to offer a provincial guarantee , but to avoid negative reaction from northern Alberta he linked the enabling legislation to one allowing for drainage in northern areas . 
 = = = Stewart and the United Farmers of Alberta = = = 
 The United Farmers of Alberta had its beginnings as a farmers ' advocacy organization ; Stewart , a farmer , had joined it . The UFA had achieved several successes in dealing with the Sifton government , and Stewart also endeavoured to cooperate with it . The irrigation project was strongly supported by the UFA , as was Stewart 's action on proportional representation . When Peace River MLA William Archibald Rae introduced legislation to allow Imperial Oil to build a pipeline in the province , UFA President Henry Wise Wood sent Stewart a telegram of protest , as he believed that pipelines should be common carriers ; Stewart read it in the legislature , and Rae 's bill was withdrawn . Even given the victories , the UFA was not satisfied with the government 's record : in 1918 , the government took action on only three of the many resolutions the UFA had sent to it . 
 Some in the UFA had long favoured contesting elections directly as a political party instead of remaining on the sidelines as a pressure group , but Wood and other UFA leaders were implacably opposed to the idea . During the war , however , the political wing began to gain momentum , and at the 1919 UFA convention , it was decided that UFA candidates would contest the next provincial election . In fact , it ended up doing so somewhat sooner : in 1919 , Charles W. Fisher , Liberal MLA for Cochrane , died as a result of that year 's influenza epidemic , and a by @-@ election was necessitated to replace him . The UFA 's Alex Moore defeated his only opponent , Liberal Edward V. Thomson , by 835 votes to 708 . 
 Stewart felt betrayed : " It has been my fight ever since I became a minister to see that the farmers of the province were having a square deal , " he remarked , " and I think I have done this with some success . " Despite his general sympathy with the aims of the UFA , he could not support their transition into a political party . For one , he disagreed with the UFA 's belief that politics should be conducted along class , rather than ideological , lines . Stewart believed that " the more strongly armed the classes become the harder will it be to get the things we really need in our government " and asserted that " I never did and never will have any desire to form a coalition with anybody except with men who think the same as I do . " 
 Given the UFA 's formal adoption of the goal of replacing Stewart 's Liberal government with a Farmer government , it remained surprisingly friendly towards the Premier . While campaigning for Moore during the Cochrane by @-@ election , Wood called Stewart " an honourable , upright citizen , doing the best he could under difficult circumstances " and boasted that " if I have got to tear down the character of an honourable man to build up something that I want , I am not going to build it up . " When at last the general election came , in 1921 , the UFA declined to run a candidate in Stewart 's Sedgewick riding as a sign of respect to the Premier . After the UFA swept to victory , there was even speculation that Stewart , still a UFA member , would stay on as Premier of a new Farmer 's government ( as part of its opposition to " old style politics , " the UFA had contested the election without designating a leader ) , but he announced otherwise . 
 = = = Defeat and legacy = = = 
 The last provincial election had been held in June 1917 , and four years was the normal life of a legislature in Canada . Stewart called an election for July 19 . Though the Liberals ' fortunes had been sagging in the post @-@ war years , there remained no doubt that they could again defeat the Conservatives ; their real challenge was evidently from the newly politicized UFA . <unk> this challenge by increasing farmers ' discontent was a collapse of agricultural prices . The UFA had no leader , no fixed platform , and no inclination to attack Stewart or his government . What it did have was superior organization , and on election day this organization made itself felt in the form of thirty @-@ nine UFA members elected to fourteen Liberals . Stewart , who has been acclaimed in his own riding of Sedgewick , announced that he would resign as Premier as soon as the UFA had selected somebody to replace him . Once it selected Herbert Greenfield , Stewart made good on his pledge , and Greenfield replaced him August 13 . 
 In Jaques ' view , Stewart was defined by what he was not : 
 he was not involved in any of the railway scandals , current or past ; he was not conspicuously involved in any of the personal battles that had consumed Alexander Rutherford , Frank Oliver , the brothers Arthur and Clifford Sifton , Charles Cross , or any of their followers ; he was not a high @-@ powered flamboyant Liberal partisan ; he did not let himself get involved in federal Liberal Party machinations over issues such as the conscription crisis ; nor did he seem to be high @-@ handed or dictatorial — a criticism levelled at his predecessor , Arthur Sifton . 
 She argues that he was a " decent family man " whose career was a product of the circumstances in which he found himself . 
 Historian L. G. Thomas recognized Stewart 's admirable qualities , but criticized him for lacking Sifton 's " ruthless and forceful leadership " and claimed that " few provincial premiers have been more universally praised by their opponents and more unanimously deplored by their supporters . " Even so , he acknowledged that the decisive factor in Stewart 's downfall was not anything that he did , but the decision by the UFA to run candidates in 1921 ; in Thomas 's view , Sifton would have been defeated in 1917 if he had had to contend with a politicized UFA . 
 Mount Charles Stewart is located in the Bow Valley just north of Canmore . The peak was named for him in 1928 . The mountain is one of a very few in which both the first and last name of the individual is attached to the feature . There was a Mount Stewart already when it was determined , in 1928 , that Mr. Stewart should be honoured . The authorities are reluctant to apply the same name to more than one mountain and perhaps appropriate political connections were made use of to " bend the rules " somewhat and allow Charles Stewart to have his mountain . 
 = = Federal politics = = 
 Following the 1921 federal election , William Lyon Mackenzie King 's Liberals came to power in Ottawa . They had not won any seats in Alberta , and Stewart was invited to join King 's cabinet as Minister of the Interior and Mines ( which included responsibility as Superintendent @-@ General of Indian Affairs ) . He won a 1922 by @-@ election in the Quebec seat of Argenteuil , before shifting to the more familiar territory of Edmonton West in the 1925 election ; he was re @-@ elected there in 1926 and 1930 . In the 1935 election , he ran in the new riding of Jasper — Edson , where he was defeated by Social Crediter Walter Frederick Kuhl . 
 As a cabinet minister , Stewart aggressively marketed Canada 's coal both domestically and internationally , for which he was honoured by Alberta 's coal producers at a banquet and later awarded the Randolph Bruce Gold Medal in Science by the Canadian Institute of Mining and Metallurgy . He took a great interest in water power , and advised the government on jurisdictional issues surrounding the Niagara , St. Mary , and Milk Rivers . In 1927 , he served as Canada 's representative at the League of Nations . As Minister of the Interior , he oversaw the 1927 creation of Prince Albert National Park . Ironically , given the attacks he had sustained as Premier from Alexander Grant MacKay , he was part of the federal delegation that finally negotiated the transfer of resource control from the federal to the Alberta provincial government in December 1929 . The same agreement transferred resource rights to Saskatchewan and Manitoba . After it was signed but before it took effect , Manitoba Premier John Bracken concluded an agreement with the Winnipeg Electric Company , a private concern , to develop a hydroelectric dam at Seven Sisters ' Reach . Because resource rights were still controlled by the federal government , the deal required federal approval . Stewart advocated withholding this approval in deference to Manitoba public opinion , which favoured public ownership of such projects , but King honoured a provision of the resource transfer agreement that required the wishes of provincial governments to be respected until the transfer was complete and granted approval . Stewart 's preference for public over private ownership extended to King 's planned creation of the Bank of Canada ; Stewart wanted the new institution entirely under the control of the government , but King preferred an arrangement whereby half of its directors would be appointed by the government and half by private shareholders and suggested that advocates of public ownership might find themselves more at home in the socialist Cooperative Commonwealth Federation than in his Liberal caucus . 
 Despite Stewart 's involvement in transferring resource rights to Alberta , his relationship with the UFA government that had defeated him in 1921 was frosty : Lakeland College historian Franklin Foster , in his biography of UFA Premier John Edward Brownlee , alleges that this antipathy influenced Stewart 's preference for private corporations over the Alberta government in granting hydroelectric power permits . He also feuded with then @-@ Premier Brownlee over development in Alberta 's national parks ( Stewart favouring large @-@ scale private development and Brownlee opposing it ) , causing King to record in his diary " Brownlee strikes me as ... being superior to Mr. Stewart , who is handicapped in his dislike of [ Brownlee ] . " When King sought to absorb Progressives into his Liberal Party to form a stronger coalition against the Conservatives , Stewart opposed cooperation with the UFA leaders who made up a large part of the Progressives ' Albertan base . While King was inclined to view UFA politicians , like Progressives elsewhere , as " Liberals in a hurry " who were fundamentally comfortable with his government and preferred it to the Conservatives , Stewart understood that the UFA was a distinct group whose members were in many respect more conservative than liberal . King dismissed his minister 's views as being the result of Stewart 's acrimonious history with the UFA . 
 In fact , Stewart did not enjoy King 's confidence . Though he brought him into his cabinet in 1921 in part at the urging of Progressive leader Thomas Crerar , King found Stewart to be an inadequate protector of western interests — especially in his advocacy of tariff reduction , which King found lacklustre — and did not trust his political advice on the west . By 1925 he was considering appointing Stewart to the Senate , to remove him from active political involvement , but was handicapped by the absence of any other Alberta representation in his cabinet . In 1926 Stewart served as an emissary from King to recruit Saskatchewan Premier Charles Avery Dunning to the federal cabinet ; the mission fulfilled , King kept Stewart in cabinet but wrote in his diary that all matters pertaining to Alberta were to be " left to Dunning to do as he thinks best " . By 1927 , King complained that Stewart had " no grip " on the province of which he had once been Premier , and in 1930 he wrote " Organization in Alberta is terrible . Stewart is worse than useless , is like an old woman , with no real control of situation . " In the 1930 federal election Dunning and Crerar were both defeated ; King complained that it was " perfectly terrible to have Stewart alone representing the West . " When Stewart too went down to defeat in 1935 , King was pleased " not to have to consider him " in assembling his new cabinet , and opted instead to leave Alberta unrepresented to punish it for failing to elect any Liberals . 
 = = Post @-@ political life = = 
 After Stewart 's defeat in 1935 , he was appointed by George V to chair the Canadian section of the International Joint Commission , in recognition of his expertise on international water boundary issues . In 1938 , he was appointed chair of the Canadian section of the British Columbia – Yukon – Alaska Highway Commission . In these capacities , he travelled across Canada , visiting his son George at the family homestead near Killam at every opportunity . He died December 6 , 1946 , leaving an estate of $ 21 @,@ 961 . 
 Born in one of Canada 's original provinces , Stewart moved west as part of a vast migration to the prairies , and settled in Alberta the year it became a province . As Alberta grew , Stewart played an increasingly important political role in it , until he joined the federal government to become Alberta 's voice there , ultimately helping it achieve constitutional equality with the older provinces by transferring to its government control of its resources . As Mackenzie King eulogized him , " in more respects than one , Mr. Stewart 's career mirrored the development of Canada itself . " 
 = = Electoral record = = 
 = = = As party leader = = = 
 = = = As MLA = = = 
 = = = As MP = = = 
 = Ilyushin Il @-@ 20 ( 1948 ) = 
 The Ilyushin Il @-@ 20 was a Soviet prototype for a heavily armored ground attack aircraft to replace the Ilyushin Il @-@ 10 . It featured a number of innovative concepts including a cockpit mounted on top of the engine , directly behind the propeller , and wing @-@ mounted autocannon that could be adjusted on the ground to fire level or depressed 23 ° to allow the aircraft to strafe ground targets while remaining in level flight . However it was slower than the Il @-@ 10 , and its immature M @-@ 47 engine was problematic in flight tests in 1948 – 49 . It was not placed into production . The test pilots called the aircraft the <unk> ( Hunchback ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 Sergey Ilyushin 's concept to meet the 1947 requirement for a superior aircraft to the Il @-@ 10 in performance and firepower was a heavily armored , single @-@ engine , all @-@ metal , low @-@ wing monoplane powered by the newly developed M @-@ 47 — also known as the MF @-@ <unk> or M @-@ <unk> — liquid @-@ cooled engine , which developed 3 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 2 @,@ 200 kW ) at take @-@ off . The design 's most notable feature was the pilot 's cockpit mounted directly above the engine , reminiscent of the Blackburn Blackburn and Blackburn <unk> . Furthermore , the cockpit was situated directly behind the four @-@ bladed propeller to maximize pilot visibility . The windshield extended down to the propeller hub and provided the pilot with a 37 ° downward field of view ; in a medium dive he could view targets directly underneath the aircraft . 
 As was traditional with Ilyushin 's ground attack aircraft the Il @-@ 20 used a load @-@ bearing armored shell to protect the pilot and gunner as well as the engine , fuel , lubrication and cooling systems . The thickness of the armor varied between 6 to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 24 to 0 @.@ 59 in ) and weighed a total of 1 @,@ 840 kg ( 4 @,@ 060 lb ) . The pilot 's canopy used armored glass 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick for the main windshield and 65 mm ( 2 @.@ 6 in ) for the <unk> . 
 A wide variety of armament suites were considered for the Il @-@ 20 . One involved two wing @-@ mounted 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) cannon and two others mounted in the fuselage , fixed downwards at a 23 ° angle for strafing targets in level flight . This version 's normal bomb load was only 400 kg ( 880 lb ) , but 700 kg ( 1 @,@ 500 lb ) could be carried in overload condition or four RS @-@ 132 rockets could be carried instead . Another version used one 45 mm ( 1 @.@ 8 in ) cannon , two 23 mm guns and six under @-@ wing rockets . Most studies placed the rear gunner in a dorsal turret separated from the cockpit by the main fuel tank , but one study put him in an armored Il @-@ <unk> rear turret , but this required a longer fuselage and moving the wings aft to maintain the CG in the right place . 
 The obliquely mounted fuselage cannon were thought to be too difficult to aim and were not included in the prototype ; the weight savings allowed the ammunition for the four 23 mm <unk> 'nyy Sh @-@ 3 wing @-@ mounted guns to be increased to 900 rounds . One additional innovation in the prototype was that they could be adjusted on the ground to fire at a 23 ° downward angle in addition to the normal level position . The dorsal gunner also fired a Sh @-@ 3 gun , which was mounted in a separate , remotely controlled , Il @-@ VU @-@ 11 turret that could traverse through 180 ° and elevated to a maximum of 80 ° . A cassette of ten AG @-@ 2 aerial grenades was provided to deter any fighters approaching from below . Maximum bomb load was 1 @,@ 190 kg ( 2 @,@ 620 lb ) and four bomb bays were provided in the wing center @-@ section for small bombs . Alternatively two 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) bombs could be carried on wing racks . Launch rails were provided for four 132 mm ( 5 @.@ 2 in ) RS @-@ 132 rockets . 
 The prototype was completed on 27 November 1948 and its first flight was shortly afterwards on 4 December . The best speed that the Il @-@ 20 could manage was only 515 km / h ( 320 mph ) at an altitude of 2 @,@ 800 m ( 9 @,@ 200 ft ) , 36 km / h ( 22 mph ) slower than the Il @-@ 10 at the same altitude , possibly a consequence of the increased drag and weight penalties inherent in the greater fuselage cross @-@ section and area as a result of the placement of the pilot above the engine . The new M @-@ 47 engine proved to be defective with severe vibration problems . Other problems were that the Air Force wasn 't satisfied with the armament and that access to the engine for routine maintenance was severely hampered by the placement of the cockpit over the engine . Another concern was the close placement of the cockpit to the propeller ; this was believed to increase the risk to the pilot if he had to bail out or make a belly landing — in which case the bent propeller blades might hit the canopy . 
 These issues , coupled with emerging jet engine technology , led to the cancellation of the Il @-@ 20 program on 14 May 1949 . 
 = = Specifications ( Il @-@ 20 ) = = 
 Data from The Osprey Encyclopedia of Russian Aircraft from 1875 - 1995 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 2 
 Length : 13 @.@ 58 m ( 44 ft 6 5 / 8 in ) 
 Wingspan : 15 @.@ 43 m ( 50 ft 7 ½ in ) 
 Height : ( ) 
 Wing area : 44 @.@ 0 m ² ( 473 @.@ 66 ft ² ) 
 Empty weight : 7 @,@ 500 kg ( 16 @,@ 534 lb ) 
 Loaded weight : 9 @,@ 500 kg ( 20 @,@ 950 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × AM @-@ 47 Liquid @-@ cooled V @-@ 12 , 2 @,@ 200 kW ( 3 @,@ 000 hp ) 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 515 km / h ( 278 kn , 320 mph ) 
 Range : 1 @,@ 680 km ( 908 nmi , 1044 mi ) 
 Service ceiling : 7 @,@ 750 m ( 25 @,@ 430 ft ) 
 Wing loading : 223 kg / m ² ( 45 @.@ 6 lb / ft ² ) 
 Power / mass : 0 @.@ 23 kW / kg ( 0 @.@ 14 hp / lb ) 
 Climb to 5 @,@ 000 m ( 16 @,@ 400 ft ) : 8 min 
 Armament 
 Prototype as flown 
 1 × Sh @-@ 3 23 mm cannon mounted in a Il @-@ VU @-@ 11 turret 
 4 × Sh @-@ 3 23 mm cannon in adjustable mounts outboard of the main undercarriage legs 
 1 @,@ 190 kg of bombs 
 4 × RS @-@ 132 132 mm rockets 
 = Cultural Revolution Group = 
 The ( Central ) Cultural Revolution Group ( CRG or <unk> ; Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> <unk> ) was formed in May 1966 as a replacement organisation to the Central Committee Secretariat and the " Five Man Group " , and was initially directly responsible to the Standing Committee of the Politburo . It consisted mainly of radical supporters of Mao , including Chen Boda , the Chairman 's wife Jiang Qing , Kang Sheng , Yao Wenyuan , Zhang Chunqiao , Wang Li and Xie Fuzhi . The CRG played a central role in the Cultural Revolution 's first few years , and for a period of time the group replaced the Politburo Standing Committee ( PSC ) as the de facto top power organ of China . Its members were also involved in many of the major events of the Cultural Revolution . 
 = = Background = = 
 In January 1965 , at a meeting of the Politburo , Mao Zedong called on the leaders of the Chinese Communist Party ( CCP ) to implement a " Cultural Revolution " in China . ( The Oxford English Dictionary traces the English @-@ language phrase " cultural revolution " ( defined as " a sudden change in the culture of a people or society " ) as far back as 1929 . ) The meeting established a body known as the " Five Man Group " ( chaired by Peng Zhen , the fifth @-@ ranking member of the Politburo ) , with the aim of overseeing the beginnings of the Cultural Revolution . Of the members of the group , only Kang Sheng was a supporter of Mao . However , the group remained relatively inactive until the spring of 1966 , when it censored the writings of Yao Wenyuan and of other radicals for making an academic debate on the play Hai Rui Dismissed from Office into a political one ( a move which Mao had started encouraging ) . 
 Unhappy over what he perceived to be an obstruction of the course of the Cultural Revolution , Mao returned to the capital in the spring of 1966 , and the Central Committee formally announced the dissolution of the " Five Man Group " in its May 16 Circular : 
 The Central Committee has decided to ... dissolve the ' Group of Five in Charge of the Cultural Revolution ' , and to set up a new Cultural Revolution group directly under the Standing Committee of the Political Bureau . 
 The " Five Man Group " was dissolved immediately and Peng Zhen faced charges of allegedly obstructing the course of the Cultural Revolution . Soon after May 16 he was dismissed from all his offices and the control of the capital passed into the hands of followers of Mao . Chen Boda was selected by Chairman Mao to head the newly formed " Cultural Revolution Group " , which would report to the Politburo Standing Committee . Consisting originally of between fifteen and twenty people , the CRG included , amongst others , Jiang Qing ( the wife of Chairman Mao ) as vice @-@ chairman , Kang Sheng as the Group Adviser , Yao Wenyuan , Zhang Chunqiao , Qi <unk> , Wang Li and Xie Fuzhi . There were also several less well @-@ known members . However , Chen Boda did not chair the CRG 's meetings - this task fell to Zhou Enlai , who held a position of control over the group , and could speak on behalf of the entire group without needing to consult it . 
 = = Role in the Cultural Revolution = = 
 The mandate given to the CRG on its formation was to guide the Cultural Revolution , and it was given many of the powers and the political prestige of the Central Committee and the Politburo . For example , when the order , on 5 September 1967 , was issued instructing the People 's Liberation Army ( PLA ) to restore order to China , it was signed by the CRG as well as the Central Committee , the State Council and the Military Affairs Commission . In addition , the CRG had theoretical control over the People 's Liberation Army , although very soon army commanders wielded enough political power to often act independently of the CRG . The CRG was also given the entire <unk> compound in Beijing to use at its offices . All documents from Mao were sent for approval to the CRG ( as well as Lin Biao and Zhou Enlai ) , while other members of the Politburo Standing Committee were not sent these documents . Gradually , through examples like this , the CRG began to overtake the PSC in its political stature and importance . 
 Throughout the early years of the Cultural Revolution , the CRG acted as a body that directed the course the movement should take . Due to Mao 's backing of the group , its orders were of significant importance . For example , after the Wuhan Incident , Jiang Qing suggested in a speech that the Red Guards should ' defend with weapons ' , leading to a surge in the seizure of PLA armaments by rebel groups . In addition , Wang Li and other CRG radicals ( taking their cue from Jiang Qing ) called for the removal of ' revisionist ' elements in the PLA . The radical CRG , however , often found it had to contend with the more conservative view of how the Cultural Revolution should progress promoted by Zhou Enlai and his supporters , who were as interested in stability and the maintenance of some form of government as they were in revolution . 
 The CRG also had several supplementary functions . Its Art and Literature Group , headed by Jiang Qing , took over the responsibilities of the Ministry of Culture when the latter was dissolved in May 1967 . Furthermore , the group worked closely with the Central Case Examination Group ( <unk> ) , an organisation established in 1966 that investigated the alleged crimes and errors of higher @-@ ranking members of the Party . Practically all the members of the CRG were also members of the <unk> . 
 The members of the CRG also had important individual roles in two of the important events of the Cultural Revolution , the Shanghai Commune and the Wuhan Incident . 
 = = = The Shanghai Commune = = = 
 See : Shanghai People 's Commune 
 Two members of the CRG played a significant part in the affair over the Shanghai Commune . Due to his connections with the city ( he had been secretary of the Shanghai Party Committee until July 1966 ) , Zhang Chunqiao was dispatched from the centre in November 1966 to mediate the crisis over the siege of some worker 's groups at Anting . Early in January the next year , Zhang Chunqiao was to return again to Shanghai with his CRG colleague Yao Wenyuan to lead the new order established after the fall of the old Party apparatus , and in early February he was to become head of the newly formed Shanghai Commune . However , the combination of questions over the legitimacy of the Commune 's leadership , and a change in attitudes to communes in general at the centre , meant that the Shanghai Commune was to last less than a month . 
 = = = The Wuhan Incident = = = 
 See : Wuhan Incident 
 Despite the CRG 's 1967 orders forbidding violence , in July 1967 the city of Wuhan became a battleground for two large rival rebel groups - the Million Heroes and the Wuhan Workers ' General Headquarters ( WWGH ) . The 400 @,@ 000 strong WWGH was besieged by the Million Heroes , who were being supplied with weapons and manpower by the local PLA commander Chen <unk> . When Chen ignored Zhou Enlai 's orders that the siege was to be lifted , Wang Li and Xie Fuzhi were dispatched to Wuhan to resolve the crisis . On 19 July the pair instructed the PLA to switch its support from the Million Heroes to the WWGH . In the early hours of the next day however , Xie Fuzhi was arrested by the PLA while Wang Li was kidnapped by the Million Heroes and beaten . After a failed attempt by Zhou Enlai to resolve the crisis , it took a show of military force by other PLA units for Chen <unk> to eventually surrender . 
 = = Fall of the Cultural Revolution Group = = 
 The first two years of the Cultural Revolution witnessed a continued growth in tensions between the People 's Liberation Army and the CRG , due to the PLA 's gradual suppression of the CRG @-@ backed rebel groups and Red Guards . By the October 1967 , the PLA had reached the peak of its ascendancy , which meant the end of the CRG . In November 1967 , the Group 's radical party journal , Red Flag , was ordered to stop publication . In addition , the leading members of the CRG quickly became scapegoats for the problems of the summer of 1967 , when armed conflict between rebel groups , other groups and the PLA had been the norm . Individuals including Wang Li were soon connected with the " May Sixteenth Corps " , a supposed group that exploited divisions in the Cultural Revolution to cause the anarchy and was plotting to seize power . Although there is evidence that Wang Li and others formed a faction within the CRG that employed the term " May Sixteenth " , and that the CRG did exploit divisions in the movement , there is little evidence known to suggest a plot to seize power . 
 The fall of the CRG has also been attributed by some to the fact that Mao had become increasingly moderate in his view of the Cultural Revolution since February 1967 , and that others ( like the CRG ) who were still committed to the original aims of the movement remained exposed on the left @-@ wing while Mao moved towards the centre . <unk> , they were now far enough on the left to be considered too radical for comfort . 
 In September , some of the CRG radicals including Wang Li and Guan Feng were arrested on the orders of Mao , but by the end of the Cultural Revolution the new drive to eradicate ' ultra @-@ leftists ' would see the arrest of nearly all of the CRG 's members ( Jiang Qing would survive until the death of Mao ) . 
 After the 1967 arrest of some of its leading members , the CRG continued to play a role in the Cultural Revolution , but this was limited . For example , the remaining members were asked to attend the Twelfth Plenum of the Eighth Central Committee in October 1968 , where Liu Shaoqi was officially expelled from the Chinese Communist Party . The group was never formally dissolved , but ceased to exist at some point after the CCP 's Ninth Congress in the Spring of 1969 . The CRG 's remaining former members - including Jiang Qing and Kang Sheng - were left to fight their individual political battles in the years that followed . 
 = Millennium Stadium = 
 The Millennium Stadium ( Welsh : Stadiwm y <unk> ) , currently named the Principality Stadium ( Welsh : Stadiwm Principality ) for sponsorship purposes , is the national stadium of Wales , located in Cardiff . It is the home of the Wales national rugby union team and has also staged games of the Wales national football team . Initially built to host the 1999 Rugby World Cup , it has gone on to host many other large @-@ scale events , such as the Tsunami Relief concert , the Super Special Stage of Wales Rally Great Britain , the Speedway Grand Prix of Great Britain and various music concerts . It also hosted six FA Cup finals and several other high profile football fixtures whilst Wembley Stadium was being redeveloped . 
 The stadium is owned by Millennium Stadium plc , a subsidiary company of the Welsh Rugby Union ( WRU ) . The stadium was designed by a team led by architects Bligh Lobb Sports Architecture . WS Atkins were the structural engineers , and the building contractor was Laing . The total construction cost of the stadium was £ 121 million , of which the Millennium Commission funded £ 46 million . 
 The Millennium Stadium opened in June 1999 and its first major event was an international rugby union match on 26 June 1999 , when Wales beat South Africa in a friendly by 29 – 19 before a test crowd of 29 @,@ 000 . With a total seating capacity of 74 @,@ 500 , it is the third @-@ largest stadium in the Six Nations Championship behind the Stade de France and Twickenham . It is also the second @-@ largest stadium in the world with a fully retractable roof and was the second stadium in Europe to have this feature . Listed as a category four stadium by UEFA , the stadium was chosen as the venue for the 2017 UEFA Champions League Final . On 8 September 2015 , the Welsh Rugby Union announced a 10 @-@ year sponsorship deal with the Principality Building Society that saw the stadium renamed as the " Principality Stadium " from 22 January 2016 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Until 1969 , Cardiff RFC and Wales both played their home matches on the same pitch at Cardiff Arms Park , but all this changed in the 1969 – 70 season . As a result of an agreement between Cardiff Athletic Club and the WRU , the National Stadium project had established that a new stadium for international matches and events was required , with Cardiff RFC moving to a new purpose built stadium on the original cricket ground at the site of the former Cardiff Arms Park stadium . By 7 April 1984 the National Stadium was officially opened . However , in 1994 , a redevelopment committee was set up to consider redeveloping the National Stadium , and by 1995 the WRU had been chosen to host the 1999 Rugby World Cup . 
 In 1995 , the National Stadium , which was designed in 1962 , only had a capacity of 53 @,@ 000 ; other nations ' stadia , such as Twickenham ( England ) with a capacity of 75 @,@ 000 , and Murrayfield Stadium ( Scotland ) with a capacity of 67 @,@ 000 , had overtaken it . France was also about to build the Stade de France , which would have a capacity of more than 80 @,@ 000 for the 1998 FIFA World Cup . The original capacity of the National Stadium was 65 @,@ 000 , but this had been reduced to 53 @,@ 000 , due to the Taylor Report . 11 @,@ 000 of 53 @,@ 000 capacity was on the East Terrace and the conversion to an all @-@ seater stadium would have reduced the stadium capacity still further to just 47 @,@ 500 . 
 In addition to the problems of capacity , the National Stadium was also very well hidden by the neighbouring buildings to the south in Park Street , Wood Street and to the east in Westgate Street , and also by Cardiff Rugby Ground in the north . It was only fully visible from across the River Taff in the west . Access to the ground was also very restricted with the main entrance being a narrow opening in Westgate Street to the east which was shared by both vehicles and spectators alike . 
 The options for the new stadium included adding a third tier to the existing National Stadium , or moving to a new site . This last option was discounted because it would have required a vast car parking facility , and that would have put severe short @-@ term pressures on the local transport infrastructure , creating traffic jams and pollution . The committee eventually chose a new stadium on the same site but with considerable increase in its capacity . It would also involve moving the alignment of the stadium from west @-@ east to north @-@ south . This was the option supported by the Millennium Commission . It would become the fourth redevelopment of the Cardiff Arms Park site . It was also decided that the new stadium should have a sliding roof to accommodate a multi @-@ use venue , with a grass pitch for rugby and football . The only other sliding roofs in Europe at the time were at two Dutch stadia – the Amsterdam Arena , completed in 1996 with a capacity of 50 @,@ 000 ; and <unk> in Arnhem , a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ capacity ground built from 1996 to 1998 . 
 To remain on the Arms Park site , additional space had to be found to allow safe access and to provide room for the increased capacity and improved facilities . This was achieved by the purchase of adjacent buildings to the south and east and by the construction of a new £ 6 million River Walk by the River Taff on the western side of the stadium . 
 By 1999 , the Millennium Stadium had replaced the National Stadium , Cardiff Arms Park , as the national stadium of Wales for rugby union and association football international matches . Cardiff RFC continued as before to play at Cardiff Arms Park rugby ground , which had replaced the cricket ground in 1969 . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The stadium was designed by a team led by Rod Sheard at Lobb Sport Architecture , who merged to become Populous . The building contractor was Laing and the structural engineers were WS Atkins . Mike <unk> of WS Atkins designed the stadium 's retractable roof . Cimolai S.p.A. from Italy fabricated and erected the 72 steel plane frames for the stands and all the 4 @,@ 500 components of the roof . 
 Construction involved the demolition of a number of buildings , primarily the existing National Stadium ( Cardiff Arms Park ) , Wales Empire Pool ( swimming pool ) in Wood Street , Cardiff Empire Telephone Exchange building ( owned by BT ) in Park Street , the newly built Territorial Auxiliary & Volunteer Reserve building in Park Street , and the Social Security offices in Westgate Street . 
 The stadium was built by Laing in 1999 on the site of the National Stadium , with the head of construction being Steve Ager . It was built for the 1999 Rugby World Cup , for which Wales was the main host , with seven of the 41 matches , including the final , being played at the stadium . 
 The total construction cost of the stadium was £ 121 million , which was funded by private investment and £ 46 million of public funds from the Millennium Commission , the sale of debentures to supporters ( which offered guaranteed tickets in exchange for an interest @-@ free loan ) , and loans . The development left the WRU heavily in debt . 
 The Millennium Stadium was named as such in recognition of the Millennium Commission 's contribution to the building . 
 The stadium was first used for a major event on 26 June 1999 , when Wales played South Africa in a rugby union friendly match before a test crowd of 29 @,@ 000 . Wales won the match 29 – 19 : the first time they had ever beaten the Springboks . 
 = = = 2016 renaming = = = 
 On 8 September 2015 it was announced that the Millennium Stadium would be renamed Principality Stadium as the result of a 10 @-@ year naming rights deal with the Principality Building Society . Some fans expressed opposition on social media . 
 On 22 January 2016 , the Millennium Stadium was officially renamed as the Principality Stadium . The new name , written bilingually ( " Stadiwm Principality Stadium " ) and covering 114 square metres of the upper stadium , was lit up at a special evening ceremony , to be followed by a festival to encourage grassroots rugby . The change of name also meant a change of logo for the Millennium Stadium . There were three designs shortlisted , and a panel , which included the former Wales international captain Ryan Jones and staff and members of the WRU and Principality Building Society , chose the final design . A spokesperson for the WRU said : " The new stadium logo takes its inspiration from the venue 's iconic architecture ; four spires , curved frontage and fully retractable roof . " 
 = = Features = = 
 The all @-@ seater stadium has the capacity for 74 @,@ 500 supporters and features a retractable roof , only the second stadium of its type in Europe , and the largest football stadium in the world with this feature , by capacity . Additional seating is sometimes added for special events such as a rugby Test against the New Zealand All Blacks , or for the FA Cup Final . The current record attendance is 74 @,@ 576 , recorded at Wales ' 30 – 15 victory over Scotland in the 2008 Six Nations Championship on 9 February 2008 . 
 The natural grass turf was made up of a modular system installed by <unk> ITM . It features built in irrigation and drainage . The pitch itself was laid on top of some 7 @,@ 412 pallets that could be moved so the stadium could be used for concerts , exhibitions and other events . 
 In May 2014 , after much trouble with disease and stability , the surface was removed and replaced with a more resilient interwoven sand based Desso pitch . 
 The four ends of the ground are called the North Stand , the West Stand , the South Stand , and the BT Stand ( east ) . The South Stand was previously known as the Hyder Stand , until Hyder was sold . The stadium has three tiers of seating with the exception of the North Stand , which has two tiers . The lower tier holds approximately 23 @,@ 500 spectators , the middle tier holding 18 @,@ 000 and the upper tier holding 33 @,@ 000 spectators . 
 The stadium was slightly restricted in size due to its proximity to Cardiff Rugby Club 's home in the adjacent smaller stadium within Cardiff Arms Park . The WRU were unable to secure enough funding to include the North Stand in the new stadium , and the Millennium Commission would not allow any of its funds to be used in any way for the construction of a new stadium for Cardiff RFC . The WRU held talks with Cardiff RFC to see if it would be possible for the club to either move or secure funding for the Cardiff Arms Park to be re @-@ developed , but these were unsuccessful . The stadium thus had to be completed with a break in its bowl structure in the North Stand , known colloquially as the Cardiff fault or Glanmor 's Gap , after Glanmor Griffiths , then chairman of the WRU and now a former president . 
