 The superstructure of the stadium is based around four 90 @.@ 3 @-@ metre ( 296 ft ) masts . The stadium was built from 56 @,@ 000 tonnes of concrete and steel , and has 124 hospitality suites and 7 hospitality lounges , 22 bars , 7 restaurants , 17 first aid points , 12 escalators and 7 lifts . The stadium has 7 gates for access to the site ; Gate 1 is from the River Walk via Castle Street ( to the north ) , Gates 2 and 3 are via Westgate Street ( to the east ) , Gate 4 is for Security only also via Westgate Street , Gate 5 is via Park Street ( to the south ) and Gates 6 and 7 are via the Millennium Plaza ( also to the south ) . 
 Further stadium development is expected to occur in the future . Any renovation will involve replacing the old North Stand of the former National Stadium with a new stand similar to the three existing stands of the new Millennium Stadium . This will make the stadium bowl shaped and will increase capacity to around 80 @,@ 000 . It will resolve the existing problems of deteriorating concrete quality on the old structure in the north stand . 
 In each of the stadium 's bars , so @-@ called " joy machines " can pour 12 pints in less than 20 seconds . During a Wales Vs France match , 63 @,@ 000 fans drank 77 @,@ 184 pints of beer , almost double the 44 @,@ 000 pints drunk by a similar number of fans at a game at Twickenham . The stadium has a resident hawk named " Dad " , who is employed to drive seagulls and pigeons out of the stadium . 
 In 2005 the stadium installed an " Arena Partition Drape System " – a 1 @,@ 100 kg black curtain made up of 12 drapes measuring 9 metres ( 30 ft ) x 35 m ( 115 ft ) – to vary the audience from a capacity of over 73 @,@ 000 down to between 12 @,@ 000 and 46 @,@ 000 , depending on the four different positions that it can be hung . The curtains can be stored in the roof of the stadium when not in use . The £ 1m cost of the curtain was funded by the stadium , the Millennium Commission , its caterers <unk> and Christopher ( Compass Group ) and by the then Wales Tourist Board . The curtain was supplied by Blackout . 
 In May 2015 Gareth Davies the Chairman of the WRU announced that the stadium would be fitted with new seats , replacing the original seats from 1999 at a cost of £ 4 million to £ 5 million , which would be completed by 2018 . In addition a new £ 3 @.@ 1 million Desso hybrid pitch will be installed . 
 = = = Statue of Sir Tasker Watkins = = = 
 A statue of Sir Tasker Watkins , the former WRU president between 1993 and 2004 , was commissioned to stand outside Gate 3 of the stadium . The bronze statue , 9 feet ( 2 @.@ 7 m ) tall , was sculpted by Llantwit Major based sculptor Roger Andrews . The Assembly Government contributed £ 25 @,@ 000 , as did Cardiff Council . It was official unveiled on 15 November 2009 by his daughter , Lady Mair Griffith @-@ Williams . 
 = = Usage = = 
 As well as international rugby union and association football , the Millennium Stadium has hosted a variety of sports , including , rugby league ( including the Challenge Cup final on 3 occasions between 2003 and 2005 , the opening ceremony of the 2013 Rugby League World Cup and Welsh Rugby League internationals ) , speedway , boxing , the Wales Rally Great Britain stage of the World Rally Championship , Monster Jam and indoor cricket . The indoor cricket match between The Brits and a Rest of the World team for the <unk> Power Cricket Cup , which took place on 4 and 5 October 2002 . 
 = = = Rugby union = = = 
 The stadium is the home of the Welsh rugby union team , who play all of their home fixtures at the venue . These games include those during the Six Nations , as well as the Autumn Internationals against nations from the Southern Hemisphere . Apart from the national team , the stadium has also hosted Heineken Cup finals on five occasions . In total , the site , including the National Stadium , has hosted the final of the Heineken Cup on seven occasions . 
 2002 Leicester Tigers 15 – 9 Munster 
 2006 Munster 23 – 19 Biarritz 
 2008 Toulouse 13 – 16 Munster 
 2011 Leinster 33 – 22 Northampton 
 2014 Toulon 23 – 6 Saracens 
 The stadium has also been used for Celtic League games , and the semi @-@ finals of the Anglo @-@ Welsh Cup in 2006 and 2007 . Since 2013 , the Millennium Stadium hosts the Judgement Day , a double @-@ header fixture of the four Welsh Pro12 teams . The 2015 edition had 52 @,@ 762 spectators , the highest in the history of the league . 
 The stadium hosted the first match in the 2005 British and Irish Lions tour to New Zealand when they drew 25 – 25 against Argentina in a warm @-@ up Test match . On 30 March 2011 , the stadium also hosted the Welsh Varsity rugby match for the first time in the history of the match . 
 Rugby World Cup fixtures 
 The Welsh Rugby Union hosted the 1999 Rugby World Cup with the Final being played at the stadium . The stadium also hosted 3 pool matches and 1 quarter @-@ final match ( New Zealand 18 – 20 France ) of the 2007 Rugby World Cup . 
 On 15 October 2011 , the stadium was open to Welsh Rugby Union fans free of charge , providing that they wear red so that they could watch a live screening of the 2011 Rugby World Cup semi @-@ final between Wales and France that was played at Eden Park , Auckland , New Zealand . The match was screened on the stadium 's existing large screens , on all of their television screens and on a screen that was brought in for the occasion . The same was done for the Bronze Final between Wales and Australia which saw Wales defeated and take fourth place . 
 The stadium hosted six pool matches , including two of Wales ' , and two quarter @-@ final matches during the 2015 Rugby World Cup . 
 = = = Rugby league = = = 
 The stadium first hosted rugby league football during the 2000 World Cup : a double header featuring Cook Islands vs Lebanon and Wales vs New Zealand that attracted a crowd of 17 @,@ 612 . It was again used as Wales ' home ground during the 2002 New Zealand rugby league tour of Great Britain and France when they again hosted the Kiwis this time attracting 8 @,@ 746 spectators . 
 The Stadium has hosted three Challenge Cup Finals , which are usually played at Wembley , from 2003 to 2005 . In 2003 the Bradford Bulls defeated the Leeds Rhinos 22 – 20 in front of 71 @,@ 212 fans . St Helens defeated Wigan 36 – 16 in 2004 in front of 73 @,@ 734 fans , while Hull defeated Leeds 25 – 24 in 2005 in front of 74 @,@ 213 fans , the largest rugby league crowd at the stadium . 
 Also , in 2007 the stadium hosted the inaugural Millennium Magic weekend . This was a 2 @-@ day event in May when an entire round of Super League matches were played , three games on the Saturday and three games on the Sunday . The event was deemed a success by the sport 's governing body , the RFL , and second Millennium Magic event took place in May 2008 , although the 2009 and 2010 events were held at Murrayfield Stadium and were renamed Magic Weekend . In 2011 , Magic Weekend moved back to Cardiff with the opening round of Super League being played . 
 On Saturday 26 October 2013 , the Millennium Stadium hosted the opening ceremony and the first two fixtures of the 2013 Rugby League World Cup : a double @-@ header featuring Wales against Italy and England against title favourites and eventual tournament champions Australia . This double header produced an overall attendance of 45 @,@ 052 which is an International rugby league record at the stadium . 
 = = = Association football = = = 
 From 2000 to 2011 , the stadium was the almost @-@ permanent home of Welsh football . The national team played the vast majority of home matches at the Millennium Stadium , with a handful of friendly matches once or twice a year at the Racecourse Ground , Wrexham or Liberty Stadium , Swansea . The first Welsh football game at the stadium was played against Finland in 2000 , and drew a then @-@ record home crowd for Welsh football of over 66 @,@ 000 . This has since been beaten on several occasions . However , since 2011 , the majority of home games have been played at the smaller Cardiff City Stadium , the home of Cardiff City . 
 While the Millennium Stadium was under construction , the original Wembley Stadium had hosted the Welsh rugby team during the building of the new ground . The favour was returned from 2001 while the new Wembley Stadium was being built , with the Millennium hosting : 
 FA Cup Final 
 League Cup Final 
 Football League Trophy Final 
 Football League play @-@ off Finals 
 FA Community Shield 
 Challenge Cup 
 The stadium became notorious for an apparent " away team hoodoo " ; the first 11 major cup finals were all won by the teams occupying the home dressing room . Stoke City beat Brentford 2 – 0 in 2002 to end the " hoodoo " , after Paul Darby carried out a feng shui blessing . 
 Liverpool were the first team to win the FA Cup at the Millennium Stadium in 2001 after beating Arsenal 2 – 1 . Liverpool also won the last FA Cup Final to be played at the Millennium Stadium in 2006 , beating West Ham United 3 – 1 in a penalty shoot @-@ out that followed a 3 – 3 draw after extra time in what was billed as ' the best cup final of the modern era ' . 
 The Football League Third Division play @-@ offs in 2003 saw AFC Bournemouth beat Lincoln City 5 – 2 . In this game , Bournemouth set a new record for the most goals scored by one team in a single match at the stadium . This record has since been matched but not beaten . The last domestic cup match played was when Doncaster Rovers beat Bristol Rovers 3 – 2 after extra time in the Football League Trophy Final on 1 April 2007 . 
 In 2001 , the Football Association of Wales ( FAW ) confirmed that they had bid to host the 2003 UEFA Champions League Final . The stadium had recently been rated as a five @-@ star stadium by UEFA , making it one of the favourites to host the match , but the final was eventually awarded to Old Trafford , the home of Manchester United . 
 It was suggested that the stadium would have been one of the venues of a proposed UEFA Euro 2016 championship hosted jointly by Wales and Scotland . However , the bid did not reach the formal UEFA selection stage having been abandoned by the Welsh and Scottish Football Associations for financial reasons . In April 2014 , the FAW did submit a formal bid to host three group matches and either a round of 16 match or a quarter @-@ final at Euro 2020 , which UEFA planned to host at 13 venues across Europe . When the host venues were voted on in September 2014 , the Millennium Stadium lost out by a single vote behind Glasgow 's Hampden Park , a decision that FAW chief executive Jonathan Ford put down to UEFA politics . In June 2015 , the Millennium Stadium emerged as the favourite to host the 2017 UEFA Champions League Final . 
 When London was selected as the host city for the 2012 Summer Olympics , the Millennium Stadium was named as one of the six venues for the football competition . It had the distinction of hosting the opening event of the Games – a 1 – 0 win for the Great Britain women 's team against New Zealand – as well as four other group games and a quarter @-@ final in the women 's tournament , and three group games , a quarter @-@ final and the bronze medal match in the men 's . 
 On 30 June 2015 , the Millennium Stadium was chosen as the venue for the 2017 UEFA Champions League Final . 
 = = = Boxing = = = 
 There have been three nights of boxing at the stadium . On 8 July 2006 when Matt Skelton beat Danny Williams for the Commonwealth heavyweight title . On 7 April 2007 Joe Calzaghe beat Peter Manfredo to retain his WBO super middleweight belt . On 3 November 2007 Calzaghe beat Mikkel Kessler to retain his WBO super middleweight belt and win the WBA and WBC super middleweight titles . 
 = = = Motorsports = = = 
 In 2001 it staged its first ever motorsport event , hosting the Speedway Grand Prix of Great Britain , and has done every year since , in 2010 attracting a record crowd of 44 @,@ 150 . The temporary Motorcycle speedway track is 278 metres ( 304 yards ) in length and with sections of the stadiums lower seating bowl covered , the capacity of the stadium for the Grand Prix is set at 62 @,@ 500 . 
 In September 2005 the stadium was host to the first ever indoor stage of the World Rally Championship during the Wales Rally Great Britain . The lower tier of the stadium was removed to create a figure @-@ of @-@ eight course . In addition to this , the stadium has also hosted Supercross events . In October 2007 , the stadium first hosted the UK leg of the Monster Jam trucks Europe tour , and returned in June 2008 , again in 2009 , 2010 and 2016 . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The stadium has also on occasion been used as a venue for shooting film and television productions . " Dalek " , an episode of the 2005 season of the BBC science fiction television series Doctor Who , was shot primarily on location at the stadium , using its underground areas to stand in for an underground base in Utah , United States in the year 2012 . The location shooting for the episode took place during October and November 2004 . The underground areas of the stadium were used again in Doctor Who for the 2005 Christmas special , " The Christmas Invasion " . The area was used as the headquarters for UNIT , based under the Tower of London . The episode was broadcast on Christmas Day 2005 . Shots of the Stormcage in which River Song is incarcerated in series 5 and 6 are also in the stadium . The Hindi film Kabhi Khushi Kabhi Gham was also filmed there . 
 The Wembley Stadium scene in the film 28 Weeks Later was actually filmed at the Millennium Stadium . Although the outside is footage of Wembley , the inside is all filmed in Cardiff . The effects team on the film edited the footage to make it look more like Wembley . 
 Sébastien Foucan jumped over the gap of the opening of the stadium roof in the Parkour documentary " Jump Britain " . 
 = = = Eventing = = = 
 The inaugural Express Eventing International Cup took place at the stadium on 30 November 2008 . The three @-@ event competition made up of dressage , cross @-@ country and show jumping all took place over the one day . The event was won by Oliver Townend . 
 = = = Music concerts = = = 
 The stadium has also been used for a variety of musical events , including the Manic Street Preachers concert held on Millennium Eve , and , on the following day , a recording of the BBC 's Songs of Praise , which attracted an attendance of 60 @,@ 000 . Tina Turner performed a sold @-@ out concert at the stadium during her highly successful Twenty Four Seven Tour in 2000 . Welsh rockers Stereophonics have played two sold out shows at the stadium : In July 2001 as part of their two @-@ day " A Day at the Races " festival which would later be released to DVD and in 2003 , shortly after the departure of the late Stuart Cable . 
 American rock band Bon Jovi played the venue during the One Wild Night Tour in 2001 . At the end of January 2005 , the stadium hosted a tsunami relief concert in aid of the victims of the 2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami , with Eric Clapton headlining the event . The stadium has also been host to Madonna on two occasions , the first in July 2006 when she opened the UK leg of her Confessions Tour , and most recently in August 2008 when she kicked off her Sticky & Sweet Tour at the stadium . Other performers who have played at the stadium include Robbie Williams as part of his Weddings , <unk> & Stadiums Tour , U2 as part of their Vertigo Tour , Red Hot Chili Peppers as part of their By the Way tour , The Rolling Stones as part of their A Bigger Bang Tour , Bon Jovi as part of their One Wild Night Tour , R.E.M. as part of their Monster tour and again for their Around the Sun tour . 
 Paul McCartney as part of his Up and Coming Tour , and The Police as part of their Reunion Tour . In late 2005 , Oasis played at the stadium during their Don 't Believe the Truth Tour and again on their Dig Out Your Soul Tour in 2009 . In 2008 , the stadium hosted Neil Diamond and Bruce Springsteen with the E Street Band as part of their Magic Tour , On 22 August 2009 , U2 again played at the stadium , as part of their European leg of their U2 360 ° Tour , playing to a record @-@ breaking concert attendance of 73 @,@ 354 . 
 Rihanna was scheduled to perform to the stadium during her Anti World Tour , but the concert was cancelled due to logistical reasons . 
 = = = Conferences = = = 
 The stadium offers conferencing facilities via the foodservice organisation Compass Group . The facilities consist of six individually designed lounges and 124 pitch @-@ facing executive box suites . 
 In addition to business events , the facilities are also available for dinners , banquets , balls , parties and weddings receptions . 
 = Eli Lilly = 
 Eli Lilly ( July 8 , 1838 – June 6 , 1898 ) was an American soldier , pharmacist , chemist , and businessman . He was the founder of the Eli Lilly and Company pharmaceutical corporation . Lilly enlisted in the Union Army during the American Civil War ; he recruited a company of men to serve with him in an artillery battery , was later promoted to colonel , and was given command of a cavalry unit . He was captured near the end of the war and held as a prisoner of war until its conclusion . After the war , he attempted to run a plantation in Mississippi , but failed and returned to his pharmacy profession after the death of his wife . Lilly remarried and worked in several pharmacies with partners before opening his own business in 1876 with plans to manufacture drugs and market them wholesale to pharmacies . 
 His company was successful and he soon became wealthy after making numerous advances in medicinal drug manufacturing . Two of the early advances he pioneered were creating gelatin capsules to hold medicine and fruit flavoring for liquid medicines . Eli Lilly and Company was one of the first pharmaceutical firms of its kind ; it staffed a dedicated research department and put in place numerous quality @-@ assurance measures . 
 Using his wealth , Lilly engaged in numerous philanthropic pursuits . He turned over the management of the company to his son in 1890 allowing himself to continue his engagement in charity and civic advancement in his primary focus . He helped found the organization that became the Indianapolis Chamber of Commerce , was the primary patron of Indiana 's branch of the Charity Organization Society , and personally funded the creation of the city 's children 's hospital which was later expanded by the state to become the Riley Children 's Hospital . He continued his active involvement with many organizations until his death from cancer in 1898 . 
 Lilly was an advocate of federal regulation of the pharmaceutical industry , and many of his suggested reforms were enacted into law in 1906 , resulting in the creation of the Food and Drug Administration . He was also among the pioneers of the concept of prescriptions , and helped form what became the common practice of giving addictive or dangerous medicines only to people who had first seen a physician . The company he founded has since grown into one of the largest and most influential pharmaceutical corporations in the world , and the largest corporation in Indiana . Using the wealth generated by the company , his son and grandsons created the Lilly Endowment to continue Lilly 's legacy of philanthropy . The endowment remains one of the largest charitable benefactors in the world . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family and background = = = 
 Eli Lilly was born the son of Gustavus and Esther Lilly in Baltimore , Maryland on July 8 , 1838 . His family was of Swedish descent and had moved to the low country of France before his great @-@ grandparents immigrated to Maryland in 1789 . The Lilly family moved to Kentucky , where Lilly first enrolled in public school . His family moved again in 1852 to Indiana , where he apprenticed to become a printer . Lilly grew up in a Methodist household , and his family was prohibitionist and anti @-@ slavery ; their beliefs served as part of their motivation for moving to Indiana . He and his family were members of the Democratic party during his early life , but they became Republicans during the years leading up to the Civil War . 
 Lilly became interested in chemicals at an early age . While on a trip visiting his aunt and uncle , he was taken to visit an apothecary , where he first witnessed the creation of drugs . In 1854 , he served an apprenticeship to become a chemist and pharmacist under Henry Lawrence at the Good Samaritan Drug Store in Lafayette . In addition to learning to mix chemicals , Lawrence taught Lilly how to manage funds and operate a business . His parents enrolled him in pharmacology studies at DePauw University , then known as Indiana Asbury University , and he graduated after two years . In 1859 , he took a position at Perkin 's and Coon 's Pharmacy in Indianapolis . Lilly became acquainted with Emily Lemen , the daughter of a local merchant , and the couple married in 1860 . The couple returned to Greencastle , where Lilly opened his own drug store in 1861 . 
 = = = American Civil War = = = 
 Lilly enlisted in the Union Army at the start of the American Civil War , and his first child , Josiah , was born in 1861 while he was away . Lilly actively recruited among his classmates , friends , local merchants and farmers , asking them to join him in forming a unit . He had recruitment posters created and posted them around Indianapolis , promising to form the " crack battery of Indiana " . His unit , the 18th Battery , Indiana Light Artillery , was known as the Lilly Battery and consisted of six 3 Inch Ordinance Rifles and 150 men . He mustered in at Indianapolis and spent a brief time drilling . His unit was assigned to the Lightning Brigade commanded by Colonel John T. Wilder in 1862 and Lilly was elected to serve as the commanding officer of his battery from August until the winter of 1863 , when his three @-@ year enlistment expired . His only prior military experience had been in a Lafayette Indiana Legion unit , and several of his artillerymen considered him too young and intemperate to command . Despite his initial inexperience , he became a competent artillery officer and his battery was instrumental in several important battles . He first saw action in the 1863 Battle of Hoover 's Gap , and he was later in the Second Battle of Chattanooga and the Battle of Chickamauga . 
 When Lilly 's term of enlistment ended , he reenlisted and was promoted to become a Major of cavalry and given command of the 9th Indiana Cavalry . During a mission in Alabama in the December 1864 , he was captured by troops under Major General Nathan B. Forrest and held in a Confederate prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camp at Enterprise , Mississippi , until the end of the war in the spring of 1865 , when he was paroled and allowed to return home . In recognition of his service , he was brevetted to the rank of Colonel before being mustered out of the army . In his later life he obtained a large atlas and marked the path of his movements in the war and the location of battles and skirmishes . He often used the atlas when telling war stories . His Colonel 's title stayed with him for the rest of his life , and his friends and family used it as a nickname for him . Lilly served as chairman of the Grand Army of the Republic , a brotherhood of Union Civil War veterans , in 1893 . During his term he helped organize an event that brought tens of thousands of Union war veterans , including Lilly 's battery , together in Indianapolis for a reunion and a large parade . 
 = = = Business ventures = = = 
 After the war , Lilly attempted a new business venture and purchased a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ acre ( 490 ha ) cotton plantation in Mississippi . Shortly after moving to their new home , the entire family was stricken with mosquito @-@ borne malaria , a disease common in the region at that time . Although Lilly and his son recovered , his wife Emily died on August 20 , 1866 . She was eight months pregnant with the couple 's second child ; their unborn son could not be saved and was stillborn . The death devastated Lilly ; he wrote to his family , " I can hardly tell you how it glares at me ... it 's a bitter , bitter truth ... Emily is indeed dead . " She was initially buried on the plantation , but later that year her body was disinterred and moved to Indiana to be reburied . Lilly 's return to Indiana following her death allowed the plantation to fall into disrepair and his crop to fail . His partner was unable to maintain the plantation because of a drought and then disappeared with the business 's remaining money . Lilly was forced to file bankruptcy in 1868 . Josiah was sent to live with Lilly 's parents in Greencastle while he worked to resolve the situation on the plantation . He remarried in 1869 , this time to Maria Cynthia Sloan , and began working for Pattison , Moore & Talbott , a medicinal wholesale company . The business was purchased by H. Daly and Company during his employment there . 
 In 1869 , Lilly left Indiana and , with a partner , opened a successful drug store , <unk> and Lilly , in Paris , Illinois . He soon sent for his son . The business was profitable and allowed Lilly to save money , but he was more interested in medicinal manufacturing than running a pharmacy . He formulated a plan to create a medicinal wholesale company of his own . In 1873 , Lilly left the partnership and returned to Indianapolis , where he opened a drug store , Johnson and Lilly , with a new partner . Three years later , Lilly dissolved the partnership ; his share of the assets amounted to several pieces of equipment , a few gallons of unmixed chemicals , and a small amount of money . He had previously approached a family friend , Augustus Keifer , to create a new partnership . Keifer and two associated drug stores agreed to purchase all their drugs from Lilly at a cost lower than they were currently paying . On May 10 , 1876 , Lilly opened a laboratory to manufacture drugs . The sign for the business said " Eli Lilly , Chemist " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 = = = Eli Lilly & Company = = = 
 Lilly 's manufacturing venture began with three employees , including his 14 @-@ year @-@ old son Josiah , who had quit school to work with his father . The elder Lilly had $ 1 @,@ 400 ( $ 29 @,@ 575 in 2011 chained dollars ) in working capital . His first innovation was gelatin @-@ coating for pills and capsules . Other early innovations included fruit flavoring for medicines and sugarcoated pills , making the medicines easier to take . Following his experience with the low @-@ quality medicines used in the Civil War , Lilly committed himself to producing only high @-@ quality prescription drugs , in contrast to the common and often ineffective patent medicines of the day . One of the first medicines he began to produce was quinine , a drug used to treat malaria , which became his best @-@ selling medicine . His products gained a reputation for quality and became popular in the city . In his first year of business , sales reached $ 4 @,@ 470 ( $ 90 @,@ 057 in 2009 chained dollars ) , and by 1879 they had grown to $ 48 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 105 @,@ 200 in 2009 chained dollars ) . Sales expanded rapidly and he began to acquire customers outside of Indiana . Lilly hired his brother , James , as his first full @-@ time salesman in 1878 . James , and the subsequent sales team that developed , marketed the company 's drugs nationally . Other family members were also employed by the growing company ; Lilly 's cousin Evan Lilly was hired as a bookkeeper and his grandsons , Eli and Josiah , were hired to run errands and perform other odd jobs . In 1881 , he formally incorporated the company , naming it Eli Lilly and Company . By the late 1880s , he was one of the Indianapolis area 's leading businessmen with over one hundred employees and $ 200 @,@ 000 ( $ 4 @,@ 775 @,@ 556 in 2009 chained dollars ) in annual sales . 
 To accommodate his growing business , Lilly acquired additional facilities for research and production . He purchased a complex of buildings on McCarty Street in south Indianapolis ; other businesses followed , and the area began to develop into a major business section of the city . Believing that it would be an advantage for his son to gain a greater technical knowledge , Lilly sent Josiah to attend Philadelphia College of Pharmacy in 1880 . Upon returning to the business in 1882 , Josiah was named superintendent of the laboratory . In 1890 , Lilly turned over the management his business to Josiah , who ran the company for several decades . The company flourished despite the tumultuous economic conditions in the 1890s . In 1894 , Lilly purchased a manufacturing plant to be used solely for creating capsules . Several technological advances were made by the company , and the capsule creation was automated . Over the next few years , they annually created tens of millions of capsules and pills . 
 Although there were many other small pharmaceutical companies in the United States , Eli Lilly and Company distinguished itself from the others by having a permanent research staff , inventing superior techniques for the mass production of medicinal drugs , and its strong focus on quality . At first , Lilly was the company 's only researcher , but as his business grew , he created a laboratory and employed a department dedicated to creating new drugs , hiring his first research scientist in 1886 . The department 's methods of research were based on Lilly 's . He insisted on quality assurance , and instituted mechanisms to ensure that the drugs being produced worked as advertised , had the correct combination of ingredients , and that only the correct dosages of medicines were contained in each pill . He was aware of the addictive and dangerous nature of some of his drugs , and pioneered the concept of giving such drugs only to people who had first seen a physician to determine if they needed the medicine . 
 = = = Philanthropy = = = 
 By the time of his partial retirement from his business , Lilly was a millionaire . He had been involved in civic affairs for several years and became increasingly philanthropic , granting funds to charitable groups in the city . Working with a group of twenty @-@ five other businessmen , he had begun sponsoring the Charity Organization Society in the late 1870s and soon became the primary patron of its Indiana chapter . The society was the forerunner of the United Way and worked to organize charitable groups under a central leadership . It allowed the many organizations to easily interact and better help people in need by coordinating their efforts and identifying areas with the greatest need . 
 Lilly wished to encourage economic growth and general development in Indianapolis . He attempted to achieve those goals by supporting local commercial organizations financially and through his personal advocacy and promotion . He first became active in local civics in 1879 . As a result of his proposal for a public water supply company to meet the needs of the city , the Indianapolis Water Company was created . In 1890 , Lilly founded the Commercial Club and was elected as its first president . The club was the primary vehicle for his city development goals and was a precursor to the Indianapolis Chamber of Commerce . The group was instrumental in making numerous advances for the city , including city @-@ wide paved streets , elevated railways to allow vehicles and people to pass beneath them , and a city sewage system . The companies were created through private and public investments and operated at low @-@ cost ; in practice they belonged to customers of the company who slowly bought each company back from its initial investors . The model was later followed in most parts of the state to provide water and electricity . The group also helped fund the creation of parks , monuments , and memorials , and successfully attracted investment from other businessmen and organizations to expand the city 's growing industries . 
 After the Gas Boom began to sweep the state in the 1880s , Lilly and his Commercial Club advocated the creation of a public corporation to pump the natural gas from the ground , pipe it to the city from the Trenton Gas Field , and provide it at low cost to businesses and homes . The project led to the creation of the Consumer Gas Trust Company , which was named by Lilly . The company provided low @-@ cost heating fuel that made urban living much more desirable . The gas was further used to create electricity to run the city 's first public transportation venture , a streetcar system . 
 During the Panic of 1893 , Lilly created a commission to help provide food and shelter to the poor people who were adversely affected . His work with the commission led him to personally donate enough funds to create a children 's hospital in Indianapolis to care for the many children of families who had no money to pay for routine medical care . 
 Lilly 's friends often urged him to seek public office , and they attempted to nominate him to run for Governor of Indiana as a Republican in 1896 , but he refused . He shunned public office and instead wanted to focus his attention on his philanthropic organizations . He did regularly endorse candidates , and made substantial donations to politicians who advanced his causes . Lilly became friends with former Governor Oliver P. Morton , who suggested that Lilly use his Commercial Club to advocate for the creation of a memorial to Indiana 's many veterans of the Civil War . Accepting the suggestion , Lilly began raising funds to build the Indiana Soldiers ' and Sailors ' Monument . Construction began in 1888 , but the monument was not completed until 1901 . The interior of the monument houses a civil war museum that was later named in honor of Lilly . 
 Lilly was an avid fisherman and built a family cottage on Lake Wawasee in 1887 , where he had enjoyed regular vacations and recreation since 1880 . In 1892 , he built the Wawasee Inn on the lake . The site became a haven for the family , and his grandson later expanded the estate . He also owned a large home on Tennessee Street in Indianapolis , where he spent most of his time . Lilly developed cancer in 1897 and died in his Indianapolis home on June 6 , 1898 . His bier was held on June 9 and attended by thousands before he was moved to his burial site , a large sepulcher in Indianapolis 's Crown Hill Cemetery . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 By 1898 , Lilly 's namesake company had a product line of 2 @,@ 005 items and annual sales over $ 300 @,@ 000 ( $ 7 @,@ 736 @,@ 400 in 2009 chained dollars ) . Josiah Lilly inherited the company following his father 's death , and continued to build the company before passing it on to his own sons , Eli Lilly and Josiah K. Lilly Jr . Josiah and his two sons continued the philanthropy practiced by Lilly and later established the Lilly Endowment that in 1998 became the largest philanthropic endowment in the world in terms of assets and charitable giving ; it has since been surpassed but still remains in the top ten . The company played an important role in delivering medicine to the victims of the devastating 1906 San Francisco earthquake . Lilly 's company has since grown into one of the largest pharmaceutical companies in the world , and under Lilly 's grandson 's leadership developed many new innovations , including the pioneering and development of insulin during the 1920s , the mass production of penicillin during the 1940s , and the promotion of advancements in the mass production of medicines . Innovation continued at the company after it was made a publicly traded corporation in 1952 , and it developed <unk> , <unk> , Prozac , and many other medicines . According to Forbes , Eli Lilly & Co. was the 229th largest company in the world and 152nd in the United States in 2007 , with a worth of $ 17 billion ( USD ) . It is the largest corporation and the largest charitable benefactor in Indiana . 
 Lilly 's greatest contributions were his standardized and methodical creation of drugs , his dedication to research and development , and the actual value of the drugs he created . He pioneered the modern pharmaceutical industry , and many of his innovations later became standard practice . His ethical reforms , in a trade that was marked by outlandish claims of miracle medicines , began a period of rapid advancement in the development of medicinal drugs . During his lifetime , Lilly had advocated for federal regulation on medicines , and his son continued that advocacy after his father 's death . 
 The Colonel Eli Lilly Civil War Museum , located below the Sailors ' and Soldiers ' Monument in Indianapolis , is named in Lilly 's honor . It opened in October 1999 and features exhibits about Indiana during the war period and the war in general . 
 = Born Free ( Dexter ) = 
 " Born Free " is the twelfth episode of season one and first season finale of the American television drama series Dexter , which aired on December 17 , 2006 on Showtime in the United States . The episode also aired on May 4 , 2008 on CTV in Canada ; on May 14 , 2008 on FX in the UK ; on September 28 , 2008 on Channel Ten in Australia ; and on March 21 , 2011 on STAR World in India . The episode was written by Daniel Cerone and executive producer Melissa Rosenberg , and was directed by Michael Cuesta . Based on the novel Darkly Dreaming Dexter by Jeff Lindsay , the season featured many differences to the original source , mainly in the lead @-@ up to and revelation of the identity of the " Ice Truck Killer " . The episode was very well received by critics . 
 The episode focuses on the final confrontation between Dexter and the " Ice Truck Killer " . After kidnapping Debra Morgan ( Jennifer Carpenter ) , Rudy Cooper ( Christian Camargo ) is in the final stages of his plan to reunite with his long @-@ lost brother . James Doakes ( Erik King ) and María LaGuerta ( Lauren Vélez ) investigate the case , and Doakes begins to suspect that Dexter is involved . Meanwhile , Paul Bennett ( Mark Pellegrino ) tries to convince Rita Bennett ( Julie Benz ) that Dexter is not who she thinks he is . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After uncovering the identity of the " Ice Truck Killer " , a serial killer who chops up the bodies of his victims and drains their blood , Dexter hurries to find his sister Debra . Since the murderer had always sent secret messages to Dexter , he searches his apartment for clues that Rudy could have left , and finds a picture of the shipping container where his mother was killed . When Dexter is about to leave , Doakes and LaGuerta arrive , telling him that they think Rudy Cooper was the one who stabbed Batista . Doakes insists that Dexter knows something , and he reveals that the blood on Angel 's collar matched Rudy 's . The pair leave , and Dexter goes to find the shipping container . At the station , LaGuerta orders a search for Rudy . Matthews walks in and introduces <unk> Pascal , the new lieutenant replacing LaGuerta . 
 At the shipping yard , Dexter breaks into the container in the picture , only to find it full of bananas . Doakes appears and asks him what he is doing , and after a fist fight , a foreman arrives and orders them to leave . Doakes tells Dexter that he knows that he is up to something , and says that he will be watching him . Meanwhile , Rita is contacted by an imprisoned Paul , who contends that Dexter knocked him out and set him up . Rita becomes annoyed as Paul persists that Dexter is dangerous and should not be around their children . Rita is visited by Paul 's Narcotics Anonymous sponsor , who attempts to convince Rita that Paul is telling the truth . In a final plea , Paul calls Rita and tells her to search their house for a shoe which he believes came off when Dexter knocked him out . Rita hangs up , but discovers the shoe while taking out the trash at the end of the episode . 
 After finding a clue at Rudy 's house , Dexter arrives at the house of his mother , Laura Moser . Flashbacks reveal that Rudy , whose real name is Brian Moser , is in fact Dexter 's biological brother . He also witnessed the murder of their mother , but did not repress the memory ; instead , he grew up in a mental institution being treated for antisocial personality disorder . Dexter meets Brian in their childhood home , where he is keeping Debra . He intends to kill Debra with Dexter as a sort of " family reunion " , but Dexter stops him . As Doakes and the rest of the homicide unit close in on the house , Brian escapes through a trap door and Dexter is left with Debra , appearing to have saved her . 
 Doakes tries to question Dexter about his involvement , but is stopped by an indignant Debra , who says that Dexter is a hero . Dexter accompanies her to the hospital and then returns home , apparently with Debra . In the middle of the night , Brian breaks into Dexter 's apartment and attempts to stab Debra , only to find a prosthetic body in her place ; Dexter then chokes him unconscious with a garrote . In the refrigeration unit in Brian 's apartment , Dexter ties him to the killing table with plastic wrap . After an emotionally charged conversation , Dexter slices his brother 's throat and leaves him upside down to drain , staging it as a suicide . Dexter and Debra arrive at a crime scene , and he imagines what it would be like if everyone knew and happily accepted the truth about him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Born Free " was written by Daniel Cerone and executive producer Melissa Rosenberg , and was directed by Michael Cuesta . Cerone and Rosenberg have written two previous episodes each , while this episode marked Cuesta 's fifth time returning as director . Guest stars in this episode include Geoff Pierson , C. S. Lee , Mark Pellegrino , Christian Camargo , Judith Scott and Scott Atkinson . Rudy 's apartment was set in Miami , Florida , however filming took place in Long Beach , California . The apartment was a brown , triangular apartment condo , so the producers altered its appearance ; a false brick wall was placed in front of the garage entrance and a door was created . The producers also concealed a narrow door of the garage entrance with a potted plant , and added false window panes to the windows , concealing the existing vertical blinds . The shipping yard shown in the episode was set in the Port of Miami , yet filming took place in a port dock at the Port of Los Angeles . The scene was filmed in San Pedro , California , in a waterfront lot of Harbor Boulevard . 
 The first season of Dexter is based on the novel Darkly Dreaming Dexter by Jeff Lindsay . However , there are numerous differences , ranging from extra subplots to rearrangements and modifications of elements from the source material . The biggest change is the lead @-@ up to and revelation of the identity of the " Ice Truck Killer " , called the " Tamiami Butcher " in the novel . In the novel , Dexter is led to believe that he might be the one committing the murders , due to a series of strange dreams that connect him to the murder . The final clue is a blurry photo , taken from surveillance footage , of a man who resembles Dexter at a crime scene . After the " Tamiami Killer " kidnaps Deborah , Dexter finds and confronts him . It is subsequently revealed that the killer is actually Dexter 's nearly identical long @-@ lost brother , Brian , who , like Dexter , witnessed their mother 's brutal murder . Dexter is followed by Detective LaGuerta , who is slain by Brian . Debra finds out her brother is a killer and Dexter helps Brian to escape . In the television series , Brian is introduced under the fake name Rudy , a prosthetist who becomes Debra 's boyfriend . Dexter hesitantly kills Brian instead of letting him escape , Debra does not discover her brother 's secret , and LaGuerta is not present at all in the confrontation . In the novel , Dexter and his brother are nearly identical , whereas the actors playing the two characters are distinct from each other in their looks . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Born Free " was the most @-@ watched original series telecast on Showtime since 2004 , when the Nielsen ratings started separating the channel 's ratings from Showtime Plex , the package of Showtime channels offered by most cable and satellite systems . The finale drew an audience of 1 @.@ 1 million American viewers , a significant increase over the series premiere , which attracted slightly more than 600 @,@ 000 viewers . The first season attracted on average 1 @.@ 96 million American viewers , including live and DVR viewing off the premium channel 's main feed . " Born Free " brought in 589 @,@ 000 viewers on its first free @-@ to @-@ air broadcast in Australia . Hall submitted the episode for consideration for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series , but was not ultimately nominated . 
 Eric Goldman of IGN said that " Born Free " was " an intense episode that brought the Ice Truck Killer story to a satisfying conclusion . " He felt that the " biggest shock of all " was the reveal of Rudy as Dexter 's brother , and described their confrontation as " riveting " . Goldman gave the episode an " incredible " rating of 9 @.@ 5 out of 10 . Paula Paige of TV Guide was " impressed " by Michael Hall 's " incredible acting ability , " praising his ability to transform from a " stoic killer to overwrought brother in a matter of moments . " She said that the series went " from being a good show to a fantastic show in the course of one season , " and hoped that " the sophomore season will be just as terrific . " Jonathan Toomey of TV Squad felt that it would be a " shame " if Hall did not win a Golden Globe Award , saying that he " certainly deserves it . " He understood why Rudy wanted to make Debra the brothers ' first victim together ; Rudy was jealous of the life that Dexter received and killing Debra was the symbol of that life dying . Although Toomey said that the episode was " really well written , " he was troubled that no one made the connection between Dexter and Rudy when all they had to do was read Rudy 's file , but Toomey speculated that it could be discovered the next season . 
 = Kadhalikka Neramillai = 
 Kadhalikka Neramillai ( English : No Time for Love ) is a 1964 Indian Tamil @-@ language romantic comedy film produced and directed by C. V. Sridhar , who also conceived and co @-@ wrote its script with Chitralaya Gopu . The film features an ensemble cast consisting of T. S. Balaiah , R. Muthuraman , Nagesh , Rajasree , Sachu , Ravichandran and Kanchana . The latter two made their debut in Tamil cinema with this film . 
 The plot of Kadhalikka Neramillai revolves around Viswanathan , an estate owner who hopes to get his daughters Nirmala and Kanchana married to wealthy grooms . However , Nirmala falls in love with Ashok , a poor man who was once employed by Vishwanathan . To earn Viswanathan 's approval , Ashok pretends to be the only heir of a rich businessman ; he is supported by his friend Vasu , who poses as Ashok 's fictional millionaire father Chidambaram . A comedy of errors ensues when Vasu discovers his lover Kanchana is Viswanathan 's other daughter . 
 Principal photography for the film was completed in 30 days , with shooting taking place mostly in Ooty and in a bungalow near Pollachi . One song sequence was filmed in Marina Beach , Chennai . It was the first Tamil film to be released in Eastmancolor ; previous Indian colour films were made in <unk> and Technicolor . The cinematographers were A. Vincent and P. N. Sundaram , and the editor was N. M. Shankar . The film 's soundtrack and score were composed by the duo Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy , with lyrics written by poet Kannadasan . 
 Kadhalikka Neramillai was released in February 1964 to critical acclaim ; it was a commercial success , running in theatres for more than 175 days . It has also received wide appreciation from contemporary critics and film personalities . Regarded as a trend @-@ setting comedy , the film has since developed a cult status in Tamil cinema . Its success led to a Telugu remake <unk> Choodu ( 1965 ) , a Hindi remake Pyar <unk> Jaa ( 1966 ) and a Kannada remake <unk> <unk> <unk> Nodu ( 1979 ) ; the Telugu remake was directed by P. Pullaiah while the Hindi remake was directed by Sridhar . Rajasree reprised her role in both those films . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Viswanathan ( T. S. Balaiah ) is an arrogant , money @-@ minded estate owner who lives in a bungalow called Chinnamalai Estate near Pollachi . His son Chellappa ( Nagesh ) is an aspiring filmmaker ; Chellappa is the antithesis of his father and voices his displeasure at his father 's arrogance . Viswanathan also has two daughters ; Kanchana ( Kanchana ) and Nirmala ( Rajasree ) . Kanchana is in love with her college mate Vasu ( R. Muthuraman ) , the son of a rich Chennai @-@ based businessman Sachidanandam ( V. S. Raghavan ) . The sisters return home after completing their education in Chennai . One day while out sightseeing , a battered car driven by their father 's young , rebellious estate manager Ashok ( Ravichandran ) bumps into their car . The sisters quarrel with Ashok and are annoyed by his insolence . At their home , they force Viswanathan to dismiss Ashok . Infuriated , Ashok pitches a tent overlooking their bungalow and begins a strike to get his job back . Nirmala accidentally drops a bucket of water on Ashok 's head , hurting him . Feeling guilty , she visits Ashok 's tent to apologise and they fall in love . 
 Viswanathan decides to get his daughters married to wealthy men . Ashok realises that because he is poor he has no chance of becoming a prospective groom . Nirmala loves him but she does not wish to elope with him . He calls up his friend , who happens to be Vasu , to pose as his wealthy father . Vasu arrives at Chinnamalai and agrees to help . He disguises himself as a rich , old man named Chidambaram . When Kanchana is introduced to Vasu in disguise , he is shocked because he believes Ashok loves Kanchana , but discovers to his relief that Ashok is in love with Nirmala . 
 Meanwhile , Chellappa starts a film production house called Oho Productions . Unable to earn anyone 's faith in his capabilities , he handles the film @-@ making himself . Chellappa unsuccessfully tries to persuade his father to finance his film ; he engages the estate manager 's daughter Meenalochni ( Sachu ) to play the heroine in his film . Chellappa selects Ashok for the film 's screenplay and asks Chidambaram to fund it . When the film does not progress as expected , Meenalochni 's father forces Chellappa to marry her . Chellappa initially refuses but realising he has no choice , he accepts the offer . 
 On a short trip , Chidambaram reveals his identity to Vishwanathan 's daughters , who agree to play along . Viswanathan , believing Ashok is the only heir of a millionaire , asks Kanchana 's consent to marry him . When Kanchana rejects the proposal , Viswanathan asks Nirmala , who happily accepts . Sachidanandam , who is buying a nearby estate , is referred to Viswanathan and arrives in Chinnamalai . They meet and discover that they are childhood friends . Thinking it would be inappropriate to marry off his younger daughter while the elder one is still unmarried , Viswanathan arranges Kanchana 's marriage to Vasu , who meets his father is unable to reveal his true identity to prevent getting caught . When Sachidanandam returns to Chennai to make the wedding preparations , he finds that there has been no word from his son , who left for Coimbatore weeks before . Sachidanandam almost cancels the marriage when Vasu makes a telephone call in the nick of time and approves the marriage . 
 Sachidanandam 's car breaks down and he takes shelter in a nearby hut until it is fixed . There , he finds a photograph of Ashok and an elderly school teacher who is Ashok 's father . He suspects Ashok of foul play to usurp Viswanathan 's riches and files a complaint . Vasu and Ashok are held in custody by the police . As Sachidanandam arrives at the police station , the truth behind the impersonation is revealed and he withdraws his complaint . When his daughters refuse to part with their lovers , Viswanathan realises their love and agrees to their request to get married . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Origin = = = 
 C. V. Sridhar and <unk> , who was known by his screen name Chitralaya Gopu , had been friends since their tenure at St. Joseph 's High School , Chengalpattu . At school both were playwrights ; Sridhar wrote stage plays and portrayed the lead roles . Gopu wrote the humour @-@ oriented plays and portrayed comic roles . Later , when Sridhar had the opportunity to direct a film , he asked Gopu to join him and handle the humour content . The success of Kalyana <unk> ( 1959 ) led to Sridhar establishing his own production house , Chitralaya Pictures . 
 Sridhar used to spend his evenings with Gopu , driving along Marina Beach . Gopu asked Sridhar whether he would like to work on a comedy film . Sridhar , who was known for dramatic films , thought the audience would not accept a comedy from him . He agreed reluctantly upon Gopu 's insistence , and decided to produce a full @-@ length comedy and originated the title , Kadhalikka Neramillai , which translates as " No time for love " . The entire story and screenplay were conceived on Marina Beach ; according to Gopu , " [ s ] <unk> in Sridhar ’ s open Herald , we discussed the script for days on end " . 
 = = = Cast and crew = = = 
 P. S. Raman , who went to Chennai in 1963 to join a medical college , was asked to see Sridhar , who was auditioning newcomers for the film . Raman was renamed Ravichandran and introduced in this film , as the character Ashok . Sivakumar had auditioned for the role before it went to Ravichandran . During a flight , Sridhar met an air @-@ hostess named Vasundhara Devi and approached her to play one of the female leads . Because she shared her name with Vasundhara Devi , the mother of actress Vyjayanthimala , Sridhar renamed her Kanchana to avoid confusion . 
 Rajasree , who made her film debut as a child actor in AVM Productions ' Naga <unk> ( 1956 ) playing the younger Jamuna , was in her late teenage years and was playing second heroine and sister roles in Telugu films . Gopu phoned and asked her to attend their studio the next day to audition for her role . A song sequence , " Anubhavam Pudhumai " , was shot to audition her ; the makers were impressed and her name was added to the cast , making it her first film as a lead actress . 
 Sachu , who began her career as a child actor , played the heroine in films such as <unk> ( 1961 ) and Annai ( 1962 ) until Sridhar offered her a comic role . Sachu initially refused the offer as she was hesitant on playing a comic role . Sridhar assured her that being a full @-@ fledged comedy film , there were no separate comedians and that she would only be playing a character in one of the three lead pairs . Gopu also persuaded Sachu 's grandmother , who used to accompany her to the sets . Impressed by the way Sridhar " narrated the story featuring three couples " , Sachu accepted the offer . Sachu felt that the film 's story was as good as William Wyler 's Roman Holiday ( 1953 ) . 
 T. S. Balaiah and R. Muthuraman were chosen to play the characters Viswanathan and Vasu respectively . Nagesh , then a struggling actor whose breakthrough role was in Sridhar 's Nenjil Or Aalayam ( 1962 ) , was selected to play Viswanathan 's son Chellappa . V. S. Raghavan was cast as the father of Muthuraman 's character . The screenplay and dialogues were co @-@ written by Sridhar and Gopu . A. Vincent and P. N. Sundaram handled the film 's cinematography , while N. M. Shankar was the editor . Art director Ganga and choreographers Thangappan and <unk> Sundar comprised the rest of the technical crew . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Kadhalikka Neramillai was the first Tamil film to be made in Eastmancolor . According to G. Dhananjayan , author of the book The Best of Tamil Cinema , the film was launched with an advertisement that said , " Do not look for any story in the film ! " . It was produced by Vijaya Vauhini Studios and processed at Gemini Studios ' laboratory . 
 Principal photography on the project commenced with the song " Anubhavam Pudhumai " , which was picturised on Ravichandran and Rajasree . Portions of the song featuring the latter were the first scenes shot . Because the producers had not taken measurements for her costumes , Rajasree was sceptical about whether filming would begin that day . She was given a nightgown as the costume for the song sequence . Sachu 's costumes were designed by Sridhar himself . 
 Because the idea for the film came while at the Marina Beach , the opening sequence song " Enna Parvai " picturised on Muthuraman and Kanchana was filmed on the beach promenade with the University of Madras and Presidency College in the background . In the first scene of the film , Sridhar attempted to depict Chennai as a " progressive place : where couples sang duets on the Marina " . After several days of filming , Sridhar was unhappy with the script and filming was stopped . He reworked the script and dialogues , after which filming resumed . Most of the film was shot in Ooty in 30 days . Filming also took place on location at the <unk> Guest House , a bungalow near <unk> Dam , Coimbatore . 
 During filming , Gopu gave Ravichandran the lyrics of the song " <unk> <unk> " , which were written like tongue @-@ twisters in chaste Tamil . He claimed they were his own lines and asked him to memorise them . When the director called for the shots , Ravichandran asked for more time because he found it difficult to remember the dialogue . The puzzled director then said , " This isn ’ t the dialogue . Who gave it to you ? This is a social film , a comedy . Gopu must have done it . He ’ s always pulling a fast one , don ’ t you know ? " During the 50th anniversary of the film in 2014 , Rajasree said she had difficulties in providing the right pronunciation of her dialogues for the film . 
 In one scene , Viswanathan asks Chellappa to tell a story , promising to finance his film if he is impressed . Knowing he will not receive any funds , Chellappa decides to scare Viswanathan and narrates a horror story . Nagesh later said this was Gopu 's idea ; " You know how director Dada <unk> tells a story . Just follow the pattern " . Nagesh and Balaiah completed shooting the scene in a single take . Kanchana recalled filming the scene and said , " I was standing behind , trembling to control my laughter . The moment the scene was over , the entire team began to laugh , so hard , we soon had tears running down our faces . " The final length of the film was 4 @,@ 355 @.@ 97 metres ( 14 @,@ 291 @.@ 2 ft ) . 
 = = Music = = 
 The soundtrack album and background score for Kadhalikka Neramillai were composed by Viswanathan – Ramamoorthy ( a duo consisting of M. S. Viswanathan and T. K. Ramamoorthy ) and the lyrics were written by Kannadasan . The album was released under the label of Saregama . 
 The song " Anubhavam Pudhumai " samples a 1940 Spanish song titled " Bésame Mucho " . Philips , an autodidact guitarist , played the guitar for " Anubhavam Pudhumai " and " <unk> <unk> " . The original soundtrack edition omits the songs " <unk> " and " Kadhalikka Neramillai " , which are included on the track list of <unk> ; the website omits the song " Viswanathan Velai <unk> " which was included on the original soundtrack edition . Viswanathan and his wife were spending a vacation in <unk> for a week , when Kannadasan , Gopu and Sridhar were waiting for him to begin composing the songs . The day when Viswanathan returned and arrived at <unk> office , Kannadasan said , " <unk> .. <unk> ... Velai <unk> .. " ( English : Viswanathan give me some work ) . Sridhar then said that should be the beginning of the song and decided to give Balaiah 's character the name Viswanathan . 
 The music received positive reviews from critics . The song " Enna Parvai " was considered by K. J. Yesudas as his breakthrough song in his career as a playback singer . G. Dhananjayan said that all the songs were popular — especially among teenagers — and contributed to the film 's success . Playwright @-@ comedian Y. G. Mahendra described the songs as " immortal masterpieces " . V. <unk> of The Hindu Tamil praised the catchy rock and roll tunes in " <unk> " and said " Anubhavam Pudhumai " and " Enna Paarvai " were meant for all music lovers . 
 = = Release = = 
 Kadhalikka Neramillai was released in late February 1964 . Gopu said Chitralaya released the film because initially no company wanted to screen it ; the first showings were at the Casino Theatre in Chennai and later in Madurai . A few weeks after its release , the film caught the attention of theatre distributors , who competed with one another for it . According to The Best of Tamil Cinema , " The distributors who saw the first copy were impressed as the film was looking fresh and appealing in Eastman Color and eagerly bought the rights " . Artist Jeyaraj designed the publicity posters . 
 After playing to full houses for about eight weeks , the film 's revenue began to reduce . The film attracted controversy when newspapers said it could spoil the youth and the society . Due to this statement , the film regained momentum . Eventually , it garnered wide critical acclaim and became a commercial success , running for more than 175 days in theatres and becoming a silver jubilee film . On the 175th day celebrations held at N. K. T. Kala Mandapam , Triplicane , Viswanathan and Ramamoorthy were conferred with the title " <unk> <unk> " , by Kannadasan . After its release , Sridhar placed full @-@ page advertisements in magazines with a disclaimer that his company should not be held responsible if anyone suffered from stomach ache after watching the film . 
 In April 2010 , Kadhalikka Neramillai was one of five films screened at the South Indian Film Chamber Theatre for the Dignity Film Festival held in Chennai ; the other four were Madhumati ( 1958 ) , Server Sundaram ( 1964 ) , Anbe Vaa ( 1966 ) and Thillana Mohanambal ( 1968 ) . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The film received positive response from critics and the performances of Nagesh and Balaiah were particularly praised . The Tamil magazine Ananda Vikatan wrote in its review , " Tamil cinema has not witnessed a film like this so far , which did not bore the audience for two and a half hours , but entertained and made them laugh throughout ... the film maker has given an innovative , best comedy entertainer to the audience . " Malathi Rangarajan of The Hindu wrote , " Even today ' Kadhalikka Neramillai ' has you in splits every time you watch it " . Following Sridhar 's death , she wrote , " ... who can forget the humour ride Sridhar offered with ' Kadhalikka Naeramillai ? ' The carnival feel and gaiety , the freshness of the cast , the hill station back drops in Eastman colour and the comedy that every actor projected so well , with Nagesh and T.S. Balaiah at the helm will live as long as Tamil cinema does ! " Also from The Hindu , P. R. Viswanathan wrote , " Kadhalikka Neramillai saw Nagesh walking into the hearts of Tamil filmgoers " . 
 According to a February 2009 article by The Hindu , Nagesh gave Tamil cinema one of its " memorable vintage comedy scenes " as the intrepid storyteller / film director . The news agency , Press Trust of India , noted that his role as aspiring director Chellappa is still remembered by Tamil filmgoers . Ramya Kannan of The Hindu said , " Kadhalikka Neramillai broke out on celluloid screens in the South , in glorious Eastman Colour , with songs ( by Vishwanathan @-@ Ramamoorthy ) that were an instant hit " . Also from The Hindu , Meera Srinivasan said , " Kadhalikka Neramillai made waves in the industry and remains one of the best @-@ loved comedies in Tamil cinema " . Another journalist for The Hindu wrote , " <unk> Neramillai ( 1964 ) turned out to be a superhit , its songs memorable , and some of the scenes featuring <unk> and Nagesh ... classic comedy " . Film critic Naman Ramachandran called it " one of the all @-@ time great comedies of Tamil cinema " . Sify wrote , " [ Nagesh 's ] scenes with <unk> who played his father has terrific comedy timing and great one @-@ liners " . In 2008 , M. Suganth of The Times of India rated the film four out of five , calling it " a humorous ride from the first reel to the last and it does so without resorting to cheap humour " and concluded , " Despite being made decades ago , the film has a charm and timelessness that are the hallmarks of any classic . " The Hindu 's N. Kesavan wrote on Sachu 's performance , " One cannot forget her role in Kadhalikka Neramillai opposite Nagesh . " 
 = = Remakes = = 
 In 1965 , Kadhalikka Neramillai was remade in Telugu as <unk> Choodu . The remake was directed by P. Pullaiah , and featured Akkineni Nageswara Rao and Kongara <unk> in the lead roles . Kanchana and Rajasree reprised their roles . The following year , the film was remade in Hindi as Pyar <unk> Jaa . This remake was directed by Sridhar , and starred Shashi Kapoor and Kishore Kumar in the lead , while Mehmood Ali portrayed the role played by Nagesh in the original . Rajasree , who again reprised her role , was the only actor to appear in both remakes . It was also remade in Kannada as <unk> <unk> <unk> Nodu by C. V. Rajendran . 
 In August 2008 , The Hindu reported that <unk> would be directing a remake of Kadhalikka Neramillai with R. Madhavan in the lead role . Plans for a contemporary remake drew criticism . In an interview with <unk> , a celebrity columnist for Behindwoods , Gopu said , " This film even if it is remade today , will not hold a candle to its original " . Crazy Mohan said , " Kadhalikka Naeramillai is Tamil Cinema ’ s Mount Everest of comedy . There ’ s no other Tenzing [ Norgay ] in sight so far . I was aghast that some people even considered re @-@ making Kadhalikka Naeramillai . None should attempt it . It is blasphemy " . <unk> Narayanan of The New Indian Express stated in February 2009 , " Recently when the news of Kadhalikka Neramillai 's remake was announced , every lip had one question that went unanswered : Who can actually do Nagesh ’ s role at least the way he did , if not better ? " An anonymous source close to the production team of <unk> <unk> ( 2016 ) described it as a " modern day version " of Kadhalikka Neramillai to The Times of India . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Since its release , Kadhalikka Neramillai has developed a cult status in Tamil cinema . It has been hailed as a trendsetting comedy , and the film is said to kindle a feeling of joie de vivre . The film 's comedy sequences are regarded as evergreen . Other films of the comedy genre that followed the trend set by Kadhalikka Neramillai 's success were <unk> <unk> ( 1972 ) , Indru <unk> Naalai Vaa ( 1981 ) , Athisaya Piravi ( 1990 ) and <unk> <unk> ( 1998 ) . The success of their on @-@ screen pairing led Nagesh and Sachu to act together in films such as Motor Sundaram Pillai ( 1966 ) , Galatta Kalyanam ( 1968 ) , <unk> Mann ( 1969 ) <unk> En Sundari ( 1971 ) and <unk> Kural ( 1974 ) . According to The News Today , Kadhalikka Neramillai also popularised the romantic comedy genre . 
 While the comedy track of ' Oho Productions ' featuring Nagesh is considered to be one of Gopu 's masterpieces , the Balaiah @-@ Nagesh scene is often termed to be legendary in Tamil cinema . In a film that featured mostly newcomers , Balaiah was the most senior artiste . When the Balaiah @-@ Nagesh pairing was an instant hit , he praised the latter saying , " Watch out ! This boy is a scene @-@ stealer " . Gopu said , " Chitralaya had a solid technical team ... Thangappan ’ s choreography in [ Kadhalikka Neramillai ] is timeless and combined with MSV ’ s magic , looks modern even today " . 
 After Tamil cinema 's platinum jubilee in 2007 , when eight acclaimed directors were asked to list ten films they liked most , Kadhalikka Neramillai was chosen by K. S. Ravikumar . In 2009 , Y. G. Mahendra said the film " [ ... ] taught me there is everything to know about comedy — what is timing , what is healthy comedy , what is situational comedy ... It also portrayed love in such a clean and healthy way . And , who can forget the music ? I can relate to the songs even today . [ ... ] <unk> ... is a movie for all seasons . The Times of India named Kadhalikka Neramillai as one out of " the hundreds of funny Tamil films that will tickle your funny bone " , stating , " There is no dearth for humour in this 1964 C V Sridhar film . " 
 Choreographer @-@ turned @-@ director Prabhu Deva , whose father Sundaram was the assistant choreographer under Thangappan , named Kadhalikka Neramillai among his five favourite films . Crazy Mohan and comedian <unk> also listed Kadhalikka Neramillai among their favourite films . The film was featured in a list by The Hindu named " Bring on the laughs " . During the celebrations of the film 's 50th anniversary , Kamal Haasan appreciated Gopu 's dialogue in the film while Y. G. Mahendra said , " [ Kadhalikka Neramillai ] was <unk> humour at its best — unadulterated and pure . " 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 In 1985 , choreographer Raghuram directed a film featuring Karthik and <unk> in the lead roles . The film was titled Viswanathan Velai <unk> after the song of the same name . In 2006 , Crazy Mohan wanted to create something similar to Kadhalikka Neramillai . He wrote the story , screenplay and dialogue of the film Jerry , which he described as his " pet project " . In 2011 , director I. Ahmed 's then @-@ forthcoming film was initially titled Kadhalikka Neramillai , but this was changed to <unk> <unk> ( 2013 ) because the producers could not get the rights to use the former name . 
 Surya , son of writer <unk> , named his short film Kadhalikka Neramillai . Independent filmmaker R. <unk> titled her romantic comedy film Kadhalikka <unk> ( " There is Time for Love " ) . Y. G. Mahendra has a particular affinity for Kadhalikka Neramillai . When he launched his theatre group United Amateur Artists ' 55th play , he named it Kadhalikka <unk> as a tribute to Gopu and Sridhar . The play , a parody of the film , was written by Gopu 's son ' Chitralaya ' Sriram . Footage from Kadhalikka Neramillai is also shown in <unk> <unk> <unk> ( 2016 ) . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Typhoon Saomai = 
 Typhoon Saomai , known in the Philippines as Typhoon Juan , was considered the most powerful typhoon on record to strike the east coast of the People 's Republic of China . It was the eighth tropical storm , fifth typhoon , and third super typhoon of the 2006 Pacific typhoon season recognized by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . According to the Japan Meteorological Agency , Saomai was the seventh tropical storm and fifth typhoon of the season . The name " Saomai " was submitted by Vietnam , and is from the Vietnamese word for " morning star " ( <unk> Mai ) , a reference to the planet Venus . 
 The typhoon brought heavy rain and wind to areas of the Mariana Islands , the Philippines , Taiwan , and the east coast of China . It was responsible for 458 deaths and $ 2 @.@ 5 billion ( 2006 USD ) in damage . Saomai affected many of the same areas affected by Tropical Storm Bilis a month earlier , and the China Meteorological Administration reported that Saomai was the strongest typhoon that ever occurred over China 's offshore region as well as the most powerful typhoon ever to make landfall over Mainland China . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical disturbance formed east of Chuuk on July 31 and gradually increased in organization over the next several days as it moved northwestward . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert on the system on August 4 and it was designated a tropical depression by both the JTWC and the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) later that day . The depression strengthened into a tropical storm on August 5 , and the JMA designated it Tropical Storm Saomai . 
 Saomai continued moving toward the northwest and passed over the Mariana Islands on August 6 while continuing to strengthen , and was upgraded to a severe tropical storm by the JMA later that day . The storm then began organizing and intensifying more rapidly , becoming a typhoon early on August 7 . Saomai moved into the area of responsibility of PAGASA on August 8 , and was designated Typhoon Juan . Due to Saomai 's proximity to Tropical Storm Bopha , located near Taiwan , the two underwent a Fujiwhara interaction . This interaction served to shift Saomai 's track slightly to the south and provided the system with in influx of moisture via southwesterly monsoonal flow on the backside of Bopha . 
 Late on August 9 , Saomai reached its peak intensity as it moved just north of Miyakojima . The JMA estimated it to have attained winds of 195 km / h ( 121 mph ) and a central pressure of 925 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 32 inHg ) . The JTWC estimated Saomai to have been a much more powerful system , ranking it as a Category 5 @-@ equivalent super typhoon with one @-@ minute winds of 260 km / h ( 160 mph ) and a pressure of 898 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 52 inHg ) . Further , though less significant , discrepancies on the peak intensity of Saomai exist between the local warning centers for China . Both the China Meteorological Administration ( CMA ) and Hong Kong Observatory ( HKO ) estimated the typhoon to have been slightly stronger , stating peak ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 215 km / h ( 134 mph ) and 210 km / h ( 130 mph ) , respectively . Similarly the agencies reported lower pressures : 915 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 02 inHg ) by the CMA and 920 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 17 <unk> ) by the HKO . 
 After passing to the south of Okinawa , Saomai turned westward and brushed the northern coast of Taiwan Island early on August 10 . The typhoon maintained its minimum pressure until it approached within 80 km ( 50 mi ) of the eastern China coast . On August 10 , Typhoon Saomai made landfall at Cangnan County in southern Zhejiang , still maintaining a small and clear eye . According to the CMA , the typhoon moved ashore with maximum sustained winds of 216 km / h ( 134 mph ) , and a central pressure of 920 mbar ( 27 inHg ) . By winds , Saomai tied Typhoon Marge in 1973 for the strongest typhoon to strike mainland China ; because Saomai had a lower landfall pressure than Marge , the CMA considered it the strongest typhoon on record to strike the nation , as well as a 1 in 100 year typhoon . Saomai was therefore the strongest typhoon to strike Zhejiang , surpassing the previous record held by typhoons Rananim in 2004 and Typhoon <unk> in 2005 . However , wind estimates for typhoons could be inaccurate for early typhoons . Gradual weakening ensued as Saomai moved further inland , and it weakened into a tropical depression on August 11 , dissipating later that day . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The United States National Weather Service issued a tropical storm warning for Guam as Tropical Storm Saomai approached the island on August 6 . Military bases in northern Guam entered Tropical Cyclone Condition of Readiness 1 , meaning that winds of 50 knots or higher were expected within 12 hours . The rest of the island was placed under Condition of Readiness 2 , meaning that such winds were possible within 24 hours . Several bases were temporarily closed . 
 The Central Weather Bureau of the Republic of China issued land and marine typhoon warnings for areas of northern Taiwan in anticipation of Saomai 's outer bands . The warnings had been upgraded from lesser warnings issued for Tropical Storm Bopha , which made landfall in southern Taiwan the day before . Five flights in and around Taiwan were canceled , as was ferry service . Hundreds of flights from Okinawa to the rest of Japan were also canceled . 
 In China , 1 @,@ 001 @,@ 000 people in Zhejiang and 710 @,@ 000 people in Fujian were evacuated to shelters prior to Saomai 's landfall . Over 20 @,@ 000 soldiers and police were mobilized to aid in cleanup and rescue efforts . Officials ordered 10 @,@ 286 ships with 35 @,@ 282 fishermen to return to port in Fujian , while another 5 @,@ 638 ships returned to port in Zhejiang . Also in Fujian , all 26 @,@ 800 schools were closed . The Wenzhou city government ordered all businesses to close and prepare for the storm . Airlines canceled 25 flights from Fuzhou Changle International Airport and another 17 from Hong Kong , while ferry service was also disrupted . During the storm , the Wenzhou <unk> International Airport closed , stranding hundreds of travelers . 
 = = Impact = = 
 During the overnight hours of August 5 – 6 , Tropical Storm Saomai moved through the southern Mariana Islands with its center passing halfway between Guam and Rota . Owing to the storm 's relatively quick pace , its effects were limited in duration . Rota received the strongest winds , with gusts peaking at 88 km / h ( 55 mph ) at the International Airport while sustained values reached 55 km / h ( 34 mph ) . Lesser winds occurred on Guam , with a peak gust of 61 km / h ( 38 mph ) measured at Andersen Air Force Base . Enhanced winds extended northward to Tinian and Saipan . Light to moderate rains accompanied the storm and accumulations were generally less than 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) ; however , monsoonal flow along the south side of Saomai enhanced totals over Guam where 113 @.@ 5 mm ( 4 @.@ 47 in ) fell . Only minor damage resulted from the storm 's passage , limited to downed trees and power lines on Guam . Brief electrical outages occurred in <unk> and <unk> Pago . Overall , damage in the region was estimated at $ 5 @,@ 000 . 
 Later , as with Tropical Storm Bilis a month earlier , Saomai 's outer rainbands affected areas of the Philippines . Over 400 homes were destroyed by storm surge , and two people were killed . At least seven people were reported missing . 
 The core of the typhoon passed to the north of Taiwan , but the island still experienced heavy rain and wind that disrupted traffic and cancelled flights to and from Taipei . No serious damage or casualties were reported . 
 While in the vicinity of Okinawa , Saomai brushed the southern Ryukyu Islands . Miyakojima reported the heaviest rainfall in Japan , totaling 52 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) . Wind gusts in the region peaked at 72 km / h ( 45 mph ) at <unk> @-@ shima . Waves of 10 m ( 33 ft ) in height were reported at Miyakojima , which caused ¥ 980 @,@ 000 ( JPY , $ 8 @,@ 500 USD ) in road damage . 
 = = = Mainland China = = = 
 Saomai was the third in a series of deadly storms that struck China in the summer of 2006 , after Tropical Storm Bilis in July killed over 600 people and Typhoon Prapiroon killed around 80 people in early August . It was also the sixth tropical cyclone of the year to strike the country . While moving ashore in Zhejiang province , Saomai produced high waves , gusty winds , and heavy rainfall . Cangnan in the city of Wenzhou reported 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) of precipitation in only one hour , and 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) over 12 hours . Rainfall reached 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) in the inland province of Jiangxi , with 105 mm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) recorded in one hour in <unk> District . The storm broke several wind records in eastern China . A station in Cangnan County reported peak winds of 245 km / h ( 152 mph ) , and a station in Fuding reported winds of 273 km / h ( 170 mph ) , which were the strongest winds on record in Zhejiang and Fujian , respectively . The latter value was slightly less than the 284 km / h ( 176 mph ) wind report in Hong Kong during Typhoon Wanda in 1962 . Fuding city reported gusts of over 144 km / h ( 89 mph ) for about three hours , and widespread areas in Zhejiang and Fujian reported typhoon force winds , with a 45 km ( 28 mi ) diameter of 216 km / h ( 134 mph ) winds . 
 Along its path , Saomai destroyed about 54 @,@ 000 buildings while causing widespread power outages . There were 61 @,@ 277 destroyed rooms and another 371 @,@ 147 that were damaged , mostly in Fujian . Most of the damaged houses along the path were generally masonry built , while newer towers fared better due to higher building standards . The typhoon also damaged 244 @,@ 900 hectares ( 605 @,@ 000 acres ) of farmlands , mostly in Jiangxi . Saomai struck a less developed area of China , which limited insured damage to around ¥ 400 – 500 million ( RMB , $ 50 @.@ 5 – 63 million USD ) . This was estimated to have been between 4 – 9 % of the overall damage . Damage was estimated at ¥ 11 @.@ 66 billion ( RMB , $ 1 @.@ 5 billion ) . Overall , Saomai killed at least 441 people , although unofficial sources suggest a death toll of around 1 @,@ 000 . 
 The storm left nearly all of Zhejiang without power and cut half of all communication links . The heavy damage prompted officials to declare a state of emergency . In Wenzhou alone , over 18 @,@ 000 homes were destroyed , and 3 @,@ 850 factories were forced to shut down . Also in Wenzhou , Saomai left over 213 @,@ 000 people without clean water . 193 people died in the city . In Cangnan County within Wenzhou , the typhoon damaged 450 schools , totaling ¥ 25 million ( RMB , $ 3 @.@ 1 million USD ) . Rainfall across the state flooded 56 provincial roads and highways . Six people died in Lishui after being crushed by a landslide . Throughout <unk> , economic losses totaled ¥ 4 @.@ 9 billion ( RMB , $ 610 million ) , of which ¥ 4 @.@ 5 billion ( RMB , $ 560 million ) was in Wenzhou . 
 In Fujian , high waves in Fuding wrecked about 1 @,@ 000 ships , killing hundreds of fishermen . Most of the lost ships were in the village of <unk> , where about half of the residents were left homeless . Some entire villages in Fujian were entirely swept away by the winds and rains . High winds and rainfall destroyed 32 @,@ 700 houses , including 10 @,@ 000 in Fuding alone ; there were also 80 @,@ 000 damaged houses in the city . Economic losses reached ¥ 3 @.@ 1 billion ( RMB , $ 388 million USD ) , and about 200 people died in Fuding . Also in the city , Saomai destroyed the roof tiles and the gate house of the 1 @,@ 146 year old <unk> temple , a local historical site . The monks in the temple had evacuated , and damage to the structure was estimated ¥ 5 million ( RMB , $ 625 @,@ 000 USD ) , rendering it largely destroyed . Damage in Fuzhou , also in Fujian , totaled ¥ 200 million ( RMB , $ 25 million USD ) . Province @-@ wide , 234 factories or mines were forced to shut down due to the typhoon . Economic losses in Fujian totaled ¥ 6 @.@ 4 billion ( RMB , $ 795 million USD ) . 
 About a month after Typhoon Kaemi affected the region , Saomai caused additional flooding in the inland province of Jiangxi . There , the storm wrecked six reservoirs , resulting in ¥ 348 million ( RMB , $ 45 million USD ) in damage . About 35 @,@ 000 people were forced to evacuate in Jiangxi due to the storm . One person was washed away in floodwaters while inspecting damage , while another person was killed when a damaged building collapsed . In neighboring Anhui province , flooding forced residents to evacuate homes . 
 87 deaths were reported in Zhejiang , mostly in Wenzhou . Major highways in the province were flooded out . Most of these deaths were caused by storm surge flooding in coastal fishing communities , such as Fuding . Eight of the deaths were caused by the collapse of a damaged evacuation shelter . Strong winds and flooding destroyed 37 @,@ 000 houses and flooded 380 km ² ( 94 @,@ 000 acres ) of farmland , and economic damage amounted to 6 @.@ 3 billion yuan . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Immediately after Saomai made landfall in China , local Red Cross chapters provided residents left homeless with emergency supplies , such as blankets , clothing , medicine , and disinfectant . After the storm moved ashore , the Wenzhou government blocked street access to the areas with the heaviest damage . Officials ordered stores to cease selling items that were unrelated to storm recovery . By 11 days after landfall , 80 % of the factories in Wenzhou had reopened . The city of Fuding provided ¥ 104 @.@ 9 million ( RMB , $ 13 @.@ 2 million USD ) toward reconstructing , as well as ¥ 5 @,@ 000 ( RMB , $ 625 USD ) for each family . 
 The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies made an appeal for almost 6 million Swiss francs ( $ 4 @.@ 8 million , 2006 USD ) to assist stricken families in the PRC . As of August 11 , 2006 , about 1 @.@ 8 million Chinese yuan ( $ 220 @,@ 000 ) worth of relief items and financial assistance had been given to the victims . The PRC government also allocated 120 million yuan ( $ 15 @.@ 2 million ) for disaster relief in areas affected by Saomai and earlier storms . The funds were used to provide food and water for displaced victims and pay for the rebuilding effort in Zhejiang and Fujian . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 After the season ended , members of the 39th meeting of the Typhoon Committee of the World Meteorological Organization met in Manila in December 2006 . They discussed retiring the name " Saomai " , along with four other names from the season . During the 40th meeting in November 2007 , the Typhoon Committee approved the retirement , announcing that the name " Son Tinh " would replace Saomai on the basin name lists beginning in 2008 and was first used in the 2012 season . 
 = Wagga Wagga = 
 Wagga Wagga ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ ə <unk> @-@ ə ; informally called Wagga ) is a city in New South Wales , Australia . Straddling the Murrumbidgee River , with an urban population of 55 @,@ 364 people , Wagga Wagga is the state 's largest inland city , and is an important agricultural , military , and transport hub of Australia . It is midway between the two largest cities in Australia , Sydney and Melbourne , and is the major regional centre for the Riverina and South West Slopes regions . 
 The central business district is focused around the commercial and recreational grid bounded by Best and Tarcutta Streets and the Murrumbidgee River and the Sturt Highway . The main shopping street of Wagga is Baylis Street which becomes Fitzmaurice Street at the northern end . The city is in an alluvial valley and much of the city has a problem with urban salinity . 
 The original inhabitants of the Wagga Wagga region were the Wiradjuri people . In 1829 , Charles Sturt became the first European explorer to visit the future site of the city . Squatters arrived soon after . The town , positioned on the site of a ford across the Murrumbidgee , was surveyed and gazetted as a village in 1849 and the town grew quickly after . In 1870 , the town was gazetted as a municipality . 
 During the negotiations leading to the federation of the Australian colonies , Wagga Wagga was a contender for the site of the capital for the new nation . During World War I the town was the starting point for the Kangaroo recruitment march . The Great Depression and the resulting hardship saw Wagga Wagga become the centre of a secession movement for the Riverina region . Wagga Wagga became a garrison town during World War II with the establishment of a military base at Kapooka and Royal Australian Air Force bases at Forest Hill and Uranquinty . After the war , Wagga Wagga was proclaimed as a city in 1946 and new suburbs were developed to the south of the city . In 1982 the city was amalgamated with the neighbouring Kyeamba and Mitchell Shires to form the City of Wagga Wagga local government area . In 2013 , the mayor of Wagga Wagga introduced the city 's nickname of Blamey 's town in a small military parade . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Wagga Wagga is at the eastern end of the Riverina region where the slopes of the Great Dividing Range flatten and form the Riverina plain . The city straddles the Murrumbidgee River , one of the great rivers of the Murray @-@ Darling Basin , and the city centre is on the southern bank , protected by a levee from potential flooding . 
 The city sits almost halfway between the largest cities in Australia being 452 kilometres southwest of Sydney and 456 kilometres northeast of Melbourne with the Sydney – Melbourne railway line passing through . The Sturt Highway , part of Australia 's National Highway network , passes through the city on its way from Adelaide to its junction with the main Sydney – Melbourne route , the Hume Highway , a further 45 kilometres east . This location astride some of the major transport routes in the nation has made Wagga Wagga an important heavy truck depot for a number of companies including Toll Holdings . Wagga Wagga itself is the major regional centre for the Riverina and for much of the South West Slopes regions , providing education , health and other services to a region extending as far as Griffith to the west , Cootamundra to the north and Tumut to the east . 
 = = = <unk> and salinity = = = 
 Wagga Wagga is upstream from the Riverina plain in the mid @-@ catchment range of the Murrumbidgee River in an alluvial valley confined by low bedrock hills . Much of Wagga Wagga is on heavy clay soils in a large drainage basin with a small catchment discharge point . Groundwater therefore cannot leave easily , leading to Wagga Wagga having a problem with waterlogged soil and soil salination . Urban salination in Wagga Wagga is now the subject of a large multi @-@ pronged approach to prevent further salination and reclaim salt @-@ affected areas . 
 = = = City and suburbs = = = 
 The location of Wagga Wagga 's Central business district was already well established by the late 1800s and remains focused around the commercial and recreational grid bounded by Best and Tarcutta Streets and the Murrumbidgee River and the Sturt Highway . The main shopping street of Wagga Wagga is Baylis Street which becomes Fitzmaurice Street at the northern end . The Wollundry Lagoon is the water focus of the city centre and has been a key element in the development and separation of the north ( older ) and south ( newer ) parts of the city centre . Most residential growth in Wagga Wagga has been on the higher ground to the south of the city centre , with the only residential areas north of the Murrumbidgee being the flood prone suburb of North Wagga Wagga and the university suburb of Estella . Major industrial areas of Wagga Wagga include the northern suburb of Bomen and the eastern suburb of East Wagga Wagga . 
 Thomas Mitchell , the surveyor who served under Lord Wellington named many of the streets after Peninsula War veterans . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Wagga Wagga has a temperate climate with hot dry summers and cold winters . Under the Köppen climate classification , the city has a humid subtropical climate ( Cfa ) , albeit having a semi @-@ arid influence due to its vegetation . At an elevation of 147 metres ( 482 ft ) above sea level , Wagga Wagga has four distinct seasons . Winters can be cold by Australian standards with the mean maximum temperature falling in July to 12 @.@ 7 ° C ( 54 @.@ 9 ° F ) and a mean minimum of 2 @.@ 7 ° C ( 36 @.@ 9 ° F ) . The lowest temperature recorded at Wagga was − 6 @.@ 3 ° C ( 20 @.@ 7 ° F ) on 21 August 1982 . 
 Fog and heavy frosts are common in the winter while snow is a very rare occurrence . By contrast , summers in Wagga Wagga are warm to hot , with mean maximum temperatures ranging between 29 and 32 ° C ( 84 and 90 ° F ) . The hottest temperature on record is 45 @.@ 2 ° C ( 113 @.@ 4 ° F ) on 7 February 2009 . Relative humidity is low in the summer months with a 3 pm average of around 30 % . Wagga Wagga has 124 @.@ 3 clear days annually . 
 In 2009 the city recorded anomalous maximum of 25 @.@ 03 ° C ( 77 @.@ 05 ° F ) , which was 2 @.@ 33 ° C ( 4 @.@ 19 ° F ) above the country 's average of 22 @.@ 7 ° C ( 72 @.@ 9 ° F ) and the highest anomalous maximum in Australia for 2009 . This proceeded the Early 2009 southeastern Australia heat wave , in which Wagga Wagga recorded 13 Consecutive days over 37 @.@ 8 ° C ( 100 @.@ 0 ° F ) . 
 Wagga Wagga has a mean annual rainfall of 573 @.@ 4 millimetres ( 22 @.@ 57 in ) per year . This rainfall is distributed fairly equally over the 12 months . On 8 March 2010 , Wagga Wagga Airport recorded 110 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 34 in ) of rain , breaking the previous all @-@ time record of 104 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 10 in ) set on 16 March 1966 , with 127 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) of rain recorded at Gurwood Street in the city 's CBD . In December 2010 , the city recorded its wettest year on record and the first yearly rainfall recording of 1 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 39 in ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The Aboriginal inhabitants of the Wagga Wagga region were the Wiradjuri people and the term " Wagga " and derivatives of that word in the Wiradjuri aboriginal language is thought to mean crow . To create the plural , the Wiradjuri repeat a word , thus ' Wagga Wagga ' translates to ' the place of many crows ' . This has been recognised in the Latin name of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Wagga Wagga as <unk> <unk> . ( " <unk> " being the Latin word for crow ) . Other translations render the word ' <unk> ' as " reeling ( a sick man or a dizzy man ) " and " to dance , slide or grind " . 
 European exploration of the future site of Wagga Wagga began in 1829 with the arrival of Captain Charles Sturt during his expedition along the Murrumbidgee River . Settlers arrived shortly thereafter with Charles Tompson establishing the <unk> ' run ' on the north bank of the river in 1832 , and then in soon after George Best establishing the Wagga Wagga ' run ' on the south bank . Other settlers followed , with all of them initially squatting on the land illegally but by 1836 the colonial government regulated the tenure of land and established a licensing scheme . Within a few years settlers numbers increased greatly and before 1850 a local bench of magistrates and a place for holding petty sessions was established . The beginnings of a village formed near the ford used by most traffic passing through the area and included a crude blacksmith 's shop , a hotel , and a post office . By 1849 the town was marked out by surveyor Thomas Scott Townsend and formally gazetted as a village . 
 Wagga Wagga grew quickly , reaching a population of 627 in 1861 and during that decade a number of hotels and stores opened , as well as professional services in the form of banks , solicitors , doctors and dentists . The Wagga Wagga Advertiser is still published today as The Daily Advertiser and commenced in 1868 . Until the 1860s most goods were transported to markets by bullock wagon . For a short time , the arrival of faster , cheaper and more reliable riverboats allowed goods to be transported more easily to export markets . The riverboat era ended when the New South Wales government extended the railway line to North Wagga Wagga in 1878 and across the river to Wagga Wagga itself in 1881 . 
 On 15 March 1870 , Wagga Wagga was incorporated as a municipality and George Forsyth was chosen as the first Mayor of Wagga Wagga . Gas lighting was installed throughout the streets of Wagga Wagga in 1881 , although once again North Wagga Wagga was neglected . By 1885 , a town waterworks and reservoir was established although water quality remained a problem . Poor sanitation caused a horrific stench in the town and was blamed for a large increase in infectious diseases such as typhoid fever in the 1890s and early 1900s . In 1908 the Council approved a sewerage scheme and by 1914 most of the main streets were <unk> . A free public library was opened in 1875 and the Council began to establish parklands such as Bolton Park and the Town Hall Gardens . 
 In September 1859 local residents formed a committee for the construction of a pile bridge over the Murrumbidgee River . After the New South Wales Government refused to support this type of bridge the committee decided to finance it themselves . The bridge was completed in October 1862 and opened on 27 October at just over 91 metres long and 7 metres wide . In 1884 the New South Wales Government purchased the bridge and it was demolished in 1895 . In 1895 a truss bridge called the Hampden Bridge , was built across the Murrumbidgee River at Wagga . The bridge served the Wagga Wagga community for over 100 years until 16 August 2006 when it was closed and fenced off to the public due to the bridge being declared a safety risk after one of the trusses failed . In 2014 the Hampden Bridge was demolished . 
 With its increasing prosperity and population , Wagga Wagga and the surrounding district became a place of interest to several infamous bushrangers . The Wagga police magistrate Henry Baylis was bailed up by Mad Dog Morgan in 1863 . Captain <unk> and his band arrived in the district on 15 November 1879 and held up 39 people at <unk> Station . <unk> and his gang escaped a police pursuit only to be captured at another nearby property when police from the neighbouring townships of Gundagai and <unk> arrived . 
 Along with most of the Riverina region , the majority of Wagga Wagga residents supported the federation of the Australian colonies , in large part due to the prospect of free trade across colonial borders . In 1898 , a group of residents promoted Wagga Wagga for consideration as the site of the future national capital due to its location equidistant from Sydney and Melbourne and its ample water supply . Despite the bid 's lack of success , in the 1899 referendum Wagga Wagga residents voted strongly in favour of federation . 
 During World War I the town was the starting point of the " Kangaroo March " , one of a series of snowball marches conducted in New South Wales during the war where groups of recruits would march toward Sydney and appeal to men in the towns along the route to join them and enlist in the Australian Imperial Force . 88 recruits left Wagga Wagga on 1 December 1915 , farewelled by a large crowd and to the accompaniment of a band . The marchers included John Ryan , who later won the Victoria Cross for his actions in the Battle of the Hindenburg Line in 1918 . The march finished at Campbelltown with over 220 recruits . 
 After the war some of the area around Wagga Wagga was designated for settlement by returned soldiers , who faced insurmountable difficulties due to poor and <unk> land , lack of farming experience and lack of access to markets . Many walked off the land after years of backbreaking work . Residential growth continued with a population in 1921 of 11 @,@ 631 . Much of this residential growth was housed in the higher ground to the south , extending to the south of the railway tracks . A suburb consisting of tents and crude huts , known as " Tent Town " , developed along the river providing housing for the poorer residents of Wagga Wagga . In 1922 , electricity was provided for the town , with hydro @-@ electric power available from Burrinjuck Dam from 1928 . 
 Hardship as a result of the Great Depression , and the election of Jack Lang of the Labor party as Premier of New South Wales , sparked the formation of the " Riverina Movement " . Throughout the Riverina in early 1931 , a series of rallies were organised by the movement , culminating in a great meeting in Wagga Wagga on 28 February 1931 . The meeting called on the State and Federal governments to alleviate the concerns of producers in the district or hold a referendum to determine if the Riverina should secede . The movement petered out following the dismissal of Lang in 1932 and the recovery of the regional economy . 
 The outbreak of World War II saw Royal Australian Air Force bases established at Forest Hill in 1940 and Uranquinty in 1941 . A major Australian Army camp was constructed at Kapooka in 1942 and one year later there were 8 @,@ 000 troops in training there with Wagga taking on the characteristics of a garrison town . 
 After the war , Wagga Wagga grew steadily and was proclaimed a city on 17 April 1946 . Suburbs such as Turvey Park and Kooringal were developed to the south of the city and in the 1960s , residential growth expanded to cover areas such as Tolland and Lake Albert . The main commercial district also moved south to the Baylis Street end with the development of the Sturt Mall in 1979 . The City Council developed a series of industrial areas including areas for service and general industries , and agricultural processing and noxious industries were established in a new industrial estate in Bomen . 
 In the 1950s the defence bases in Wagga Wagga again became an important part of the city . The Army camp at Kapooka was reopened as a recruit training centre from 1951 , a role it maintains to this day . RAAF Base Wagga at Forest Hill also expanded , with training of defence force aircraft technicians there from 1969 . After a series of major floods in the early 1950s , the City Council protected the city area on the south flood plain through construction of a levee , completed in 1962 . The levee was designed to provide protection from floods at levels expected once every one hundred years . North Wagga Wagga was initially excluded from protection however by 1982 another levee was constructed to protect the village , although at a lower standard . 
 In 1971 , following pressure from the Wagga Wagga community for a university , the teachers ' college established in 1947 became the Riverina College of Advanced Education and was relocated to a site adjacent to the Wagga Agricultural College , with which it amalgamated in 1975 . In 1989 , the College amalgamated with the College of Advanced Education at Bathurst to become Charles Sturt University . In 1981 , the New South Wales government forced the amalgamation of Wagga Wagga City Council with neighbouring Kyeamba Shire and Mitchell Shire to form the new City of Wagga Wagga local government area , containing 4 @,@ 886 square kilometres . 
 On 23 February 1993 Wagga Wagga was the first city in the world to be proclaimed as a Rotary Peace City , with a Rotary Peace Monument unveiled on the corner of The Esplanade and Best Street . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 Wagga Wagga is the major city of the Riverina and the largest inland city in New South Wales . As at June 2014 the urban area of Wagga Wagga was home to a population of 55 @,@ 364 having grown 1 @.@ 3 % on prior year and from 50 @,@ 123 over the prior decade . Much of this growth is attributable to the " sponge city " phenomenon as Wagga Wagga attracts residents from smaller towns in the region such as Urana . Other factors include Wagga 's role as a regional centre and its hosting of major defence establishments and a Charles Sturt University campus . 
 The population is reasonably homogenous with only 6 @.@ 4 % of the population born outside of Australia as opposed to 21 @.@ 9 % for Australia as a whole and 93 @.@ 8 % of households in Wagga Wagga speaking only English at home . Wagga Wagga is home to immigrants from England ( 1 @.@ 4 % of residents ) , New Zealand ( 0 @.@ 7 % ) , India ( 0 @.@ 6 % ) , China ( 0 @.@ 5 % ) and South Africa ( 0 @.@ 3 % ) . The indigenous population at the 2011 census was 2 @,@ 423 Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders . The main sources of employment in Wagga Wagga include education , retailing , health and defence . 
 In religion , Wagga Wagga is predominantly Christian , with the major religious denominations being Catholic ( 33 @.@ 9 % ) and Anglican ( 23 @.@ 9 % ) . 15 % of the population professed no religion . 
 Wagga Wagga falls within the boundary of the Anglican Diocese of Canberra and Goulburn . Anglican parishes include St John 's , Wagga Wagga ( Church St ) ; St Paul 's , Turvey Park ( <unk> Rd ) ; St Alban 's , Kooringal ( Lake Albert Rd ) ; Community of the Redeemer , Ashmont ( Blakemore Ave ) . 
 Wagga Wagga is the seat of a Roman Catholic diocese , with its principal church being St Michael 's Cathedral . 
 = = Industry = = 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 Wagga attracts people from all over the Riverina and southwestern New South Wales to its shopping facilities . It is the major support city for over 200 @,@ 000 people who live across the region . 
 Wagga 's shopping centres include two notable centres of metropolitan standards , Wagga Wagga Marketplace and Sturt Mall in the central business district , and suburban shopping centres such as the South City Shopping Centre in Glenfield Park , the Lake Village Shopping Centre , Lake Albert , the Tolland Shopping Centre and Kooringal Mall in Kooringal . Wagga has a large Home Base located on the Sturt Highway . Wagga 's central business district , with both Baylis and Fitzmaurice Streets and other surrounding streets , offers hundreds of speciality retailers including national chains such as Big W , Myer and Target Country . The dairy company <unk> ( Formerly Murrumbidgee Dairy Products ) , is based on the Sturt Highway which is a supplier of dairy products in the Riverina , Other major industries include Cargill and Heinz which are in the suburb of Bomen . 
 = = = Defence forces = = = 
 The Australian Army base at Kapooka includes the Army Recruit Training Centre , where general enlistment members of the Australian Army undertake their initial training . The barracks at Kapooka are named after World War II military commander Sir Thomas Blamey , born at Lake Albert Wagga Wagga and Australia 's only Field Marshal . Following recruit training , soldiers move on to trade specific training at training establishments throughout Australia . The soldiers club at Kapooka is named for John Hurst Edmondson , Australia 's first Victoria Cross winner in World War II , who was born in Wagga Wagga . 
 There is a separate Royal Australian Air Force ( RAAF ) base at Forest Hill ( RAAF Base Wagga ) , which is the administration and logistics training base for Air Force personnel and the tri @-@ service ( RAN / Army / RAAF ) electronic ( White hander ) and aircraft ( Black hander ) trades school . Some Royal Australian Navy Aircraft Technicians assigned to the naval air station HMAS Albatross are based at RAAF Base Wagga as an Aircraft Maintenance and Flight Trials Unit ( <unk> ) . As of 2008 , No 1 Recruit Training Unit ( <unk> ) has moved from RAAF Edinburgh to RAAF Wagga Wagga . RAAF Base Wagga is also the home of the Wagga Wagga RAAF Museum . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 The sole provider of higher education in Wagga Wagga is the local campus of the multi @-@ campus Charles Sturt University , located on the outskirts of the suburb of Estella . The university was established on 1 July 1989 following the enactment of The Charles Sturt University Act , 1989 and involved the merger of several existing separately @-@ administered Colleges of Advanced Education including the Riverina College of Advanced Education in Wagga Wagga . At the time of its establishment it became the ninth university in the state and its inaugural vice @-@ chancellor was C.D. Blake AO who at the time was the principal of the Riverina College . 
 The Riverina Institute , a collection of TAFE institute campuses has its headquarters in Wagga Wagga and Wagga is home to three campuses . The Primary Industries Centre , at North Wagga Wagga is set on 250 hectares and runs courses on agriculture and horticulture . The National Aerospace Training Centre of Excellence , at RAAF Base Wagga provides training support to the Australian Defence Force aerospace <unk> program . The commercial contract with the ADF is the largest technical training contract in Australia . In addition Wagga Wagga is home to eight secondary schools and 22 primary schools . 
 = = = Government = = = 
 Local government for the city is provided by the Wagga Wagga City Council . As well as Wagga Wagga itself the City Council area includes the outlying towns of Tarcutta , Ladysmith , <unk> , <unk> and Uranquinty covering an area of 4 @,@ 824 km ² . The local government area was formed as a result of the amalgamation of the City of Wagga Wagga with the Mitchell and Kyeamba Shires in 1981 . The council itself consists of 11 councillors elected for a four @-@ year term and from these a mayor and deputy mayor are elected each year by the council . 
 Wagga Wagga is the largest city in the Australian House of Representatives electorate of Riverina , currently represented by Michael McCormack of the National Party . At the state level , the city is represented in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly by Daryl Maguire , of the Liberal Party , member for the Electoral district of Wagga Wagga . 
 = = Transport = = 
 <unk> Wagga Wagga provides bus services from most Wagga Wagga suburbs to the CBD from Mondays to Saturdays with no services on Sunday or public holidays . Wagga Radio Cabs run taxis 24 / 7 in the city with taxi ranks at Station Place , Forsyth Street , Gurwood Street , Wagga Wagga Base Hospital and Kooringal Mall . 
 Baylis Street in the CBD was a thoroughfare for the Olympic Highway until the <unk> Bridge ( referred to locally as the <unk> Bridge and is believed to be the longest continuous @-@ span viaduct in New South Wales ) about 6 km northwest of the CBD was opened on 26 July 1997 . The Sturt Highway passes through the centre of Wagga Wagga . 
 Wagga Wagga railway station is located on the Sydney – Melbourne railway line with twice daily <unk> rail services provided by NSW TrainLink , the state owned passenger rail service . 
 Wagga Wagga Airport at Forest Hill has scheduled daily flights to Sydney and Melbourne operated by two carriers , Regional Express and QantasLink bringing approximately 210 @,@ 000 passengers through the region every year . Coupled with Rex ’ s major maintenance base and the Australian Airline Pilot Academy ( AAPA ) , the Airport is one of the busiest in regional Australia . The Airport itself is owned by the Royal Australian Air Force and the civil side is leased by the Wagga Wagga City Council . The sealed runway can cater for aircraft up to Boeing 737 @-@ 300 and Airbus A321 . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Wagga 's location approximately midway between Melbourne and Sydney on the " Barassi Line " contributes to high levels of participation in Rugby league , Rugby union and Australian rules football in the town . Other popular sports in Wagga include soccer , cricket , tennis , and lawn bowls . 
 The local rugby league teams play in the Group 9 Rugby League competition and include Wagga Brothers , South City and Wagga Kangaroos . The Group 9 grand final is a major sport event in Wagga Wagga . Rugby union teams include CSU <unk> , Wagga Agricultural College , Wagga City and Wagga Waratahs in the Southern Inland Rugby Union . Australian rules football clubs in Wagga include <unk> @-@ Ashmont @-@ Kapooka , <unk> @-@ <unk> United @-@ <unk> , Turvey Park and Wagga Tigers in the Riverina Football League and East Wagga @-@ Kooringal , North Wagga and <unk> ( CSU ) in the Farrer Football League . Wagga soccer teams include Henwood Park , Wagga United , Tolland and Lake Albert , with the first grade competition for men being the Pascoe Cup and for women the Leonard Cup . The Wagga Wagga Gold Cup , said to be Australia 's second oldest thoroughbred horse race , is held in the first week of May . 
 = = = The " Wagga Effect " = = = 
 The " Wagga Effect " is a term that has been used frequently in the Australian media to describe the disproportionately large number of elite sportsmen and women that originate from the city . It is speculated that the phenomenon may arise in rural areas where the population is large enough to sustain the presence of a large number of sporting codes , but small enough to ensure that talented individuals are exposed to adult @-@ level competition at an earlier age . 
 Famous sportspeople from Wagga include : 
 Australian Rules Football – Wayne Carey , Paul Kelly , Cameron Mooney , Paul Hawke , Bill Mohr , John <unk> , Matt Suckling and Adam Schneider 
 Cricket – Mark Taylor , Michael Slater and Geoff Lawson 
 Golf – US PGA Championship winner Steve <unk> 
 Horse racing – jockey Scobie Breasley 
 Rugby League – Peter Sterling , Ben Cross , the Mortimer brothers Chris , Peter and Steve , and Greg Brentnall 
 Rugby Union – Nathan Sharpe and Nathan Hines 
 Soccer – Australia women 's national soccer team representative Sally <unk> 
 Tennis – Tony Roche , 1966 French Open champion , and later a coach , is from Tarcutta near Wagga 
 Triathlon – Brad <unk> , Commonwealth Games Gold Medallist , Olympian , and World Champion 
 In 1993 , the City of Wagga Wagga instituted a Sporting Hall of Fame as part of the Museum of the Riverina dedicated to the elite sportspeople from Wagga Wagga and the surrounding area . 
 = = = 5 o 'clock wave = = = 
 The 5 o 'clock wave is a fictional theory on the reasons for Wagga Wagga 's sporting success . According to the local urban myth , at precisely 5 o 'clock arrives a giant wave which flushes a secret nutrient into the Murrumbidgee River following the release of water from the <unk> and Burrinjuck Dams . The wave is said to continue down river at high speed , and indeed visitors are told it is so powerful that surfers can ride it along the meandering river until it reaches the town of Narrandera . 
 = = Recreation and culture = = 
 = = = Recreation = = = 
 The Murrumbidgee River at Wagga Wagga forms into a large sandy beach , and is a popular location for swimming , picnics and barbecues during the warmer months . Between 1977 and 1995 the beach played host to the Gumi Races , where people were encouraged to make rafts from inner tubing and sabotage their competition by throwing rotten eggs and flour at them . Visitors and local residents still take every opportunity during the warmer months to float down the river from the area known as " The Rocks " some 600 metres upstream from the main beach area . 
 Wollundry Lagoon , Lake Albert and parks provide recreational facilities . Sporting facilities include the Oasis Regional Aquatic Centre , with Australia 's only wave ball . Wagga Wagga Civic Theatre and the Forum 6 Cinemas provide entertainment venues . The Wagga Wagga Botanic Gardens are home to a music bowl , a small zoo with a walk through aviary , a tree chapel , <unk> Hill Model Railway and a <unk> garden . Located on the banks of the Wollundry lagoon and officially opened in 1927 , the Victory Memorial Gardens were established amidst some controversy as a tribute to those who fought and died in World War I. 
 = = = Culture = = = 
 The main cultural precinct for Wagga Wagga can be found in central Wagga Wagga , at the Wagga Wagga Civic Centre on the banks of Wollundry Lagoon . The precinct includes the Wagga Wagga Civic Theatre , Museum of the Riverina , Wagga Wagga Regional Art Gallery and Wagga Wagga City Library . 
 The Wagga Wagga Civic Theatre was officially opened in 1963 at a cost of ₤ 165 @,@ 000 . During its design and construction and again after opening the theatre was the subject of severe criticism . Critics lamented the destruction of rose gardens removed to allow construction , the size of the orchestra pit , the amount of seating ( 497 seats ) as well as the design of the feature mural . A considerable refurbishment was carried out in the 1990s and now the theatre is regarded as one of the best in regional Australia , playing host to national and international touring acts . 
 The Wagga Wagga Regional Art Gallery hosts local collections and travelling exhibitions and has space for an Artist in residence . The centrepiece of the collection is the National Art Glass Gallery , a nationally significant collection of studio art glass hosted in a separate , specially designed gallery . The collection was first established by the former director of the Wagga Wagga Regional Art Gallery , Judy Le <unk> in response to a request by the Australia Council for regional galleries to develop a specialised collection to avoid duplication and competition . The collection consists of around 400 works making it the largest studio glass collection in Australia . 
 The Museum of the Riverina was established in 1967 by the Wagga Wagga and District Historical Society . Wagga Wagga City Council took over its operations in the late 1990s and it now operates at two sites . The Historic Council Chambers site on the corner of Baylis and Morrow streets in central Wagga , hosts travelling exhibitions and the main site at the Botanic Gardens is home to the main collection including the Wagga Wagga Sporting Hall of Fame . The museum also has an important collection of memorabilia about the Tichborne Case , including a set of four rare plaster figurines depicting characters from the trial , a complete set of hard @-@ bound court transcripts and a monumental painting entitled The Tichborne Trial painted in 1874 by Nathan Hughes , which hangs in the city 's council chambers . 
 The Wagga Wagga Jazz Festival was established in 1995 and has featured a range of Australian and international musicians . Established in 1976 as the Riverina Trucking Company and renamed in 1983 , the Riverina Theatre Company is one of Australia 's longest running regional theatre companies and runs a full program of events each year at the Riverina Playhouse , which is located on the banks of the Murrumbidgee River and owned by Charles Sturt University . 
 Notable artists and performers from Wagga Wagga include poet Dame Mary Gilmore , who is featured on the Australian 10 dollar note and veteran actor Bill Kerr . The Yellow Wiggle , Sam Moran , is from Wagga Wagga , having replaced the original Yellow Wiggle , Greg Page , in November 2006 . The fictional creation of satirist Barry Humphries , Dame Edna Everage was said to have been born in Wagga Wagga . 
 Frank <unk> wrote a song Wagga Wagga about the city in 1942 , calling it a ' Riverina paradise ’ . It was recorded by Tom Davidson and his Orchestra . 
 Wagga has strong cultural ties with three international sister cities which form part of a twinning program . Those sister cities are Leavenworth , Kansas in the United States , which was established in 1962 ; Nördlingen in Germany , established in 1967 ; and Kunming in China , mutually established in 1988 . 
 = = = Literary links = = = 
 Wagga has captured the interest of writers , novelists and songwriters over the years . Specifically the city 's international notoriety surrounding Arthur Orton and the Tichborne Case attracted a visit from Mark Twain when he visited Australia in the 1890s . In addition Wagga has been home to a number of famous Australian writers , including Frank Moorhouse who worked as a journalist on the city 's daily newspaper , and the poets Mary Gilmore and <unk> <unk> . 
 <unk> Spike Milligan was quite taken with the double @-@ barrelled names of Australian towns , and presented a show called " Australia : From <unk> <unk> to Wagga Wagga " . 
 In other cases the town 's name has been directly referred to as part of the content of songs and novels . For example , the song Don 't call Wagga Wagga Wagga , written by Australian country music artists Greg Champion and Jim Haynes , was a minor hit on the Australian country charts and is a light @-@ hearted take on the habit of Australians to refer to double named towns by one name only . Other examples include the Harry Potter series of fantasy novels , where the character Gilderoy Lockhart claimed to have defeated the " Wagga Wagga Werewolf " , the Bryce Courtenay book The Power of One , where the main character <unk> is said to have a cousin Lenny from Wagga Wagga Australia , the Bryce Courtenay book Jessica has several passages that take place in Wagga Wagga , including the judgement of Billy Simple , and the Robert G. Barrett novel , " Mud Crab Boogie " which is partially set in Wagga Wagga . 
 = = Media = = 
 As a regional centre for the Riverina and South West Slopes , Wagga Wagga is home to a number of regional media outlets . Both WIN Television and Prime7 air half @-@ hour local news programs on weeknights . The bulletins are presented from studios in Wollongong and Canberra respectively with reporters and camera crews for both services based in <unk> in the city . Since 2006 , WIN 's weeknight bulletin has also included coverage of the Griffith area . In addition , Southern Cross Ten runs a small sales office and airs short local news updates from its Canberra studios throughout the day . 
 The city receives the ABC 's four free @-@ to @-@ air national television networks on ( ABC1 , ABC2 , ABC3 and ABC News 24 ) , the SBS 's two television networks ( SBS ONE and SBS Two ) and the commercial networks ' digital channels ( 7Two and 7mate from Prime7 , GO ! and GEM HD from WIN and One HD and Eleven from Southern Cross Ten ) . 
 Local radio stations broadcasting from Wagga Wagga include ABC Riverina , AM radio commercial station <unk> , FM radio commercial station Star FM , and a rebroadcast from radio reading service Radio <unk> . Other local stations include Christian radio station Life FM and the community station <unk> FM . The ABC 's national stations Radio National , Triple J and ABC Classic FM and the multicultural network SBS Radio are broadcast into Wagga Wagga . 
 The Daily Advertiser , published Monday to Friday and its sister publication , the Weekend Advertiser , service Wagga and much of the surrounding region . The newspaper was established by two wealthy local pastoralists , Auber George Jones and Thomas Darlow and first printed on 10 December 1868 by editor Frank Hutchison , an Oxford graduate . Originally printed bi @-@ weekly , by 1880 it was tri @-@ weekly and finally became ' daily ' on 31 December 1910 . In 1962 the newspaper reduced in size from a broadsheet to a tabloid format . The Riverina Leader , the local free community newspaper was launched in May 1979 . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Helen Coonan ( Liberal Party senator for New South Wales 1996 – 2011 ) 
 Geoff Dixon ( Former Qantas CEO ) 
 Paul Kelly ( Former Australian rules footballer , Brownlow Medal winner and captain of the Sydney Swans for ten seasons ) 
 Bill Kerr ( Australian actor and co @-@ star of the BBC radio comedy Hancock 's Half Hour ) 
 Arthur Orton ( Imposter of the late 19th century ) 
 Sam Moran ( Former member of the children 's musical group The Wiggles ) 
 William Monks ( Architect ) 
 Steve Mortimer ( Rugby league player ) 
 Dame Edna Everage ( Satirical figure ) 
 Tony Roche ( 1966 French Open tennis champion ) 
 Peter Sterling ( Rugby League player and TV commentator ) 
 Nathan Sharpe ( Rugby union player ) 
 Jamie <unk> ( Rugby League player ) 
 Mark Taylor ( Cricket Australian Captain ) 
 <unk> Burgess ( Dancing With The Stars professional dancer ) 
 In 2013 British musician David A. Stewart confirmed that the famous music duo Eurythmics had formed in Wagga Wagga . 
 = Jean @-@ Hilaire Aubame = 
 Jean @-@ Hilaire Aubame ( 10 November 1912 – 16 August 1989 ) was a Gabonese politician active during both the colonial and independence periods . The French journalist Pierre Péan said that Aubame 's training " as a practicing Catholic and a customs official helped to make him an integrated man , one of whom political power was not an end in itself . " 
 Born into a Fang family , Aubame was orphaned at a young age . He was raised by the stepbrother of Léon M 'ba , who became Aubame 's chief political rival . Encouraged by his colleagues , Aubame entered politics , serving as Gabon 's first representative in the National Assembly of France from 1946 to 1958 . Aubame was also a leader in solving African problems , particularly developing the Gabonese standard of living and planning urban sites . Aubame 's quick rise in Gabonese politics was spurred by the support of the missions and administration , whereas much of M 'ba 's strength came from the colonists . 
 Despite a rivalry , Aubame and M 'ba , now the President of Gabon , formed several political unions which were sufficiently politically balanced to appeal to the electorate . In appreciation for his help , M 'ba appointed Aubame as foreign minister and later President of the Supreme Court . Tensions soon rose between the two due to Aubame 's refusal to merge his party with M 'ba 's and create a one @-@ party state . Aubame was installed as President of Gabon during a 1964 coup d 'état against M 'ba . However , the coup was toppled three days later , and although he did not participate in the coup 's planning , Aubame was sentenced to 10 years of hard labor and 10 years of exile . He was beaten almost daily by his prison guards while serving out his sentence . M 'ba 's successor as President , Omar Bongo , allowed the return of Aubame to Gabon in 1972 . The elder politician died in 1989 in Gabon 's capital of Libreville . 
 = = Youth and early political career = = 
 Born into a Fang family near Libreville , Aubame lost his father at eight years of age and his mother at eleven . Abbé Jean <unk> , stepbrother of Léon M 'ba , looked after the orphaned Aubame and arranged for schooling at several Roman Catholic missions . After he graduated , Aubame became a schoolteacher . 
 M 'ba helped get him a job in customs on 24 March 1931 . First appointed to Libreville from 1931 to 1935 , he was transferred to Bangui in 1935 and then to Brazzaville in 1936 , where he co @-@ founded a branch of the <unk> <unk> with a brother of politician Louis Bigmann . He was also a member of the Association des <unk> , an organization which was dominated by two other soon @-@ to @-@ be politicians : René @-@ Paul <unk> and Jean Rémy <unk> . 
 Following the speech given by Charles de Gaulle on the Appeal of 18 June 1940 , Aubame sided with the Free French , and in November was sent by Libreville authorities to rally Fangs for the cause . In February 1942 , Aubame met colonial administrator Félix Éboué and quickly became his protégé . He served as an informant for Éboué on African affairs . Aubame 's reward was to be one of several Africans promoted on 23 February 1943 into the European section of the civil service , and on 1 January 1944 Éboué appointed him president of the municipal commission for the <unk> @-@ <unk> section of Brazzaville . 
 Aubame participated in the 1944 Brazzaville Conference and served in this post until 10 November 1946 . After Éboué 's sudden death in March 1944 , Aubame worked as an adviser to Governor @-@ General André <unk> and his secretary André <unk> . They encouraged Aubame to run for office , and he returned to Gabon to campaign with the support of both the administration and the missionaries . 
 = = Deputy = = 
 = = = Deputy to the French National Assembly = = = 
 Aubame lost in the 1945 elections , though on 10 November 1946 became Gabon 's first representative to the French National Assembly by winning 7 @,@ 069 votes out of 12 @,@ 528 possible . From 1946 to 1951 he was Commissioner of shipping , the press , communication , labor and social security . He voted for Algerian independence on 27 August 1947 and for the establishment of a Council of Europe on 9 July 1949 . 
 On 17 June 1951 , Aubame was reelected a deputy with 17 @,@ 329 votes out of a total of 29 @,@ 203 and on 2 January 1956 with 26 @,@ 712 votes out of a total of 57 @,@ 031 , with this term lasting until the end of the Fourth French Republic . Around this time , M 'ba was establishing his political career after being exiled to Oubangui @-@ Chari . <unk> with the French Section of the Workers ' International ( <unk> ) , Aubame later worked most closely with the Indépendants d <unk> @-@ Mer , an African parliamentary group whose leaders were Senegalese Léopold Sédar Senghor and Cameroonian Louis @-@ Paul <unk> . While a deputy he lived in Paris and toured Gabon regularly . 
 He continued to develop local Gabonese politics , in particular revitalizing the Fang clans . In fact , M 'ba asserted that Aubame was too involved with the Fang to pay attention to the interests of the southern tribes , a charge Aubame ridiculed . Aubame was also a leader in solving African problems , particularly developing the Gabonese standard of living and planning urban sites . On 29 September 1951 , he voted to increase the minimum wage in the overseas territories of France , and served as vice president of its Commission from 1953 to 1955 . He organized the Gabonese Democratic and Social Union ( UDSG ) in 1947 , whose leadership came mostly from the interior , particularly Woleu @-@ Ntem Province . The party in turn backed Aubame 's reelection in 1951 and 1956 . It had few philosophical differences with the M 'ba @-@ led Bloc Démocratique Gabonais ( BDG ) , including advocating less economic dependence on France and faster " Africanization " of French political jobs . Fairly quickly , Gabonese politics became dominated by Aubame , supported by the missions and the administration , and M 'ba , supported by the settlers . 
 = = = Deputy to the Gabonese Territorial Assembly = = = 
 In 1952 he was elected as Woleu @-@ N <unk> 's representative for Gabon 's Territorial Assembly . He was re @-@ elected in the March 1957 elections , in which the UDSG also placed first , winning 18 of the 40 contested seats , against 16 for BDG . M 'ba 's party won 21 seats against 19 for Aubame 's party after a recount . However , in the absence of an absolute majority , on 21 May 1957 , both parties were obligated to submit a list of individuals that both agreed were suitable for inclusion in the government . That same day , M 'ba was appointed vice president of the government . Soon , divisions within the government grew , and Aubame resigned from his position and filed a motion of censure against the government . The motion was rejected by a 21 – 19 vote . With M 'ba 's victory , many elected UDSG members joined the parliamentary majority , giving the ruling government 29 of the 40 legislative seats . Well installed in the government , he slowly began to reinforce his power . 
 = = Independence and opposition = = 
 = = = Opposition leader = = = 
 After voting in favor of the Franco @-@ African Community constitutional referendum of 28 September 1958 , Gabon became pseudo @-@ politically independent . Legislative elections were scheduled for 19 June 1960 through the <unk> de Liste voting system , a form of bloc voting in which each party offers a list of candidates who the population vote for ; the list that obtains a majority of votes is declared the winner and wins all the contested seats . Through the redistricting of district and constituency boundaries , the BDG arbitrarily received 244 seats , while the UDSG received 77 . In the months that followed , the legislative majority was plagued by internal strife . M 'ba , now President of Gabon , decided to dissolve the Assembly and looked to the opposition to strengthen his position . 
 With Aubame , he formed a number of sufficiently balanced political unions to appeal to the electorate . On 12 February , they won 99 @.@ 75 % of the vote , and later that day , M 'ba , running unopposed , was elected president of Gabon . For his cooperation , M 'ba appointed Aubame foreign minister , replacing André Gustave <unk> . In contrast to M 'ba who wanted a strong executive regime , Aubame preferred a parliamentary republic . Tensions rose when a new constitution was unanimously adopted , on 21 February 1961 , providing for a " <unk> " regime . Under this system , M 'ba was able to appoint ministers whose functions and limitations were decided by him . 
 On 19 February , he broke his ties with Aubame ; all UDSG representatives were dismissed , with the exception of M 'ba supporter Francis <unk> . This was due to Aubame 's refusal to merge the UDSG with M 'ba 's and create a one @-@ party state . In an attempt to oust Aubame from his legislative seat , M 'ba appointed him President of the Supreme Court on 25 February . Thereafter , M 'ba claimed that Aubame had resigned from the National Assembly , citing incompatibility with parliamentary functions . Aubame resolved the accusation by resigning from his post as President of the Supreme Court , complicating matters for M 'ba . Faced with reports of tension between the government and the National Assembly , even though 70 % of its composition were BDG members , the Gabonese president dissolved the legislature on 21 January 1964 as an " economy measure " . 
 The electoral conditions were announced as such : The election 67 districts were reduced to 47 . M 'ba disqualified Aubame by announcing no one who held a post recently was banned . Any party would have to submit 47 candidates who had to pay US $ 160 or none at all . Thus , over US $ 7 @,@ 500 would be deposited without considering campaign expenses . M 'ba 's idea was that no party other than his would have the money to enter candidates . In response to this , the opposition announced its refusal to participate in elections that they did not consider fair . 
 It is unlikely that Aubame participated in the planning of the 1964 Gabon coup d 'état . It appears that he joined the effort after being recruited by the new government . His nephew , Pierre Eyeguet , a former ambassador to the United Kingdom , may have known of the plot beforehand and notified his uncle , although it is unknown whether or not Aubame established contact with the plotters . 
 = = = 1964 Gabon coup d 'état = = = 
 During the night of 17 February and the early morning of 18 February 1964 , 150 members of the Gabonese military , gendarmerie , and police , headed by Lieutenant Jacques Mombo and Valére Essone , seized the presidential palace . They arrested President of the National Assembly Louis Bigmann , French commanders Claude Haulin and Major Royer , several ministers , and President M 'ba , who was dragged from his bed at gunpoint . On Radio Libreville , the military announced to the Gabonese people that a coup d 'état had taken place , and that they required technical assistance and told the French not interfere in this matter . M 'ba was instructed to broadcast a speech acknowledging his defeat . " The D @-@ Day is here , the injustices are beyond measure , these people are patient , but their patience has limits " , he said . " It came to a boil . " 
 During these events , no gunshots were fired . The people did not react strongly , which according to the military , was a sign of approval . A provisional government was formed , and the presidency was offered to Aubame . The government was composed of civilian politicians from both the UDSG and BDG , such as Paul Gondjout . As for the coup plotters , they were content to ensure security for civilians . The small Gabonese army did not intervene in the coup ; composed mostly of French officers , they remained in their barracks . 
 Aubame was unaware of the coup until the French ambassador to Gabon , Paul Cousseran , called him on the telephone roughly a half hour after sunrise . Cousseran , meanwhile , was awoken by the noisy streets and checked to see what was happening . Aubame replied that he was to find out why there was " no government " , as Cousseran never directly mentioned a coup . However , about midway through the morning an automobile carrying the revolutionary committee arrived at Aubame 's residence and drove him to the governmental offices , where he had been named president . 
 Second Lieutenant Ndo Edou gave instructions to transfer M 'ba to Ndjolé , Aubame 's electoral stronghold . However , due to heavy rain , the deposed president and his captors took shelter in an unknown village . The next morning they decided to take him over the easier road to Lambaréné . Several hours later , they returned to Libreville . The new head of government quickly contacted French ambassador Paul Cousseran , to assure him that the property of foreign nationals would be protected and to ask him to prevent any French military intervention . 
 In Paris , French president Charles de Gaulle decided otherwise . M 'ba was one of the most loyal allies to France in Africa . While visiting France in 1961 , M 'ba said : " [ a ] ll Gabonese have two fatherlands : France and Gabon . " Moreover , under his regime , Europeans enjoyed particularly friendly treatment . Therefore , President de Gaulle , upon advice from his chief adviser on African policy , Jacques Foccart , decided that he would restore the legitimate government . This was in accordance with a 1960 treaty between Gabon and the French , which was ironically signed by Aubame in his stint as Foreign Minister . Intervention could not commence without a formal request to the Head of State of Gabon . Since M 'ba was otherwise occupied , the French contacted the Vice President of Gabon , Paul @-@ Marie Yembit , who had not been arrested . However , he remained unaccounted for ; therefore , they decided to compose a predated letter that Yembit would later sign , confirming their intervention . Less than 24 hours later , French troops stationed in Dakar and Brazzaville landed in Libreville and restored M 'ba to power . Over the course of the operation , one French soldier was killed , while 15 to 25 died on the Gabonese side . 
 = = Trial at Lambaréné = = 
 Aubame and Gondjout fled Libreville as fugitives , though were eventually discovered . In August , the trial of the military rebels and provisional government was opened in Lambaréné . A " state of precations " was enacted , which decreed that the local government maintained surveillance over suspected troublemakers and , if necessary , order a curfew . Special permits were required to travel through the town . The trial was held in a school building overlooking the Ogooue River , near Albert Schweitzer 's hospital . Space was limited , so there was no representative section of the public . One needed a permit to witness the trial , and family members were restricted to one each . Press coverage was limited , and journalists were only allowed if they were representing a high @-@ profile news agency . In addition , there were restrictions on the defence of the accused . 
 The prosecution called 64 witnesses to the trial . Essone , Mbene , and Aubame claimed that their involvement in the coup was due to a lack of development in the Gabonese army . Judge Leon Auge , the judge in the case , said that if " that is the only reason for your coup d 'état , you deserve a severe penalty . " Aubame affirmed his position that he did not participate in its planning . According to him , he formed the provisional government in a constitutional manner , at the request of some " putschists " . He stated that the French intervention was an illegal act of interference , an assertion that Gondjout and Jean Mare Ekoh , a former education minister , shared . 
 On 9 September , the judge came to a verdict without consulting M 'ba . Aubame was sentenced to 10 years of hard labor and 10 years of exile on a remote island off <unk> , 100 miles ( 161 km ) down the coast of Gabon , as were most criminals of the case . He was not particularly popular during his political career , though according to Time , his arrest " ballooned him to heroic proportions in the eyes of the aroused public " . While serving his 10 years of labor , he was beaten regularly by prison guards . Besides Aubame , M 'ba imprisoned more than 150 of his opponents , most of whom were sentenced to 20 years of hard labor . The actor and the doctor were given 10 years of imprisonment each . While appealing for peace on 18 February , he pledged " no pardon or pity " to his enemies , but rather " total punishment " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 M 'ba 's successor as President , Omar Bongo , allowed the return of Aubame to Gabon in 1972 . Afterward , Aubame lived in Paris and removed himself from the world of politics . He did visit Libreville in 1981 , on which occasion Bongo appointed him " special adviser " — a mostly honorary post . Although not a supporter of the Movement for National Renewal ( <unk> ) , his home was bombed on 12 December 1984 by anti @-@ <unk> extremists . Aubame and his family barely escaped harm . 
 Aubame , whom journalist Ronald Matthews descried as having " a curiously harsh voice , a severe appearance , and ... a stern character " , died in 1989 in Libreville . The French journalist Pierre Péan said that Aubame 's training " as a practicing Catholic and a customs official helped to make him an integrated man , one of whom political power was not an end in itself . " Michael C. Reed speculates that , had Aubame become president instead of M 'ba , he might have made the country more democratic . After his death , a Libreville high school was established in his name . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Médaille de la Résistance 
 Commandeur de la Légion d 'honneur 
 l 'Étoile <unk> ( Gabon ) 
 l 'Étoile africaine ( <unk> ) 
 l 'Ordre <unk> de la <unk> africaine 
 l 'Ordre national du Mérite du Niger 
 l 'Ordre national du Mérite <unk> 
 l 'Ordre national du Mérite de Côte @-@ d 'Ivoire 
 l 'Ordre national du Tchad 
 l 'Étoile noire du <unk> 
 = Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage = 
 The Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage took place during the Second World War on 13 June 1944 , one week after the Normandy Landings by the Western Allies that began the conquest of German @-@ occupied France . The battle was the result of a British attempt to improve their position , by exploiting a gap in the German defences west of the city of Caen . After one day of fighting in and around the small town of Villers @-@ Bocage and a second day defending a position outside the town , the British force retired . 
 The Allies and the Germans regarded control of Caen as vital to the Normandy battle . In the days following the D @-@ Day landings on 6 June , the Germans rapidly established strong defences in front of the city . On 9 June , a two @-@ pronged British attempt to surround and capture Caen was defeated . On the right flank of the British Second Army , the 1st US Infantry Division had forced back the German 352nd Infantry Division and opened a gap in the German front line . Seizing the opportunity to bypass the German Panzer @-@ Lehr Division blocking the direct route south in the area of Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles , a mixed force of tanks , infantry and artillery , based on the 22nd Armoured Brigade of the 7th Armoured Division , advanced through the gap in a flanking manoeuvre towards Villers @-@ Bocage . British commanders hoped that the appearance of a strong force in their rear would force the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division to withdraw or be surrounded . 
 Under the command of Brigadier William " Loony " Hinde , the 22nd Armoured Brigade group reached Villers @-@ Bocage without serious incident on the morning of 13 June . The leading elements advanced eastwards from the town on the Caen road to Point 213 , where they were ambushed by Tiger I tanks of the 101st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion . In fewer than 15 minutes numerous tanks , anti @-@ tank guns and transport vehicles were destroyed , many by SS @-@ Obersturmführer Michael Wittmann . The Germans then attacked the town and were repulsed , losing several Tigers and Panzer IV . After six hours , Hinde ordered a withdrawal to a more defensible position on a knoll west of Villers @-@ Bocage . The next day the Germans attacked the defensive " Brigade Box " in the Battle of the Island . The British inflicted a costly repulse on the Germans and then retired from the salient . The Battle for Caen continued east of Villers @-@ Bocage , which was captured , in ruins , on 4 August after two raids by the strategic bombers of the Royal Air Force . 
 The British conduct of the Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage has been controversial , because their withdrawal marked the end of the post D @-@ Day " scramble for ground " and the start of an attritional battle for Caen . Historians have written that the British attack was a failure caused by a lack of conviction among some senior commanders , rather than the fighting power of the German army , although some judge the British force to have been insufficient for the task . The " single @-@ handed " attack by Wittmann early on , has excited imaginations to the extent that some historians and writers conclude that it has dominated the historical record to an unwarranted degree and that while " remarkable " , the role of Wittmann in the battle has been exaggerated . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = D @-@ Day and Operation Perch = = = 
 The British 3rd Infantry Division , of I Corps , came ashore on Sword beach on 6 June 1944 , with Caen — 9 miles ( 14 km ) inland — as their final objective . The vicinity of Caen was attractive to Allied planners because it contained airfields and was open , dry and conducive to swift offensive operations , for which the Allies had the advantage of numerical superiority in tanks and mobile units . The attempt to capture Caen on D @-@ Day was ambitious and traffic jams on the beaches delayed the 27th Armoured Brigade . The advance of the 3rd Infantry Division diminished as it fought past German fortifications and was stopped short of Caen before dark , by elements of the 21st Panzer Division . 
 The next day , the British began Operation Perch , an advance to the south @-@ east of Caen , according to a contingency in the invasion plan . I Corps continued the attack towards Caen , but the Germans were able to reinforce the defenders , which made it impossible to rush the city with small numbers of men and tanks . On 9 June , the Allied ground forces commander , General Bernard Montgomery , revised Operation Perch to be a bigger attack with a pincer movement to surround the city . After delays caused by the time taken to get the attacking forces into position , on 12 June , simultaneous attacks began west and east of Caen . On the east side of the Orne River , in the airborne bridgehead , two attacking brigades of the 51st ( Highland ) Infantry Division were held up by the 21st Panzer Division and on 13 June , the attack was called off . To the west of Caen , XXX Corps was unable to advance south of the village of Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles against the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division , one of the most powerful armoured formations in the German army , which had recently arrived in Normandy . 
 = = = Caumont Gap = = = 
 While the envelopment of Caen had been prevented by the Germans on the right flank of XXX Corps , at the junction between the British Second and United States First armies , five German battle groups , including the last reserves of LXXXIV Korps had been destroyed , leaving only the remnants of the 352nd Infantry Division defending the front from Trévières to <unk> . American attacks caused the left flank of the division to collapse and on the night of 9 – 10 June , the division retreated to Saint @-@ Lô ; the withdrawal created a 7 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 12 @.@ 1 km ) gap between the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division and the German troops near Caumont @-@ l 'Éventé , with only the 17th SS @-@ Panzergrenadier Division reconnaissance battalion remaining in the area . The Germans intended that the 2nd Panzer Division would fill the gap , but on 10 June , the bulk of the division was still between Amiens and Alençon and not expected to arrive in strength until 13 June . Although reluctant to commit the 2nd Panzer Division piecemeal , General der Panzertruppe Hans Freiherr von Funck , commander of the XLVII Panzer Korps , rushed the divisional reconnaissance battalion to Caumont to hold the high ground . 
 The Second Army commander , Lieutenant @-@ General Miles Dempsey , ordered Lieutenant @-@ General Gerard Bucknall , the XXX Corps commander and Major @-@ General George Erskine , the 7th Armoured Division commander , to disengage the 7th Armoured Division from the fighting around Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles and to move through the gap , seize Villers @-@ Bocage and menace the exposed left flank of the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division . The British objective was a ridge 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) to the east of Villers @-@ Bocage . Dempsey hoped that its capture would force the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division to withdraw or be surrounded . The 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division and most of the infantry brigade of the 7th Armoured Division , were to continue the attack against the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division around Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles and the 1st and 2nd US Infantry divisions of the V US Corps would continue their advance . 
 The 7th Armoured Division spent the morning of 12 June attacking towards Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles , according to its original orders and at 12 : 00 Erskine ordered Hinde to move the 22nd Armoured Brigade immediately through the gap . Soon afterwards , the 8th King 's Royal Irish Hussars , the divisional reconnaissance regiment , began to reconnoitre a route for the brigade and the rest of the division left <unk> at around 16 : 00 . Four hours later the main body was close to Livry after a 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) unopposed advance , the last 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) of which was through German @-@ held territory . The leading Cromwell tanks of the 8th Hussars were destroyed by a Panzer @-@ Lehr Division Escort Company anti @-@ tank gun which held out for two <unk> to mislead the Germans about the objective , on reaching the vicinity of la <unk> north of Livry , Hinde ordered a halt for the night and the 8th King 's Royal Irish and 11th ( Prince Albert 's Own ) hussars , the divisional armoured car regiment , reconnoitred the flanks . The 11th Hussars encountered no resistance on the right flank and gained touch with the 1st US Infantry Division near Caumont and on the left flank ; the 8th Hussars located elements of the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division less than 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) away . 
 = = Plan = = 
 It was clear that to control Villers @-@ Bocage , the British would have to occupy the ridge rapidly . The 4th County of London Yeomanry ( Sharpshooters ) ( 4th CLY ) , with a company of the 1st Battalion Rifle Brigade , was to pass through Villers @-@ Bocage and occupy the highest point of the ridge at Point 213 . The 1 / 7th Queen 's Royal Regiment ( West Surrey ) would follow up and occupy the town and the 5th Royal Tank Regiment ( 5th RTR ) and a company of the Rifle Brigade , were to take high ground at <unk> @-@ <unk> to the south @-@ west of Villers @-@ Bocage . The 260th Anti @-@ tank Battery of the Norfolk Yeomanry would cover the gap between the 4th CLY and the 5th RTR with <unk> SP Achilles self @-@ propelled anti @-@ tank guns . The 5th Regiment , Royal Horse Artillery ( 5th RHA ) , would follow the rest of the brigade group with its Sexton self @-@ propelled guns . The 5th RHA and the brigade group tactical headquarters were established at Amayé @-@ sur @-@ Seulles . The two Hussar regiments were to provide flank protection against the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division and uncover German positions either side of the line of advance . The 131st Infantry Brigade , with the 1st Royal Tank Regiment ( 1st RTR ) and the 1 / 5th and 1 / 6th Queen 's , was to hold Livry as a firm base . 
 The I SS @-@ Panzer Korps commander Obergruppenführer Sepp Dietrich ordered his only reserve , schwere SS @-@ Panzer Abteilung 101 to move behind the Panzer @-@ Lehr and 12th SS @-@ Panzer divisions in the Villers @-@ Bocage area , as a precaution against an attempt to advance into the Caumont Gap . Schwere SS @-@ Panzer Abteilung 101 had arrived in Normandy on 12 June , after a five @-@ day drive from Beauvais . The battalion had an establishment of 45 Tiger I but had been reduced to about 17 serviceable tanks by an air attack near Versailles . The 1st Company moved to a position 5 @.@ 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 0 km ) north @-@ east of Villers @-@ Bocage ; the 2nd Company to just south of Point 213 on the Villers @-@ Bocage ridge and the 3rd remained near Falaise with one serviceable tank . The 2nd Company consisted of 12 tanks , but through a combination of losses and mechanical failures , only six Tigers were present on 13 June . The area around Villers @-@ Bocage came under heavy naval artillery fire during the night of 12 / 13 June and the 2nd Company moved three times ; the company planned a mechanical overhaul for the morning . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Advance = = = 
 During the early hours of 13 June , the 1st Rifle Brigade reconnoitred the first 0 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 80 km ) of the route . Livry was reported to be clear of Germans and the advance resumed at 05 : 30 with the 4th CLY leading the way . The column was met by jubilant French civilians , leading to a relaxed mood among the soldiers . Erroneous information was passed to the British that German tanks were stranded in Tracey @-@ Bocage and rumours held that that other tanks were similarly stranded at the Château de Villers @-@ Bocage . On 11 June , German medical personnel had established a hospital at the château but had left at dawn on 13 June ; a few German troops remained about the town . 
 As the column approached Villers @-@ Bocage , an Sd.Kfz. 231 armoured car crew observed the British advance and escaped . At 08 : 30 , having covered 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) , the 22nd Armoured Brigade group entered the town to be greeted by celebrating residents ; two German soldiers were spotted leaving at high speed in a Volkswagen Kübelwagen . The two Hussar regiments made contact with German forces on either side of the 22nd Brigade group route and the 8th Hussars engaged German eight @-@ wheeler armoured cars . The Hussars reported German tanks heading towards Villers @-@ Bocage , but Lieutenant Charles Pearce , of 4th CLY , thought that these were probably self @-@ propelled guns . 
 = = = Morning = = = 
 With Villers @-@ Bocage occupied , A Squadron 4th CLY motored ahead to Point 213 without reconnaissance , as ordered . A Kübelwagen was destroyed and the tanks moved into hull down positions to establish a defensive perimeter . Along the road between the town and the ridge , the personnel carriers of the Rifle Brigade pulled over nose @-@ to @-@ tail , to allow reinforcements for Point 213 to pass . The riflemen dismounted and posted sentries but could see fewer than 250 yards ( 230 m ) to either side of the road . 
 Major Wright , the commanding officer of the 1st Rifle Brigade , called a conference at Point 213 for all officers and the senior NCOs of A Company . It was realised that a shell could wipe out the company commanders and the half @-@ track occupants were rapidly dispersed among several other vehicles . In Villers @-@ Bocage Lieutenant @-@ Colonel Arthur , Viscount Cranley , commander of the 4th CLY , expressed concern that his men were " out on a limb " but was assured by Hinde that all was well and was ordered to Point 213 , to ensure his men had taken up good defensive positions . Hinde then left Villers @-@ Bocage for his headquarters . 
 South of Point 213 Wittmann , the commander of the 2nd Company , schwere SS @-@ Panzer Abteilung 101 , was surprised by the British advance through Villers @-@ Bocage 
 I had no time to assemble my company ; instead I had to act quickly , as I had to assume that the enemy had already spotted me and would destroy me where I stood . I set off with one tank and passed the order to the others not to retreat a single step but to hold their ground . 
 Wittmann 's Tiger was spotted at about 09 : 00 by Sergeant O 'Connor of the Rifle Brigade , who was travelling towards Point 213 in a half @-@ track and broke radio silence to give the only warning the British force received . The Tiger emerged from cover onto Route Nationale 175 and knocked out a Cromwell , the rearmost tank at Point 213 . A Sherman Firefly was then knocked out , caught fire and blocked the road . The British at Point 213 were then engaged by the rest of the 2nd Company and lost three more tanks . 
 Wittmann drove towards Villers @-@ Bocage and along the road , the Rifle Brigade troops attempted to reply with PIAT anti @-@ tank weapons and a 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun , but as the Tiger drew closer , panic set in and the riflemen looked for cover . The brigade vehicles were set on fire by machine guns and high @-@ explosive shells , but few casualties were inflicted . At the east end of Villers @-@ Bocage , Wittmann engaged and knocked out three M5 Stuart light tanks of the 4th CLY Reconnaissance Troop . 
 In the town , the tanks of the 4th CLY Regimental Headquarters tried to escape , but their reverse speed was " painfully slow " and one tank fired two shots before being destroyed by the Tiger . Two tanks reversed off the road into gardens , the 4th CLY Adjutant Captain Pat Dyas parked behind a barn ; the Tiger drove past a wrecked Stuart towards the centre of town , knocking out another tank but missed Dyas . Lieutenant Charles Pearce took his scout car and warned the rest of the Reconnaissance Troop in the town centre and Pearce continued westwards to alert B Squadron of the 4th CLY . Wittmann knocked out another Cromwell and on the main street , destroyed two artillery Observation Post ( OP ) tanks of the 5th RHA , the Intelligence Officer 's scout car and the Medical Officer 's half @-@ track . 
 Forty and Taylor wrote that Wittmann was engaged by a Sherman Firefly and withdrew after collapsing a house that contained a German sniper . Moore wrote that he forced Wittmann to retire when a shot from his tank dented the driver visor of the Tiger . Wittmann 's withdrawal brought him close to Dyas who , having been bypassed , had been stalking the Tiger to fire at its thin rear armour . The Cromwell shells had no effect and Wittmann destroyed the British tank . Pearce wrote that Wittmann engaged the Cromwell with the Tiger turret reversed . Dyas escaped the tank and was shot at by German infantry in houses along the street . Wittmann drove east to the outskirts of Villers @-@ Bocage , before being disabled by a 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun at the Tilly @-@ sur @-@ Seulles road junction . Wittmann wrote that his tank was disabled by an anti @-@ tank gun in the town centre . In fewer than 15 minutes , 13 – 14 tanks , two anti @-@ tank guns and 13 – 15 transport vehicles had been destroyed by the 2nd Company , schwere SS @-@ Panzer Abteilung , many by Wittmann . Wittmann and the crew made their way to the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division headquarters at <unk> d <unk> , 3 @.@ 7 miles ( 6 @.@ 0 km ) north of Villers @-@ Bocage . 
 = = = Point 213 = = = 
 Major <unk> of the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division conducted a reconnaissance of Point 213 later in the morning and reconnoitring on foot , discovered a column of unoccupied Cromwell tanks . The tank crews were studying a map with an officer at the front of the column and <unk> drove one off before the British could react . At the east end of Villers @-@ Bocage , he found a scene of " burning tanks and Bren @-@ gun carriers and dead Tommies " and drove back to the Panzer @-@ Lehr headquarters at Château d <unk> . After the ambush on Point 213 , A Squadron , 4th CLY had nine tanks operational , including two Fireflies and a Cromwell OP tank , although some were short of crew . There was one rifle section and an equal number of officers . It was decided to hold the position on the ridge until reinforcements arrived and an all round defence was organised . At around 10 : 00 , support and reconnaissance troops of the 4th Company , schwere SS @-@ Panzer Abteilung 101 arrived and began to collect prisoners between the ridge and the town . Some of the British escaped and c . 30 got back to British lines . 
 The 1 / 7th Queen 's took up defensive positions in Villers @-@ Bocage and captured an advance party of three men from the 2nd Panzer Division . A relief force was prepared to rescue the troops on the ridge but this was rejected by Cranley . At about 10 : 30 , Cranley reported that the position on Point 213 was becoming untenable and withdrawal was impossible . A breakout attempt was planned and two hours later , a Cromwell crew tried to get back to Villers @-@ Bocage by a roundabout route but were knocked out by German tank fire . The Germans shelled the trees along the road , spraying shell and wood splinters and after five minutes the troops on the ridge surrendered . The British tried to burn their tanks but German soldiers arrived quickly and took thirty of the CLY prisoner , along with some riflemen and troops of the Royal Horse Artillery . A few men escaped ; Captain Christopher Milner of the Rifle Brigade , spent the rest of the day on the run and crossed back into British lines after dark . 
 Wittmann briefed the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division Intelligence Officer and was given a <unk> to return to Point 213 . Kauffmann ordered Hauptmann Helmut Ritgen to block the northern exits of the town with 15 Panzer IV , mainly from 6th Company , 2nd Battalion Panzer @-@ Lehr Regiment 130 and ten from a workshop south of Route Nationale 175 . Ritgen rendezvoused with the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division commanding officer , Generalleutnant Fritz Bayerlein , at Villy @-@ Bocage . As Ritgen 's tanks moved towards Villers @-@ Bocage they ran into a British anti @-@ tank gun screen and lost a tank . Four Panzer IVs entered the town from the south and the first two tanks were knocked out ; the others withdrew . 
 In Villers @-@ Bocage , A Company of the 1 / 7th Queen 's secured the area around the railway station and B and C companies occupied the east side of the town . German infantry had entered the town and house @-@ to @-@ house fighting began . Two German tanks were damaged and driven off , but the 1 / 7th Queen 's infantry companies became mingled and were ordered to fall back to reorganise . A Company was ordered back to the railway station , C Company was assigned the north @-@ eastern edge of the town and D Company the south @-@ eastern edge . B Company was placed in reserve and the battalion anti @-@ tank guns were distributed along the front line . At the town square an ambush was laid by the 4th CLY . A Sherman Firefly , several Cromwells , a 6 @-@ pounder anti @-@ tank gun and infantry of the 1 / 7th Queen 's with PIATs , waited for German tanks to move down the main street . To the west of the town , the Germans attacked the 1 / 5th Queen 's near Livry and lost a tank . 
 = = = Afternoon = = = 
 At around 13 : 00 , tanks of the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division advanced into Villers @-@ Bocage unsupported by infantry . Four Panzer IV tried to enter from the south near a wrecked Panzer IV and two were knocked out by anti @-@ tank fire . Some Tigers were brought up and in an exchange of fire , silenced the anti @-@ tank position . Möbius divided the primary counter @-@ attack down the main highway through Villers @-@ Bocage and through the southern section of town parallel to the main road , to secure the town centre . The Tigers advanced slowly to intimidate the British into withdrawing and ran into the British ambush . The Firefly opened fire on the lead tank and missed but the anti @-@ tank gun knocked it out . A group of three Tigers split up and drove through the back streets to flank the British ; one was engaged by an anti @-@ tank gun and destroyed , the other two were engaged with PIATs , one was knocked out and the other immobilised . 
 A fifth Tiger halted on the main street short of the ambush site , apparently waiting for the British to emerge from cover . The Tiger was spotted by the Firefly crew through the windows of a corner building . They reversed to shoot through the windows . The Tiger was hit on the gun mantlet and raced past the side street . A Cromwell advanced onto the main street and fired into the rear of the Tiger , knocking it out and then reversed back into cover . The Firefly knocked out a Panzer IV and during a lull , the disabled tanks were set on fire with blankets and petrol . Outside the town , the 7th Armoured Division brigade group stretched back to Amayé @-@ sur @-@ Seulles and was attacked from the north and south . The attacks were repulsed and at Tracey @-@ Bocage , the 11th Hussars overwhelmed a pocket of resistance . 
 Under a mortar and artillery bombardment , the Germans attacked A Company 1 / 7th Queen 's in the town and a platoon was cut off and captured . Even with the whole of the Queen 's battalion in the town , the German troops found their way inside . Two grenadier battalions of the 2nd Panzer Division attacked from the south , were engaged by B Squadron 4th CLY and suffered many casualties . Both sides called for artillery support and several British mortars and a carrier were destroyed . By 18 : 00 the Queen 's battalion headquarters was threatened and Hinde decided to withdraw before dark made the town untenable . Behind a smoke screen and bombardment by the 5th RHA and V US Corps , the infantry retreated covered by tanks of the 4th CLY . The Germans harassed the withdrawal with artillery fire and infantry from Tracy @-@ Bocage attacked the British for 2 1 ⁄ 2 hours as they fell back . Though costly to the Germans this continued until around 22 : 30 . 
 = = = 14 June = = = 
 On 14 June , the 22nd Armoured Brigade group formed an all round defensive position , a " brigade box " , in the Amayé @-@ sur @-@ Seulles – Tracy @-@ Bocage – St @-@ Germain area to overlook Villers @-@ Bocage . Supported by the 1st Company , schwere SS @-@ Panzer Abteilung 101 , the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division attacked the Brigade Box . The 1st US Infantry Division , on the heights around Caumont , opened observed artillery fire , which helped to defeat the first German attack . Later attacks got so close that the artillery could not fire without hitting British positions . A platoon was overrun and a counter @-@ attack with tanks and infantry then forced the Germans back . The Germans subjected the box to harassing fire and attacked from two sides later in the day with artillery and tanks , which broke into the box and came close to the brigade headquarters before being repulsed . Although confident that the brigade box could be held , the inability of the 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division to come up , prompted the decision to recall the brigade group and straighten the front line . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
 Contradictory sources make casualty figures difficult to establish . The 22nd Armoured Brigade group suffered around 217 men killed , wounded and missing , many of whom were taken prisoner at Point 213 . This figure includes five riflemen who had been captured but were then shot by their guards , apparently for attempting to escape , when they took cover spontaneously in a ditch under American artillery fire . The British lost from 23 – 27 tanks , more than half of which were on Point 213 , where A Squadron 4th CLY lost all 15 of its tanks . The Panzer @-@ Lehr Division and the 2nd Panzer Division were in action elsewhere on 13 June and did not count the casualties at Villers @-@ Bocage separately from the day 's losses . The 101st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion was only engaged at Villers @-@ Bocage and Taylor gave nine men killed and ten wounded in the 1st Company and one killed and three wounded in the 2nd Company . 
 Sources differ on the number of German tanks lost , in part because the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division was committed piecemeal , making it impossible to be certain of the number of Panzer IVs knocked out . German tank losses are generally considered to be from 8 – 15 , including six Tigers . Wilmot states that this was a serious loss , as there were only 36 Tiger tanks in Normandy . Taylor wrote that the numbers claimed by the British included tanks that were immobilised and later recovered . Marie named at least nine French civilians who died on 13 June . Six were killed by crossfire or shrapnel during the battle and three by artillery fire just before midnight . Three of the deaths may have been war crimes . More civilians became casualties in the fighting and bombing later . Following the British withdrawal , the town was reoccupied and searched by the Germans looking for wounded fugitive British soldiers . Several shops , houses and the town hall were set on fire . 
 = = = Bombing and liberation = = = 
 During the night of 14 / 15 June , to cover the withdrawal of the 22nd Armoured Brigade group , 337 Royal Air Force ( RAF ) bombers ( 223 Avro Lancasters , 100 Handley Page Halifax and 14 de Havilland Mosquitos from No.4 , No.5 and No. 8 Group RAF ) dropped 1 @,@ 700 long tons ( 1 @,@ 700 t ) of high explosives on the town of Évrecy and on targets around Villers @-@ Bocage , destroying one Tiger tank and damaging three more . No aircraft were lost . 
 Just over two weeks later , at 20 : 30 hours on 30 June , Villers @-@ Bocage was bombed again by 266 bombers ( 151 Lancasters , 105 Halifaxes and 10 Mosquitos from No.3 , No. 4 and No. 8 Group RAF ) in support of Operation Epsom , dropping 1 @,@ 100 long tons ( 1 @,@ 100 t ) of bombs . Only two aircraft were lost . The town was a vital traffic centre for German forces and though it was hoped that German troops would be caught in the bombing , only French civilians were present at the time . After being severely damaged by the fighting of 13 June and subsequent bombing raids , the town was liberated by a patrol of the 1st Battalion Dorset Regiment , 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division , on 4 August 1944 . 
 = = = Command changes = = = 
 In early August up to 100 men , including Bucknall , Erskine , Hinde and other senior officers , were removed from their positions and reassigned . Historians largely agree that this was a consequence of the failure at Villers @-@ Bocage and had been planned since the battle . Daniel Taylor is of the opinion that the battle 's outcome simply provided a convenient excuse and that the <unk> took place to " demonstrate that the army command was doing something to counteract the poor public opinion of the conduct of the campaign " . 
 = = = Battle honours and awards = = = 
 In 1956 and 1957 , the British and Commonwealth system of battle honours recognised participation in the Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage by the award to 11 units of the battle honour Villers Bocage , for service in expanding the bridgehead from 8 – 15 June . For his actions at Villers @-@ Bocage , Michael Wittmann was promoted to Hauptsturmführer and awarded Swords to his Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross . For their skill and bravery in defending Villers @-@ Bocage , Lieutenant Cotton was awarded the Military Cross and Sergeant Bramall the Military Medal . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Propaganda = = = 
 Both sides tried to exploit the Villers @-@ Bocage battle for propaganda . Having escaped from their knocked @-@ out tank , Lieutenant John <unk> @-@ Thompson and his crew of the 4th CLY spent much of the day in a basement in Villers @-@ Bocage . They made their way back after dark and were picked up by troops of the 50th ( Northumbrian ) Infantry Division . During debriefing <unk> @-@ Thompson said that he " never wished to see another tank as long as [ he ] lived " but the British press reported this as : " The first thing the five tank men asked for was another tank " . Because the British had lost contact with the forces on Point 213 and withdrawn from Villers @-@ Bocage , they were ignorant of the losses on both sides . The German propaganda machine swiftly credited Wittmann , a household name in Germany , with all the British tanks destroyed at Villers @-@ Bocage . 
 Wittmann recorded a radio message on the evening of 13 June , describing the battle and claiming that later counter @-@ attacks had destroyed a British armoured regiment and an infantry battalion . <unk> images were produced ; three joined @-@ together photographs , published in the German armed forces magazine Signal , gave a false impression of the scale of destruction in the town . The propaganda campaign was given credence in Germany and abroad , leaving the British convinced that the Battle of Villers @-@ Bocage had been a disaster when its results were less clear @-@ cut . Schneider , an instructor at the German Bundeswehr tank school and an historian , wrote that the Waffen @-@ SS did not have an " experienced tank arm " , compared to the army panzer divisions . The Waffen @-@ SS may have fought with distinction during the Battle of Kursk but could not match the army 's success , hence Dietrich 's attempts to manufacture a hero out of Wittmann . 
 = = = Wittmann = = = 
 Badsey wrote that Wittmann 's engagement of the spearhead of the 22nd Armoured Brigade group , had overshadowed the period between D @-@ Day and 13 June in historical accounts . Commentators of the late twentieth @-@ century revisionist school found Wittmann 's actions impressive . D 'Este wrote that Wittmann 's attack was " one of the most amazing engagements in the history of armoured warfare " , Hastings called it " one of the most devastating single @-@ handed actions of the war " and Beevor wrote that it was " one of the most devastating ambushes in British military history " . Meyer attributed the failure of Operation Perch to Wittmann 's " courage , his tactical and technical abilities and [ ... ] the valor , the expertise and the camaraderie of his Panzer crew " . Marie called the attack a " spur of the moment " decision , that showed Wittmann 's quick grasp of the possibility of surprising the British but described the action as foolhardy and that other historians had got carried away by Wittmann 's ambush ; Wittmann lost the first Tiger knocked out in Normandy . 
 Buckley attributed the hyperbole about Wittmann to the lingering influence of the German propaganda campaign and criticised D 'Este , Simpson and Meyer for exaggerating Wittmann 's role and implying that he single @-@ handedly stopped the 7th Armoured Division . Buckley noted Hart 's erroneous claim that Wittmann " all but annihilated " the 7th Armoured Division spearhead . Badsey summarised Wittmann 's attack and the attention since , as " remarkable but massively over @-@ written " . In 2013 , Buckley wrote that unquestioning regurgitation of Nazi propaganda by writers and historians was inexcusably casual , when a glance at the facts showed that the defeat of the 7th Armoured Division by one Tiger crew led by Wittmann was a myth . Wittmann made a bold and decisive attack , which helped to stop the advance of the 4th CLY but did not make a solo effort and the action at Point 213 was led by Möbius . 
 = = = Tactics = = = 
 Beevor and <unk> have written that the ambush would have been mitigated had it been detected sooner and blame " Erskine 's failure to provide [ a ] reconnaissance screen " ahead of the British vanguard as it moved to Point 213 . Marie wrote that the British vanguard out @-@ paced the rest of the Brigade group , whose flanks were well protected and advanced with poor information and little intelligence gathering . Milner of the Rifle Brigade wrote that information was not gleaned from the town 's inhabitants when it should have been and that had the battalion scout platoon been present , the result of the first engagement may have been different . Milner also wrote that the first attack could have been repulsed had the battalion officers and NCOs been with their men instead of with the O @-@ group on the ridge . 
 Buckley wrote that while Wittmann showed great audacity , the causes of the British defeat were broader and that the British were to blame for the failure at Villers @-@ Bocage , not superior German tanks . Hastings wrote that although the Tiger was " incomparably " more deadly than the Cromwell , the " shambles " caused by the Tigers reflected poorly on the tactics of the British force , the 
 German achievement on 13 / 14 June had been that , while heavily outnumbered in the sector as a whole , they successfully kept the British everywhere feeling insecure and off @-@ balance , while concentrating sufficient forces to dominate the decisive points . The British , in their turn , failed to bring sufficient forces to bear on these . " 
 Marie noted the disappointment of Dempsey in the lack of tactical flair shown by Brigadier Hinde throughout the battle and that the British should have known better than to attempt an armoured advance unsupported by infantry in the bocage . The British fought an uncoordinated infantry and tank battle during the morning and the Germans did much the same throughout the day . 
 Schneider described the contribution of the 101st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion to the battle as " everything but awe @-@ inspiring " . The Tiger companies and the Panzer @-@ Lehr Division averted a serious British breakthrough but there was no need for the German counter @-@ attack to have been launched so precipitately . Möbius and the 1st Company was in command of the road to Caen , so Wittmann had time to plan a coordinated attack . Schneider wrote that " a competent tank company commander does not accumulate so many serious mistakes " . By putting the Tigers in a sunken lane overnight , with a vehicle with engine trouble at the head of the column , Wittmann risked blocking the company . Schneider called the advance by Wittmann into the town courageous but that it went " against all the rules " . No intelligence was gathered beforehand and there was no " centre of gravity " or " concentration of forces " in the attack . " The bulk of the 2nd Company and Rolf Möbius 1st Company , came up against an enemy who had gone onto the defensive " . 
 Wittman 's " carefree " advance into British @-@ occupied positions , was " pure folly " and that " such over <unk> was uncalled for " . Had Wittmann properly prepared an assault involving the rest of his company and the 1st Company , far greater results could have been achieved . " [ T ] <unk> of this kind was to cost [ Wittmann ] his life [ in ] August ... near <unk> , during an attack casually launched in open country with an exposed flank " . Meyer wrote that the 2nd Company advance into the town without infantry support was " obviously inexpedient " . Marie called this a serious tactical error by Möbius 's but that it was a justifiable risk under the circumstances . Infantry were unavailable and the British could have been expected to still be " under the devastating impression of seeing [ their ] vanguard totally destroyed in such a short time " . 
 = = = British withdrawal = = = 
 The British Official Historian , L. F. Ellis , described the 22nd Armoured Brigade group withdrawal and explained that with the unexpected arrival of the 2nd Panzer Division , the 7th Armoured Division " could hardly have achieved full success " . This view was partially supported by the briefing given to 7th Armoured Division commanders prior to the retreat but has gained little support . In 1979 , following the revelation of Ultra , it was revealed that intercepted German communications revealed the 2nd Panzer Division to be 35 miles ( 56 km ) from the front line on 12 June . Ralph Bennett has called Montgomery 's claim , that the division " suddenly appeared " , as being disingenuous . Buckley wrote that the order to retreat was given before the 2nd Panzer division arrived in any real strength and Reynolds wrote that " 2nd Panzer 's tanks were nowhere near Villers @-@ Bocage at this time " . Ellis described the retirement as temporary , the 7th Armoured Division was to be reinforced with the 33rd Armoured Brigade to renew the offensive towards Évrecy . 
 French wrote that the follow @-@ up formations landing in Normandy were on average two days behind schedule and that had the 33rd Armoured Brigade , the 49th ( West Riding ) Infantry Division and the 7th Armoured Division infantry brigade landed on time , XXX Corps might have been able to secure Villers @-@ Bocage , before the arrival of substantial German forces . Other historians wrote that substantial British forces remained uncommitted during the battle . Melvin wrote that although the 7th Armoured Division changed its organisation to a flexible combined arms structure , which was not done by the other British armoured divisions until after Operation Goodwood , neither the 131st Infantry Brigade nor the balanced divisional reserve of an armoured regiment and an infantry battalion were employed well . 
 Buckley referred to " a reduced armoured brigade , with only limited mobile infantry and artillery support " and doubted it could worry the Germans and noted that the 151st Infantry Brigade was available in corps reserve . Hastings was critical of a British failure to concentrate force at the crucial place and time and referred to the feelings of the " men on the spot " in Villers @-@ Bocage that " a single extra infantry brigade could have been decisive in turning the scale " . D 'Este supported the XXX Corps commander Bucknall 's claim that neither the 151st Infantry Brigade or the 49th Infantry Division could be made ready in time to influence the battle . 
 = = = Result = = = 
 After the ambush by the 2nd Company , 101st SS Heavy Panzer Battalion and the loss of Point 213 , the 22nd Armoured Brigade group had repulsed every German for two days , 
 Erskine 's troops had suffered no defeat after the first costly encounters with the single Tiger . 
 Students of the battle have looked to the senior commanders involved to explain the " fumbled failure " at Villers @-@ Bocage . Dempsey remarked after the war that 
 this attack by 7th Armoured Division should have succeeded . My feeling that Bucknall and Erskine would have to go started with that failure ... the whole handling of that battle was a disgrace . Their decision to withdraw [ from Villers @-@ Bocage ] was done by the corps commander and Erskine . 
 D 'Este called Dempsey " excessively harsh " and that once the town had been abandoned the Brigade group withdrawal was inevitable . Other historians suggest that Bucknall threw away the chance swiftly to capture Caen . Montgomery had been a patron of Bucknall and wrote that his protégé " could not manage a Corps once the battle became mobile " . Buckley wrote that Bucknall was unprepared to support the attack once problems developed and that Erskine was not suited to the task . Wilmot agreed with Dempsey that Bucknall , not the Germans , was to blame for the 7th Armoured Division withdrawal . Wilmot wrote that Bucknall refused to reinforce the division , because he had already decided that its lines of communication were endangered 
 This great opportunity of disrupting the enemy line and expanding the Allied bridgehead was lost not so much in the woods and orchards around Villers @-@ Bocage , as in the Corps Commander 's mind . 
 D 'Este wrote that the failure to unhinge the German front line south of Caen and outflank the I SS Panzer Corps , was " one of the costliest Allied mistakes " of the campaign . With the British withdrawal the chance of mounting a " snap airborne operation " to seize Caen or to deepen the Allied bridgehead had been lost . Wilmot wrote that after the battle , " Caen [ could ] be taken only by a set @-@ piece assault " . Hastings called Villers @-@ Bocage a " debacle " and the moment which " marked , for the British , the end of the scramble for ground that had continued since D @-@ Day " . Reynolds wrote that the consequences of the battle would be felt in the coming weeks , during the costly attacks needed to drive the Germans from Caen and the surrounding area . The official 7th Armoured Division history called the battle indecisive , 
 ... the brilliant defensive battle of Villers Bocage ... , although it obliged us to withdraw some seven miles , cost the enemy casualties disproportionate to this gain " . 
 a view shared by Taylor , who wrote that the battle ended with no clear winner . 
 = Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution = 
 The Fifteenth Amendment ( Amendment XV ) to the United States Constitution prohibits the federal and state governments from denying a citizen the right to vote based on that citizen 's " race , color , or previous condition of servitude . " It was ratified on February 3 , 1870 , as the third and last of the Reconstruction Amendments . 
 In the final years of the American Civil War and the Reconstruction Era that followed , Congress repeatedly debated the rights of the millions of black former slaves . By 1869 , amendments had been passed to abolish slavery and provide citizenship and equal protection under the laws , but the election of Ulysses S. Grant to the presidency in 1868 convinced a majority of Republicans that protecting the franchise of black voters was important for the party 's future . After rejecting more sweeping versions of a suffrage amendment , Congress proposed a compromise amendment banning franchise restrictions on the basis of race , color , or previous servitude on February 26 , 1869 . The amendment survived a difficult ratification fight and was adopted on March 30 , 1870 . 
 United States Supreme Court decisions in the late nineteenth century interpreted the amendment narrowly . From 1890 to 1910 , most black voters in the South were effectively disenfranchised by new state constitutions and state laws incorporating such obstacles as poll taxes and discriminatory literacy tests , from which white voters were exempted by grandfather clauses . A system of whites @-@ only primaries and violent intimidation by white groups also suppressed black participation . 
 In the twentieth century , the Court began to interpret the amendment more broadly , striking down grandfather clauses in Guinn v. United States ( 1915 ) and dismantling the white primary system in the " Texas primary cases " ( 1927 – 1953 ) . Along with later measures such as the Twenty @-@ fourth Amendment , which forbade poll taxes in federal elections , and Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections ( 1966 ) , which forbade poll taxes in state elections , these decisions significantly increased black participation in the American political system . To enforce the amendment , Congress enacted the Voting Rights Act of 1965 , which provided federal oversight of elections in discriminatory jurisdictions , banned literacy tests and similar discriminatory devices , and created legal remedies for people affected by voting discrimination . 
 = = Text = = 
 = = Background = = 
 In the final years of the American Civil War and the Reconstruction Era that followed , Congress repeatedly debated the rights of black former slaves freed by the 1863 Emancipation Proclamation and the 1865 Thirteenth Amendment , the latter of which had formally abolished slavery . Following the passage of the Thirteenth Amendment by Congress , however , Republicans grew concerned over the increase it would create in the congressional representation of the Democratic @-@ dominated Southern states . Because the full population of freed slaves would be now counted rather than the three @-@ fifths mandated by the previous Three @-@ Fifths Compromise , the Southern states would dramatically increase their power in the population @-@ based House of Representatives . Republicans hoped to offset this advantage by attracting and protecting votes of the newly enfranchised black population . 
 In 1865 , Congress passed what would become the Civil Rights Act of 1866 , guaranteeing citizenship without regard to race , color , or previous condition of slavery or involuntary servitude . The bill also guaranteed equal benefits and access to the law , a direct assault on the Black Codes passed by many post @-@ war Southern states . The Black Codes attempted to return ex @-@ slaves to something like their former condition by , among other things , restricting their movement , forcing them to enter into year @-@ long labor contracts , prohibiting them from owning firearms , and by preventing them from suing or testifying in court . Although strongly urged by moderates in Congress to sign the bill , President Johnson vetoed it on March 27 , 1866 . In his veto message , he objected to the measure because it conferred citizenship on the freedmen at a time when 11 out of 36 states were unrepresented in the Congress , and that it discriminated in favor of African Americans and against whites . Three weeks later , Johnson 's veto was overridden and the measure became law . This was the first time in American history that Congress was able to muster the votes necessary to override a presidential veto . Despite this victory , even some Republicans who had supported the goals of the Civil Rights Act began to doubt that Congress possessed the constitutional power to turn those goals into laws . The experience encouraged both radical and moderate Republicans to seek Constitutional guarantees for black rights , rather than relying on temporary political majorities . 
 On June 18 , 1866 , Congress adopted the Fourteenth Amendment , which guaranteed citizenship and equal protection under the laws regardless of race , and sent it to the states for ratification . After a bitter struggle that included attempted <unk> of ratification by two states , the Fourteenth Amendment was adopted on July 28 , 1868 . 
 The second section of the Fourteenth Amendment punished , by reduced representation in the House of Representatives , any states that disenfranchised any male citizens over 21 years of age . By failing to adopt a harsher penalty , this signaled to the states that they still possessed the right to deny ballot access to blacks . Northern states were generally as adverse to granting voting rights to blacks as Southern states . In the year of its ratification , only eight Northern states allowed blacks to vote . In the South , blacks were able to vote in many areas , but only through the intervention of the occupying Union Army . 
 = = Proposal and ratification = = 
 = = = Proposal = = = 
 Anticipating an increase in Democratic membership in the following Congress , Republicans used the lame @-@ duck session of the 40th United States Congress to pass an amendment protecting black suffrage . Representative John Bingham , the primary author of the Fourteenth Amendment , pushed for a wide @-@ ranging ban on suffrage limitations , but a broader proposal banning voter restriction on the basis of " race , color , nativity , property , education , or religious beliefs " was rejected . A proposal to specifically ban literacy tests was also rejected . Some Representatives from the North , where nativism was a major force , wished to preserve restrictions denying the franchise to foreign @-@ born citizens , as did Representatives from the West , where ethnic Chinese were banned from voting . Both Southern and Northern Republicans also wanted to continue to deny the vote temporarily to Southerners disfranchised for support of the Confederacy , and they were concerned that a sweeping endorsement of suffrage would enfranchise this group . 
 A House and Senate conference committee proposed the amendment 's final text , which banned voter restriction only on the basis of " race , color , or previous condition of servitude " . To attract the broadest possible base of support , the amendment made no mention of poll taxes or other measures to block voting , and did not guarantee the right of blacks to hold office . This compromise proposal was approved by the House on February 25 , 1869 , and the Senate the following day . 
 The vote in the House was 144 to 44 , with 35 not voting . The House vote was almost entirely along party lines , with no Democrats supporting the bill and only 3 Republicans voting against it , some because they thought the amendment did not go far enough in its protections . The House of Representatives passed the amendment with 143 Republican and 1 Conservative Republican votes of " Yea " ; 39 Democrat , 3 Republican , 1 Independent Republican and 1 Conservative votes of " Nay " ; 26 Republican , 8 Democrat and 1 Independent Republican not voting . The final vote in the Senate was 39 to 13 , with 14 not voting . The Senate passed the amendment with a vote of 39 Republican votes of " Yea " , 8 Democrat and 5 Republican votes of " Nay " ; 13 Republican and 1 Democrat not voting . Some Radical Republicans , such as Massachusetts Senator Charles Sumner , abstained from voting because the amendment did not prohibit literacy tests and poll taxes . Following congressional approval the proposed amendment was then sent by Secretary of State William Henry Seward to the states for ratification or rejection . 
 = = = Ratification = = = 
 Though many of the original proposals for the amendment had been moderated by negotiations in committee , the final draft nonetheless faced significant hurdles in being ratified by three @-@ fourths of the states . Historian William Gillette wrote of the process , " it was hard going and the outcome was uncertain until the very end . " 
 One source of opposition to the proposed amendment was the women 's suffrage movement , which before and during the Civil War had made common cause with the abolitionist movement . However , with the passage of the Fourteenth Amendment , which had explicitly protected only male citizens in its second section , activists found the civil rights of women divorced from those of blacks . Matters came to a head with the proposal of the Fifteenth Amendment , which barred race discrimination but not gender discrimination in voter laws . After an acrimonious debate , the American Equal Rights Association , the nation 's leading suffragist group , split into two rival organizations : the National Woman Suffrage Association of Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton , who opposed the amendment , and the American Woman Suffrage Association of Lucy Stone and Henry Browne Blackwell , who supported it . The two groups remained divided until the 1890s . 
 Nevada was the first state to ratify the amendment , on March 1 , 1869 . The New England states and most Midwest states also ratified the amendment soon after its proposal . Southern states still controlled by Radical reconstruction governments , such as North Carolina , also swiftly ratified . Newly elected President Ulysses S. Grant strongly endorsed the amendment , calling it " a measure of grander importance than any other one act of the kind from the foundation of our free government to the present day . " He privately asked Nebraska 's governor to call a special legislative session to speed the process , securing the state 's ratification . In April and December 1869 , Congress passed Reconstruction bills mandating that Virginia , Mississippi , Texas and Georgia ratify the amendment as a precondition to regaining congressional representation ; all four states did so . The struggle for ratification was particularly close in Indiana and Ohio , which voted to ratify in May 1869 and January 1870 , respectively . New York , which had ratified on April 14 , 1869 , tried to revoke its ratification on January 5 , 1870 . However , in February 1870 , Georgia , Iowa , Nebraska , and Texas ratified the amendment , bringing the total ratifying states to twenty @-@ nine — one more than the required twenty @-@ eight ratifications from the thirty @-@ seven states , and forestalling any court challenge to New York 's resolution to withdraw its consent . 
 The first twenty @-@ eight states to ratify the Fifteenth Amendment were : 
 Nevada : March 1 , 1869 
 West Virginia : March 3 , 1869 
 North Carolina : March 5 , 1869 
 Illinois : March 5 , 1869 
 Louisiana : March 5 , 1869 
 Michigan : March 8 , 1869 
 Wisconsin : March 9 , 1869 
 Maine : March 11 , 1869 
 Massachusetts : March 12 , 1869 
 Arkansas : March 15 , 1869 
 South Carolina : March 15 , 1869 
 Pennsylvania : March 25 , 1869 
 New York : April 14 , 1869 ( Rescinded ratification : January 5 , 1870 ; re @-@ ratified : March 30 , 1870 ) 
 Indiana : May 14 , 1869 
 Connecticut : May 19 , 1869 
 Florida : June 14 , 1869 
 New Hampshire : July 1 , 1869 
 Virginia : October 8 , 1869 
 Vermont : October 20 , 1869 
 Alabama : November 16 , 1869 
 Missouri : January 10 , 1870 
 Minnesota : January 13 , 1870 
 Mississippi : January 17 , 1870 
 Rhode Island : January 18 , 1870 
 Kansas : January 19 , 1870 
 Ohio : January 27 , 1870 ( After rejection : April 1 / 30 , 1869 ) 
 Georgia : February 2 , 1870 
 Iowa : February 3 , 1870 
 Secretary of State Hamilton Fish certified the amendment on March 30 , 1870 . New York , despite rescinding its ratification , was included as a ratifying state , as were : 
 Nebraska : February 17 , 1870 
 Texas : February 18 , 1870 
 The remaining seven states all subsequently ratified the amendment : 
 New Jersey : February 15 , 1871 ( After rejection : March 17 / 18 , 1870 ) 
 Delaware : February 12 , 1901 ( After rejection : March 17 / 18 , 1869 ) 
 Oregon : February 24 , 1959 ( After rejection : October 26 , 1870 ) 
 California : April 3 , 1962 ( After rejection : January 28 , 1870 ) 
 Maryland : May 7 , 1973 ( After rejection : February 4 / 26 , 1870 ) 
 Kentucky : March 18 , 1976 ( After rejection : March 11 / 12 , 1869 ) 
 Tennessee : April 8 , 1997 ( After rejection : November 16 , 1869 ) 
 The amendment 's adoption was met with widespread celebrations in black communities and abolitionist societies ; many of the latter disbanded , feeling that black rights had been secured and their work was complete . President Grant said of the amendment that it " completes the greatest civil change and constitutes the most important event that has occurred since the nation came to life " . Many Republicans felt that with the amendment 's passage , black Americans no longer needed federal protection ; congressman and future president James A. Garfield stated that the amendment 's passage " confers upon the African race the care of its own destiny . It places their fortunes in their own hands . " Congressman John R. Lynch later wrote that ratification of those two amendments made Reconstruction a success . 
 = = Application = = 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 The first known black voter after the amendment 's adoption was Thomas Mundy Peterson , who cast his ballot on March 31 , 1870 , in a Perth Amboy , New Jersey referendum election adopting a revised city charter . 
 In United States v. Reese ( 1876 ) , the first U.S. Supreme Court decision interpreting the Fifteenth Amendment , the Court interpreted the amendment narrowly , upholding ostensibly race @-@ neutral limitations on suffrage including poll taxes , literacy tests , and a grandfather clause that exempted citizens from other voting requirements if their grandfathers had been registered voters , a condition only whites could generally meet . The Court also stated that the amendment does not confer the right of suffrage , but it invests citizens of the United States with the right of exemption from discrimination in the exercise of the elective franchise on account of their race , color , or previous condition of servitude , and empowers Congress to enforce that right by " appropriate legislation " . The Court wrote : 
 The Fifteenth Amendment does not confer the right of suffrage upon any one . It prevents the States , or the United States , however , from giving preference , in this particular , to one citizen of the United States over another on account of race , color , or previous condition of servitude . Before its adoption , this could be done . It was as much within the power of a State to exclude citizens of the United States from voting on account of race , & c . , as it was on account of age , property , or education . Now it is not . If citizens of one race having certain qualifications are permitted by law to vote , those of another having the same qualifications must be . Previous to this amendment , there was no constitutional guaranty against this discrimination : now there is . It follows that the amendment has invested the citizens of the United States with a new constitutional right which is within the protecting power of Congress . That right is exemption from discrimination in the exercise of the elective franchise on account of race , color , or previous condition of servitude . This , under the express provisions of the second section of the amendment , Congress may enforce by " appropriate legislation . " 
 White supremacists , such as the Ku Klux Klan ( KKK ) , used paramilitary violence to prevent black people from voting . A number of blacks were killed at the Colfax massacre of 1873 while attempting to defend their right to vote . The Enforcement Acts were passed by Congress in 1870 – 1871 to authorize federal prosecution of the KKK and others who violated the amendment . However , as Reconstruction neared its end and federal troops withdrew , prosecutions under the Enforcement Acts dropped significantly . In United States v. Cruikshank ( 1876 ) , the Supreme Court ruled that the federal government did not have the authority to prosecute the perpetrators of the Colfax massacre because they were not state actors . 
 Congress further weakened the acts in 1894 by removing a provision against conspiracy . In 1877 , Republican Rutherford B. Hayes was elected president after a highly contested election , receiving support from three Southern states in exchange for a pledge to allow white Democratic governments to rule without federal interference . As president , he refused to enforce federal civil rights protections , allowing states to begin to implement racially discriminatory Jim Crow laws . A Federal Elections Bill was successfully filibustered in the Senate . 
 = = = Post @-@ reconstruction = = = 
 From 1890 to 1910 , poll taxes and literacy tests were instituted across the South , effectively disenfranchising the great majority of blacks . White @-@ only primary elections also served to reduce the influence of blacks in the political system . Along with increasing legal obstacles , blacks were excluded from the political system by threats of violent reprisals by whites in the form of lynch mobs and terrorist attacks by the Ku Klux Klan . Some Democrats even advocated a repeal of the amendment , such as William Bourke <unk> of New York . 
 In the 20th century , the Court began to read the Fifteenth Amendment more broadly . In Guinn v. United States ( 1915 ) , a unanimous Court struck down an Oklahoma grandfather clause that effectively exempted white voters from a literacy test , finding it to be discriminatory . The Court ruled in the related case Myers v. Anderson ( 1915 ) , that the officials who enforced such a clause were liable for civil damages . 
 The Court addressed the white primary system in a series of decisions later known as the " Texas primary cases " . In Nixon v. Herndon ( 1927 ) , Nixon sued for damages under federal civil rights laws after being denied a ballot in a Democratic party primary election on the basis of race . The Court found in his favor on the basis of the Fourteenth Amendment , which guarantees equal protection under the law , while not discussing his Fifteenth Amendment claim . After Texas amended its statute to allow the political party 's state executive committee to set voting qualifications , Nixon sued again ; in Nixon v. Condon ( 1932 ) , the Court again found in his favor on the basis of the Fourteenth Amendment . 
 Following Nixon , the Democratic Party 's state convention instituted a rule that only whites could vote in its primary elections ; the Court unanimously upheld this rule as constitutional in Grovey v. Townsend ( 1935 ) , distinguishing the discrimination by a private organization from that of the state in the previous primary cases . However , in United States v. Classic ( 1941 ) , the Court ruled that primary elections were an essential part of the electoral process , undermining the reasoning in Grovey . Based on Classic , the Court in Smith v. <unk> ( 1944 ) , overruled Grovey , ruling that denying non @-@ white voters a ballot in primary elections was a violation of the Fifteenth Amendment . In the last of the Texas primary cases , Terry v. Adams ( 1953 ) , the Court ruled that black plaintiffs were entitled to damages from a group that organized whites @-@ only pre @-@ primary elections with the assistance of Democratic party officials . 
 The Court also used the amendment to strike down a gerrymander in <unk> v. Lightfoot ( 1960 ) . The decision found that the redrawing of city limits by Tuskegee , Alabama officials to exclude the mostly black area around the Tuskegee Institute discriminated on the basis of race . The Court later relied on this decision in Rice v. Cayetano ( 2000 ) , which struck down ancestry @-@ based voting in elections for the Office of Hawaiian Affairs ; the ruling held that the elections violated the Fifteenth Amendment by using " ancestry as a racial definition and for a racial purpose " . 
 After judicial enforcement of the Fifteenth Amendment ended grandfather clauses , white primaries , and other discriminatory tactics , Southern black voter registration gradually increased , rising from five percent in 1940 to twenty @-@ eight percent in 1960 . Although the Fifteenth Amendment was never interpreted to prohibit poll taxes , in 1962 the Twenty @-@ fourth Amendment was adopted banning poll taxes in federal elections , and in 1966 the Supreme Court ruled in Harper v. Virginia State Board of Elections ( 1966 ) that state poll taxes violate the Fourteenth Amendment 's Equal Protection Clause . 
 Under its authority pursuant to Section 2 of the Fifteenth Amendment , Congress passed the Voting Rights Act of 1965 to achieve further racial equality in voting . Sections 4 and 5 of the Voting Rights Act required states and local governments with histories of racial discrimination in voting to submit all changes to their voting laws or practices to the federal government for approval before they could take effect , a process called " preclearance . " By 1976 , sixty @-@ three percent of Southern blacks were registered to vote , only five percent less than Southern whites . 
 The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of Sections 4 and 5 in South Carolina v. Katzenbach ( 1966 ) . However , in Shelby County v. Holder ( 2013 ) , the Supreme Court ruled that Section 4 ( b ) of the Voting Rights Act , which established the coverage formula that determined which jurisdictions were subject to preclearance , was no longer constitutional and exceeded Congress 's enforcement authority under Section 2 of the Fifteenth Amendment . The Court declared that the Fifteenth Amendment " commands that the right to vote shall not be denied or abridged on account of race or color , and it gives Congress the power to enforce that command . The Amendment is not designed to punish for the past ; its purpose is to ensure a better future . " According to the Court , " Regardless of how to look at the record no one can fairly say that it shows anything approaching the ' pervasive , ' ' flagrant , ' ' widespread , ' and ' rampant ' discrimination that faced Congress in 1965 , and that clearly distinguished the covered jurisdictions from the rest of the nation . " In dissent , Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg wrote , " Throwing out preclearance when it has worked and is continuing to work to stop discriminatory changes is like throwing away your umbrella in a rainstorm because you are not getting wet . " While the preclearance provision itself was not struck down , it will continue to be inoperable unless Congress passes a new coverage formula . 
 = M @-@ 157 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 157 is a short state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The highway is entirely within Roscommon County in the Lower Peninsula . It is the fourth shortest state highway in the system , and it serves as a connector route between M @-@ 18 and M @-@ 55 just east of Prudenville . The current roadway was built and designated as M @-@ 157 in the 1930s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 157 begins at an intersection with M @-@ 55 east of Prudenville and Houghton Lake . The trunkline angles to the northwest before turning north near Ryan Lake . Serving as a short connector , the highway travels north through the Roscommon State Forest terminating just over a mile later at a junction with M @-@ 18 . M @-@ 157 has not been listed on the National Highway System , a system of highways important to the nation 's economy , defense , and mobility . The average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) in 2008 was 496 vehicles per day . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 157 was originally designated in 1931 as a connector route between M @-@ 55 and US 27 ( present day M @-@ 18 ) . Just a year later , that version was decommissioned , and the road obliterated . A new alignment , the present @-@ day routing of M @-@ 157 , was then commissioned just to the east . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Backus Township , Roscommon County . 
 = SM UB @-@ 16 = 
 SM UB @-@ 16 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. The submarine was sunk by a British submarine in May 1918 . 
 UB @-@ 16 was ordered in November 1914 and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in February 1915 . UB @-@ 16 was a little under 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 141 tonnes ( 125 and 139 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . UB @-@ 16 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to Antwerp for reassembly . She was launched in April 1915 and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 16 in May . 
 UB @-@ 16 spent her entire career in the Flanders Flotilla and sank 23 merchant ships , about half of them British fishing vessels . The U @-@ boat was also responsible for sinking the new British destroyer Recruit in 1917 . In 1918 , UB @-@ 16 was converted into a minelayer with the replacement of her torpedo tubes with four mine chutes . On 10 May 1918 , UB @-@ 16 was torpedoed by the British submarine E34 off the British east coast . Of the 16 men on board , only UB @-@ 16 's commander survived the attack . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow seas off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 tonnes ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . 
 UB @-@ 16 and sister boat UB @-@ 17 comprised an order of two submarines placed on 25 November from AG Weser of Bremen , a little more than three months after planning for the class began . UB @-@ 16 was laid down by Weser in Bremen on 21 February 1915 . As built , UB @-@ 16 was 27 @.@ 88 metres ( 91 ft 6 in ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draught of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Körting 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 7 @.@ 45 knots ( 13 @.@ 80 km / h ; 8 @.@ 57 mph ) , surfaced , and 6 @.@ 24 knots ( 11 @.@ 56 km / h ; 7 @.@ 18 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 800 km ; 1 @,@ 700 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 16 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 16 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 16 's standard complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 After work on UB @-@ 16 was complete at the Weser yard , she was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . In early 1915 , the sections of UB @-@ 16 were shipped to Antwerp for assembly in what was typically a two- to three @-@ week process . After UB @-@ 16 was assembled and launched on 26 April , she was loaded on a barge and taken through canals to Bruges where she underwent trials . 
 = = Early career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 16 on 12 May 1915 under the command of Oberleutnant zur See ( Oblt . ) Hans Valentiner , a 26 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ time U @-@ boat commander . On 1 June , UB @-@ 16 joined the Flanders Flotilla ( German : U @-@ boote des Marinekorps U @-@ Flotille Flandern ) , which had been organized on 29 March . When UB @-@ 16 joined the flotilla , Germany was in the midst of its first submarine offensive , begun in February . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German @-@ defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom , were to be sunk . Vessels of neutral countries were not to be attacked unless they definitively could be identified as enemy vessels operating under a false flag . 
 On 3 June , two days after joining the flotilla , Valentiner and UB @-@ 16 sank three British fishing vessels while patrolling between 40 and 50 nautical miles ( 74 and 93 km ; 46 and 58 mi ) off Lowestoft . All three of the sunken ships were smacks — sailing vessels traditionally rigged with red ochre sails — which were stopped , boarded by crewmen from UB @-@ 16 , and sunk with explosives . On 12 June , UB @-@ 16 torpedoed and sank the 3 @,@ 027 @-@ ton British cargo ship Leuctra 1 @.@ 5 nautical miles ( 2 @.@ 8 km ; 1 @.@ 7 mi ) from the Shipwash Lightship . Nine days later , the U @-@ boat torpedoed the British steamer <unk> off Lowestoft . After being hit , the 4 @,@ 220 @-@ ton ship 's master beached her on Barnard Sands to save the cargo of wheat shipped from Montreal , but the ship was a complete loss . <unk> was the largest ship sunk by UB @-@ 16 . In her first month of action , UB @-@ 16 's totals were five ships sunk of 7 @,@ 432 tons , more than half of the flotilla 's June total of 14 @,@ 080 tons . No lives were lost on any of UB @-@ 16 's June victims . 
 UB @-@ 16 's next two successes came on consecutive days in late July . On the 27th , Westward Ho ! , a 57 @-@ ton smack was boarded and sunk by UB @-@ 16 's crew 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ; 29 mi ) southeast of Lowestoft . The following day , the 1 @,@ 821 @-@ ton <unk> was torpedoed without warning one @-@ quarter nautical mile ( 500 m ) from the Sizewell Buoy at Aldeburgh . Eleven men died when the ship and her cargo of iron ore were sent to the bottom . 
 Although the Flanders Flotilla sank 31 ships in August , UB @-@ 16 did not add to that total . In a four @-@ day span in September , however , she accounted for three of the eight ships sunk by the flotilla during the month . On the 7th , she sank two more fishing smacks , Emblem and Victorious , 44 nautical miles ( 81 km ; 51 mi ) from Lowestoft . On 10 September , UB @-@ 16 sank the 51 @-@ ton Nimrod in the same vicinity . 
 Germany 's submarine offensive was suspended on 18 September by the chief of the Admiralstab , Admiral Henning von Holtzendorff , in response to American demands after German submarines had sunk the Cunard Line steamer Lusitania in May 1915 and other high profile sinkings in August and September . Holtzendorff 's directive from ordered all U @-@ boats out of the English Channel and the South @-@ Western Approaches and required that all submarine activity in the North Sea be conducted strictly along prize regulations . UB @-@ 16 did not sink any vessels over the next four months , but resumed attacks on 18 January 1916 , sinking three more smacks — Evelyn , Foam Crest , and Sunshine — between 25 and 35 nautical miles ( 46 and 65 km ; 29 and 40 mi ) from Lowestoft . 
 = = Second submarine offensive = = 
 By early 1916 , the British blockade of Germany was beginning to have an effect on Germany and her imports . The Royal Navy had stopped and seized more cargo destined for Germany than the quantity of cargo sunk by German U @-@ boats in the first submarine offensive . As a result , the German Imperial Navy began a second offensive against merchant shipping on 29 February . The final ground rules agreed upon by the German Admiralstab were that all enemy vessels in Germany 's self @-@ proclaimed war zone would be destroyed without warning , that enemy vessels outside the war zone would be destroyed only if armed , and — to avoid antagonizing the United States — that enemy passenger steamers were not to be attacked , regardless of whether in the war zone or not . 
 UB @-@ 16 's first successes in the new offensive came on 6 March when she sank the smacks <unk> and Young Harry about 30 nautical miles ( 56 km ; 35 mi ) east of Lowestoft . Valentiner and UB @-@ 16 attacked another pair of ships in early April . The 653 @-@ ton British ship Perth was torpedoed and sunk near Yarmouth on the 1st , while the Dutch sailing vessel <unk> Helena was damaged in an attack two days later east of Southwold . 
 On 5 April , Valentiner was succeeded by Kapitänleutnant Paul Hundius , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old , first @-@ time U @-@ boat skipper . In the first two weeks under Hundius ' command , UB @-@ 16 sank two British steamers : the 2 @,@ 978 @-@ ton Robert Adamson on the 10th , and the 3 @,@ 091 @-@ ton Tregantle on the 22nd . Robert Adamson was sunk 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ; 3 @.@ 5 mi ) from the Shipwash Lightship while en route from Dundee to Le Havre with a cargo of props . Tregantle had sailed from Galveston , Texas , via Norfolk , Virginia , with a load of wheat for Hull , but was sunk off Lowestoft . 
 Near the end of April 1916 , Admiral Reinhardt Scheer , the newest commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the German High Seas Fleet , called off the merchant shipping offensive and ordered all boats at sea to return , and all boats in port to remain there . UB @-@ 16 did not sink any more ships for the next eight months . 
 = = Grand Fleet ambush attempts = = 
 In mid @-@ May , Scheer completed plans to draw out part of the British Grand Fleet . The German High Seas Fleet would sortie for a raid on Sunderland , luring the British fleet across " ' nests ' of submarines and mine @-@ fields " . In support of the operation , UB @-@ 16 and five other Flanders boats set out at midnight 30 / 31 May to form a line 18 nautical miles ( 33 km ; 21 mi ) east of Lowestoft . This group was to intercept and attack the British light forces from Harwich , should they sortie north to join the battle . Unfortunately for the Germans , the British Admiralty had intelligence reports of the departure of the submarines which , coupled with an absence of attacks on shipping , aroused British suspicions . 
 A delayed departure of the German High Seas Fleet for its sortie ( which had been redirected to the Skagerrak ) and the failure of several of the U @-@ boats stationed to the north to receive the coded message warning of the British advance caused Scheer 's anticipated ambush to be a " complete and disappointing failure " . In UB @-@ 16 's group , only UB @-@ 10 sighted the Harwich forces , and they were too far away to mount an attack . The failure of the submarine ambush to sink any British capital ships allowed the full Grand Fleet to engage the numerically inferior High Seas Fleet in the Battle of Jutland , which took place 31 May – 1 June . 
 UB @-@ 16 's activities over the next two months are not reported , but on 2 August the submarine was patrolling off the Mass Lightship and torpedoed the Norwegian steamer John Wilson , sending her cargo of food destined for London to the bottom . Later in August , Scheer set up another ambush for the British fleet , when he drew up plans for another High Seas Fleet raid on Sunderland ( as had been the original intention in May ) . The German fleet planned to depart late in the day on 18 August and shell military targets the next morning . As in May , UB @-@ 16 was part of a group intended to attack the Harwich forces . As one of five boats forming the second line of boats from the Flanders Flotilla , UB @-@ 16 was stationed off Texel by the morning of 20 August . Once again , British intelligence had given warning of the impending attack and ambush , causing the Grand Fleet to sortie at 16 : 00 on 18 August , five hours before the German fleet sailed . Faulty intelligence caused Scheer initially to divert from Sunderland , and then to eventually call off the whole operation . Although U @-@ boats to the north sank two British light cruisers , UB @-@ 16 and her group played no part in the action . 
 Later , on 24 August , UB @-@ 16 was again patrolling off the Mass Lightship when Hundius stopped Velox , another Norwegian steamer headed for London . Crewmen from UB @-@ 16 boarded the 312 @-@ ton cargo ship , planted explosives , and sank the vessel and her general cargo . Velox was the last ship sunk by the UB @-@ 16 for nearly eight months , and the last sunk by Hundius before he was replaced by Oblt . Ernst Müller @-@ Schwarz late in the month . Neither Müller @-@ Schwartz , nor his January 1917 replacement , Oblt . Hans Ewald <unk> , sank any ships while in command of UB @-@ 16 . 
 = = Unrestricted submarine warfare = = 
 By the time of the so @-@ called " turnip winter " of 1916 – 17 , the Royal Navy blockade of Germany had severely limited imports of food and fuel into Germany . Among the results were an increase in infant mortality and as many as 700 @,@ 000 deaths attributed to starvation or hypothermia during the war . With the blockade having such dire consequences , Kaiser Wilhelm II personally approved a resumption of unrestricted submarine warfare to begin on 1 February 1917 to help force the British to make peace . The new rules of engagement specified that no ship was to be left afloat . 
 With the new campaign already underway , <unk> was replaced as UB @-@ 16 's commander by Oblt . Hugo Thielmann on 18 March . Although only in command of UB @-@ 16 for little more than a month , Thielmann sank one ship on UB @-@ 16 . The 107 @-@ ton Dutch motor vessel Arie was sunk in the Hoofden area on 20 April ; there were no reports of casualties . 
 Kapitänleutnant Wilhelm Rhein was assigned to UB @-@ 16 on 23 April , and under his command , UB @-@ 16 may have been responsible for damaging the Norwegian cargo ship <unk> on 26 April . On 9 August , UB @-@ 16 torpedoed and sank the British destroyer Recruit 3 nautical miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ; 3 @.@ 5 mi ) from the North Hinder Lightship . Recruit , commissioned four months earlier , sank with 54 of her complement . Rhein was succeeded by Oblt . Günther Bachmann on 26 August , and he , in turn , was succeeded by Oblt . Alfred <unk> on 25 December . 
 = = Conversion to minelayer = = 
 UB @-@ 16 and three sister boats , UB @-@ 10 , UB @-@ 12 , and UB @-@ 17 , had all been converted to minelaying submarines by 1918 . The conversion involved removing the bow section containing the pair of torpedo tubes from each U @-@ boat and replacing it with a new bow containing four mine chutes capable of carrying two mines each . In the process , the boats were lengthened to 105 feet ( 32 m ) , and the displacement increased to 147 t ( 145 long tons ) on the surface , and 161 t ( 158 long tons ) below the surface . Exactly when this conversion was performed on UB @-@ 16 is not reported , but UB @-@ 12 was at the dockyard from November 1916 to January 1917 . The lack of reported successes by UB @-@ 16 during this same span makes it a possibility that her conversion was accomplished in a similar timeframe . 
 On 13 March , UB @-@ 16 , now under the command of Oblt . Rudolf Stier , was responsible for sinking the 895 @-@ ton steamer Lisette near the Shipwash Lightship . One month later , on 13 April , the fishing smack Ruth was boarded and sunk by UB @-@ 16 ; Ruth was the final ship sunk by UB @-@ 16 . 
 On 28 April , British forces attempted to block the canal at Zeebrugge and bottle up the vessels of the Flanders Flotilla in the Zeebrugge Raid . In the raid , the British succeeded in sinking two obsolete cruisers , Iphigenia and Intrepid , in the narrowest part of the canal . British admiral Roger Keyes , who had planned the raid , believed that the Flanders Flotilla ships were bottled up for a long period of time . However , the following day , after the Germans had removed two piers , UB @-@ 16 — under Oblt . <unk> von der Lühe , her newest commander — made the first sortie from Zeebrugge after the raid . 
 = = Sinking = = 
 UB @-@ 16 departed Zeebrugge for what would be the final time on 6 May 1918 for a patrol off Harwich . At 18 : 50 on 10 May , the British submarine E34 spotted UB @-@ 16 on the surface near Harwich . Although E34 's commanding officer Lieutenant <unk> initially believed that UB @-@ 16 was a British submarine , he submerged out of caution because of UB @-@ 16 's proximity to Harwich . After identifying the submarine as a German boat , <unk> maneuvered to attack . At 19 : 15 , E34 launched two torpedoes at UB @-@ 16 from a distance of 400 yards ( 370 m ) . The first hit UB @-@ 16 's bow and failed to detonate , but the second hit below the conning tower and exploded , sinking UB @-@ 16 at position 52 ° 6 ′ N 2 ° 1 ′ E in less than five minutes . After a further five minutes , E34 surfaced near where UB @-@ 16 had gone down , and rescued von der Lühe from the oily water ; he was the only survivor . Von der Lühe was imprisoned in a British prisoner of war camp , where he died of influenza on 1 March 1919 . British divers dispatched to the site of UB @-@ 16 's demise a week later could only find some plating and a few pipes and concluded that UB @-@ 16 had disintegrated after the torpedo hit . 
 = = Ships sunk or damaged = = 
 = Joey Hamilton = 
 Johns Joseph " Joey " Hamilton ( born September 9 , 1970 ) is a former Major League Baseball pitcher who played professionally for nine seasons , recording a 74 – 73 win – loss record , a 4 @.@ 44 earned run average ( ERA ) and 894 strikeouts . He attended Statesboro High School in Georgia . Following high school , Hamilton attended Georgia Southern University for three years . 
 He started his professional career in 1991 when he was drafted by the San Diego Padres , and pitched for three major league teams during his career . As a rookie with San Diego in 1994 he finished fifth in the Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award voting for the National League . Following the 1998 season , San Diego traded Hamilton to the Toronto Blue Jays . In 2001 , after two seasons with the Blue Jays , he was released . Hamilton signed with the Cincinnati Reds shortly afterward . Hamilton had stints in training camps and the minor leagues with some of the Padres and Reds affiliates . In March 2005 , two days after signing with the New York Mets , the team released him . 
 = = Early years and college = = 
 Hamilton was born on September 9 , 1970 , in Statesboro , Georgia to Jack Hamilton and Helen Mathis . He attended Statesboro High School before the Baltimore Orioles drafted him in the 1988 Major League Baseball draft . Hamilton decided against signing with the Orioles , opting instead to play college baseball for Georgia Southern University . 
 As a sophomore at Georgia Southern in 1990 , Hamilton had an 18 – 4 record with a 3 @.@ 07 ERA . He was one of nine finalists for the Golden Spikes Award , and he earned Second Team All @-@ American honors from The Sporting News and Baseball America . However , at the beginning of his junior season he went 1 – 3 with a 7 @.@ 43 ERA after starting five games . It was soon discovered that Hamilton was suffering from an elbow injury , which forced him to have surgery in 1992 . 
 Hamilton held the Georgia Southern baseball record for appearances , starts , complete games , innings pitched and strikeouts until 1995 . He was elected to the Georgia Southern University Athletics Department Hall of Fame in 1997 . 
 The San Diego Padres drafted Hamilton eighth overall in the 1991 Major League Baseball draft , making him the highest drafted Atlantic Sun Conference baseball player in the league 's history . He eventually signed a contract with the Padres worth $ 415 @,@ 000 after a short period in which Hamilton refused to sign a contract . He was surprised upon hearing of his selection , saying " It came as a bit of a shock because I really hadn 't heard much from the Padres . " According to Hamilton 's mother , Hamilton only signed the deal because his father Jack was dying of cancer , and it had been his father 's dream to watch his son pitch in the major leagues . Following the draft , Hamilton joined Team USA in Canada in preparation for the Olympics . 
 In 1992 , Padres general manager Joe McIlvaine stated the Padres would have never selected Hamilton if they knew his agent was Scott Boras . McIlvaine said of the situation , " Basically , he lied to us . We had no idea . That 's why half the time , you don 't know who he represents . [ Scott Boras is ] very good at that . His clients are very good about keeping their mouths shut . " McIlvaine retracted his comments about Hamilton and Boras after Boras threatened to sue McIlvaine . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = San Diego Padres = = = 
 In 1992 , Baseball America ranked him as the top prospect in the San Diego Padres organization and the 36th in Major League Baseball . The Padres sent Hamilton to their Single @-@ A affiliate , the Charleston Rainbows , who were managed by future Baltimore Orioles manager Dave <unk> . With the Rainbows he went 2 – 2 , with a 3 @.@ 38 ERA in seven games and 342 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was then called up to the High Desert Mavericks . With High Desert , Hamilton went 4 – 3 with a 2 @.@ 74 ERA in nine appearances . Hamilton received one more call @-@ up , this time to Double @-@ A. With the Wichita Wranglers he went 3 – 0 with a 2 @.@ 86 ERA in six starts and pitched 342 ⁄ 3 innings during his time with the team . 
 In 1993 , Hamilton was ranked as the second best prospect in the Padres organization . He was sent to the Padres ' affiliate , the Rancho Cucamonga Quakes . One of Hamilton 's teammates with the Quakes was 17 @-@ year @-@ old and future All @-@ Star Derrek Lee . During his time with the Quakes , he went 1 – 0 with a 4 @.@ 09 ERA in 11 innings during two starts . The Padres then called him up to their Double @-@ A affiliate , the Wichita Wranglers . In Wichita , Hamilton had four wins and nine losses with a 3 @.@ 97 ERA in 15 starts . After a combined 39 appearances during two seasons , Hamilton was called up to Triple @-@ A Las Vegas . With Las Vegas he went 3 – 2 with a 4 @.@ 40 ERA in eight starts . 
 He made his Major League debut on May 24 , 1994 . In the game , Hamilton allowed three runs and five hits in six innings but ended up winning the game 6 – 3 after Phil Clark hit a three – run home run . Overall , Hamilton went 9 – 6 with a 2 @.@ 69 ERA in 1082 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He was fifth in the Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award voting for the National League . In 1995 , Hamilton went 6 – 9 with a 3 @.@ 08 ERA in 30 starts and 2041 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . Hamilton gave up 189 hits and 70 earned runs ( 89 unearned ) . Hamilton walked 56 batters and struck out 123 . At age 25 in 1996 , Hamilton put up a career high in wins ( 15 ) and his second most innings pitched ( 2112 ⁄ 3 ) . Hamilton accrued a 4 @.@ 17 ERA in 33 starts , along with 206 hits allowed and 98 earned runs . In his fourth year with San Diego in 1997 , Hamilton started on Opening Day for the Padres . In the game , he pitched six innings and gave up four runs on eight hits . The Padres won the game over the New York Mets 12 – 6 . Hamilton compiled a 12 – 7 record with a 4 @.@ 25 ERA for the season and gave up 69 walks and struck out 124 . Hamilton suffered a shoulder injury that was described as an inflammation of the rotator cuff and bursa sac . This injury forced Hamilton onto the disabled list during the 1997 season . Hamilton called the injury " real scary " , saying that he feared he may lose the ability to throw 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) . During the 1998 off @-@ season , San Diego acquired Kevin Brown through a trade with the Florida Marlins , giving San Diego three pitchers who could throw at 90 miles per hour ( 140 km / h ) and above , including Hamilton . With the Padres in 1998 , Hamilton 's last season in San Diego , he had a 13 – 13 record , 4 @.@ 27 ERA in 34 starts and <unk> ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He walked a career @-@ high 106 batters and struck out 147 . There was a rumored trade around the 1998 MLB trade deadline that would have sent Hamilton to the Detroit Tigers , but it never materialized . During the 1998 World Series , the Padres scheduled Hamilton to pitch game four but was passed over for game one starter Kevin Brown and instead entered game three to relieve starter Sterling Hitchcock . With San Diego , Hamilton went 55 and 44 with a 3 @.@ 75 ERA in <unk> ⁄ 3 innings pitched . 
 = = = After San Diego = = = 
 After five years with San Diego , Hamilton was traded to the Toronto Blue Jays on December 12 , 1998 , for Peter Tucci , Carlos <unk> , and Woody Williams . Analysts believe that Toronto acquired Hamilton if Roger Clemens 's trade request was successful . Hamilton began the 1999 season with the Syracuse <unk> , the Triple @-@ A affiliate of the Blue Jays . He started three games , recording one loss , no wins , and a 5 @.@ 11 ERA in 121 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . The Blue Jays called him up , and Hamilton made 18 starts in 22 games pitched . Pitching in 98 innings , he went 7 – 8 with a 6 @.@ 52 ERA . 
 For the second time in his career , Hamilton began the season in Syracuse and went 3 – 2 with a 3 @.@ 66 ERA in six games and 391 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . Hamilton had a shortened 2000 season for Toronto in which he went 2 – 1 with a 3 @.@ 55 ERA in six games . 
 For the first time during his tenure with Toronto , Hamilton started the season with the Blue Jays . He went 5 – 8 with a 5 @.@ 89 ERA in 22 games and 1221 ⁄ 3 innings , before being released on August 3 , 2001 . 
 Hamilton signed with the Cincinnati Reds on August 17 , 2001 , and was optioned to their Triple @-@ A team , the Louisville Bats . He made one start in Louisville , posting a 1 – 0 record with a 5 @.@ 40 ERA . The Reds called him up , and he made four starts and went 1 – 2 with a 6 @.@ 23 ERA . 
 Despite only recording one win for the team the year before , Hamilton was named the Reds ' 2002 Opening Day starter . In the game , Hamilton allowed two runs on seven hits in five innings of work . The Reds won the game over the Chicago Cubs , 5 – 4 . For the rest of the year , he spent time in Louisville and Cincinnati and posted a combined 5 – 10 record , 3 @.@ 92 ERA , and started 20 games and pitched in relief in 22 games . According to ESPN 's Peter Gammons , Hamilton , " looked like the ' 97 Hamilton " when he was making his comeback to the majors after spending time in the minors . At the conclusion of the 2002 season , he was offered arbitration by the Reds along with José Rijo , which they both rejected in mid @-@ December , meaning the Reds could not sign them until May 1 , 2003 . 
 = = = Final years = = = 
 Hamilton was signed by the St. Louis Cardinals on January 6 , 2003 , but was released on March 26 , 2003 after struggling in spring training . Hamilton then re @-@ signed with the Cincinnati Reds on April 11 , 2003 . After posting a 12 @.@ 66 ERA in three starts with the Reds , he was sent down to Louisville . He made 33 appearances for the Bats with an 8 – 3 record and a 3 @.@ 23 ERA in 861 ⁄ 3 innings . On October 15 , 2003 , he became a free agent . 
 The Padres re @-@ signed Hamilton on December 10 , 2003 , and optioned him to their Triple @-@ A affiliate , the Portland Beavers . Hamilton appeared in 11 games with the Beavers , posting an 0 – 2 record and 5 @.@ 36 ERA . Hamilton was released on June 7 , 2004 . He was signed by the New York Mets on March 10 , 2005 , to a minor league contract . He was released two days later after being arrested for suspicion of driving under the influence . 
 = Middle Level Navigations = 
 The Middle Level Navigations are a network of waterways in England , primarily used for land drainage , which lie in The Fens between the Rivers Nene and Great Ouse , and between the cities of Peterborough and Cambridge . Most of the area through which they run is at or below sea level , and attempts to protect it from inundation have been carried out since 1480 . The Middle Level was given its name by the Dutch Engineer Cornelius Vermuyden in 1642 , who subsequently constructed several drainage channels to make the area suitable for agriculture . Water levels were always managed to allow navigation , and Commissioners were established in 1754 to maintain the waterways and collect tolls from commercial traffic . 
 A new main drain to Wiggenhall St Germans was completed in 1848 , which provided better drainage because the outfall was lower than that at Salters Lode . Whittlesey Mere , the last remaining lake , was drained soon afterwards , using one of the first applications of John Appold 's centrifugal pump , following its appearance at the Great Exhibition in 1851 . Traffic on the network began to diminish after the opening of the railway through March in 1846 , and fell dramatically in the early twentieth century . The last regular commercial traffic was the tanker barge <unk> , which delivered fuel oil to pumping stations until 1971 . 
 As a result of the drainage , land levels continued to fall , and in 1934 the gravity outfall at Wiggenhall St Germans was replaced by a pumping station , with three diesel engines driving 8 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) diameter pumps . Its capacity was increased in 1951 , and again in 1969 / 70 , when two of the engines were replaced by electric motors . Following over 50 hours of continuous running at maximum capacity in 1998 , a new pumping station was commissioned . Work on it began in 2006 , and when it was completed in 2010 , it was the second largest pumping station in Europe . Much of the drainage of the Middle Levels relies on pumping , and the Commissioners manage over 100 pumping stations throughout the area . 
 Interest in restoration of the Middle Levels for leisure traffic began in 1949 , and the first significant work by volunteers occurred in 1972 , when they worked on the restoration of Well Creek , which finally reopened in 1975 . Since then , locks have been lengthened , to allow access by modern narrowboats , as they were built for Fen Lighters , which were only 49 feet ( 15 m ) long . The southern reaches became more accessible in 2006 , when a low Bailey bridge was raised by soldiers from the 39 Engineer Regiment . The system is managed by Commissioners , and they are the fourth largest navigation authority in Great Britain . 
 = = History = = 
 The Middle Levels of the Fens are a low @-@ lying area of approximately 270 square miles ( 700 km2 ) , much of which is at or below sea level . Attempts to protect them from inundation and to make them suitable for agriculture began in 1480 , when the Bishop of Ely , John Morton , constructed a 12 @-@ mile ( 19 km ) straight cut from Stanground to <unk> . This provided the waters of the River Nene with a more direct route to the sea than the previous route through Benwick , Floods Ferry , March , Outwell and Wisbech . Morton 's Leam , the name given to the medieval drainage ditch , was 40 feet ( 12 m ) wide and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) deep , and much of the manual labour was provided by prisoners of war from the Hundred Years War . In 1605 , Sir John Popham , who was the Lord Chief Justice at the time , began work on a drainage scheme near Upwell , and although the scheme was ultimately abandoned in 1608 , Popham 's Eau , his 5 @.@ 6 @-@ mile ( 9 @.@ 0 km ) cut from the old course of the River Nene near March to the Well Creek at <unk> remains . 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 The next significant advance was in 1630 , when the Dutch Engineer Cornelius Vermuyden was employed by the Earl of Bedford and others to drain the Fens . The Old Bedford River was cut from <unk> to Salters Lode , a distance of 21 miles ( 34 km ) , and provided sufficient drainage that the land could be used for summer grazing . Vermuyden published a document in 1642 , entitled Discourse touching the draining of the Great <unk> , in which he proposed the division of the fens into three zones , the North Level , the South Level , and between them , the Middle Level , stretching from Morton 's Leam to the Bedford River . An Act of Parliament , the <unk> Act , was obtained in 1649 , and work began under his supervision . The New Bedford River was constructed , running parallel to the Old , and the Middle Levels area was protected . The Forty Foot , Twenty Foot and Sixteen Foot Rivers were cut soon afterwards , to drain water from the area to Salters Lode and Welches Dam . In addition to these new channels , the Middle Level also contained 26 miles ( 42 km ) of the old course of the Nene , and the ancient artificial waterways of King 's Dyke and Whittlesey Dyke , which connect Stanground to Floods Ferry . To the north is Well Creek , most of which was a natural waterway , although the final section to Salters Lode Lock follows the course of the New <unk> , a drainage channel constructed in the early sixteenth century . The primary function of the waterways was drainage , but water levels were managed to enable them to be navigated . The volumes of traffic carried are not well documented , especially in the early period . 
 Within the level , there were four large lakes or meres , of which the biggest was Whittlesey Mere . It was used for leisure boating , and was described by Celia Fiennes in 1697 , who stated that it was 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) long and 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) wide , and noted that it was sometimes dangerous , since it was prone to sudden winds rising up ' like hurricanes ' . In order to maintain and improve the route between Salters Lode Sluice on the Great Ouse and Stanground Sluice on the River Nene , another Act of Parliament was obtained in 1754 . This created Commissioners to manage the waterways , with powers to charge 3 old pence ( <unk> ) per ton on goods entering the system through either of the sluices . Agricultural produce was carried through Salters Lode , bound for Kings Lynn , while coal , timber and groceries moved in the opposite direction . Pleasure boats were specifically excluded from paying tolls , as were certain products including manure , compost , malt dust , pigeons ' dung and some varieties of oil cake . Another account of the system is provided by George Walpole 's Journal of the Voyage round the Fens in 1774 , which was made in a fleet of nine boats , all of which were towed by a single horse called Hippopotamus when there was insufficient wind for sailing . Carpenters were employed to jack up or remove bridges which were too low for the boats to pass , and although the expedition lasted for 22 days , Walpole only recorded one gang of lighters , which delayed them as Salters Lode . 
 The system was enhanced in 1796 by the opening of the Wisbech Canal , which linked the Well Creek at Outwell to the River Nene at Wisbech . It followed the line of the <unk> , another ancient waterway . At Outwell the Well Creek is also joined by the old course of the River Nene . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 A new Act of Parliament was obtained in 1810 , as the 1754 Act did not make sufficient provision for the funding of drainage works , and in some cases ensured that flood relief could not be given until the land had flooded . The new Act transferred responsibility from the Bedford Level Corporation to local Commissioners , who had to be land @-@ owners . They had powers to charge a levy on all land which could be taxed under the Eau Brink Acts . Between 1824 and 1839 , John Dyson Jr was employed as the resident engineer by the Bedford Level Commissioners . He had been recommended by John Rennie , and was charged with the reconstruction of ten locks and sluices , together with " a great many other works of great importance " , for which the estimated cost was between £ 50 @,@ 000 and £ 60 @,@ 000 . The work included the rebuilding of Salters Lode sluice , which Dyson oversaw himself , as no suitable tenders were received when the work was advertised . It was completed by 1832 . Sluices and bridges at Stanground , Welches Dam , and the end of the Old Bedford River , near Salters Lode , were also rebuilt . 
 As the land dried , the peaty soils shrank , causing the land surface to drop . Much of the Middle Levels was flooded in 1841 @-@ 2 , and this led the Commissioners to obtain an Act of Parliament in 1844 , which authorised the construction of a new main drain , 11 miles ( 18 km ) long , in order that water could flow by gravity to Wiggenhall St Germans , where the levels of the tidal river were about 7 feet ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) lower than at Salters Lode . The work was completed in 1848 , and the sluice at <unk> Priory was also built at this time , in order to allow boats with a deeper draught to navigate through Upwell and Outwell . A railway line from Ely to Peterborough passed through the port of March from 1846 , which soon became a railway hub , with branch lines to Wisbech and St Ives . Traffic transferred from the waterways , which made the drainage responsibilities of the Commissioners easier . The new main drain enabled Whittlesey Mere to be drained . A pumping station with an Appold centrifugal pump was used to achieve this , rather than the more traditional scoop wheel . The pump had been shown for the first time at the Great Exhibition in 1851 , where it amazed visitors , and its inventor was commissioned to design a pump for the draining of the mere . It was 4 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) in diameter , and powered by a 25 hp ( 19 kW ) steam engine , could raise 101 tons of water per minute by 2 or 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 or 0 @.@ 9 m ) . In 1862 an Act of Parliament created the Middle Level Commissioners as a separate body to the Bedford Level Corporation , although they had been almost independent since 1810 , and they embarked on a series of improvements . Drainage was always the primary function , but navigation was also important , and the new body had powers to charge tolls for the use of the waterways . 
 1862 was also the year in which the Wiggenhall sluice collapsed and around 9 square miles ( 23 km2 ) of the levels were flooded . Sir John Hawkshaw constructed a new sluice , consisting of a large cofferdam , with 16 tubes , each 3 @.@ 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 1 m ) in diameter , which passed over the top of it . The tops of these pipes were 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) above the inlet and outlet , and an air pump was used to remove the air from them , so that the water would syphon over the cofferdam . It was the only time that such a solution was tried in the Fens , and it was supplemented in 1880 by a more conventional gravity sluice , also constructed by Hawkshaw , as it was unable to discharge sufficient water . 
 Some commercial traffic on the waterways continued despite the railway competition , with 44 @,@ 034 tons generating £ 733 of tolls in 1888 , which enabled the Commissioners to show a profit of £ 216 . Traffic had fallen slightly to 42 @,@ 640 tons in 1898 , but by 1905 was down to 12 @,@ 770 tons , and the Commissioners showed a loss of £ 702 that year . An Alderman giving evidence to the Royal Commission on Canals and Waterways in 1905 pointed out that one of the railway companies had been paying to collect traffic in hay and straw , although this practice ceased when it became public knowledge . The condition of the Nene and the Wisbech Canal declined , which discouraged navigation , but some trade in agricultural produce , coal , bricks and road building materials continued . Coal was delivered by barge from Outwell Depot to around 40 pumping stations . 
 There were a few regular carriers left by the 1920s , one of whom ran Jackson 's Navy , using horses to tow the barges , and steam tugs after 1930 . When the company stopped trading in 1948 , sugar beet traffic was carried to Ely in boats owned by the beet factory for another ten years . Fuel oil for the pumping stations was supplied by the tanker barge <unk> until 1971 , by which time the Well Creek was almost impassible . 
 = = = Pumping Stations = = = 
 The effect of drainage on the light peaty soils was that further shrinkage occurred , and land levels continued to fall . By the late 1920s , gravity discharge alone could no longer be relied upon to provide an adequate level of flood protection , and a change to pumped drainage began . A new sluice and pumping station were constructed at St Germans , which was completed in 1934 . The sluice was built in the centre of the old syphon sluice channel , with a pumping station on either side of it . Three pump sets were installed , with space for a fourth . Each consisted of a 1 @,@ 000 brake horsepower ( 750 kW ) Crossley diesel engine coupled to an 8 @.@ 5 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) Gwynnes pump , which could pump 840 tons per minute ( 1234 <unk> per day ( Mld ) ) . Once completed , the syphon sluice was demolished , while Hawkshaw 's replacement sluice and its channel were abandoned . The new works were paid for by a grant , given on condition that three quarters of the workforce were from the local area . The capacity of the station was increased in 1951 , when a 1 @,@ 200 brake horsepower ( 890 kW ) Crossley diesel engine was fitted into the spare bay , and again in 1969 / 70 , when the two pumps on the north side of the sluice were rebuilt , and the engines replaced by 1 @,@ 500 brake horsepower ( 1 @,@ 100 kW ) electric motors . 
 From 1977 to 1983 , a series of improvements were carried out , which included the construction of a pumping station at <unk> Bridge on <unk> Leam , preventing navigation along this channel to the southern reaches of the Middle Levels . A new lock was constructed at Lodes End to provide an alternative route . The banks of the Old River Nene were raised and clay puddling was used to retain the water , and major improvements to the Forty Foot , Twenty Foot and Sixteen Foot rivers were made , to maintain water levels for navigation . All of the bridges on the Sixteen Foot River were demolished and replaced to provide wider channels , as their width restricted flows during heavy rainfall , and St Germans pumping station was again upgraded , when the remaining 1934 engine was replaced by a 1 @,@ 550 brake horsepower ( 1 @,@ 160 kW ) Allen diesel engine . The improvements have restricted navigation in the lower south @-@ western area , but greatly improved flood defences . 
 The <unk> 's Bridge pumping station houses six Allen 39 @-@ inch ( 0 @.@ 99 m ) diameter pumps , each capable of pumping 260 Mld . Three of them are powered by 168 kW electric induction motors , manufactured by Lawrence Scott , which are controlled automatically , while the other three are powered by Dorman 274 bhp ( 204 kW ) diesel engines , which are controlled manually . There is a standby generator , to cope with loss of the electric supply , and when all six pumps are operational , the station can pump 1586 Mld , equivalent to 18 tonnes a second . 
 In April 1998 , the St Germans pumping station ran at maximum capacity , which was <unk> Mld ( or 71 tonnes a second ) , for over 50 hours , and this led to the decision to replace it with a brand new installation , with 40 % extra capacity . Work started in December 2006 , and the pumping station , which is the second largest in Europe , includes a glass wall to enable visitors to see the pumps . The new station was commissioned on 22 April 2010 , after which the old station was demolished . A formal opening ceremony was held on 20 April 2011 , when the station was opened by Lord James Russell , brother of the Duke of Bedford , and a descendent of the Earl of Bedford who started the process of draining the Fens in the seventeenth century . There are more than one hundred smaller pumping stations scattered throughout the system to maintain the water levels and prevent flooding . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 Local interest in restoring the Middle Levels for navigation began to develop in 1949 . The Fenlands Branch of the Inland Waterways Association was formed on 30 October 1949 , and following assurances from the Ouse Catchment Board that they were planning to restore the river for navigation up to Bedford , the branch decided to devote their energies to the Middle Levels , which were weedy and heavily silted . Salters Lode lock was rebuilt in 1963 , but passage along Well Creek was very difficult . The East Anglian Waterways Association and the Middle Level <unk> Club began campaigning for it to be dredged in 1964 . The first major working party by volunteers on the system occurred in 1972 , when the Well Creek Trust organised a project called ' <unk> ' in October , which involved draining the creek so that it could be cleared of rubbish . It was reopened for traffic in 1975 . 
 When the navigations were built , the boats using them were traditional Fen Lighters , which were 46 by 11 feet ( 14 @.@ 0 by 3 @.@ 4 m ) , and the locks were sized accordingly . However , there has been a programme to increase the lock sizes to make the waterways accessible to standard narrow boats . Lodes End lock was 65 feet ( 20 m ) when built . The lock at <unk> Priory was extended to 92 feet ( 28 m ) , Ashline lock to 90 feet ( 27 m ) , Stanground to 80 feet ( 24 m ) , and Horseway to 60 feet ( 18 m ) . with the new Ashline lock being reopened on 1 April 1999 . Salter 's Lode lock has three sets of gates , with a guillotine gate at the tidal end , and mitre gates which allow boats up to 62 feet ( 19 m ) long to enter the River Ouse when the river level is higher than the level of Well Creek . It was possible for longer boats to pass straight through at certain states of the tide , but the lock has been lengthened to 80 feet ( 24 m ) , by the addition of a third set of mitre gates , facing away from the river , which can only be used when the level of the river is lower than that of the Creek . Welches Dam Lock is still sized for Fen Lighters , at just 47 feet ( 14 m ) long . 
 Access to the southern reaches of the Levels was improved in 2006 , when soldiers from the 53rd Field Squadron of the 39 Engineer Regiment raised the level of a Bailey bridge at Ramsey Hollow . This had previously restricted passage , as it was very low , but the exercise increased the headroom by 3 ft ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) . The Inland Waterways Association raised the funding for the additional materials required , and the reconstruction opened up a 33 @-@ mile ( 53 km ) cruising ring on the Levels . 
 = = Today = = 
 The navigations are managed by the Middle Level Commissioners , who are responsible for about 120 miles ( 192 km ) of waterway , of which around 100 miles ( 160 km ) are navigable . The Commissioners are also responsible for six locks and a number of pumping stations , and are the fourth largest navigation authority in Great Britain . 
 The navigations often form a short cut for boaters between the River Nene at Peterborough and the River Great Ouse at Salters Lode Lock . The suggested route passes through Stanground Sluice , along King 's Dyke to Ashline Lock , and then along Whittlesey Dike to Flood 's Ferry junction . From here the route is along the old course of the River Nene , passing through the twin villages of Outwell and Upwell , where the abandoned Wisbech Canal once formed a route back to the new course of the River Nene . The final stretch to Salters Lode lock is along Well Creek , passing over the top of the Middle Level Main Drain on <unk> Aqueduct . 
 The alternative route via Horseway sluice and the Old Bedford River has been closed for several years . The lock at Welches Dam has been closed as being unsafe and a reedbed has taken hold . Very low water levels between Horseway sluice and Welches Dam lock often prevented passage . This stands to be improved , however , as part of the Fens Waterways Link project , which includes plans for improving the route through the Middle Levels from Stanground to Salters Lode and to Welches Dam . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Rated R : Remixed = 
 Rated R : Remixed ( stylized as Rated R / / / Remixed ) is the second remix album by Barbadian singer Rihanna . It was released on May 8 , 2010 , in Brazil and Europe and on May 24 , 2010 , in the United States by Def Jam Recordings . It contains remixes from her fourth studio album , Rated R ( 2009 ) . The songs were solely remixed by Chew Fu . The majority of the remixes were remastered to incorporate influences from the genre of house music , and incorporate heavy usage of synthesizers as part of their instrumentation . 
 Rated R : Remixed received a mixed review from Jean Goon for MSN Entertainment . She praised Fu for remixing some of the dark and sombre songs into upbeat dance songs , but criticized the album as it did not provide memorability . The album peaked at number four in Greece and number six on the US Dance / Electronic Albums chart ; it peaked at number 33 on the US Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart and number 158 on the US Billboard 200 chart . As of July 2010 , Rated R : Remixed has sold 13 @,@ 000 copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following the release and success of Rated R ( 2009 ) and its singles " Russian Roulette " , " Hard " and " Rude Boy " , it was confirmed on April 14 , 2010 , by Def Jam Recordings that Rihanna was going to release her second remix album entitled Rated R : Remixed . The singer 's first remix album was Good Girl Gone Bad : The Remixes in January 2009 . The project was announced as something for fans to bridge the gap while Rihanna was still on the Last Girl on Earth Tour ( 2010 – 11 ) and her fifth studio album , Loud , was not yet released . Rated R : Remixed was exclusively remixed by New York @-@ based electronic record producer , remixer and DJ , Chew Fu . Although the tracklist on Rated R consists of 13 songs , Rated R : Remixed consists of 10 songs ; " Cold Case Love " , " The Last Song " and " Te Amo " were not remixed by Fu and were therefore not included . Rated R : Remixed was released on May 8 , 2010 , in Brazil and various European territories in a digital download format . It was released in the same format on May 24 , in the United States . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 Rated R : Remixed is an uptempo house album . " Russian Roulette " , " Photographs " , " Rude Boy " and " Stupid in Love " feature " heavy electro and synth beats " . " Wait Your Turn " , originally a dubstep and hip hop song , was remastered to a house song . " Stupid in Love " , which was originally a pop and R & B power ballad , was also changed to an uptempo house track . Jean Goon for MSN Entertainment gave a mixed review for the album , and awarded it 2 @.@ 5 stars out of five . Goon was complimentary of how Fu changed some of the more sombre and downtempo songs to incorporate " catchy , upbeat touches . " She noted that Goon noted that " Photographs " had undergone a " groovy " transformation , and that the composition complemented Rihanna 's vocal performance . With regard to " Stupid in Love " , Goon described the remix as " classy enough to be played in a trendy boutique or cafe . " 
 However , Goon was critical of " Russian Roulette " ' s production , writing that Fu appeared to have " got a little carried away " and criticising him for applying electro beats to every song , not all of which may have needed them . The critic noted that " Russian Roulette " was a " mess to listen to . " With regard to " Rude Boy " , originally an uptempo dance song that incorporates elements of the dancehall , ragamuffin , pop and R & B genres , Goon stated that Fu 's production was an attempt to try and " outdo the already upbeat original . " Goon concluded although she thought some of the remixes " weren 't too bad on the ears , " there were not any outstanding or memorable tracks . Furthermore , Goon criticised the remixes for being too heavily distorted with electronic synths which " seemed to compete for our attention rather than complement Rihanna ’ s vocals . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In Greece , Rated R : Remixed debuted at number 11 on May 17 , 2010 . The following week , the album peaked at number four . The album spent a total of two weeks on the album chart . In the United States , the album debuted and peaked at number 158 on the Billboard 200 on June 12 , 2010 . The album stayed on the chart for one week . Rated R : Remixed debuted and peaked at number six on the US Dance / Electronic Albums on June 12 , and stayed on the chart for 11 weeks . It debuted and peaked at number 33 on the US Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums on June 12 , and stayed on the chart for 13 weeks . As of July 2010 , Rated R : Remixed has sold 13 @,@ 000 copies in the US , according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rated R : Remixed . 
 Notes 
 ^ a signifies a vocal producer 
 ^ b signifies a remixer 
 ^ c signifies a co @-@ producer 
 ^ d signifies an additional producer 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits for Rated R : Remixed adapted from Allmusic . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Tank Girl ( film ) = 
 Tank Girl is a 1995 American science fiction action @-@ comedy film directed by Rachel Talalay . Based on the British post @-@ apocalyptic comic series of the same name by Alan Martin and Jamie Hewlett that was originally published in Deadline magazine , the film stars Lori Petty , Naomi Watts , Ice @-@ T and Malcolm McDowell . Tank Girl is set in a drought @-@ ravaged Australia , years after a catastrophic impact event . It follows the antihero Tank Girl ( Petty ) as she , Jet Girl ( Watts ) , and genetically modified supersoldiers called the Rippers fight " Water & Power " , an oppressive corporation led by Kesslee ( McDowell ) . 
 After reading an issue of the Tank Girl comic she had received as a gift , Talalay obtained permission from Deadline 's publisher Tom Astor to direct a film adaptation . She selected Catherine Hardwicke to be the production designer , and worked closely with Martin and Hewlett during the making of the film . Tank Girl was filmed primarily in White Sands , New Mexico , and Tucson , Arizona . The film 's critically praised soundtrack was assembled by Courtney Love , and the Rippers ' makeup and prosthetics team was headed by Stan Winston . Winston 's studio wanted to work on the project so much that they cut their usual prices in half in order to meet the film 's budget . 
 Financially unsuccessful , Tank Girl recouped only about $ 6 million of its $ 25 million budget at the box office and received mixed to negative reviews from critics . Martin and Hewlett have since spoken negatively of their experiences creating the film . Talalay blamed some of the film 's negative reception on studio edits over which she had no control . Despite the negative critical reception and box office failure of the film , it has been cited as an example of a comic book film with a cult following , and it is noted for its feminist themes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 2022 , a comet strikes Earth causing an 11 @-@ year drought . By 2033 , most of the little remaining water is held in reserve by Kesslee ( Malcolm McDowell ) and his Water & Power ( W & P ) corporation , which uses the water to control the population . Rebecca Buck – " Tank Girl " ( Lori Petty ) – is a member of a commune in the Australian outback that operates the last water well not controlled by the corporation . In an attack on the commune , W & P troops kill Tank Girl 's boyfriend , Richard ( Brian Wimmer ) , and capture Tank Girl and her young friend Sam ( Stacy Linn <unk> ) . Rather than killing her , Kesslee tortures and enslaves the defiant Tank Girl . Jet Girl ( Naomi Watts ) , a talented but introverted jet mechanic who has given up trying to escape W & P , urges Tank Girl to make less trouble for their captors , though Tank Girl refuses . Among other forms of torture , W & P personnel push her down into a long pipe and fill it with water . 
 The mysterious Rippers slaughter guards at the W & P compound , then escape undetected . Kesslee uses Tank Girl to lure the Rippers into the open , but they gravely wound Kesslee and let Tank Girl and Jet Girl escape . Jet Girl steals a fighter jet from W & P and Tank Girl steals a tank , which she modifies heavily . The girls learn from the eccentric Sub Girl ( Ann Cusack ) that Sam is working at a sex club called Liquid Silver . They infiltrate the club , rescue Sam from a pedophile , Rat Face ( Iggy Pop ) , and then humiliate the club 's owner , " The Madame " ( Ann Magnuson ) , by making her sing Cole Porter 's " Let 's Do It " at gunpoint . W & P troops break up the performance and re @-@ capture Sam . Tank Girl and Jet Girl wander the desert and find the Rippers ' hideout . They learn that the Rippers are supersoldiers created from human and kangaroo DNA by a man called Johnny Prophet . Tank Girl befriends a Ripper named Booga ( Jeff Kober ) , while a Ripper named Donner ( Scott Coffey ) shows romantic interest in Jet Girl . Despite the objections of the Ripper T @-@ Saint ( Ice @-@ T ) , who is suspicious of the girls , the Rippers ' leader <unk> ( Reg E. Cathey ) sends the pair out to capture a shipment of weapons . The girls bring the weapon crates back , though most of them are empty . After finding Johnny Prophet dead in one of the containers , the girls and the Rippers realize that W & P has tricked them . 
 The girls and the Rippers sneak into W & P , where they are ambushed . Kesslee , whose body had been reconstructed by the cybernetic surgeon Che <unk> ( James Hong ) , reveals that Tank Girl has unknowingly been bugged . <unk> is killed . While the Rippers turn the tide of the battle , Jet Girl kills Sergeant Small ( Don Harvey ) , who had earlier sexually harassed her . Kesslee reveals that Sam is in the pipe , and her life is endangered by the rising water . Tank Girl uses her tank to kill Kesslee , then pulls Sam out of the pipe . The film ends with an animated sequence showing water starting to flow freely . Tank Girl drives down rapids , pulling Booga behind on water @-@ skis , then takes them over a waterfall , shouting for joy . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Writing in the 1997 book Trash Aesthetics : Popular Culture and Its Audience , Deborah Cartmell states that while the comic showed Tank Girl to be " unheroic or even [ an ] accidental anti @-@ hero " , the film sets her up with " classic western generic " emotional and moral justifications for her liberation and revenge on W & P , as she witnesses the slaughter of her boyfriend and her " trusty steed " . She also sees one of the commune 's children being abducted , and is herself captured and enslaved . Cartmell also says Tank Girl holds parallels with other " contemporary ' post @-@ feminist ' icons " , as she displays dominant female sexuality and a " familiarity and knowing coolness of ' outlawed ' modes of sexuality " , such as masturbation , sadomasochism and lesbianism . 
 In her 2006 book The Modern Amazons : Warrior Women On @-@ Screen , Dominique <unk> writes that the film has anti @-@ establishment themes and , unlike many comic @-@ book adaptation films which feature " gratuitous sexual objectification " of women , Tank Girl stands out as being " stridently feminist " , with the exception of the " cliché victim / avenger complex " . According to <unk> , the film makes fun of female stereotypes , as shown by Tank Girl 's repeated emasculation of Kesslee with witty comebacks while she is being tortured , and by her response to the computer training device telling her how to present herself to men at the Liquid Silver club . The device provides seductive clothing and tells Tank Girl to remove her body hair and to wear make @-@ up and a wig . Tank Girl completely ignores the advice and modifies the clothes to create her own style . 
 In the 2011 book Cult Cinema , Ernest Mathijs and Jamie Sexton discuss the issue of whether cult films purported to be feminist were truly feminist or " partly the effect of the performance of feminist attitudes in its reception " . The authors consider Tank Girl to be a " ' real ' feminist cult film " , as opposed to the feminist cult films of Kathryn Bigelow and Catherine Hardwicke , which they consider to be too masculine and too eager to cater to " hetero @-@ normativity " respectively . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 In 1988 , about a year after the launch of the Tank Girl comic in the British magazine Deadline , its publisher , Tom Astor , began looking for a studio interested in making a film adaptation . While several studios , including New Line Cinema , expressed interest , progress was slow . Rachel Talalay 's stepdaughter gave her a Tank Girl comic to read while she was shooting her directorial debut film , Freddy 's Dead : The Final Nightmare ( released in 1991 ) . Talalay read the comic between takes and became interested in directing a Tank Girl film . She contacted Astor and , after hearing nothing for almost a year , was about to give up trying to secure the rights when he gave her permission to make the film . Talalay pitched the film to Amblin Entertainment and Columbia Pictures , who both turned it down . Talalay turned down an offer from Disney as she did not believe the studio would allow the levels of violence and the sexual references the plot required . An offer from MGM was accepted . Talalay worked closely with the Tank Girl comic 's co @-@ creators Alan Martin and Jamie Hewlett during the film 's production , and selected Catherine Hardwicke to be the production designer . The studio was unhappy with Hardwicke , who was relatively unknown at the time , being chosen over more experienced designers and Talalay had to meet with the producers to persuade them to allow Hardwicke to work on the project . <unk> Sarafian wrote the screenplay , which marked his debut production credit , and Gale Tattersall was chosen as cinematographer . Believing that MGM would not allow the depiction of a bestial relationship in the film , the romance between Tank Girl and Booga was only written into the second or third version of the script , after the character was already established in the minds of people involved in the production . By this stage , Booga : " was a character and not just a kangaroo [ so ] it wasn 't an issue anymore . " 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 MGM held open casting sessions in London , Los Angeles , and New York for the role of Tank Girl . According to Talalay , some were skeptical of the open casting , thinking that it was a publicity stunt . This was true to an extent , as she had been asking the studio to cast a well @-@ known English actress , Emily Lloyd , who was replaced after she refused to cut her hair for the role . Talalay cast Lori Petty , an American , because " she is crazy in her own life and [ the film ] needed somebody like that . " MGM faxed Deadline asking them for an " ideal cast " list ; they selected Malcolm McDowell for Kesslee , but never believed MGM would actually contact him . McDowell has spoken favorably of his experience working on the film , saying it had the " same flavour " as A Clockwork Orange , and praised Talalay and Petty . Talalay was approached by several people who wanted cameos in the film , but she did not want the film to be overshadowed by such appearances . Two cameos were settled on – Iggy Pop was given the role of Rat Face , and Björk was offered Sub Girl . She later dropped out , her character 's scenes were re @-@ written , and the role was then given to Ann Cusack . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Tank Girl was filmed over sixteen weeks , in three locations : desert scenes were filmed in White Sands , New Mexico , the Liquid Silver club set was built at an abandoned shopping mall in Phoenix , Arizona , and all remaining scenes were filmed within forty miles of Tucson , Arizona . Many scenes were filmed in an abandoned open @-@ pit mine , where filming had to be halted one day due to a chemical leak . Permission was received to film the water pipe scenes at the Titan Missile Museum , near the mine , but the day before shooting permission was withdrawn . These scenes were filmed instead in a tunnel at the abandoned mine . New sets were often found by simply searching the mine . Principal photography was completed on September 27 , 1994 , two days over schedule though still within the original budget . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 In the comics , the Rippers are considerably more kangaroo @-@ like . However , Talalay wanted real actors rather than stuntmen in suits playing the roles . She asked Hewlett to redesign the Rippers to make them more human , allowing them to have the actual actors ' facial expressions . Requests were sent out to " all the major make @-@ up and effects people " , including Stan Winston , whose prior work included the Terminator films , Aliens , and Jurassic Park . Talalay said that while she considered Winston to be the best , she did not expect to hear back from him . When she did , she still did not think that she would be able to afford his studio on her budget . A meeting was arranged and Winston insisted on being given the project , saying the Rippers would be : " the best characters we 've had the opportunity to do . " Winston 's studio cut their usual prices in half to meet the film 's budget . Eight Rippers featured in the film : half were given principal roles , the others were mainly in the background . Each Ripper had articulated ears and tails which were activated by remote control , and the background Rippers also had mechanical snouts which could be activated either by remote control or by the movement of the actors ' mouths . Each Ripper 's make @-@ up took about four hours to apply . Three technicians from Winston 's studio were required to work on each Ripper 's articulations during filming ; no puppets or digital effects were used for the Rippers . 
 The tank used in the film is a modified M5A1 Stuart . It was purchased from the government of Peru about twelve years prior to filming and had already been used in several films . Among numerous modifications made for Tank Girl , the tank 's 37 mm anti @-@ tank gun was covered with a modified flag pole to give the appearance of a 105 mm gun . An entire 1969 Cadillac Eldorado was added onto the tank , with the rear section welded at the back and the fender welded to the front . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 A " naked Ripper suit " incorporating a prosthetic penis was created for Booga and used in a filmed post @-@ coital scene which was removed from the final version of the film at the studio 's insistence . Deborah Cartmell described the " post @-@ coital scene " in the final version , which featured Booga fully clothed , as " carefully edited " . Against Talalay 's wishes , the studio made several other edits to the film . The scene in which Kesslee tortures Tank Girl was cut heavily on the grounds that she appeared " too ugly " while being tortured . Also cut was a scene showing Tank Girl 's bedroom , which was shown to be decorated with dozens of dildos , and a scene in which she places a condom on a banana before throwing it at a soldier . The studio cut the original ending scene , a live @-@ action scene in which it begins to rain ; the film was to have ended with Tank Girl burping . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 The film 's soundtrack was assembled by Courtney Love ; Graeme Revell composed the original music . Love 's band Hole contributed the song " Drown Soda " . Greg Graffin from Bad Religion was originally supposed to sing the duet of " Let 's Do It , Let 's Fall in Love " with Joan Jett , but due to contractual restrictions he was replaced by Paul Westerberg from The Replacements . Devo recorded a new version of their song " Girl U Want " specifically for the film , as they were big fans of the comic . The soundtrack featured Björk 's song " Army of Me " before it was released as a single . Because of the box office failure of the film , both Björk and her label decided not to use footage from the film in the song 's accompanying music video . 
 The song " Mockingbird Girl " by The Magnificent Bastards ( a side project of Scott Weiland ) was recorded specifically for the album after Love approached Weiland asking if he would like to contribute a song . The single 's cover showed the torso and thighs of an animated character resembling Tank Girl and featured the tracks " Ripper Sole " and " Girl U Want " from the album . In the United States it peaked at No. 27 on the Mainstream Rock chart and No. 12 on the Modern Rock Tracks chart . The song " 2 ¢ " by <unk> also appears in the film ; Talalay lobbied Restless Records to have the song included on the soundtrack but was unsuccessful . Instead , she directed the music video for the song , which featured both animated and live @-@ action footage from the film . 
 The soundtrack album was released on March 28 , 1995 on Warner Bros. / Elektra Records . It peaked at No. 72 on the Billboard 200 . The next week , New York magazine wrote that the soundtrack was getting more attention than the film itself . However , Ron Hancock of Tower Records stated that sales of the album were disappointing and attributed this to the financial failure of the film . Owen Gleiberman spoke favorably of the soundtrack , as did Laura Barcella writing in the book The End , describing it as a " who 's who of ' 90s female rock . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic said the album was " much better than the film " , awarding it three out of five stars . 
 Other songs in the film 
 " B @-@ A @-@ B @-@ Y " by Rachel Sweet 
 " Big Time Sensuality " by Björk 
 " Blank Generation " by Richard Hell and the Voidoids 
 " Disconnected " by Face to Face 
 " Shipwrecked " by Sky Cries Mary 
 " Theme from Shaft " by Isaac Hayes 
 " 2 ¢ " by <unk> 
 " Wild , Wild , Thing " by Iggy Pop 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Initial screening and box office = = = 
 Tank Girl premiered at the Mann Chinese Theatre on March 30 , 1995 . Approximately 1 @,@ 500 people attended the screening , including Talalay , Petty , Ice @-@ T , McDowell , Watts , and several other actors from the film , as well as Rebecca De Mornay , Lauren Tom , Brendan Fraser and Jason Simmons . Men in W & P costumes handed out bottles of mineral water , and girls dressed in Liquid Silver outfits gave out Astro Pops , candy cigarettes , and Tank Girl candy necklaces . About 400 people attended the official after @-@ party at the Hollywood Roosevelt Hotel . The film opened in cinemas across the United States the following day . 
 Tank Girl opened in 1 @,@ 341 theatres in the United States bringing in $ 2 @,@ 018 @,@ 183 in its first weekend and $ 2 @,@ 684 @,@ 430 at the end of its first week of release . By the end of its second week , Tank Girl had made only $ 3 @,@ 668 @,@ 762 . Its final gross in the United States was $ 4 @,@ 064 @,@ 495 . Internationally , the film added approximately $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to that total , against a production budget of $ 25 million . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The website Rotten Tomatoes , which categorizes reviews as positive or negative , surveyed 37 critics and determined that 38 % of the reviews were positive with a rating average of 4 @.@ 9 out of 10 . The website gives the consensus summary : " While unconventional , Tank Girl isn 't particularly clever or engaging , and none of the script 's copious one @-@ liners have any real zing . " Lamar <unk> of the BBC gave the film one out of five stars , saying : " Sadly , the BBC does not pay out for one @-@ word reviews . If it did , then this review would read simply : ' tiresome ' . " In 2001 , Matt Brunson from Creative Loafing gave the film one and a half stars out of four concluding : " a rockin ' soundtrack ... and a peek at Watts early in her career are the only ingredients saving this from a bomb rating . " Roger Ebert gave the film two out of four stars . While praising the film 's ambition and energy , he said he could not " care about it for much more than a moment at a time , and after a while its manic energy wore [ him ] down . " 
 Owen Gleiberman gave the film a C – rating , praising Petty 's performance which he said was the only good part of an otherwise " amateurish " film . Jonathan Rosenbaum and Janet Maslin gave moderately positive reviews , with Rosenbaum concluding : " unless you 're a preteen boy who hates girls , it 's funnier and a lot more fun than Batman Forever . " Maslin wrote : " Chief among its strong points is Lori Petty , a buzz @-@ cut fashion plate in a Prozac necklace , who brings the necessary gusto to Tank Girl 's flippancy . " Leonard Klady from Variety gave a mixed review , saying : " What 's missing from the mix is an engaging story to bind together its intriguing bits . And Lori Petty as ' Tank Girl ' ... has the spunk but , sadly , not the heart of the post @-@ apocalyptic heroine . " 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Tank Girl was released on DVD by MGM on April 10 , 2001 . Aaron Beierle from DVD Talk gave the DVD three and a half stars out of five for both video and audio quality , though only half a star for special features , noting that only the original trailer was included . 
 Shout ! Factory acquired the rights to several MGM films , including Tank Girl , and subsequently released a US Blu @-@ ray version on November 19 , 2013 . Special features included the original trailer , a ' Making of ' featurette , a commentary track with Petty and Talalay , and interviews with Talalay , Petty , and Hardwicke . Jeffrey Kauffman from Blu @-@ ray.com gave the version four stars out of five for audio and video quality and three stars for special features . M. <unk> Duarte from <unk> gave the version three and a half stars out of five for video quality , four stars for audio quality , and two and a half stars for extras . The blu @-@ ray has not been released internationally . 
