 = = Legacy and related media = = 
 To boost its declining readership , Deadline featured Tank Girl on its cover many times in 1994 and 1995 in anticipation of the film 's release . Subsequently , Tom Astor said the release of the film : " was very helpful , but it did not make up the difference , it lost some of its cult appeal without gaining any mainstream credibility . " The magazine ceased publication in late 1995 . Alan Martin and Jamie Hewlett have since spoken negatively of their experiences creating the film , calling it " a bit of a sore point " for them . " The script was lousy , " Hewlett recalled , " me and Alan kept rewriting it and putting Grange Hill jokes and Benny Hill jokes in , and they obviously weren 't getting it . They forgot to film about ten major scenes so we had to animate them ... it was a horrible experience . " Talalay complained that the studio interfered significantly in the story , screenplay , and feel of the film . She said that she had been " in sync " and on good terms with Martin and Hewlett until the studio made significant cuts to the film , which she had no control over . Peter Milligan wrote an adaptation comic in 1995 , and a novelization of the film by Martin Millar was published in 1996 . 
 Despite being a critical and commercial failure , Tank Girl is often said to have a cult following . Petty 's version of Tank Girl remains a popular character at cosplay events . The music video for Avril Lavigne 's 2013 song " Rock n Roll " was heavily influenced by Tank Girl . During her interview included on the Blu @-@ ray release of the film in 2013 , Petty was asked why she thinks the film still resonates with fans , and replied : " There 's no formula as to why Tank Girl was so fabulous and why people love it so much ... It was unique , it was new , it was fresh , it was way ahead of its time , and I 'm happy that I got to do it and that I 'll always have her . " Luke Buckmaster from the BBC included the film in his 2015 list of the " ten weirdest superhero films " , asserting that : " at its best , director Rachel Talalay captures an ostentatious steampunk vibe that proves weirdly addictive . " 
 = Scientific Detective Monthly = 
 Scientific Detective Monthly ( also known as Amazing Detective Tales and Amazing Detective Stories ) was a pulp magazine which published fifteen issues beginning in January 1930 . It was launched by Hugo Gernsback as part of his second venture into science fiction magazine publishing , and was intended to focus on detective and mystery stories with a scientific element . Many of the stories involved contemporary science without any imaginative elements — for example , a story in the first issue turned on the use of a bolometer to detect a black girl blushing — but there were also one or two science fiction stories in every issue . 
 The title was changed to Amazing Detective Tales with the June 1930 issue , perhaps to avoid the word " scientific " , which may have given readers the impression of " a sort of scientific periodical " , in Gernsback 's words , rather than a magazine intended to entertain . At the same time , the editor — Hector Grey — was replaced by David Lasser , who was already editing Gernsback 's other science fiction magazines . The title change apparently did not make the magazine a success , and Gernsback closed it down with the October issue . He sold the title to publisher Wallace Bamber , who produced at least five more issues in 1931 under the title Amazing Detective Stories . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 By the end of the 19th century , stories that were centered on scientific inventions and set in the future , in the tradition of Jules Verne , were appearing regularly in popular fiction magazines . The first science fiction ( sf ) magazine , Amazing Stories , was launched in 1926 by Hugo Gernsback at the height of the pulp magazine era . It was successful , and helped to form science fiction as a separately marketed genre , but in February 1929 Gernsback lost control of the publisher when it went bankrupt . By April he had formed a new company , Gernsback Publications Incorporated , and created two subsidiaries : Techni @-@ Craft Publishing Corporation and Stellar Publishing Corporation . In the middle of the year he launched three new magazines : a non @-@ sf magazine titled Radio Craft , and two sf pulps titled Science Wonder Stories and Air Wonder Stories . These were followed in September 1929 by the first issue of Science Wonder Quarterly , and in October Gernsback sent a letter to some of the writers he had already bought material from , letting them know that he was seeing more demand for " detective or criminal mystery stories with a good scientific background " . He named Arthur B. Reeve 's " Craig Kennedy " stories as an example , and also mentioned S.S. Van Dine 's " Philo Vance " stories , which were very popular at the time . In the January 1930 issue of both the sf magazines , Gernsback advertised the new magazine that he hoped to populate with these stories : Scientific Detective Monthly . 
 Gernsback believed that science fiction was educational , claiming , for example , that " teachers encourage the reading of this fiction because they know that it gives the pupil a fundamental knowledge of science and aviation " . He intended Scientific Detective Monthly to be a detective magazine in which the stories had a scientific background ; it would entertain , but also instruct . The subgenre of scientific detective fiction was not new ; it had first become popular in the U.S. between 1909 and 1919 , and the appearance of Gernsback 's magazine was part of a resurgence of popularity in the subgenre at the end of the 1920s . The first issue was dated January 1930 ( meaning it would have been on the newsstands in mid @-@ December 1929 ) . Gernsback was editor @-@ in @-@ chief , and had final say on the choice of stories , but the editorial work was done by his deputy , Hector Grey . 
 In February 1930 , an article by Gernsback appeared in Writers ' Digest titled " How to Write ' Science ' Stories " . In it , Gernsback offered advice on how to write stories for his new magazine , claiming that scientific detective stories represented the future of the genre , and that " the ordinary gangster and detective story will be relegated into the background in a very few years " . Science fiction historian Gary Westfahl comments that the article also serves as a guide to writing science fiction in general , and that the article is the first " how to " article published for the new genre of science fiction . 
 With the June issue , the title was changed to Amazing Detective Tales . Gernsback merged Science Wonder Stories and Air Wonder Stories into Wonder Stories at the same time ; he was concerned that the word " Science " was putting off some potential readers , who assumed that the magazine was , in his words , " a sort of scientific periodical " . It is likely that the same reasoning motivated Scientific Detective Monthly 's new title . In the following issue , Grey was replaced as editor by David Lasser , who was already editing Gernsback 's other sf titles , and an attempt was made to include more stories with science fiction elements . Gernsback continued the magazine for five issues under the new title ; the last issue was dated October 1930 . The decision to cease publication was apparently taken suddenly , as the October issue included the announcement that the format would change in November from large to standard pulp size , and listed two stories planned for the November issue . Gernsback sold the title to Wallace Bamber , who published at least five more issues , starting in February 1931 ; no issues are known for June or July 1931 , or after August . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The stories in Scientific Detective Monthly were almost always detective stories , but they were only occasionally science fiction , as in many cases the science appearing in the stories already had practical applications . In the first issue , for example , " The Mystery of the Bulawayo Diamond " , by Arthur B. Reeve , mentions unusual science , but the mystery is solved by use of a bolometer to detect a blush on the face of a black girl . The murderer in " The Campus Murder Mystery " , by Ralph W. Wilkins , freezes the body to conceal the manner of death ; a chemical catalyst and electrical measurements of palm sweat provide the scientific elements in two other stories in the same issue . The only genuine science fiction story in the first issue is " The Perfect Counterfeit " by Captain S.P. Meek , in which a matter duplicator has been used to counterfeit paper money . Van Dine 's Philo Vance novel , The Bishop Murder Case , began serialization in the first issue , which probably assisted sales , since the hardcover edition of the novel , which had appeared only a few months previously , had sold well . It was not science fiction , however , and throughout the magazine 's run , only one or two stories per issue include elements that would qualify them as science fiction . Mike Ashley , a historian of the field , suggests that Gernsback was more interested in stories about the science of detection than in imaginary science : most of Scientific Detective Monthly 's contents were gadget stories , of a kind which Gernsback had been publishing in his other magazines for some time . The cover for the first issue , by <unk> Ruger , showed a detective using an electronic device to measure the reactions of a suspect . 
 Later issues included stories by some writers who either were already well @-@ known to readers of science fiction or would soon become so , including Lloyd Arthur Eshbach , David H. Keller , Ed Earl Repp , Neil R. Jones , and Edmond Hamilton , though even these stories were not always science fiction . Hamilton 's " The Invisible Master " , for example , describes a way to become invisible , but at the end of the story the science is revealed to be a hoax , and the story is straightforward detective fiction . Clark Ashton Smith , later to be better known for his fantasy than for science fiction , contributed " Murder in the Fourth Dimension " to the October 1930 issue ; the protagonist uses the fourth dimension to dispose of his victim 's corpse . 
 As well as fiction , there were some non @-@ fiction departments , including readers ' letters ( even in the first issue — Gernsback obtained letters by advertising the magazine to readers who subscribed to his other magazines ) , book reviews , and miscellaneous crime or science @-@ related fillers . The first issue included a test of the readers ' powers of observation : it showed a crime scene , which the readers were supposed to study , and then posed questions to see how much they could remember of the details . There was also a questionnaire about science , which asked about scientific facts mentioned in the stories , and a " Science @-@ Crime Notes " section containing news items about science and crime . Gernsback 's editorial argued that science would eventually end crime , and suggested that both the police and criminals would make growing use of scientific innovations in the future . Gernsback included on the masthead the names of several experts on crime , such as Edwin Cooley , a professor of criminology at Fordham University ; he also listed members of his staff on the masthead with made @-@ up titles : C.P. Mason , a member of his editorial staff , was listed as " Scientific Criminologist " , for example . 
 After the sale , Bamber filled the magazine with ordinary detective fiction , including Edgar Wallace 's The Feathered Serpent . 
 The first few covers of the magazine did not advertise the names of the authors whose work was inside , which was probably a mistake as existing science fiction readers might have been attracted by the names of writers with whom they were familiar . Conversely , the readers who might have been interested in the more sedate topics covered by the non @-@ fiction were probably discouraged by the lurid cover artwork . Gernsback was unable to obtain enough fiction to make Scientific Detective Monthly a true mixture of the two genres , and the result was a magazine that failed to fully appeal to fans of either genre . It was , in sf historian Robert Lowndes ' words , a " fascinating experiment " , but a failed one . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Scientific Detective Monthly was published by Techni @-@ Craft Publishing Co. of New York for the first ten issues , and then by Fiction Publishers , Inc . , also of New York . The editor @-@ in @-@ chief was Hugo Gernsback for the first ten issues ; the managing editor was Hector Grey for the first six issues , and David Lasser for the next four . The editor for the 1931 issues is not known . The first volume contained ten numbers , the second contained four , and the last contained only one . The title changed to Amazing Detective Tales with the June 1930 issue , and again to Amazing Detective Stories in February 1931 . The magazine was in large pulp format throughout ; it was 96 pages long and priced at 25 cents . 
 = Cardinal @-@ nephew = 
 A cardinal @-@ nephew ( Latin : cardinalis nepos ; Italian : cardinale <unk> ; Spanish : <unk> de su <unk> ; French : prince de fortune ) is a cardinal elevated by a Pope who is that cardinal 's uncle , or , more generally , his relative . The practice of creating cardinal @-@ nephews originated in the Middle Ages , and reached its apex during the 16th and 17th centuries . The word nepotism originally referred specifically to this practice , when it appeared in the English language about 1669 . From the middle of the Avignon Papacy ( 1309 – 1377 ) until Pope Innocent XII 's anti @-@ nepotism bull ( a papal charter ) , Romanum decet pontificem ( 1692 ) , a pope without a cardinal @-@ nephew was the exception to the rule . Every Renaissance pope who created cardinals appointed a relative to the College of Cardinals , and the nephew was the most common choice , although one of Alexander VI 's creations was his own son . 
 The institution of the cardinal @-@ nephew evolved over seven centuries , tracking developments in the history of the papacy and the styles of individual Popes . From 1566 until 1692 , a cardinal @-@ nephew held the curial office of the Superintendent of the Ecclesiastical State , known as the Cardinal Nephew , and thus the terms are sometimes used interchangeably . The curial office of the Cardinal Nephew as well as the institution of the cardinal @-@ nephew declined as the power of the Cardinal Secretary of State increased and the temporal power of popes decreased in the 17th and 18th centuries . 
 The list of cardinal @-@ nephews includes at least fifteen , and possibly as many as nineteen popes ( Gregory IX , Alexander IV , Adrian V , Gregory XI , Boniface IX , Innocent VII , Eugene IV , Paul II , Alexander VI , Pius III , Julius II , Leo X , Clement VII , Benedict XIII , and Pius VII ; perhaps also John XIX and Benedict IX , if they were really promoted cardinals ; as well as Innocent III and Benedict XII , if in fact they were related to their elevators ) ; one antipope ( John XXIII ) ; and two or three saints ( Charles Borromeo , <unk> of Palestrina , and perhaps Anselm of Lucca , if he was really a cardinal ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Before 1566 = = = 
 The creation of cardinal @-@ nephews predates the hierarchical preeminence of cardinals within the Roman Catholic Church , which grew out of the 1059 decree of Pope Nicholas II , In nomine Domini , which established cardinal bishops as the sole electors of the Pope , with the consent of cardinal deacons and cardinal priests . The first known cardinal @-@ nephew is <unk> ( Latin : <unk> ) , <unk> , cousin of Pope Benedict VIII ( 1012 – 1024 ) , elected circa 1015 . Benedict VIII also elevated his brother Giovanni ( the future Pope John XIX ) and his cousin <unk> ( the future Pope Benedict IX ) as cardinal @-@ deacons . The first known cardinal @-@ nephew after 1059 is Anselm of Lucca , the nephew or brother of Pope Alexander II ( 1061 – 1073 ) , although until the end of 12th the majority of the alleged cases of such appointments are dubious , either because the relationship between the Pope and cardinal is not proven , or because the cardinalate of the papal kinsman is uncertain . However , it is beyond doubt that the promotions of papal relatives to the College of Cardinals were common in 13th century . 
 According to historian John <unk> , " by the Council of <unk> , Session 21 , the number of cardinals was not to be above 24 , and not any nephew of the Pope or of any cardinal was to be of that number . ( Session 23 . ) " 
 Pope Clement VI ( 1342 – 1352 ) created more cardinal @-@ nephews than any other pontiff , including six on September 20 , 1342 , the greatest number of cardinal @-@ nephews elevated at one time . The capitulation of the 1464 papal conclave limited the Pope it elected ( Pope Paul II ) to appointing one cardinal @-@ nephew , along with other conditions designed to increase the power of the College of Cardinals and reduce the Pope 's ability to dilute that power . 
 The Fifth Council of the Lateran declared in 1514 that the care of relatives was to be commended , and the creation of cardinal @-@ nephews was often recommended or justified based on the need to care for indigent family members . A cardinal @-@ nephew could usually expect profitable appointments ; for example , Alessandro Farnese , cardinal @-@ nephew of Pope Paul III ( 1534 – 1549 ) held 64 benefices simultaneously in addition to the vice @-@ chancellorship . 
 Pope Paul IV ( 1555 – 1559 ) , in his old age , was said to have " fallen almost completely under the cardinal @-@ nephew 's influence " ; Paul IV 's cardinal @-@ nephew , Carlo Carafa , was accused in August 1558 by a <unk> of seducing a Roman noble woman , <unk> de ' <unk> , who had come into possession of an inordinate amount of money and jewelry , but the accusations were dismissed by the pontiff . Saint Charles Borromeo , cardinal @-@ nephew of Pope Pius IV ( 1559 – 1565 ) , had ensured the subordination of the <unk> <unk> to the Cardinal Nephew , which came to be sometimes known as the <unk> maior . Pius IV was notorious for nepotism : between 1561 and 1565 he transferred more than 350 @,@ 000 scudi to his relatives . 
 = = = 1566 – 1692 = = = 
 Following the Council of Trent ( 1563 ) , Pope Pius V ( 1566 – 1572 ) drew up the terms for the office of the Superintendent of the Ecclesiastical State , who was to handle the temporal affairs of the Papal States and the foreign relations of the Holy See . After abortively attempting to divide the duties of the Superintendent between four non @-@ familial cardinals , Pius V acceded to the urgings of the College of Cardinals and his Spanish ambassador , and appointed his grandnephew , Michele Bonelli , as Superintendent , demarcating his duties with a papal bull of March 14 , 1566 . However , Pius V relentlessly avoided delegating any real autonomous power to Bonelli . 
 The Cardinal Nephew ( also called cardinale padrone or <unk> <unk> et <unk> status <unk> : " Superintendent of the Ecclesiastical State " , Italian : <unk> dello Stato <unk> ) was an official legate of the Roman Curia , approximately equivalent to the Cardinal Secretary of State , which absorbed its functions after the office of Cardinal Nephew was abolished in 1692 . The office has been likened by historians to a " prime minister " , " alter ego " , or " vice @-@ pope " . The Cardinal Nephew was generally among a Pope 's first cardinal creations , and his creature was traditionally accompanied by a salute from the guns of Castel Sant 'Angelo . 
 Following the Avignon Papacy , the Cardinal Nephew was responsible for the spiritual and temporal governance of the <unk> <unk> , where the Avignon Popes had resided ; in 1475 , Pope Sixtus IV raised the Diocese of Avignon to the rank of an archbishopric , to the benefit of his nephew Giuliano della Rovere . 
 The terms of the office of Cardinal Nephew were established by a papal brief developed and refined by Pius V 's successors to Paul V ( 1605 – 1621 ) . The Cardinal Nephew was also the correspondence liaison for all papal <unk> and gubernatorial legates , and the prefect for two congregations : the Consulta and the <unk> del <unk> <unk> . The Cardinal Nephew was also the captain @-@ general of the papal army and a " channel through which flowed benefices one way and gold the other " . 
 However , these formal functions only came into force during the pontificates of unusually weak Popes ; most Cardinal Nephews were the de facto rubber stamp of the pontiff himself . 
 Although Pope Leo XI ( 1605 ) died before he was able to elevate his nephew , Roberto Ubaldini , Ubaldini was elevated by Leo XI 's successor , Pope Paul V in 1615 . 
 Some historians consider Scipione Borghese , cardinal @-@ nephew to Pope Paul V , to be the " prototypical representative " of a cardinal @-@ nephew , unlike those before him , created to " provide for and oversee the permanent social and economic ascent of the reigning papal family into the ranks of the high Roman aristocracy " . For example , in 1616 , 24 of the 30 abbeys belonging to Borghese were rented out , a practice the Council of Trent had attempted to eliminate . A thorough financial analysis of Borghese 's cardinalate by Reinhard Volcker ( based on a series of extant account books ) examines the strategies Borghese used to build up wealth during his uncle 's pontificate and non @-@ ecclesiastical assets before his uncle 's death , which Volcker considers to be exemplary of Baroque papal families . It is estimated that Paul V Borghese had transferred to his family approximately 4 % of the total income of the Holy See during his pontificate . Borghese 's personal revenues in 1610 were 153 @,@ 000 scudi compared to the mere 4 @,@ 900 scudi that constituted his entire family 's income in 1592 . 
 Pope Gregory XIV ( 1590 – 1591 ) began the practice of creating cardinal @-@ nephews whose formal appointment coincided de facto with their nomination , and was thus separate from the ordinal process for creating cardinals , and , when he fell ill , he authorized his cardinal @-@ nephew , Paolo Emilio <unk> , to use the Fiat ut <unk> , a power which was later diminished at the urging of the College . Paul V issued a motu proprio on April 30 , 1618 , formally bestowing on his cardinal @-@ nephew the same authority Pope Clement VIII had given to Pietro Aldobrandini , beginning what historian <unk> @-@ <unk> calls " l <unk> classique ' " of nepotism . 
 Pope Gregory XV 's ( 1621 – 1623 ) cardinal @-@ nephew , Ludovico Ludovisi , the first cardinal @-@ nephew known as il cardinale padrone ( " the Cardinal boss " ) accumulated a vast array of benefices : the bishopric of Bologna , 23 abbeys , the directorship of the Apostolic Signatura , as well as the offices of the vice @-@ chancellor and high @-@ chamberlain , and was able to have most of them redistributed among 17 of his kinsmen upon his death . These benefices and offices netted Ludovisi more than 200 @,@ 000 scudi annually , and he is considered to have exercised " more unlimited authority " than any previous cardinal @-@ nephew . Notably , cardinal @-@ nephews were allowed to create <unk> <unk> to will the rewards of their benefices to secular family members . Gregory XV 's successor , Urban VIII ( 1623 – 1644 ) convened two special committees of theologians , both of whom endorsed this practice . 
 Not all Cardinal Nephews were cardinal @-@ nephews in the strictest sense . In fact , papal historian Valérie Pirie considers not having a nephew a " tremendous asset for a would @-@ be Pope " as it left the position open for an ally cardinal . For example , Pope Clement X gave the office to Cardinal <unk> @-@ Altieri , whose nephew had recently married Laura Caterina Altieri , the sole heiress of Clement X 's family . Many historians consider Olimpia Maidalchini , the sister @-@ in @-@ law of Pope Innocent X ( 1644 – 1655 ) , to have been a de facto Cardinal Nephew ; the position was formally held by her son , Camillo Pamphili , then her nephew , Francesco Maidalchini ( after Pamphili renounced his cardinalate in order to wed ) , and ( after Francesco proved incompetent ) Camillo <unk> , her cousin . 
 Popes often had only a few choices for the creation of a Cardinal Nephew . According to papal historian Frederic Baumgartner , Pope Sixtus V 's ( 1585 – 1590 ) reign " started badly " because Alessandro Peretti di Montalto was " his only nephew eligible for the office , but he could hardly serve the Pope as a trustworthy confidant " , causing several cardinals to refuse to attend his investiture . Another papal historian Ludwig von Pastor notes that " the misfortune of Pope <unk> was that the only person in his family who would have had the qualities necessary to fill such a position was a woman " . 
 Pope Innocent XI ( 1676 – 1689 ) despised the practice and only accepted his election as Pope after the College of Cardinals consented to his plans for reform , which included a ban on nepotism . However , Innocent XI backed down after thrice failing to achieve the support of the majority of his cardinals for a bull banning nepotism , which had been tediously composed between 1677 and 1686 . Innocent XI refused entreaties from within the papal court to bring his only nephew , Livio Odescalchi , the prince of <unk> , to Rome , although he did elevate Carlo Stefano Anastasio Ciceri , a distant relative , cardinal on September 2 , 1686 . Innocent XI 's successor , Pope Alexander VIII ( 1689 – 1691 ) , was the last Pope to create a Cardinal Nephew . Alexander VIII also undid another reform of Innocent XI by restoring the revenues of the former Chancery to the Vice @-@ Chancellor , who was , at the time , his cardinal @-@ nephew , Pietro <unk> . Edith Standen , a consultant to the Metropolitan Museum of Art , calls <unk> the " last and certainly not least magnificent example " of the " splendor of an extinct species , the Cardinal @-@ Nephew " . 
 Until 1692 ( and sometimes thereafter ) , the cardinal @-@ nephew ( or a lay nephew ) would be the chief archivist of the Pope , usually removing the archives to a family archive upon the death of the pontiff . In particular , the archival collections of the Barberini , Farnese , Chigi , and Borghese families contain important papal documents . 
 = = = Since 1692 = = = 
 Pope Innocent XII ( 1691 – 1700 ) issued a papal bull on June 22 , 1692 , Romanum decet pontificem , banning the office of Cardinal Nephew , limiting his successors to elevating only one cardinal relative , eliminating various sinecures traditionally reserved for cardinal @-@ nephews , and capping the stipend or endowment the nephew of a Pope could receive to 12 @,@ 000 scudi . Romanum decet pontificem was later incorporated into the Code of Canon Law of 1917 in canons 240 , 2 ; 1414 , 4 ; and 1432 , 1 . In 1694 , Innocent XII 's series of reforms was concluded with an expensive campaign to eliminate the " venality " of offices while reimbursing their current holders . These reforms are viewed by some scholars as a delayed reaction to the financial crisis created by the nepotism of Pope Urban VIII ( 1623 – 1644 ) . 
 However , even following Romanum decet pontificem , only three of the eight Popes of the 18th century failed to make a nephew or brother cardinal . The College of Cardinals apparently preferred rule by nephews than by favorites , which they perceived as the alternative ; for example , the College urged Pope Benedict XIII ( 1724 – 1730 ) to appoint a cardinal @-@ nephew , who they hoped would replace Benedict XIII 's notorious lieutenant Niccolò <unk> . Pope Gregory XIII ( 1572 – 1585 ) also had to be urged by key figures in the College to appoint his cardinal @-@ nephew : Filippo <unk> . 
 The cardinal @-@ nephews of the 18th century declined in influence as the power of the Cardinal Secretary of State increased . The church of Pope Benedict XIII ( 1724 – 1730 ) is described by historian Eamon Duffy as " all the evils of nepotism without the nephew " . Neri Maria Corsini , cardinal @-@ nephew of Pope Clement XII ( 1730 – 1740 ) was by far the most powerful cardinal @-@ nephew of the 18th century , on account of his uncle 's advanced age and blindness . However , Clement XII 's successor , Pope Benedict XIV ( 1740 – 1758 ) was described by Hugh Walpole as " a priest without indolence or interest , a prince without favorites , a Pope without nephews " . 
 Romualdo Braschi @-@ Onesti , cardinal @-@ nephew of Pius VI ( 1775 – 1799 ) , was the penultimate cardinal @-@ nephew . Despite Pius VI 's lineage to a noble Cesena family , his only sister had married a man from the poor Onesti family . Therefore , he commissioned a genealogist to discover ( and inflate ) some trace of nobility in the Onesti lineage , an endeavor which yielded only a circuitous connection to Saint Romualdo . 
 After the turbulent 1800 papal conclave , Pope Pius VII ( 1800 – 1823 ) shunned the institution of the cardinal @-@ nephew and instead relied on his Cardinal Secretary of State , Ercole <unk> . During the 19th century , the only nephew of a Pope created cardinal was Gabriele della Genga <unk> , nephew of Pope Leo XII , created cardinal by Pope Gregory XVI on February 1 , 1836 . Although the institutionalization of nepotism disappeared in the 18th century , " pietas " ( duty to family ) remained a theme of papal administration into the 20th century , although rarely with the overt intervention of a papal uncle . Following the example of Pius VI , Popes Leo XIII ( who elevated his brother , Giuseppe Pecci , cardinal on May 12 , 1879 ) and Pius XII ( 1939 – 1958 ) weakened the formal curial bureaucracy in favor of a parallel government , in which family members often figured prominently . The loss of temporal power over the Papal States ( de facto in 1870 with the " Roman Question " and de jure in 1929 with the Lateran Treaty ) also eliminated the structural conditions which had figured prominently in the family politics of earlier Popes . 
 = = Role in conclaves = = 
 Even into the 18th century , the cardinal @-@ nephew was a natural power broker at the conclave following his uncle 's death , as a figure whom cardinals desirous of continuing the status quo could rally around . In particular , the cardinal @-@ nephew often commanded the loyalty of his uncle 's creatures , whom he generally had a role in naming . For example , Alessandro Peretti di Montalto led his uncle 's creatures in the papal conclave of 1590 despite being only 21 . According to conclave historian Frederic Baumgartner , " the purpose of such appointments was ensuring that the Pope 's family would have power and influence for a much longer time than the brief period that a Pope could expect to reign " . A notable exception is Pope Gregory XV ( 1621 – 1623 ) who declined on his death bed the request of Ludovico Ludovisi to name more relatives to the College , saying he had " enough to account to God for the unworthy ones he had appointed " . 
 However , cardinal @-@ nephews were not guaranteed the leadership of their uncle 's creatures ; for example , in the papal conclave , 1621 , Scipione Borghese could count only twenty @-@ nine votes ( a fraction of his uncle 's fifty @-@ six cardinals ) , Pietro Aldobrandini controlled only nine ( of his uncle 's thirteen remaining cardinals ) , and Montalto only five of his uncle 's remaining cardinals . In fact , international rivalries sometimes overwhelmed family loyalties when cardinal @-@ nephews were relatively " poorly organized " . As Pope Innocent X ( 1644 – 1655 ) died with the office of Cardinal Nephew vacant his faction proved divided and leaderless in the conclave , although his sister @-@ in @-@ law Olimpia Maidalchini was invited to address the cardinals from within the enclosure , the only woman ever so honored . 
 <unk> al cardinal <unk> circa il modo come si <unk> <unk> una <unk> di <unk> con tutti i <unk> che <unk> <unk> per lo <unk> della sua <unk> ( " Instructions to the chief cardinal on how to create a faction of cardinals with all the requisites for the establishment of his grandeur " ) , discovered in the archive of the Santa Maria de <unk> offers advice to cardinal @-@ nephews for consolidating power within the College of Cardinals . Another text , the Ricordi <unk> da Gregorio XV al cardinale <unk> suo <unk> ( " Memoir addressed by Gregory XV to his Nephew Cardinal <unk> " ) offers advice for how to rise within the Curia . 
 An analysis of the five papal conclaves between 1605 and 1644 shows that cardinal @-@ nephews were generally unsuccessful in electing their chosen candidates , although the victor was usually a cardinal created by the deceased Pope . Crown @-@ cardinals in particular , when they deigned to travel to Rome for the conclave , tended to oppose the election of cardinal @-@ nephews , although they equally opposed the election of crown @-@ cardinals of other monarchs . In general , a cardinal @-@ nephew had to outlive one or more successors of his uncle to become regarded as papabile , both because of their youth and their tendency to be blamed for any unpopular papal policies of their uncles . 
 A papal election could bring a dramatic change of fortune for a cardinal @-@ nephew , often bringing the former favorites into conflict with the new Pope . For example , Prospero Colonna and Francisco de Borja were excommunicated , and Carlo Carafa was executed . The papal conclave , May 1605 , is one example of a conclave where a candidate ( Antonmaria Sauli ) was defeated because enough other cardinals were convinced of the need for " a Pope willing to punish the cardinal @-@ nephews for robbing the papacy " . A cardinal @-@ nephew was also a potential threat to any future pontiff ; for example , Ludovisi came to lead the opposition against Pope Urban VIII ( 1623 – 1644 ) , even talking about calling a council against the Pope ( which never occurred as Ludovisi died in 1632 ) because " no one else had the standing to confront Urban 's titanic temper " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Nepotism is a common feature in the history of governance , particularly in cultures where identity and loyalty are determined more at the level of the family than that of the nation @-@ state . The use of nephews , rather than direct descendants , is a product of the tradition of clerical celibacy within the Catholic Church , although hereditary descent from uncles to nephews is also seen in the patriarchate of the Assyrian Church of the East . 
 The creation of relatives and known @-@ allies as cardinals was only one way in which medieval and Renaissance Popes attempted to dilute the power of the College of Cardinals as an " ecclesiastical rival " and perpetuate their influence within the church after their death . The institution of the cardinal @-@ nephew had the effect both of enriching the Pope 's family with desirable benefices and of modernizing the administration of the papacy , by allowing the pontiff to rule through a proxy which was more easily deemed fallible when necessary and provided a formal distance between the person of the pontiff and the <unk> of pontifical affairs . 
 Gregorio <unk> 's Papal Nepotism , or the True Relation of the Reasons Which <unk> the Popes to make their Nephews Powerful ( 1667 ) is one example of contemporary criticism of the institution of the cardinal @-@ nephew ; <unk> holds the rare distinction of having all of his publications on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum ( " List of Prohibited Books " ) . The Catholic Encyclopedia of 1913 defended the institution of the cardinal @-@ nephew as a necessary countermeasure to the intrigue of the old Church . According to Francis A. Burkle @-@ Young , 15th century Popes in particular found it necessary to elevate their relatives to the College of Cardinals due to their distrust of the crown @-@ cardinals , Roman baronial families , and Italian princely families who also populated the college . According to Thomas Adolphus Trollope , a famed papal historian , " the evil wrought by them in and to the church has been well nigh fatal to it ; and it continued to increase until increasing danger warned the Pontiffs to abstain . The worst cardinals , providing , of course , the material for the worst Popes , have been for the most part cardinal nephews , the temptation to the creation of such having been rendered too great to be resisted by the exorbitant greatness of the power , dignity , and wealth attributed to the members of the Sacred College . The value of these great " prizes " was so enormous , that the " hat " became an object of ambition to princes , and it was the primary object with a long series of Popes to bestow it on their kinsmen . " 
 = = = Cardinal Secretary of State = = = 
 The curial office of Cardinal Secretary of State in many ways evolved from the roles formerly filled by cardinal @-@ nephews . From 1644 to 1692 , the power of the Cardinal Secretary of State was essentially inversely proportional to that of the Cardinal Nephew , to whom the Secretariat was subordinate . During some pontificates , for example that of Pope Pius V ( 1566 – 1572 ) and his nephew Michele Bonelli , the cardinal @-@ nephew and secretary of state were one and the same . 
 According to Baumgartner , " the rise of a centralized administration with professional bureaucrats with careers in the papal service " proved more effective than nepotism for future Popes and thus " greatly reduced the need for papal nephews " . The rise of the Cardinal Secretary of State was the " most obvious element of this new approach " . 
 = Gertie the Dinosaur = 
 Gertie the Dinosaur is a 1914 animated short film by American cartoonist and animator Winsor McCay . It is the earliest animated film to feature a dinosaur . McCay first used the film before live audiences as an interactive part of his vaudeville act ; the frisky , childlike Gertie did tricks at the command of her master . McCay 's employer William Randolph Hearst later curtailed McCay 's vaudeville activities , so McCay added a live @-@ action introductory sequence to the film for its theatrical release . McCay abandoned a sequel , Gertie on Tour ( c . 1921 ) , after producing about a minute of footage . 
 Although Gertie is popularly thought to be the earliest animated film , McCay had earlier made Little Nemo ( 1911 ) and How a Mosquito Operates ( 1912 ) . The American J. Stuart Blackton and the French Émile Cohl had experimented with animation even earlier ; Gertie being a character with an appealing personality distinguished McCay 's film from these earlier " trick films " . Gertie was the first film to use animation techniques such as <unk> , registration marks , tracing paper , the Mutoscope action viewer , and animation loops . It influenced the next generation of animators such as the Fleischer brothers , Otto Messmer , Paul Terry , and Walt Disney . John Randolph Bray unsuccessfully tried to patent many of McCay 's animation techniques and is said to have been behind a plagiarized version of Gertie that appeared a year or two after the original . Gertie is the best preserved of McCay 's films — some of which have been lost or survive only in fragments — and has been preserved in the US National Film Registry . 
 = = Background = = 
 Winsor McCay ( c . 1867 – 71 – 1934 ) had worked prolifically as a commercial artist and cartoonist by the time he started making newspaper comic strips such as Dream of the Rarebit Fiend ( 1904 – 11 ) and his signature strip Little Nemo ( 1905 – 14 ) . In 1906 , McCay began performing on the vaudeville circuit , doing chalk talks — performances in which he drew before live audiences . 
 Inspired by the flip books his son brought home , McCay " came to see the possibility of making moving pictures " of his cartoons . He claimed that he " was the first man in the world to make animated cartoons " , though he was preceded by the American James Stuart Blackton and the French Émile Cohl . McCay 's first film starred his Little Nemo characters and debuted in movie theatres in 1911 ; he soon incorporated it into his vaudeville act . He followed it in 1912 with How a Mosquito Operates , in which a giant , naturalistically animated mosquito sucks the blood of a sleeping man . McCay gave the mosquito a personality and balanced humor with the horror of the nightmare situation . His animation was criticized as being so lifelike that he must have traced the characters from photographs or resorted to tricks using wires ; to show that he had not , McCay chose a creature that could not have been photographed for his next film . 
 McCay conferred with the American Historical Society in 1912 , and announced plans for " the presentation of pictures showing the great monsters that used to inhabit the earth " . He spoke of the " serious and educational work " that the animation process could enable . McCay had earlier introduced dinosaurs into his comic strip work , such as a March 4 , 1905 , episode of Dream of the Rarebit Fiend in which a Brontosaurus skeleton took part in a horse race , and a May 25 , 1913 , Rarebit Fiend episode in which a hunter unsuccessfully targets a dinosaur ; the layout of the background to the latter bore a strong resemblance to what later appeared in Gertie . In the September 21 , 1913 , episode of McCay 's Little Nemo strip In the Land of Wonderful Dreams , titled " In the Land of the <unk> " , Nemo meets a blue dinosaur named Bessie which has the same design as that of Gertie . 
 McCay considered a number of names before settling on " Gertie " ; his production notebooks used " Jessie the <unk> " . Disney animator Paul Satterfield recalled hearing McCay in 1915 relate how he had chosen the name " Gertie " : 
 He heard a couple of " sweet boys " [ gay men ] out in the hall talking to each other , and one of them said , " Oh , Bertie , wait a minute ! " in a very sweet voice . He thought it was a good name , but wanted it to be a girl 's name instead of a boy 's , so he called it " Gertie " . 
 = = Content = = 
 Gertie the Dinosaur is the earliest animated film to feature a dinosaur . Its star Gertie does tricks much like a trained elephant . She is animated in a naturalistic style unprecedented for the time ; she breathes rhythmically , she shifts her weight as she moves , and her abdominal muscles undulate as she draws water . McCay imbued her with a personality — while friendly , she could be capricious , ignoring or rebelling against her master 's commands . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 When her master McCay calls her , the frisky , childlike Gertie appears from a cave . Her whip @-@ wielding master has her do tricks such as raising her foot or bowing on command . When she feels she has been pushed too far , she nips back at her master . She cries when he scolds her , and he placates her with a pumpkin . Throughout the act , prehistoric denizens such as a flying lizard continually distract Gertie . She tosses a mammoth in the lake ; when it teases her by spraying her with water , she hurls a boulder at it as it swims away . After she quenches her thirst by draining the lake , McCay has her carry him offstage while he bows to the audience . 
 = = Production = = 
 Gertie was McCay 's first piece of animation with detailed backgrounds . Main production began in mid @-@ 1913 . Working in his spare time , McCay drew thousands of frames of Gertie on 6 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ by @-@ 8 1 ⁄ 2 @-@ inch ( 17 cm × 22 cm ) sheets of rice paper , a medium good for drawing as it did not absorb ink , and as it was translucent it was ideal for the laborious retracing of backgrounds , a job that fell to art student neighbor John A. Fitzsimmons . The drawings themselves occupied a 6 @-@ by @-@ 8 @-@ inch ( 15 cm × 20 cm ) area of the paper , marked with registration marks in the corners to reduce <unk> of the images when filmed . They were photographed mounted on large pieces of stiff cardboard . 
 McCay was concerned with accurate timing and motion ; he timed his own breathing to determine the timing of Gertie 's breathing , and included subtle details such as the ground sagging beneath Gertie 's great weight . McCay consulted with New York museum staff to ensure the accuracy of Gertie 's movements ; the staff were unable to help him find out how an extinct animal would stand up from a lying position , so in a scene in which Gertie stood up , McCay had a flying lizard come on screen to draw away viewers ' attention . When the drawings were finished , they were photographed at Vitagraph Studios in early 1914 . 
 McCay pioneered the " McCay Split System " of <unk> animation , in which major poses or positions were drawn first and the intervening frames drawn after . This relieved tedium and improved the timing of the film 's actions . McCay was open about the techniques that he developed , and refused to patent his system , reportedly saying , " Any idiot that wants to make a couple of thousand drawings for a hundred feet of film is welcome to join the club . " During production of Gertie , he showed the details to a visitor who claimed to be writing an article about animation . The visitor was animator John Randolph Bray , who sued McCay in 1914 after taking advantage of McCay 's lapse to patent many of the techniques , including the use of registration marks , tracing paper , and the Mutoscope action viewer , and the cycling of drawings to create repetitive action . The suit was unsuccessful , and there is evidence that McCay may have countersued — he received royalty payments from Bray for licensing the techniques . 
 = = Release = = 
 Gertie the Dinosaur first appeared as part of McCay 's vaudeville act in early 1914 . It appeared in movie theaters in an edition with a live @-@ action prologue , distributed by William Fox 's Box Office Attractions Company from December 28 . Dinosaurs were still new to the public imagination at the time of Gertie 's release — a Brontosaurus skeleton was put on public display for the first time in 1905 . Advertisements reflected this by trying to educate audiences : " According to science this monster once ruled this planet ... Skeletons [ are ] now being unearthed measuring from 90 ft. to 160 ft. in length . An elephant should be a mouse beside Gertie . " 
 = = = Vaudeville = = = 
 McCay originally used a version of the film as part of his vaudeville act . The first performance was on February 8 , 1914 , in Chicago at the Palace Theater . McCay began the show making his customary live sketches , which he followed with How a Mosquito Operates . He then appeared on stage with a whip and lectured the audience on the making of animation . Standing to the right of the film screen , he introduced " the only dinosaur in captivity " . As the film started Gertie poked her head out of a cave , and McCay encouraged her to come forward . He reinforced the illusion with tricks such as tossing a cardboard apple at the screen , at which point he turned his back to the audience and pocketed the apple as it appeared in the film for Gertie to eat . For the finale , McCay walked offstage from where he " reappeared " in the film ; Gertie lifted up the animated McCay , placed him on her back , and walked away as McCay bowed to the audience . 
 The show soon moved to New York . Though reviews were positive , McCay 's employer at the New York American , newspaper magnate William Randolph Hearst , was displeased that his star cartoonist 's vaudeville schedule interrupted his work illustrating editorials . At Hearst 's orders , reviews of McCay 's shows disappeared from the American 's pages . Shortly after , Hearst refused to run paid advertisements from the Victoria Theater , where McCay performed in New York . On March 8 , Hearst announced a ban on artists in his employ from performing in vaudeville . McCay 's contract did not prohibit him from his vaudeville performances , but Hearst was able to pressure McCay and his agents to cancel bookings , and eventually McCay signed a new contract barring him from performing outside of greater New York . 
 = = = Movie theaters = = = 
 In November 1914 , film producer William Fox offered to market Gertie the Dinosaur to moving @-@ picture theaters for " spot cash and highest prices " . McCay accepted , and extended the film to include a live @-@ action prologue and intertitles to replace his stage patter . The film successfully traveled the country and had reached the west coast by December . 
 The live @-@ action sequence was likely shot on November 19 , 1914 . It features McCay with several of his friends , such as cartoonists George McManus and Tad Dorgan , writer Roy McCardell , and actor Tom Powers ; McCay 's son Robert had a cameo as a camera @-@ room assistant . McCay used a bet as a plot device , as he had previously in the Little Nemo film . 
 As the film opens , McCay and friends suffer a flat tire in front of the American Museum of Natural History . They enter the museum , and while viewing a Brontosaurus skeleton , McCay wagers a dinner that he can bring a dinosaur to life with his animation skills . The animation process and its " 10 @,@ 000 drawings , each a little different from the one preceding it " is put on display , with humorous scenes of mountains of paper , some of which an assistant drops . When the film is finished , the friends gather to view it in a restaurant . 
 = = McCay and animation after Gertie = = 
 McCay 's working method was laborious , and animators developed a number of methods to reduce the workload and speed production to meet the demand for animated films . Within a few years of Nemo 's release , Canadian Raoul Barré 's registration pegs combined with American Earl Hurd 's cel technology became near @-@ universal methods in animation studios . McCay used cel technology in his follow @-@ up to Gertie , The Sinking of the Lusitania ( 1918 ) . It was his most ambitious film at 25 @,@ 000 drawings , and took nearly two years to complete , but was not a commercial success . 
 McCay made six more films , though three of them were never made commercially available . After 1921 , McCay was made to give up animation when Hearst learned he devoted more of his time to animation than to his newspaper illustrations . Unexecuted ideas McCay had for animation projects included a collaboration with Jungle Imps author George Randolph Chester , a musical film called The Barnyard Band , and a film about the Americans ' role in World War I. 
 In 1927 , McCay attended a dinner in his honor in New York . After a considerable amount of drinking , McCay was introduced by animator Max Fleischer . McCay gave the gathered group of animators some technical advice , but when he felt the audience was not giving him attention , he berated them , saying , " Animation is an art . That is how I conceived it . But as I see , what you fellows have done with it , is making it into a trade . Not an art , but a trade . Bad Luck ! " That September he appeared on the radio at WNAC , and on November 2 Frank Craven interviewed him for The Evening Journal 's Woman 's Hour . During both appearances he complained about the state of contemporary animation . McCay died July 26 , 1934 , of a cerebral embolism . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Gertie pleased audiences and reviewers . It won the praise of drama critic Ashton Stevens in Chicago , where the act opened . On February 22 , 1914 , before Hearst had barred the New York American from mentioning McCay 's vaudeville work , a columnist in the paper called the act " a laugh from start to finish ... far funnier than his noted mosquito drawings " . On February 28 the New York Evening Journal called it " the greatest act in the history of motion picture cartoonists " . Émile Cohl praised McCay 's " admirably drawn " films , and Gertie in particular , after seeing them in New York before he returned to Europe . Upon its theatrical release , Variety magazine wrote the film had " plenty of comedy throughout " and that it would " always be remarked upon as exceptionally clever " . 
 A fake version of Gertie the Dinosaur appeared a year or two after the original ; it features a dinosaur performing most of Gertie 's tricks , but with less skillful animation , using cels on a static background . It is not known for certain who produced the film , though its style is believed to be that of Bray Productions . Filmmaker Buster Keaton rode the back of a clay @-@ animated dinosaur in homage to Gertie in Three Ages ( 1923 ) . 
 McCay 's first three films were the earliest animated works to have a commercial impact ; their success motivated film studios to join in the infant animation industry . Other studios used McCay 's combination of live action with animation , such as the Fleischer Studios series Out of the Inkwell ( 1918 – 1929 ) and Walt Disney 's Alice Comedies series ( 1923 – 1927 ) . McCay 's clean @-@ line , high @-@ contrast , realistic style set the pattern for American animation to come , and set it apart from the abstract , open forms of animation in Europe . This legacy is most apparent in the feature films of the Walt Disney Animation Studios , for example in Fantasia ( 1940 ) , which included anthropomorphic dinosaurs animated in a naturalistic style , with careful attention to timing and weight . Shamus Culhane , Dave and Max Fleischer , Walter Lantz , Otto Messmer , Pat Sullivan , Paul Terry , and Bill Tytla were among the generation of American animators who drew inspiration from the films they saw in McCay 's vaudeville act . Gertie 's reputation was such that animation histories long named it as the first animated film . 
 Around 1921 , McCay worked on a second animated film featuring Gertie , titled Gertie on Tour . The film was to have Gertie bouncing on the Brooklyn Bridge in New York , attempting to eat the Washington Monument in Washington , D.C. , wading in on the Atlantic City shore , and other scenes . The film exists only in concept sketches and in one minute of film footage in which Gertie plays with a trolley and dances before other dinosaurs . 
 Since his death , McCay 's original artwork has been poorly preserved ; much was destroyed in a late @-@ 1930s house fire , and more was sold off when the McCays needed money . About 400 original drawings from the film have been preserved , discovered by animator Robert Brotherton in disarray in the fabric shop of Irving Mendelsohn , into whose care McCay 's films and artwork had been entrusted in the 1940s . Besides some cels from The Sinking of the Lusitania , these Gertie drawings are the only original animation artwork of McCay 's to have survived . McCay destroyed many of his original cans of film to create more storage space . Of what he kept , much has not survived , as it was photographed on 35mm nitrate film , which deteriorates and is highly flammable in storage . A pair of young animators discovered the film in 1947 and preserved what they could . In many cases only fragments could be saved , if anything at all . Of all of McCay 's films , Gertie is the best preserved . Mendelsohn and Brotherton tried fruitlessly to find an institution to store McCay 's films until the Canadian film conservatory the Cinémathèque québécoise approached them in 1967 on the occasion of that year 's World Animation Film Exposition in Montreal . The Cinémathèque québécoise has since curated McCay 's films . Of the surviving drawings , fifteen have been determined not to appear in extant copies of the film . They appear to come from a single sequence , likely at the close of the film , and have Gertie showing her head from the audience 's right and giving a bow . 
 McCay 's son Robert unsuccessfully attempted to revive Gertie with a comic strip called Dino . He and Disney animator Richard Huemer recreated the original vaudeville performance for the Disneyland television program in 1955 ; this was the first exposure the film had for that generation . Walt Disney expressed to the younger McCay his feeling of debt , and gestured to the Disney studios saying , " Bob , all this should be your father 's . " An ice cream shop in the shape of Gertie sits by Echo Lake in Disney 's Hollywood Studios in Walt Disney World . 
 New York Times film critic Richard Eder , on seeing a retrospective of McCay 's animation at the Whitney Museum of American Art in 1975 , wrote of Gertie that " Disney ... struggled mightily to recapture " the qualities in McCay 's animation , but that " Disney 's magic , though sometimes scary , was always contained ; McCay 's approached necromancy " . Eder compared McCay 's artistic vision to that of poet William Blake 's , saying " it was too strange and personal to be generalized or to have any children " . 
 Gertie has been written about in hundreds of books and articles . Animation historian Donald Crafton called Gertie " the enduring masterpiece of pre @-@ Disney animation " . Brothers Simon and Kim Deitch loosely based their graphic novel The Boulevard of Broken Dreams ( 2002 ) on McCay 's disillusionment with the animation industry in the 1920s . The story features an aged cartoonist named Winsor Newton , who in his younger years had a Gertie @-@ like stage act featuring a mastodon named Milton . Gertie has been selected for preservation in the US National Film Registry . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals and magazines = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = BR Standard Class 8 = 
 The BR Standard Class 8 was a class of 4 @-@ 6 @-@ 2 Pacific steam locomotive designed by Robert Riddles for use by British Railways . Only the prototype was constructed , which was named Duke of Gloucester . Constructed at Crewe Works in 1954 , the Duke , as it is popularly known , was a replacement for the destroyed Princess Royal Class locomotive number <unk> Princess Anne , which was involved in the Harrow and Wealdstone rail disaster of 1952 . 
 The Duke was based on the BR Standard Class 7 Britannia design . It incorporated three sets of modified Caprotti valve gear , relatively new to British locomotive engineering and more efficient than Walschaerts or Stephenson valve gear . The Duke was regarded as a failure by locomotive crews due to its poor steaming characteristics and its heavy fuel consumption . Trials undertaken by British Railways also returned negative feedback , reporting problems with the poor draughting of the locomotive which resulted in difficulty adhering to the timetables . 
 The result was an operational period of only eight years . This unique locomotive was saved from being scrapped at Woodham Brothers scrapyard in Barry , Vale of Glamorgan , South Wales when it was purchased by a group of railway enthusiasts who restored it from scrapyard to as @-@ built condition in 13 years . Since then , modifications have been made to the original design , resulting in one of the most efficient and powerful steam locomotives ever to run in Britain . As a result , the Duke of Gloucester can frequently be seen on the mainline around Britain . 
 = = Background = = 
 Riddles had frequently argued the case for the inclusion of a Standard Class 8 Pacific into the standard range of locomotives being introduced by British Railways . However , these proposals were rejected by the Railway Executive on the grounds of cost in attempting to develop a form of steam motive power that was not necessarily required for use on Britain 's railways , as there were enough class 8 locomotives already available for use . However , opportunity came out of adversity when the short @-@ lived rebuild of The <unk> , <unk> Princess Anne , was destroyed in the Harrow and Wealdstone rail disaster of 1952 . A gap now existed in the roster for locomotives with 8P power classification , of which the demand was high for the efficient operation of heavy expresses on the West Coast Main Line between London Euston and Scotland . This presented Riddles with the perfect opportunity to press the case for his new design , a prototype of which was duly authorised for construction . 
 = = Design details = = 
 At first , Riddles wished to develop an enlarged version of his Standard Class 7 Britannias , as the design still featured a two @-@ cylinder layout . However , the size of the cylinders in order to achieve the 8P power classification would have put the design over the British loading gauge limit and so a reluctant reversion to the three @-@ cylinder layout ensued . This reluctance was born from experience with the Gresley Pacifics , whose conjugated valve gear was difficult to maintain due to the location of the middle cylinder between the frames . Therefore , an alternative type of valve gear had to be found . 
 The valve gear that was settled upon was a modified form of Caprotti valve gear , the novel rotary cam @-@ driven British Caprotti valve gear developed by Heenan & Froude with poppet valves . This was based on Italian locomotive practice and allowed precise control of steam admission to the cylinders while improving exhaust flow and boiler draughting characteristics when compared to the more conventional Walschaerts and Stephenson valve gear . On paper this created a free @-@ steaming , hard @-@ working locomotive capable of hauling heavy loads over long distances but , in practice , fundamental design errors and undetected deviations from the drawings made during construction combined to prevent the locomotive from achieving its expected performance during British Railways ownership . 
 The main problem was known even when the locomotive was under construction , as Mr. L.T. Daniels , the representative of the British Caprotti company , recommended the use of the Kylchap blastpipe , which could have coped with the fierce exhaust blasts experienced with the Caprotti system . A standard double chimney of the Swindon type had already been fabricated in order to cut costs and it had been installed in the smokebox supposedly before Riddles could do anything about it . As a result , the locomotive suffered due to the choke area of both chimney and blastpipe being much too small for the pressure created by the exhaust , leading to poor draughting . Further problems regarding the firebox of the locomotive were only discovered during restoration , including a poorly dimensioned <unk> and dampers that were again too small , strangling the fire of air when operating at speed . Further , British Railways " Modernization Plan " was already under development concurrent with the construction of 71000 raising other questions . 
 Following experience of occasional cracks appearing near the spring brackets of the Britannias and Clans , a substantial rearrangement took place in this area that resulted in the locomotive riding on three cast steel " sub @-@ frames " carrying the ten front @-@ most spring brackets and lengthened spring brackets behind the rear driven axle . ( Perhaps remarkably , these were not integrated into a cast combined sub @-@ frame / pony truck pivot stretcher , the pony truck pivot stretcher being a fabrication . ) Had the planned batch of further smaller Pacifics been built , they would have been fitted with this arrangement . 
 = = Construction history = = 
 The opportunity to create an entire batch of locomotives within the 8P category was declined by the Railway Executive . It had been said this was because the design process had been highly expensive and complex , so that when the locomotive emerged from Crewe Works in 1954 , such thoughts had to be precluded , especially with the advent of the 1955 Modernisation Plan . As a result , 71000 remained the solitary member of a proposed class of Standard 8P locomotives . 
 = = = Naming the locomotive = = = 
 Upon emerging from Crewe Works in 1954 , the locomotive was named Duke of Gloucester prior to entering revenue @-@ earning service . Had further locomotives been constructed , they would have belonged to the Duke Class , standing alongside the sister locomotives of the Britannia and Clan Classes . Since then , the locomotive has colloquially been referred to by steam enthusiasts and crews as the Duke . 
 = = Operational details = = 
 The Duke was highly unpopular with crews , who regarded it as something of a liability due to its poor steam production . <unk> caused by the aforementioned problems regarding the draughting abilities and firebox design meant that no further examples were constructed . The fact that no effort was made to rectify these problems indicates the change in policy regarding steam locomotives , with the Modernisation Plan entering circulation as the " Duke " entered service . Based for its entire working life at Crewe North depot , the locomotive was utilised in hauling boat trains on the undemanding North Wales Coast Line between Crewe and Holyhead . All of this culminated in the locomotive having a short service life of only eight years , being withdrawn from service in 1962 . The reputation of the locomotive amongst its crews as being a poor steamer was eventually to disappear – but only after it was rescued from the scrapyard during 1974 . 
 = = Livery and numbering = = 
 The livery of the " Duke " was a continuation of the British Railways standard class practice . The class was given the power classification 8P . Following on from the ' Britannias ' , the " Duke " was numbered under the British Railways standard numbering system in the <unk> series . The " Duke " was given the number 71000 , and featured brass nameplates with a black background , located on the smoke deflectors . 
 = = Preservation = = 
 After withdrawal , the " Duke " was initially selected for the National Collection , though it was later decided that only the cylinder arrangement was of interest . One of the outside cylinders was removed for display at the Science Museum ; the other was removed to restore balance in readiness for scrapping . The locomotive was purchased by Dai Woodham , though it was initially sent to the wrong scrapyard . After retrieval , the " Duke " languished for many years in Woodham Brothers scrapyard at Barry Island , South Wales , before enthusiasts purchased the locomotive in 1974 , forming the Duke of Gloucester Steam Locomotive Trust . Restoration began in earnest , though with many components missing , the most expensive of which being the Caprotti valve gear , it took 13 years of effort on the part of enthusiasts , with assistance in the guise of sponsorships from industry , to return the locomotive to near as @-@ built condition . One of the very few compromises made was replacing the previous steel cylinders with spheroidal graphite iron . 
 Two significant construction errors were discovered during restoration : 
 The chimney was too small compared with other locomotives of similar size , resulting in poor boiler draughting at times of high steam demand . 
 The <unk> ( grate ) air inlet dampers had not been built to the drawings ; they were too small , resulting in poor air supply and inefficient combustion . 
 These errors were corrected and the opportunity taken to incorporate some other improvements , including the previously recommended Kylchap exhaust system , which has finally unlocked the locomotive 's true potential as a powerful express passenger locomotive . When the " Duke " was first allowed to haul a full load on the main line , it became immediately obvious that the boiler was now producing steam at a more efficient rate and that the reborn " Duke " was unrecognisable from the failure that was experienced under British Railways ownership With these modifications , the " Duke " is now one of the most powerful steam locomotives ever to run on Britain 's railways , past or present ( the LMS Coronation Class Pacifics held that title under British Railways auspices . The three cylinder " Duke " never actually achieved the 3000 cylinder horse power figure that was recorded by the four cylinder Princess Coronation Class ) ; ironically , it is now more powerful than the English Electric Type 4 diesel locomotives which replaced it in service . The locomotive can now be regularly seen hauling enthusiasts ' special trains around the country . 
 In preservation , the " Duke " had held an impeccable operational record for reliability ; however on 9 June 2007 , the engine operated a railtour from Preston to Carlisle returning via Settle , where , for operational reasons , the locomotive 's start position was changed to Carnforth . Little over 30 miles ( 48 km ) into the journey , the locomotive was stopped at Penrith with leaking tubes in the firebox and removed from the train . The engine was then withdrawn for overhaul before a return to service in January 2008 . As the locomotive now bears little mechanical resemblance to that which operated under British Railways , it has also been used as a test bed , incorporating several other modifications and innovations . These are intended to investigate how much further the locomotive 's performance can be enhanced , therefore raising speculation surrounding the capabilities of an entire batch of Standard class 8 " Pacifics " had history been different . 
 = = Models = = 
 On 17 December 2012 Hornby announced that in their 2013 product range they will make 71000 Duke of Gloucester in BR Brunswick Green . This model was released in late 2013 and has been praised in reviews by both Hornby and Model Rail Magazines . 
 The only well documented construction of working live steam scale Duke of Gloucester models in Model Engineer magazine was by Denis Evans of Blackpool in England . Beginning in the 1966 , and using original British Railways and Associated Locomotive Equipment ( a subsidiary of Heenan & Froude ) drawings , Denis built three Dukes each complete with fully working Caprotti valve gear , first in 7 ¼ inch gauge , and then 5 and 3 ½ inch gauges . The 7 ¼ inch gauge Duke won multiple awards at the 48th Model Engineer Exhibition in 1979 , as did his 3 ½ inch gauge locomotive at the 61st Model Engineer Exhibition in 1992 . 
 = The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold = 
 The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold is a novel by the British writer Evelyn Waugh , first published in July 1957 . It is Waugh 's penultimate full @-@ length work of fiction , which the author called his " mad book " — a largely autobiographical account of a period of mental illness that he experienced in the early months of 1954 , recounted through his protagonist Gilbert Pinfold . 
 Waugh 's health in the winter of 1953 – 54 was indifferent , and he was beset with various personal anxieties that were stifling his ability to work . He was also in the grip of a serious drug addiction . In search of a peaceful environment in which he could resume writing , he embarked on a sea voyage to Ceylon , but was driven to the point of madness by imagined voices that assailed him throughout the voyage . These experiences are mirrored in the novel by those of Pinfold , a successful writer in the Waugh mould who , as an antidote to his lassitude and chronic insomnia , is dosing himself with a mixture of barbiturates and alcohol . This cocktail brings about a series of hallucinatory episodes during a sea voyage taken by Pinfold for the sake of his health ; he hears voices that insult , taunt and threaten him . Believing that his life may be in danger he leaves the ship , but his unseen tormentors follow him . After medical treatment on his return home he is advised that the voices were imaginary , the product of his excessive drug @-@ taking . However , Pinfold ascribes his rapid cure not to the cessation of his drug habit but to a private victory over the forces of evil . 
 On the book 's publication , Waugh 's friends praised it , but its general critical reception was muted . Most reviewers admired the self @-@ portrait of Waugh with which the novel opens , but expressed divided views about the rest , in particular the ending . Commentators have debated whether the novel provides a real @-@ life depiction of Waugh , or if it represents the exaggerated persona that he cultivated as a means of preserving his privacy . The book has been dramatised for radio and as a stage play . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Gilbert Pinfold is a reputable English novelist who at the age of 50 can look back on a varied life that has included a dozen reasonably successful books , wide travel , and honourable service in the Second World War . His reputation secure , he lives quietly , on good but not close terms with his neighbours ; his Roman Catholicism sets him slightly apart in the local community . He has a pronounced distaste for most aspects of modern life , and has of late become somewhat lazy , given to drinking more than he should . To counter the effects of his several aches and pains , Pinfold has taken to dosing himself with a powerful sedative of chloral and bromide . He conceals this practice from his doctor . 
 Pinfold is very protective of his privacy , but uncharacteristically agrees to be interviewed on BBC radio . The main inquisitor is a man named Angel , who is civil enough , yet something about his voice and manner <unk> Pinfold , who detects a veiled malicious intent . In the weeks that follow , Pinfold broods on the incident . The encroaching winter depresses him further ; he decides to escape by taking a cruise , and secures passage on the SS Caliban , bound for Ceylon . As the voyage proceeds , Pinfold finds that sounds and conversations from other parts of the ship are somehow being transmitted into his cabin . At first this is a mild annoyance , but when he catches the sound of his own name in conversation , he realises he is being talked about . Amid an increasingly bizarre series of overheard incidents , the personal remarks become progressively more insulting , and then directly threatening . Pinfold perceives that his main tormentors are a man and a woman , whose vicious words are balanced by those of a provocative and amorous younger woman , Margaret . He is convinced that the man is the BBC interviewer Angel , using his technical knowledge to broadcast the voices . Pinfold spends sleepless nights , awaiting either the promised physical attacks or a seductive visit from Margaret . 
 To escape his persecutors Pinfold disembarks at Alexandria and flies on to Colombo , but the voices pursue him . Pinfold has now reconciled himself to their presence and is able to ignore them , or even converse rationally with them . After a brief stay in Colombo he returns to England . On the flight home he is told by " Angel " that the whole episode was a scientific experiment that got out of hand ; if Pinfold will keep silent about his experiences , he is told , he will never be bothered by the voices again . Pinfold refuses , declaring Angel a menace that must be exposed . The voices grow fainter ; back in England and reunited with his wife , Pinfold hears Margaret faintly say : " I don 't exist , but I do love you " , before the voices disappear . Pinfold 's doctor tells him that the voices were imagined , a result of his drug addiction , but he thinks differently . Believing that he has won a significant battle over his personal demons , he begins to write an account of his experiences : " The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Evelyn Waugh 's professional and private circumstances , in the years after the Second World War , prefigured those of his fictional counterpart Pinfold . Before the war he had established himself as a writer , mainly of light satirical fiction . His wartime experiences , including service in the Royal Marines and the Royal Horse Guards , changed his personal and literary outlook , and put him into what his biographer David Wykes describes as " a mood of introspection ... that endured to the end of his career " . Despite occasional reversions to his former style , in general Waugh 's post @-@ war fiction aspired to a more serious purpose . In an essay published in Life magazine in April 1946 , he wrote : " In my future books there will be two things to make them unpopular : a preoccupation with style and the attempt to represent man more fully , which , to me , means only one thing , man in his relation to God . " The commercial success of Brideshead Revisited , published in 1945 , provided Waugh with the financial means to pursue his writing career in a leisurely fashion . He worked intermittently on his novel Helena for five years , while completing shorter projects and carrying out much unpaid work , particularly for Catholic organisations . In a marked change from his pre @-@ war life , he ceased to socialise and became increasingly concerned to protect his privacy . To this end he adopted an overtly hostile persona as a defence mechanism , to repel the outside world . 
 By the early 1950s Waugh was troubled on a number of fronts . He was afflicted with writer 's block , and was unable to make progress with his current novel , the second in his Sword of Honour trilogy . He had financial worries , a legacy of his free @-@ spending post @-@ war habits combined with accumulated tax liabilities and a lack of remunerative productivity . His general health was poor ; he suffered from toothache , sciatica and rheumatism , and his memory was faulty . He was also drinking heavily , the effects of which were aggravated by a large intake of chloral and bromide washed down with crème de <unk> — a treatment for insomnia that he concealed from his doctors . 
 A shortage of cash was the principal reason why , in 1953 , Waugh agreed to be interviewed on radio by the BBC , first in the Overseas Service 's Personal Call programme and then in the Frankly Speaking series . The second of these was broadcast on the BBC Home Service on 16 November 1953 . Most of Waugh 's friends thought he had acquitted himself well , and he was mildly pleased with the result , writing to Nancy Mitford that " they tried to make a fool of me and I don 't think they entirely succeeded " . Nevertheless , the broadcasts preyed on Waugh 's mind ; he saw hostility in the attitudes of his interlocutors , a point noted by his 13 @-@ year @-@ old son Auberon Waugh , who later wrote that the interviews " drove my father mad " . 
 In January 1954 Waugh sailed on the SS Staffordshire , bound for Ceylon . He hoped on the voyage to find the peace that would enable him to finish his stalled book . On board , his strange behaviour became an increasing concern to his fellow @-@ passengers , and the letters which he wrote to his wife Laura from the ship alarmed her — Waugh appeared to be in the grip of a persecution mania in which he was beset by threatening , malevolent voices . He left the ship at Alexandria and flew on to Ceylon , but the voices continued to harass him . He wrote to Laura : " Everything I say or think or read is read aloud by the group of psychologists whom I met in the ship ... the artful creatures can communicate from many hundreds of miles away " . Laura arranged for her friend Jack Donaldson to fly out with her to Colombo to bring Waugh home , but before they could do so Waugh returned to London of his own volition . There he was persuaded by his friend , the Jesuit priest Philip Caraman , to accept treatment from Eric Strauss , the head of psychiatry at St Bartholomew 's Hospital . Strauss quickly diagnosed that Waugh 's delusions arose from the concoction of drugs to which he had become addicted , and substituted paraldehyde for chloral . The hallucinations disappeared immediately , and Waugh recovered his senses . 
 = = Writing history = = 
 Christopher Sykes , Waugh 's friend and first biographer , believes that during his sessions with Strauss Waugh may have discussed the idea of writing a fictional account of his hallucinatory experiences . He may have prepared a brief draft , but if so this has not come to light . In the three months following his return to his home , Piers Court at Stinchcombe in Gloucestershire , Waugh was inactive ; when he resumed work his first task was to complete his Sword of Honour novel , Officers and Gentlemen , which occupied him for most of the rest of 1954 . In late December or early January 1955 he left for Jamaica for his usual winter in the sunshine , and began work on his new novel there . He chose the name " Pinfold " for his protagonist , after a recusant family that had once owned Piers Court . 
 Waugh worked on the Pinfold novel intermittently during the next two years . After his return from Jamaica he set the book aside , confining his writing to journalism and occasional prefaces — " neat little literary jobs " . There is no mention of Pinfold in his diary or in letters . Waugh 's biographer Martin Stannard describes Waugh at this time as physically lazy , unable to harness his still considerable mental energies — the diary entry for 12 July 1955 notes the pattern of his days : " the morning post , the newspaper , the crossword , gin " . Waugh 's longstanding feud with the Beaverbrook press preoccupied him , particularly after an uninvited visit to Piers Court by the Daily Express journalist Nancy Spain in June , that left Waugh " tremulous with rage " . In March 1956 Spain attacked Waugh in an Express article , after which he began a libel action against her and her paper . Meanwhile , preparations for his daughter Teresa 's coming @-@ out ball provided a further hindrance to progress on the novel . It is not until 11 September 1956 that his diary records : " I have resumed work on Pinfold " . Soon after , he was writing 1 @,@ 000 words a day — on 26 September he told his friend Ann Fleming that " the mad book is going to be very funny I believe " . A week later he asked his friend Daphne Fielding for permission to dedicate the book to her . 
 Waugh had decided in the summer of 1955 that he would sell Piers Court . By October 1956 the sale had been completed and he had acquired a new home in the Somerset village of Combe Florey . While the chaos of the move went on around him , Waugh worked on the novel ; in November he moved to his pre @-@ war <unk> , the Easton Court Hotel at Chagford , where he hoped to finish the book . As the date for the libel case against Nancy Spain and the Express approached , Waugh was involved in a second libel action , against the author and journalist Rebecca West and Pan Books , an additional distraction that delayed the novel 's completion . In January 1957 Waugh rewrote the ending , creating a circularity with a return to the words that introduce the novel , and also gave the book its subtitle , " A Conversation Piece " . Waugh did not explain his choice of wording for the subtitle , but David Wykes in his literary biography believes it is an ironic reference to the traditional British paintings of families and friends in social gatherings ; in this case the " conversation " is with enemies , not friends . The main title is an echo of George Meredith 's Victorian novel The Ordeal of Richard <unk> . By the end of January 1957 the book was in the publishers ' hands . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Autobiography = = = 
 Waugh confirmed the autobiographical basis for the novel on several occasions ; at the book 's launch on 19 July 1957 , to Robert Henriques in a letter of 15 August 1957 ( " Mr Pinfold 's experiences were almost exactly my own . " ) , and to John Freeman in a Face to Face television interview in 1960 . As well as the congruence with real life of specific incidents in the book , Pinfold 's age and his domestic and professional circumstances as revealed in the first chapter closely mirror Waugh 's . The fictional counterpart shares Waugh 's <unk> to modern life ; he hates " plastic , Picasso , sunbathing and jazz — everything , in fact , that had happened in his own lifetime " . Pinfold expresses the same attitude towards his books — " objects that he had made , things quite external to himself " — that Waugh had demonstrated in the second of his 1953 radio interviews . 
 The BBC interviewer Stephen Black appears in the novel as " Angel " , and other associates of Waugh make brief appearances . The poet John Betjeman is represented as " James Lance " , Waugh 's priest Philip Caraman is " Father Westmacott " , and Christopher Sykes is " Roger Stillingfleet " . In his biography Sykes maintains that the depiction of Mrs Pinfold does not represent Laura Waugh to any degree — " not the glimmer of a resemblance " . The name " Margaret " , awarded to Pinfold 's gentler tormentor , was that of Waugh 's second daughter for whom , he wrote to Ann Fleming in September 1952 , he had developed a sexual passion . When cured of his hallucinations , Waugh confided to Nancy Mitford that his " unhealthy affection " for his daughter Margaret had disappeared . 
 Pinfold 's adopted defensive persona , " a combination of eccentric don and testy colonel " , was the same that Waugh cultivated to keep the world at bay . Pinfold adheres to an outmoded form of Toryism , does not vote , and expresses outrageous views , part @-@ facetiously . Pinfold was " absurd to many but to some rather formidable " . After Waugh 's death , Nancy Mitford confirmed the essentially mocking nature of Waugh 's persona : " What nobody remembers about Evelyn is that everything with him was jokes . Everything " . While Waugh 's biographer Selena Hastings describes Pinfold as " an accurate and revealing self @-@ portrait " , Stannard suggests that it is primarily an analysis of the adopted persona in which , like Pinfold , Waugh " gives nothing away " . 
 = = = Paranormal = = = 
 Among Waugh 's neighbours in Stinchcombe was Diana <unk> , known in the Waugh family as " Tanker " . She was an organiser of local music festivals , and the possessor of a contraption known as " the Box " . This device was reputed to cure all ills , by means of " sympathetic life @-@ waves " working on some physical part of the victim — hairs , nail @-@ clippings , or a drop of blood . Waugh himself was generally sceptical , even scornful of these powers , but some of his acquaintances claimed to have been cured by the Box , as apparently had one of Laura Waugh 's cows . In letters to Laura from Cairo and Colombo , Waugh ascribed the voices he was hearing to the power of the Box , and instructs Laura to tell " Tanker " that he now believes in it . 
 In the novel , Pinfold initially dismisses the Box — described as resembling " a makeshift wireless set " — as " a lot of harmless nonsense " , but , like Waugh , he is driven to revise his position in the face of his persecution by the voices . He believes that " Angel " is using an adapted form of the Box , as developed by the Germans at the end of the war and perfected by the " <unk> " in Paris — " a hellish invention in the wrong hands " . At the end of his ordeal Pinfold muses that had he not defied Angel but instead compromised with him , he might have continued to believe in the Box 's sinister capabilities . He is finally convinced of the non @-@ existence of a box with such powers by the assurances of his priest , Father Westmacott . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 In contrast with Waugh 's other late full @-@ length fiction , religious themes are not prominent in Pinfold . As with earlier novels , the " Catholic gentleman " is subject to a degree of ridicule and mockery ; the voices speculate that Pinfold is Jewish , that his real name is " <unk> " and that his professed Catholicism is mere humbug invented to ingratiate himself with the aristocracy . Otherwise , Waugh uses the self @-@ revelatory opening chapter of the novel to attribute to Pinfold his own traditional Roman Catholic beliefs . Pinfold is a convert , received into the Church in early manhood on the basis of a " calm acceptance of the propositions of his faith " , rather than through than a dramatic or emotional event . While the Church was encouraging its adherents to engage with society and political institutions , Pinfold , like Waugh , " burrowed ever deeper into the rock , [ holding himself ] aloof from the multifarious organisations which have sprung into being at the summons of the hierarchy to redeem the times " . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 In an undated postcard ( probably late 1956 ) to John McDougall of Chapman & Hall , Waugh 's publishers , Waugh asks that McDougall seek permission from Francis Bacon to use one of the artist 's works as an image on the dust @-@ jacket of the new novel . Jacobs considers this a " startling " request , given Waugh 's known antipathy to modern art . Waugh probably had in mind one of Bacon 's heads from the series generally referred to as the " screaming popes " — perhaps Head VI , which Waugh may have seen at Bacon 's 1949 exhibition at the Hanover Gallery . No such arrangement with the painter was possible . Waugh was dissatisfied with the illustration that the publishers finally produced , and on 17 June 1957 wrote to Ann Fleming complaining that McDougall had made " an ugly book of poor Pinfold " . 
 The novel was published by Chapman and Hall in the UK on 19 July 1957 , and by Little , Brown in the US on 12 August . The Daily Telegraph had partly revealed the book 's principal theme three months earlier : " The publishers hope to establish ' Pinfold ' as a household word meaning ' half round the bend ' . " This comment followed closely on the release of Muriel Spark 's first novel , The <unk> , which also dealt with issues of drug @-@ induced hallucination . Although it would have been in Waugh 's commercial interests to have ignored or downplayed Spark 's book , he reviewed it generously in The Spectator on 22 February 1957 : " a complicated , subtle and , to me at least , an intensely interesting first novel " . 
 A special edition of 50 copies of Pinfold , on large paper , was prepared at Waugh 's expense for presentation to his friends . The first Penguin paperback was issued in 1962 , followed by numerous reissues in the following years , including a Penguin Modern Classic edition in 1999 . It has also been translated into several languages . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 On the day that Pinfold was published , Waugh was persuaded to attend a Foyle 's Literary Luncheon , as a means of promoting the book . He informed his audience that " Three years ago , I had quite a new experience . I went off my head for about three weeks " . To further stimulate sales the dust @-@ jacket also emphasised Waugh 's experiences of madness , which brought him a large correspondence from strangers anxious to relate their own parallel experiences — " the voices ... of the persecuted , turning to him as confessor " . 
 Waugh 's friends were generally enthusiastic about the book . Anthony Powell thought it was one of Waugh 's most interesting works , and Graham Greene placed it among the writer 's best fiction . The <unk> thought that he had " succeeded wonderfully " in providing so vivid an account of his experiences . John Betjeman , reviewing the book for the The Daily Telegraph , wrote : " The Ordeal of Gilbert Pinfold is self @-@ examination written as a novel , but unlike other such works , which are generally dreary and self @-@ pitying , this , because it is by Mr Waugh , is readable , thrilling and detached " . Other reviewers were generally more circumspect . Philip Toynbee in The Observer found it " very hard to say whether it is a good book or not ; it is certainly an interesting and a moving one " . He sensed in Waugh 's writing a " change of gear " , a point picked up by John Raymond in the New Statesman . Raymond thought Waugh was the only current English novelist whose work showed signs of development , and that in Pinfold had produced " one of his wittiest , most humane entertainments " , a work of self @-@ revelation only marred , in Raymond 's view , by an unsatisfactory conclusion . The Times Literary Supplement 's reviewer <unk> Price deemed it a " thin little tale " , while acknowledging that Waugh as a comic writer could reasonably be compared with P.G. Wodehouse in terms of originality and humour . 
 Donat O 'Donnell in The Spectator was dismissive , calling the story " moderately interesting , almost entirely unfunny and a little embarrassing " . On the book 's autobiographical nature O 'Donnell commented : " The Waugh of before Brideshead seldom wrote about himself ; the Waugh of after Brideshead seldom writes about anything else " . Reviewing the American edition in The New York Times , Orville Prescott found the book 's central situation far too slight for a full @-@ length novel ; furthermore , " the reader 's knowledge that the voices are delusions robs Mr Waugh 's story of any narrative conflict or suspense ... Mr Pinfold 's ordeal is neither humorous nor pathetic " . 
 A few weeks after the book 's publication the novelist J. B. Priestley , in a long essay in the New Statesman entitled " What Was Wrong With Pinfold " , offered the theory that Waugh had been driven to the verge of madness not by an unfortunate cocktail of drugs but by his inability to reconcile his role as a writer with his desire to be a country squire . He concluded : " Pinfold [ Waugh ] must step out of his role as the Cotswold gentleman quietly regretting the Reform Bill of 1832 , and if he cannot discover an accepted role as English man of letters ... he must create one . " Waugh replied mockingly , drawing attention to Priestley 's large land @-@ holdings and surmising that " what gets Mr Priestley 's goat ( supposing that he allows such a deleterious animal in his lush pastures ) is my attempt to behave as a gentleman " . 
 Later opinions of the book , expressed by Waugh 's eventual biographers , are mixed . Sykes considered the beginning one of the best pieces of autobiographical writing , but found the ending " weak & sentimental " . Stannard , writing in 1984 , did not consider the book a major work in the Waugh canon . Hastings in 1994 , however , thought it " by any criteria an extraordinary work " , and credited it with establishing Waugh 's public image : " stout and splenetic , red @-@ faced and reactionary " . David Wykes ( 1999 ) considers that this " very controlled short novel " demonstrates that " Waugh was not very good at invention , but was unsurpassed at embroidery " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1960 Waugh accepted a fee of £ 250 from the BBC for an adaptation of Pinfold , as a radio play , by Michael Bakewell . The broadcast , on 7 June 1960 , was well received by the critics , although Waugh did not listen to it . In September 1977 a staged version of the book , written by Ronald Harwood and directed by Michael Elliott , opened at the Royal Exchange theatre , Manchester . The play was brought to London , and performed at the Roundhouse Theatre in February 1979 , where Michael Hordern 's depiction of Pinfold was highly praised — " a man suffering from chronic indigestion of the soul " . 
 During 1962 Sykes was approached by the Russian @-@ American composer Nicolas Nabokov , who was interested in making an opera from the Pinfold story on the basis of a libretto provided by Sykes . Waugh gave his approval to the idea , and in March 1962 met with Nabokov . Discussions continued during the following months , before the project was abandoned in the summer . 
 = 1967 European Cup Final = 
 The 1967 European Cup Final was a football match between Italian team Internazionale and Scottish team Celtic . It took place at the Estádio Nacional in Lisbon , Portugal on 25 May 1967 in front of a crowd of 45 @,@ 000 . It was the final of the 1966 – 67 European Cup , the premier club competition in Europe . The match was Celtic 's first European final and Internazionale 's third ; they had won the tournament in two of the previous three years . 
 Both teams had to go through four qualifying rounds to get the final . Celtic won their first two ties comfortably , with their second two rounds being tighter . Internazionale 's first tie was very close but they won their next two by bigger margins . In the semi @-@ final Internazionale needed a replay to win the tie . 
 Internazionale scored after seven minutes , when Sandro Mazzola converted a penalty . Celtic equalised through Tommy Gemmell after he scored on 63 minutes . Stevie Chalmers then put Celtic in the lead after 84 minutes . The match finished 2 – 1 to Celtic . It was said to be a victory for football because Celtic 's attacking football overcame Internazionale 's defensive @-@ style " catenaccio " which was considered to be a less attractive way to play the game . Celtic 's manager Jock Stein and the team received acclaim after the match and were given the nickname the Lisbon Lions ; considered to be the greatest side in the club 's history . 
 = = Route to the final = = 
 = = = Celtic = = = 
 Celtic qualified for the European Cup after winning the 1965 – 66 Scottish First Division , their 21st title , by two points over rivals Rangers . Celtic entered at the first round where they faced Swiss side Zürich . Celtic won 2 – 0 at home , with goals from Tommy Gemmell and Joe McBride . They then won the away leg 3 – 0 as Stevie Chalmers scored and Gemmell got a brace . Celtic faced French side Nantes in the second round , and won the away leg 3 – 1 . Nantes had taken the lead through Francis Magny , before McBride had equalised to level the match at 1 – 1 . In the second half , Bobby Lennox and Bertie Auld scored to seal a victory . Celtic won the home leg by the same scoreline . Jimmy Johnstone put them in front , before Gérard <unk> equalised . Celtic again scored twice in the second half , as Chalmers and Lennox secured the victory . 
 Celtic faced Yugoslavia ( now Serbian ) side Vojvodina Novi Sad in the quarter @-@ finals , and lost the first leg 1 – 0 after a goal from Milan Stanić ; this was Celtic 's only defeat of the competition . The tie looked like it was going to end in a draw after Chalmers had given Celtic a 1 @-@ 0 lead in the second leg . This would have resulted in the teams from having to go to Rotterdam for a replay . However , in the 90th minute captain Billy McNeill scored to give Celtic the victory . In the semi @-@ finals , Czechoslovakian side Dukla Prague were beaten 3 – 1 in Glasgow , Johnstone put the hosts in front , before Stanislav <unk> equalised . A second half brace from Willie Wallace gave Celtic the victory . The teams then drew 0 – 0 in Prague , which meant Celtic progressed to the final . 
 = = = Internazionale = = = 
 Internazionale had won the 1965 – 66 Serie A , their tenth title , by four points over second placed Bologna . As a result of this , they qualified for the European Cup and their first round opponents were Soviet side Torpedo Moscow . Internazionale won the first leg 1 – 0 , thanks to an own goal by Valery Voronin before drawing 0 – 0 in Russia . Their second round opponents were Vasas of Hungary , Internazionale won 2 – 1 at home , with goals from Carlo <unk> and Mario Corso , while Lajos Puskás had scored for the visitors . Two goals from Sandro Mazzola gave Inter the victory in the second leg . 
 Internazionale beat six time champions and holders Real Madrid in the quarter @-@ finals . Internazionale won 1 – 0 at home , through a Renato Cappellini goal . Before defeating Madrid 2 – 0 in Spain , thanks to another goal from Cappellini , and an own goal from Ignacio <unk> . In the semi @-@ finals . Internazionale faced Bulgarian side CSKA Red Flag ( now CSKA Sofia ) . Giacinto <unk> scored for Internazionale , as they drew 1 – 1 at home , with Nikola <unk> scoring for the visitors . <unk> scored again in Bulgaria , but his goal was cancelled out by Nikolay <unk> , meaning that a play @-@ off was needed to settle the tie . The play @-@ off was supposed to be held in Graz , Austria , but CSKA were persuaded to let it be moved to Bologna in Italy , after they were offered a larger share of the gate money . The match was won 1 – 0 by Internazionale , thanks to a goal from Cappellini , sealing their place in the final . 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Internazionale had won the European Cup in two of the previous three seasons , 1964 and 1965 . Pre @-@ match talk focused on Internazionale winning a famous <unk> of European Cups and they were considered strong favourites going into the game . 
 Internazionale were very well known for using a defensive tactic , the <unk> , which meant that they won many matches by slim scorelines and rarely conceded . Their manager , Helenio Herrera , was the highest paid in Europe and was considered to be the catalyst of their success . By contrast Celtic were an attacking team . Before the match their manager Jock Stein said that , " Celtic will be the first team to bring the European Cup back to Britain ... we are going to attack as we have never attacked before , " 
 One of Celtic 's most important players , striker Joe McBride was to miss the match . He had suffered a long @-@ term knee injury and his last match of the season was on 24 December 1966 . McBride would definitely have played had he been fit . He was in such good form for Celtic that , despite missing half the season , McBride finished as the top scorer in Scotland that year with 35 goals in 26 appearances . 
 Both Internazionale and Celtic had been performing well domestically throughout the season . Only a few days before the final Internazionale had been on the verge of winning a historic treble but losses in their last two games knocked them out of the semi @-@ finals of the Coppa Italia and cost them the Scudetto . The European Cup was the last chance for them to redeem what had initially been such a promising season . Celtic came into the final having already won the First Division , the Scottish Cup and the Scottish League Cup as well as the Glasgow Cup earlier in the season . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Internazionale had the first attack of the match . With Renato Cappellini running down the wing and supplying a cross to Sandro Mazzola whose header hit Celtic goalkeeper Ronnie Simpson 's knees . Internazionale won a penalty moments later . Jim Craig fouled Cappellini in the box , and Mazzola converted to put Inter in front after only six minutes . Once they had taken the lead , Internazionale retreated back into their defensive style , which allowed Celtic to attack . However , they struggled to get through Internazionale 's defensive wall and were mainly restricted to long shots from outside the box . Bertie Auld hit the crossbar then a cross from Jimmy Johnstone was gathered up by Giuliano Sarti , who then tipped a header from the same player over the crossbar . Internazionale pulled nine men back , but Celtic kept attacking them . Tommy Gemmell 's dangerous free @-@ kick was saved by Sarti , he then speculatively attempted to lob the Inter ' keeper and hit the bar . Despite Celtic 's inability to break through their opponents defence they were in complete control of the match and Internazionale were not able to attack . Inter had not had another chance since their goal , whilst Celtic found themselves foiled time and again by outstanding goalkeeping from Sarti . 
 After just over an hour , Gemmell finally managed to equalise for Celtic when Craig passed to him from the right wing and he scored with a powerful 25 yard shot . The balance of play remained the same with Inter defending deeply against sustained Celtic attacking . With about five minutes remaining , a long @-@ range shot from Bobby Murdoch was diverted by Stevie Chalmers past a wrong @-@ footed Sarti . This proved to be the winning goal . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 After the final whistle there was a pitch invasion by Celtic fans , which meant that the Celtic team could not be presented the trophy on the pitch . Some of the Celtic players also had their shirts taken by Celtic supporters . Celtic captain Billy McNeill had to be ushered around the outside of the stadium under armed guards to receive the trophy on a podium in the stand . 
 Internazionale 's loss in the final is considered to be the downfall of " La Grande Inter " , the greatest period of success in the club 's history . They had been one of the top teams in Europe for the previous three years , however , failed to recover from their bad season in which they lost out to Celtic as well as in their two domestic competitions . They finished the following season trophyless again and Helenio Herrera , the manager who was considered to be the catalyst of their success , then left the club . 
 Celtic 's attacking style play against Internazionale 's catenaccio was heralded as a win for football . Internazionale manager Helenio Herrera said that " We can have no complaints . Celtic deserved their victory . We were beaten by Celtic 's force . Although we lost , the match was a victory for sport . " while one Portuguese official said " This attacking play , this is the real meaning of football . This is the true game . " . The Portuguese newspaper , Mundo Desportivo , said " It was inevitable . Sooner or later the Inter of Herrera , the Inter of catenaccio , of negative football , of marginal victories , had to pay for their refusal to play entertaining football . " 
 Celtic manager Jock Stein received widespread praise following the final . Liverpool manager Bill Shankly said to him after the match , " John , you 're immortal now " . Since the match a stand has been named after him at Celtic Park . While Stein also received the Commander of the Order of the British Empire . Stein is considered by many , including Alex Ferguson , to be the greatest ever Scottish manager , with his victory in the final being one of the main reasons for this . 
 The Celtic team from that year has also received much recognition . They have become known as the Lisbon Lions and are widely considered the greatest team in Celtic 's history . All of Celtic 's players were born within a 30 @-@ mile radius of Glasgow . In 2000 , Celtic named a stand at Celtic Park after the Lisbon Lions . They also won the BBC Sports Personality Team of the Year Award in 1967 . 
 = Rise ( perfume ) = 
 Rise ( also known as Beyoncé Rise ) is a perfume endorsed by Beyoncé and distributed through division Coty Beauty of manufacturer Coty , Inc . She collaborated with perfumer Loc Dong from the company International Flavors & Fragrances ( IFF ) for creating the scent . It marks her third fragrance following the release of Heat ( 2010 ) and Pulse ( 2011 ) . Inspired by African @-@ American author Maya Angelou and meant to showcase private sides of Beyoncé 's personal life , Rise was created as a woman 's fragrance . 
 It was released in February 2014 to various stores ; a promotional poster and a commercial shot by English music video director Jake Nava were released the same month with the latter featuring Beyoncé surrounded by golden glitter . Upon their release , the perfume and the commercial were positively received by critics with Rise 's various scents and its feminist inspiration being particularly hailed . Rise features top notes of Italian bergamot orange , golden apricot and a basil sorbet middle notes of gold symphony orchid freesia blossom and <unk> sambac and base notes of autumn woods accord , cashmere musk and a vetiver extract . 
 = = Background = = 
 Beyoncé announced the release of her first fragrance Heat in December 2009 after she had previously worked with Tommy Hilfiger on True Star and with Giorgio Armani on Diamonds for which she also appeared in several promotional campaigns . Heat , released on February 3 , 2010 , was followed by six additional releases of the same line with various scent changes . It went on to become one of the three best @-@ selling fragrances of all time with $ 400 million earned at retail globally . A new line of perfumes titled Pulse followed in September 2011 and included several additional releases . The perfume was meant to showcase the singer 's persona and energy while performing live on stage during her concerts . 
 On December 12 , 2013 , it was reported by MTV that beauty and lifestyle editor Jess Torres of the magazine Siempre Mujer was offered a glimpse of Beyoncé 's new perfume called Rise . On December 20 , 2013 , it was officially announced by fashion magazine Women 's Wear Daily that she would release her third line of perfumes titled Rise in early 2014 . <unk> Loc Dong of International Flavors & Fragrances ( IFF ) served as a collaborator with Beyoncé . The perfume was influenced by Beyoncé 's autobiographical HBO documentary Life Is But a Dream ( 2013 ) ; both Rise and the film showcase the singer 's personal sides including " inner strength , overcoming adversity , and what it really means to be a woman " . 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Marsha Brooks , a vice president of global marketing for Coty Beauty , a division of Coty , Inc. responsible for Beyoncé 's fragrance business , said in an interview that Rise was meant to leave a " strong sense of ' overcoming adversity and rising above it all . ' " She added , " The fragrance concept is a about female empowerment and finding the inner strength that makes women so beautiful ... We 're getting a little bit more intimate and personal with this next initiative we are doing . The time has come for something more natural and emotional . " According to her , <unk> for Rise were done in multiple countries with positive feedback . 
 It was also revealed that the perfume was inspired by a poem by African @-@ American author Maya Angelou . Journalists Katy Waldman of Slate , Kathleen Hou of New York and <unk> Green of the International Business Times noted " Still I Rise " from Angelou 's book And Still I Rise as a potential inspiration . The fragrance features various notes . The top notes consist of an Italian bergamot orange , golden apricot and a basil sorbet . The middle notes contain gold symphony orchid ( identified as Beyoncé 's favorite flower ) , freesia blossom and <unk> sambac . Rise concludes with base notes of autumn woods accord , cashmere musk and a vetiver extract . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 The perfume was shipped in January 2014 and it was released to stores the following month . It was packaged in a tall glass bottle , designed by Ken Hirst , and contained a gold collar and gold crystals . Marissa G. Muller of MTV compared the packaging with the foil of Jay @-@ Z 's Gold perfume . According to Beyoncé 's official perfume website , it was meant to show her " resilient spirit and graceful femininity " . 
 The promotional poster for Rise was released in early 2014 . It features a close @-@ up shot of her face with blonde hair and metallic eye shadow . Reveal magazine writer Brigitte <unk> deemed the photograph " smouldering " and went on to offer praise for Beyoncé looking " breathtaking ... rocking flawless skin and perfectly contoured cheeks " . Brittany Talarico of People also reviewed the image positively , calling it " sexy " and noting " one of her signature powerhouse stares as her hair blows wildly around her " . Talarico concluded that the golden theme matched the perfume 's bottle design . 
 It was estimated by several industry sources that the promotion for the fragrance , which mainly included the commercial and promotion on Facebook , was worth US $ 10 million and it was predicted the perfume would sell $ 25 million . In January , 2014 , People magazine organized a contest between readers of its website on Twitter asking them to share a photo of the singer in their favorite outfit on their profiles and win a signed bottle of Rise . In celebration of the perfume 's release , a contest was also launched by Beyoncé 's team asking fans to tell them " what they rise for " ; several of them were filmed and their videos were published on Beyoncé 's perfume channel . A winner was announced in June 2014 and awarded with a bottle of Rise . 
 = = = Commercial = = = 
 A 30 @-@ second clip for the fragrance surfaced on the Internet in January 2014 and several publications reported and speculated it would be the commercial for Rise . A commercial was later officially released in February and was shot by Jake Nava with whom Beyoncé had collaborated frequently . It opens with shots of her showered in gold as she rises out of a glittering bowl formed of dust while dramatic music plays in the background ; several of the scenes are filmed using a slow motion technique . Her voiceover is heard in the background , " You can let yourself disappear , or you can stir things up . Never settle , shake loose . Embrace the elements . Because from now on , you will always Rise ! " . Beyoncé is seen surrounded by glittery ashes , wearing thigh @-@ high gladiator sandals and a bodysuit noted to be Amazonian @-@ inspired . 
 Brigitte <unk> of Reveal labelled it " sizzling " noting scenes showing Beyoncé " swishing her hair around in true Beyoncé style " . Kelly Bryant of OK ! magazine called the advertisement " sexy " . In an in @-@ depth review of the commercial , Caitlin Morton from MTV heavily praised Beyoncé 's look , style , movements and poses for the camera and concluded , " THAT ... is how you sell a perfume " . Maeve <unk> writing for the same publication wrote the clip was " heavy on the glitter and hair @-@ flips " and added , " We would 've bought Rise anyway , but now [ due to its commercial ] we 're definitely going to buy it . " Carl Williott from the website Idolator interpreted Beyoncé 's character in the video as a " gold dust woman imploring you to embrace the elements and rise " . Charlie Gowans Eglinton of Elle magazine provided a positive review for the clip summarizing , " there 's hair – flipping , intense eye – contact and a sultry voiceover , all covered in a layer of gold dust . What more could you ask for ? " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kristin Booker of the fashion website Refinery29 described the scent as a " voluptuous , sexy floral " . Kathleen Hou writing for New York opined that the <unk> 's best part was the fact it was inspired by a poem by Angelou . Hou also noted feminist influences in the scent with usual additions of orchid and masculine notes of autumn woods , cashmere , musk , and vetiver extract . She concluded her review by stating " Maya Angelou @-@ reading perfume sounds ( and will surely smell ) pretty good " . With a similar opinion , <unk> Green of the International Business Times noted more masculine notes with the addition of woods , cashmere , musk . She hailed Rise as a " sweet treat " for her fans along her self @-@ titled album 's surprise release a week earlier and noted , " Beyoncé 's definition of feminism has stirred quite the debate following her new album 's release . But maybe her perfume version of it will be more openly embraced – plus who can deny the genius of a Maya Angelou @-@ inspired scent . " Madison Lafayette in an article for VIBE Vixen praised Beyoncé 's decision to release Rise " <unk> [ ing ] off " her success and " giving us another reason to talk about her " . 
 Tor Cardona of the magazine Grazia Daily praised the fact the perfume was announced a week after Beyoncé 's fifth album , noting she was set for a " world domination " in 2014 . Focusing on the scent , Cardona advised female readers to buy it and went on to state " With hints of orchid , golden apricot and <unk> we reckon this might just be 2014 ’ s hottest scent . " BET editor <unk> Ramos described the scent as a mixture of " sexy , floral " notes . The Daily Telegraph 's Katy Young called the gold symphony orchid used in the scent " the queen of orchids " . She also said that notes of cashmere musk and vetiver " give the whole blend a grounding element " before concluding " the notes are not wrong " . Charlie Gowans Eglinton of Elle , noted that the perfume promised to be " almost as intoxicating as Bey herself " with a " sexy scent " of musk according to reports she had read . In a guide for spring perfumes to buy in 2014 , editors of E ! Online included Rise , calling it " exactly what you think it would be : vivacious , strong and bold " and concluding " it is certainly not a dainty spring scent " . Cinya Burton of the same publication noted the fragrance was different than other floral perfumes during the season , deeming it " plain fierce " . 
 = = Products = = 
 Products related to Rise are taken from Beyoncé 's official perfume website . Two additional products were released in the collection — a body lotion for hydrating the skin and a shower gel . 
 Eau de <unk> 
 <unk> / 3 @.@ 4 oz 
 50 ml / 1 @.@ 7 oz 
 30 ml / 1 @.@ 0 oz 
 15 ml / 0 @.@ 5 oz 
 Glistening body lotion 
 200ml / 6 @.@ 7 oz 
 Silky shower gel 
 200ml / 6 @.@ 7 oz 
 = Delaware Route 404 = 
 Delaware Route 404 ( DE 404 ) is a major state highway in Sussex County , Delaware that spans the width of the state . DE 404 's western terminus is at the Maryland border northwest of Bridgeville , where it continues as Maryland Route 404 ( MD 404 ) , and its eastern terminus is at the Five Points intersection with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) , DE 1 , and US 9 Business ( US 9 Bus . ) . The route passes through rural areas as well as the towns of Bridgeville and Georgetown . DE 404 runs concurrent with DE 18 from east of Bridgeville to Georgetown and with US 9 from Georgetown to Five Points . DE 404 has a business route , DE 404 Bus . , that passes through Bridgeville and a truck route , DE 404 Truck , that bypasses Georgetown . DE 404 , along with MD 404 , serves as a major route connecting the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area with the Delaware Beaches . 
 DE 404 was first designated by 1936 to run from the Maryland border to DE 18 southeast of Bridgeville . The route was extended to Five Points by 1987 . By 1999 , DE 404 was aligned to bypass Bridgeville , with DE 404 Bus. designated on the former route through the town . The new alignment of DE 404 around Bridgeville replaced DE 404 Alternate ( DE 404 Alt . ) 
 = = Route description = = 
 DE 404 begins at the Maryland border , where it continues northwest into that state as MD 404 . From the state line , the route heads southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Seashore Highway , passing through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes . In the community of Scotts Corner , the road intersects the western terminus of DE 36 . DE 404 continues through more rural areas and turns northeast onto Newton Road , with DE 404 Bus. continuing southeast along Seashore Highway toward Bridgeville . From here , DE 404 heads through agricultural areas to the north of Bridgeville , curving east and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . 
 The route comes to an intersection with US 13 and turns south to form a concurrency with that route on Sussex Highway , a four @-@ lane divided highway . A short distance later , US 13 Bus. splits off to the southwest to head into Bridgeville . The road continues through farmland with some businesses to the east of Bridgeville . Upon reaching an intersection with US 13 Bus . / DE 404 Bus . , DE 404 splits from US 13 by heading southeast onto four @-@ lane divided Seashore Highway . The road passes a few businesses before becoming two lanes and undivided as it continues through agricultural areas , coming to an intersection with DE 18 . 
 At this point , DE 18 heads east concurrent with DE 404 along Seashore Highway through a mix of farmland and woodland with some residences , passing through tracts of the Redden State Forest . Farther east , DE 18 / DE 404 heads into Georgetown , running to the north of Delaware Technical Community College 's Jack F. Owens Campus . The road intersects US 113 and the western terminus of DE 404 Truck in a commercial area and continues east . The two routes head southeast onto North Bedford Street , passing homes and businesses . The road comes to an intersection with US 9 at The Circle in the center of Georgetown , where the Sussex County Courthouse is located . Here , DE 18 reaches its eastern terminus . 
 At this point , DE 404 continues northeast concurrent with US 9 on East Market Street through the downtown area . The road crosses Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line and runs through residential areas with a few businesses . US 9 / DE 404 heads east @-@ northeast out of Georgetown and becomes Lewes Georgetown Highway , passing through farmland and woodland with some development . The two routes intersect the eastern terminus of US 9 Truck / DE 404 Truck a short distance east of Georgetown . In Gravel Hill , the road intersects DE 30 . Following this intersection , US 9 / DE 404 passes through more rural land , reaching a junction with DE 5 in Harbeson . Past here , the two routes cross a Delaware Coast Line Railroad line . Farther east , residential development near the road begins to increase . Upon reaching the area of the Five Points intersection in Nassau , US 9 / DE 404 runs past homes and businesses , widening into a divided highway and coming to an intersection with DE 1D / DE 23 . DE 23 joins US 9 / DE 404 for a concurrency on a four @-@ lane divided highway before the road comes to a junction with DE 1 . Here , DE 23 / DE 404 ends , US 9 Bus. continues northeast , and US 9 heads east for a concurrency with DE 1 . 
 DE 404 serves as a major route connecting the Chesapeake Bay Bridge and the Baltimore @-@ Washington Metropolitan Area to the Delaware Beaches . The highest annual average daily traffic along DE 404 is 30 @,@ 773 vehicles along the US 13 concurrency with the lowest being 5 @,@ 777 vehicles at the western terminus of DE 404 Business . All of DE 404 is part of the National Highway System . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1920 , what would originally become DE 404 was an unimproved county road , with the section east of Bridgeville under contract as a state highway . The entire route of what would become DE 404 was completed as a state highway to a point northwest of Bridgeville by 1924 . By 1931 , the road was built as a state highway northwest to the Maryland border . DE 404 was designated to run from the Maryland border , where it connected to MD 404 , southeast to DE 18 southeast of Bridgeville by 1936 . The route followed its current alignment to Bridgeville , where it passed through the town on Market Street and South Main Street before picking up its current alignment east of US 13 . At this time , what is now DE 404 past its then @-@ eastern terminus was designated as part of DE 18 . By 1987 , DE 404 was extended east to DE 1 in Five Points , following DE 18 to Georgetown and US 9 ( which had replaced a portion of DE 18 ) from Georgetown to Five Points . DE 404 Alt. was created to bypass Bridgeville to the north and east by 1990 , following Newton Road and US 13 . The alternate route became a part of mainline DE 404 by 1999 , with the former DE 404 through Bridgeville becoming DE 404 Bus . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Sussex County . 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 = = = DE 404 Business = = = 
 Delaware Route 404 Business ( DE 404 Bus . ) is a 3 @.@ 34 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 38 km ) long business route of DE 404 that runs through the town of Bridgeville . The route begins at DE 404 northwest of Bridgeville , heading southeast on two @-@ lane undivided Seashore Highway through agricultural areas with some homes . DE 404 Bus. enters Bridgeville and heads through commercial areas , turning northeast onto Market Street and crossing Norfolk Southern 's Delmarva Secondary railroad line . The route passes several homes before intersecting US 13 Bus. and turning south to join that route on South Main Street . The two routes run through more residential areas before leaving Bridgeville and heading through farmland with some development . The road widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway and heads into a commercial area , intersecting US 13 and DE 404 . At this point US 13 Bus. and DE 404 Bus. both end , with the road continuing southeast as DE 404 . DE 404 Bus. was created in 1999 when DE 404 was rerouted to bypass Bridgeville on the alignment of DE 404 Alt . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Bridgeville , Sussex County . 
 = = = DE 404 Truck = = = 
 Delaware Route 404 Truck ( DE 404 Truck ) is a truck bypass of the section of DE 404 through Georgetown . The route begins at the intersection between US 113 and DE 18 / DE 404 , heading south along with US 113 on four @-@ lane divided North Dupont Boulevard . The road passes through commercial areas with some farmland , reaching an intersection with US 9 . At this point , US 113 / DE 404 Truck becomes concurrent with US 9 Truck and the name changes to South Dupont Boulevard . The road heads southeast through woodland with some farm fields and businesses . US 9 Truck / DE 404 Truck split from US 113 by heading north @-@ northeast on two @-@ lane undivided South Bedford Street . The road passes commercial development before heading through farmland with some homes . The routes curve to the north @-@ northwest prior to heading north . US 9 Truck / DE 404 Truck turn east onto Park Avenue and pass through residential areas before crossing Norfolk Southern 's Indian River Secondary railroad line . The road runs through agricultural areas and passes to the south of Delaware Coastal Airport , where it makes a curve to the north . US 9 Truck / DE 404 Truck head through a mix of farmland and woodland with some homes to the east of the airport , crossing a Delaware Coast Line Railroad line before ending at US 9 / DE 404 east of Georgetown . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Georgetown , Sussex County . 
 = = = Former DE 404 Alternate = = = 
 Delaware Route 404 Alternate ( DE 404 Alt . ) was a 4 @.@ 65 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 48 km ) alternate route of DE 404 that bypassed the town of Bridgeville . It ran to the north of Bridgeville on Newton Road and to the east of Bridgeville on US 13 . The route was created by 1990 . The alignment of DE 404 Alt. was replaced by DE 404 itself in 1999 . The route of DE 404 in Bridgeville then became known as DE 404 Bus . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route was in Bridgeville , Sussex County . 
 = Lemurs of Madagascar ( book ) = 
 Lemurs of Madagascar is a 2010 reference work and field guide for the lemurs of Madagascar , giving descriptions and biogeographic data for the known species . The primary contributor is Russell Mittermeier , president of Conservation International , and the cover art and illustrations were drawn by Stephen D. Nash . Currently in its third edition , the book provides details about all known lemur species , general information about lemurs and their history , and also helps travelers identify species they may encounter . Four related pocket field guides have also been released , containing color illustrations of each species , miniature range maps , and species checklists . 
 The first edition was reviewed favorably in the International Journal of Primatology , Conservation Biology , and Lemur News . Reviewers , including Alison Jolly , praised the book for its meticulous coverage of each species , numerous high @-@ quality illustrations , and engaging discussion of lemur topics , including conservation , evolution , and the recently extinct subfossil lemurs . Each agreed that the book was an excellent resource for a wide audience , including ecotourists and lemur researchers . A lengthy review of the second edition was published in the American Journal of Primatology , where it received similar favorable comments , plus praise for its updates and enhancements . The third edition was reviewed favorably in Lemur News ; the reviewer praised the expanded content of the book , but was concerned that the edition was not as portable as its predecessors . 
 The first edition identified 50 lemur species and subspecies , compared to 71 in the second edition and 101 in the third . The taxonomy promoted by these books has been questioned by researchers , such as Ian Tattersall , who view these growing numbers of lemur species as insufficiently justified inflation of species numbers ( taxonomic inflation ) . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Lemurs of Madagascar is published by Conservation International ( CI ) , a non @-@ profit conservation organization headquartered near Washington , D.C. , and is intended as a field guide that identifies all of the known lemur species from Madagascar . The first edition of Lemurs of Madagascar was published in 1994 and contained 356 pages . The 520 @-@ page second edition was published in 2006 and is now officially out of print , having been followed by the 767 @-@ page third edition in the fall of 2010 . 
 For all three editions , Stephen D. Nash , winner of the 2004 American Society of <unk> President 's Award , has been the illustrator and front cover artist . The lead author for all three editions is Russell A. Mittermeier , president of CI and a well @-@ published primatologist , herpetologist and biological anthropologist . In the first edition , four other authors were also listed : Ian Tattersall , a curator in the Division of Anthropology at the American Museum of Natural History ; William R. <unk> , the Director of Conservation and Science at the Houston Zoo ; David M. Meyers , a researcher and conservationist who has worked with CI , the World Wildlife Fund , and other conservation and development organizations ; and Roderic B. Mast , marine biologist , primatologist , and the founding Director of CI 's Madagascar Program . 
 The second edition was authored by Mittermeier , <unk> , Tattersall , and Meyers , as well as seven new authors : Frank Hawkins , the Technical Director for CI in Madagascar ; Edward E. Louis , Jr . , the conservation geneticist for Omaha 's Henry Doorly Zoo 's Center for Conservation and Research ; Olivier Langrand , CI 's Senior Vice President for Africa and Madagascar ; Jonah H. <unk> , the Scientific Coordinator for the Durrell Wildlife Conservation Trust - Madagascar Program ; Rodin Rasoloarison , a field researcher and research coordinator at the German Primate Center ; Jörg U. <unk> , professor in the Department of Animal Ecology and Conservation at the University of Hamburg and Chairman for the Madagascar section of the IUCN Species Survival Commission ( IUCN / SSC ) Primate Specialist Group since 1998 ; and Serge <unk> , the President of Fanamby , a Malagasy non @-@ governmental environmental organization . 
 The list of authors changed again with the third edition . Returning authors included Mittermeier , Louis , Langrand , Hawkins , <unk> , <unk> , and Rasoloarison . New authors included Matthew Richardson , writer and member of the IUCN / SSC Primate Specialist Group ; Christoph <unk> , the Head of Research at the Bristol Zoo Gardens ; Anthony Rylands , a Senior Research Scientist at Conservation International and Deputy Chair of the IUCN / SSC Primate Specialist Group ; Christian Roos , a geneticist at the German Primate Center ; Peter M. Kappeler , a Professor of Sociobiology and Anthropology at the University of Göttingen in Germany ; and James MacKinnon , the Senior Technical Director of Conservation International in Madagascar . 
 The first edition followed a 1982 volume by Tattersall , entitled Primates of Madagascar . As a field guide , the Lemurs of Madagascar is " more portable and affordable , " while offering updated information to assist lemur researchers and tourists in the identification of lemur species and subspecies , according to a 1996 review published in Lemur News . All three editions cover the natural history and conservation status for each known species . They also discuss conservation strategies , lemur origins , extinct lemurs , and the history of discoveries made by early European naturalists . The books provide suggestions on where to see each species , as well as checklists to help people keep track of their sightings . The purpose of the book is defined in the " Introduction " as follows : 
 Conservation International and the Primate Specialist Group of the World Conservation Union 's Species Survival Commission ( IUCN / SSC ) have long recognized Madagascar as one of their top priorities , and are pleased to present this guide to facilitate field identification of lemurs , to summarize available data on their ecology , distribution and conservation status , and to stimulate further interest in the survival of these animals in their natural habitats . 
 Four pocket field guides have also been published by CI , intended strictly to help people identify lemurs in the field by providing over 100 species illustrations . All illustrations , including the detailed cover art , were drawn by Nash . <unk> for their respective lemur species are included with these guides , along with thumbnail range maps for each species . The four pocket guides include two editions of Lemurs of Madagascar Pocket Identification Guide ( out of print ) , Nocturnal Lemurs , and Diurnal and <unk> Lemurs . The Nocturnal Lemurs booklet contains 65 species from eight genera . Diurnal and <unk> Lemurs hosts 34 species and subspecies from seven genera , along with illustrations to show male and female fur color differences in the genus Eulemur and color morphs for the indri and ruffed lemur species . A fifth and sixth pocket field guides are planned following the publication of the third edition of the field guide . 
 = = Content = = 
 All three editions are split into multiple chapters , sections , and appendices . In the second and third editions , the inside of the front and back covers include a quick visual reference , with color @-@ coded illustrations for each lemur type and colored tabs to help locate their corresponding sections . A section entitled " How to Use this Field Guide " is included between the " Introduction " and the first chapter . In this section , the layout of the book is discussed in detail , including the quick visual reference , chapters , appendices , references , and lemur @-@ watching checklist . The chapter " The Living Lemurs " is discussed in great detail , including each section heading used for all the lemur species . 
 The " Introduction " in the first two editions was written by Peter A. <unk> , Chairman of the Board and CEO of CI , and Mittermeier . In the third edition , the " Introduction " was written only by Mittermeier . In it , they emphasize the richness of Madagascar 's primate diversity , summarize the conservation efforts and opportunities for preserving that diversity , and highlight recent discoveries , while also acknowledging the need for additional research . The chapter entitled " Origins of Lemurs " ( " Origin of the Lemurs " in the third edition ) briefly summarizes the theories on how lemurs came to Madagascar and the difficulty in resolving the mystery . " Discovery and Study of the Living Lemurs " reviews the history of exploration , field research , and taxonomic nomenclature of lemurs , starting from the 1625 description of a ring @-@ tailed lemur to contemporary research by Western and Malagasy scientists . " The Extinct Lemurs " discusses the recently extinct subfossil lemurs , including the monkey lemurs , sloth lemurs , and koala lemurs . " Conservation of Lemurs " details the threats lemurs face , such as habitat destruction and hunting for bushmeat , and conservation efforts aimed at their protection , from the in @-@ situ and ex @-@ situ programs of the Madagascar Fauna Group to the promise by Madagascar 's former president Marc Ravalomanana to triple the country 's protected areas over five years , known as the Durban Vision . In the third edition , a new chapter was added , entitled " Madagascar 's Ancient Geological History " , written by Maarten de Wit from the University of Cape Town . In it , three billion years of geological and biological history are explored in detail . 
 The majority of the book , including the chapter " The Living Lemurs " and separate sections on each taxonomic group of lemur , providing detailed accounts of all lemur species known up until the time of publication , from the tiny mouse lemurs to the large indri and diademed sifaka . In the first and second editions , the chapter " The Living Lemurs " is broken first into sections on families , and then into species clumped together by genus . In the third edition , each family is assigned its own chapter number , separate from " The Living Lemurs " chapter , yet the order and layout are the same . In the second and third editions , all pages within each family section are assigned a colored tab to match those in the quick visual reference inside the covers . Each species subsection has a distribution map , an illustration or photo ( if available ) , a list of common names in multiple languages ( including Malagasy ) , and species information broken into five sections : " Identification " , " Geographic Range " , " Natural History " , " Conservation Status " , and " Where to See It " . 
 The " Identification " section for each species provides descriptive information to help identify and distinguish species , including a detailed physical description , discussions of variation in size and coloration ( morphometrics ) , and descriptions of distinguishing vocalizations . " Geographic Range " offers textual information to accompany the provided distribution map , although the authors note that ranges change due to habitat destruction and that species may be found in new localities outside of their known range . " Natural History " summarizes what is known about the behavior and ecology of each species , such as the unusual feeding strategies of the aye @-@ aye or the nest @-@ building behavior of the ruffed lemurs . Estimated populations densities and distributions , life histories , diet , social structure , and other details are provided when known . For many species , little information is given due to a lack of research , while others have been studied extensively allowing for more elaborate detail . " Conservation Status " lists the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species assessment and protected areas in which a species can be found , while also discussing specific threats to each species , the effects of local fady ( taboos ) , the future outlook for species survival , and its coverage within protected areas . Lastly , " Where to See It " aims to promote ecotourism by helping travelers find the best lemur watching sites that can be reached quickly and with the least effort . Suggested modes of transportation are sometimes mentioned as well . 
 The appendices differ between editions . The first edition has two appendices . The first is entitled " Lemurs Present in Protected Areas " and discusses each region and domain of Madagascar while also providing basic information and lemur species content for each protected area . The second appendix , " Alternative Names for Towns and Sites in Madagascar " spells out a few alternative French and Malagasy names for some of the larger town and cities in Madagascar . In the second and third editions , Appendix A , " Maps of Madagascar " , contains color maps that help locate towns , protected areas , topography , rivers , forest cover , regions , and lemur watching sites . Appendix B , entitled " Biogeographic Regions and Floristic Domains of Madagascar " discusses the regions and domains of Madagascar . Appendix C , " Key Sites for Watching Lemurs " , covers characteristics and highlights of individual national parks , reserves , and regions for lemur watching . The third edition added Appendix D , entitled " Primate @-@ watching and Primate Life @-@ listing " . In it , primate @-@ watching and primate life @-@ listing ( the act of recording personal first sightings of a species ) are promoted while their benefits to conservation are discussed . 
 All three editions provide a " References " section , with the second edition listing approximately 500 scientific papers , books , reports , and dissertations used in the creation of the book . The number of references jumped to over 1 @,@ 100 in the third edition . Following the " References " , the first edition provides a section with the color plates . In contrast , the second and third editions provides color illustrations throughout the book . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 In a 1996 review of the first edition in the International Journal of Primatology , Lisa Gould spoke favorably of the book , citing passages about lemur descriptions from the 17th and 18th centuries that she found entertaining and informative . She was particularly fascinated with Chapter four , " The Extinct Lemurs " , and the reconstructions by Nash that accompanied the descriptions of morphology , behavior , and diet . She praised Nash 's artwork as being one of the most enjoyable aspects of the book . The book was hailed as an excellent source for identifying lemur species for both tourists and researchers . The book was also briefly reviewed in College & Research Libraries News by George Eberhart in April 1996 . The review noted Conservation International 's promotion of ecotourism while also providing a count of the book 's illustrations : 35 color plates , 50 distribution maps , and 135 drawings of postures and behaviors . 
 In the 1996 edition ( volume 2 ) of Lemur News , Alison Jolly praised the first edition for its " contribution to knowledge in general " and " its effect on its intended audience . " Like Gould , Jolly praised the work as a field guide , as well as Nash 's high @-@ quality illustrations . She noted the attraction of Nash 's subfossil lemur reconstruction , claiming that it was " rapidly becoming one of the most pirated single book illustration on the primate lecture @-@ slide circuit . " Jolly went on to praise the thoroughness of the natural history information provided for each species , including recently described species , noting that the information covered existing knowledge better than any other published literature , even when only a single paragraph was provided for poorly known species . The book was recommended not only for lemur specialists , but also for tourists , hoping it would spark an interest in ecotourism in impoverished Madagascar . The checklist of species , as well as the information on where to most easily spot them , earned a special mention from Jolly , who could only boast seeing 30 of the 50 known species at that time . Finally , the " most significant and most appreciative " audience Jolly mentioned was the Malagasy researchers , to whom Mittermeier reportedly gave 50 copies of the book during a workshop in 1995 . 
 In a 1997 review from Conservation Biology by <unk> <unk> , the book was referred to as a " remarkable achievement " for its up @-@ to @-@ date information , and for being the first comprehensive lemur field guide . Emphasizing many of the same highlights as Gould and Jolly , he went on to note the inclusion of captive management information , unpublished details , and the use of common names in English , French , German , and Malagasy . His critique focused on the organization of the illustrations in relation to the text , the lack of an index , and a desire for more information about the roles lemurs play in their ecosystem . Though he praised it for being useful to tourists , researchers , students , resource managers , and conservationists , he expressed concern over its lack of availability in the bookstores of Madagascar . 
 The completely revised second edition of Lemurs of Madagascar was reviewed in detail in the American Journal of Primatology by Stacey Tecot . Each chapter , section , and appendix was thoroughly summarized , and as with the reviews of previous editions , the chapter on subfossil lemurs was noted as one of the more " fascinating " parts of the book , particularly due to its colorful and informative illustrations . Although the book received only praise , Tecot did suggest two additions for the next edition : the need for information about the processes of island biogeography and expansion on captive conservation programs aside from the Duke Lemur Center , particularly at the Lemur Conservation Foundation and St. Catherines Island . A subject index was also recommended , along with better referencing of the figures and illustrations . Otherwise , the book was praised as being better than other field guides due to its inclusion of seemingly obscure yet important details , such as how to get to lemur watching sites , travel time , where to stay , mentions of lesser @-@ known sites , listings of species to be seen , best times to observe , and even , among other things , the number of habituated lemur groups in each area . Tecot noted that the lemur checklist promoted competitive lemur watching , similar to birdwatching , and that the color @-@ coded sections assisted in " on @-@ the @-@ fly species identification . " Although very satisfied with the information provided for each species , Tecot commended the promise made in this edition to more extensively cover the published literature in the upcoming third edition . Like its predecessor , the second edition was praised as an excellent tool for ecotourists and researchers . It was also noted for its attempt to promote ecotourism as a conservation strategy . 
 This newer edition was also mentioned briefly in the 2006 edition ( volume 11 ) of Lemur News . The publication announcement highlighted the extensive coverage of scientific information throughout a range of chapters and appendices . The edition is said to contain over 200 illustrations , including drawings , photos , and maps . 
 The 2010 third edition was reviewed in Lemur News by Alex Dunkel . He praised the increased level of detail in the new edition , which adds additional information on geology , the history of lemur research , and numerous aspects of lemur biology . Efforts to conserve lemurs have faced steep challenges , Dunkel wrote , due to political and economic instability in Madagascar , and these challenges make the new edition especially important . However , he worried that the increased size of the book made it less portable than its predecessors . 
 = = Impact on lemur taxonomy = = 
 While the first edition recognized 50 lemur taxa ( 32 species and 25 subspecies ) , the second edition recognized 71 lemur taxa ( 68 species and 5 subspecies ) just 12 years later . The second edition followed the recommendations of Colin Groves in the third edition of Mammal Species of the World from 2005 by recognizing newly identified nocturnal species and raising many former subspecies to species status . For comparison , Tattersall 's book Primates of Madagascar from 1982 listed only 20 species and 29 subspecies . Following the publication of the second edition , Nick Garbutt recognized 87 species and 5 subspecies in his book Mammals of Madagascar . 
 Not all lemur researchers agree with the species promotions supported by these books . Researchers such as Tattersall and Anne D. Yoder , director of the Duke Lemur Center , have raised concerns about taxonomic inflation . In particular , Tattersall has noted a steep decline in <unk> lemur species , or species with defined subspecies , starting with the first edition of Lemurs of Madagascar and becoming more pronounced in the second edition . He noted that more than half of the new species added in the second edition were promoted subspecies and questioned whether Madagascar could produce so many monotypic species . 
 Prior to the release of the third edition of Lemurs of Madagascar , many of the major contributors , as well as Colin Groves , teamed up in 2008 to compile an updated lemur species list , published under the title " Lemur diversity in Madagascar " in the International Journal of Primatology . In it , 99 lemur taxa were recognized ( 97 species and 3 subspecies ) . The third edition went on to recognize 101 lemur taxa ( 97 species and 6 subspecies ) and suggested that future research could reveal as many as 110 to 125 taxa . 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 8 = 
 State Highway 8 , also abbreviated as SH @-@ 8 or OK @-@ 8 , is a highway maintained by the U.S. state of Oklahoma . Because it runs mainly north – south , it has an even number ( which is normal for Oklahoma state highways , but opposite from national highways ) . Highway 8 runs from U.S. Highway 277 in Cyril , Oklahoma to the state line south of Kiowa , Kansas , for a total length of 179 @.@ 1 miles ( 288 @.@ 2 km ) The highway has two lettered spur routes . 
 Highway 8 dates from the creation of the state highway system in 1924 . Initially a border @-@ to @-@ border route , it was shortened to its current extent due to encroaching U.S. highways . SH @-@ 8 has followed its current route since 1966 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The highway begins in Cyril , at US @-@ 277 ( which at the time is concurrent with State Highway 19 ) , and immediately heads northward . Fourteen miles ( 23 km ) later , the highway passes through Anadarko , sharing a brief overlap with US @-@ 62 / SH @-@ 9 . It also becomes concurrent with US @-@ 281 here , which it remains with after passing through Anadarko . 
 US @-@ 281 and SH @-@ 8 continue northward to meet SH @-@ 152 , which they overlap for five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) . SH @-@ 152 splits off to the west at Binger , and US @-@ 281 / SH @-@ 8 go northward through <unk> to meet SH @-@ 37 at its western terminus in Hinton . Four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) to the north , the two highways have an interchange with Interstate 40 at its <unk> 101 . After this , US @-@ 281 / SH @-@ 8 cross the Canadian River and begin a concurrency with U.S. Highway 270 in Geary . SH @-@ 8 splits off by itself after passing through Watonga , sixteen miles ( 26 km ) to the north . 
 North of Watonga , SH @-@ 8 generally runs parallel to SH @-@ 51A and , after intersecting SH @-@ 51 in <unk> , it runs parallel to SH @-@ 58 . Eleven miles ( 18 km ) north of <unk> , SH @-@ 58 and SH @-@ 8 switch places through a 9 @-@ mile ( 14 km ) overlap , with SH @-@ 8 ending up running to the west through Fairview and SH @-@ 58 running to the east to Ringwood . 
 After swapping places with SH @-@ 58 , Highway 8 continues north , overlapping US @-@ 60 for nine miles ( 14 km ) , spending the last three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) also signed concurrently with US @-@ 412 . Eleven miles ( 18 km ) north of this , SH @-@ 8 has a three @-@ mile ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) concurrency with SH @-@ 45 southeast of Carmen . Through Cherokee , the Alfalfa County seat , it overlaps U.S. Highway 64 and SH @-@ 58 . After US @-@ 64 splits off to the west , SH @-@ 11 joins the concurrency . 
 After six miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) , SH @-@ 58 splits off to the northeast . SH @-@ 11 and SH @-@ 8 remain overlapped for seven more miles ( 11 @.@ 3 km ) before splitting off to the north . SH @-@ 8 ends seven miles ( 11 km ) to the north of this at the Kansas state line . After crossing the state line , it becomes K @-@ 8 , which soon ends at K @-@ 2 in Kiowa , Kansas . 
 = = History = = 
 SH @-@ 8 was one of the original thirty @-@ one state highways created on 1924 @-@ 08 @-@ 24 . When it was created , it was a border @-@ to @-@ border highway , stretching from Texas to Kansas . It began at the Red River near Burkburnett , Texas . It then passed through Randlett and had a short concurrency with SH @-@ 5 west of Walters . The highway then ran through Lawton — concurring with the original SH @-@ 29 — en route to Anadarko via Apache . In Anadarko , SH @-@ 8 linked up with the present highway . The remainder of the route was mostly the same as it is today . 
 In November 1926 , AASHTO officially approved the United States Numbered Highways system . The Oklahoma Transportation Commission applied the national highways to Oklahoma 's state highway system on 1926 @-@ 11 @-@ 26 . Three U.S. highways were assigned to portions of what was then SH @-@ 8 : U.S. Highway 64 was added to a segment of highway south of Cherokee , U.S. Highway 66 was added between Bridgeport and Geary , and U.S. Highway 70 was added from the Texas state line to Randlett . US @-@ 66 and 64 merely ran concurrently with SH @-@ 8 . However , US @-@ 70 completely replaced the state highway , which was truncated so that its southern terminus was at US @-@ 70 in Randlett . 
 By 1936 , several U.S. highways had been added to the system that took over parts of State Highway 8 's route . US @-@ 62 , added in 1930 , took over the Lawton – Anadarko portion of the road . US @-@ 277 took over much of the remaining route between Randlett and Lawton . In addition , a US @-@ 70N had been created that overlaid US @-@ 277 between Randlett and the split with SH @-@ 5 west of Walters . These changes to the U.S. route system precipitated the truncation of SH @-@ 8 in 1936 . On 1936 @-@ 03 @-@ 13 , the section of the route between Anadarko and the state line was dropped . However , a new road between Anadarko and Cyril had been built ; this became part of SH @-@ 8 and set the highway 's southern terminus at its present location . 
 By the end of 1937 , however , the highway 's southern terminus had changed once again . On 1937 @-@ 10 @-@ 19 , SH @-@ 8 had been truncated to Anadarko . However , on 1938 @-@ 10 @-@ 18 , the route was extended back to the former southern terminus at Randlett ; this change did not appear on the state map until the April 1941 edition . On 1941 @-@ 04 @-@ 14 , the route was realigned to run through Cyril once again . 
 On 1955 @-@ 09 @-@ 12 , SH @-@ 8 underwent a small realignment . Previously , the highway went due north from Carmen , then turned due east , running through Lambert before connecting to US @-@ 64 south of Cherokee . As a result of the 1955 realignment , SH @-@ 8 cut northeast to connect to US @-@ 64 directly , bypassing Lambert . 
 All of SH @-@ 8 between Randlett and Cyril was once again dropped on 1966 @-@ 05 @-@ 09 , restoring the route to its current southern terminus at US @-@ 277 / SH @-@ 19 in Cyril . No major changes to the highway have occurred since 1966 . 
 = = Spurs = = 
 SH @-@ 8A runs from SH @-@ 8 to SH @-@ 51A , north of Watonga . Along the way , it provides access to Roman Nose State Park . 
 A former SH @-@ 8A connected the highway to the town of Geronimo . When SH @-@ 8 was truncated to Cyril in 1966 , it became SH @-@ <unk> . 
 SH @-@ 8B is a spur route from SH @-@ 8 to Aline . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = The Tale of Mr. Tod = 
 The Tale of Mr. Tod is a children 's book written and illustrated by Beatrix Potter , first published by Frederick Warne & Co. in 1912 . The tale is about a badger called Tommy Brock and his arch enemy Mr. Tod , a fox . Brock kidnaps the children of Benjamin Bunny and his wife Flopsy , intending to eat them , and hides them in an oven in the home of Mr. Tod . Benjamin and his cousin Peter Rabbit have followed Tommy Brock in an attempt to rescue the babies . When Mr. Tod finds Brock asleep in his bed , he determines to get him out of the house . His initial attempt fails , and the two eventually come to blows . Under cover of the fight , the rabbits rescue the baby rabbits . The tale was influenced by the Uncle Remus stories , and was set in the fields of Potter 's Castle Farm . Black and white illustrations outnumber those in colour . The tale is critically considered one of Potter 's " most complex and successful in plot and tone . " 
 Potter 's publisher wanted Mr. Tod to be the first in a new series of Peter Rabbit tales in larger formats with elaborate bindings , but Potter disliked the idea . Nonetheless , Mr. Tod and its 1913 follower , The Tale of Pigling Bland , were published in the new formats , but the idea was eventually dropped and the ordinary bindings were adopted for reprints . The two tales were the last completely original productions by Potter . She continued to publish sporadically but used decades @-@ old concepts and sketches rather than new images and ideas . In 1995 , an animated film adaptation of the tale was featured on the BBC television anthology series The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . 
 = = Background = = 
 Following her acquisition of Hill Top Farm in 1905 in Lancashire ( now Cumbria ) , Potter began her most creative and productive years as a children 's author and illustrator . By the end of the decade , however , she had grown weary of writing for children . Her eyesight was failing , and the demands of operating her farm and caring for her aging parents limited the amount of time and attention she could allocate to the production of books . In 1912 however , she brought Peter Rabbit and his kin together for one last time in The Tale of Mr. Tod . She thought her editors too cautious and too concerned about offending the public , and knew she was capable of creating more complex characters and plots . In Mr. Tod she offered her fans two villainous characters – Mr. Tod and Tommy Brock , a fox and a badger . The Tale of Mr. Tod and the book to follow in 1913 , The Tale of Pigling Bland , were her last completely original works . Her marriage to William <unk> in October 1913 effectively put an end to her career as a children 's author and illustrator , but she continued to produce sporadically over the following years at the demand of fans and publisher , though relying upon decades @-@ old ideas and sketches rather than new concepts and illustrations . 
 = = Composition and publication = = 
 Influenced in part by the Uncle Remus stories , Mr. Tod is longer than Potter 's earlier tales , and set in the Sawrey countryside at Bull Banks and Oatmeal Crag , two fields Potter acquired with Castle Farm in 1909 . Pen and ink sketches outnumber the watercolors . 
 Potter 's publisher Harold Warne received the text of Mr. Tod in November 1911 , though Potter had written the tale some time in the past . Warne had doubts about the name ' <unk> ' for a fox , but Potter responded : 
 " Tod " is surely a very common name for a fox ? It is probably Saxon , it was the word in ordinary use in Scotland a few years ago , probably is still amongst the country people . In the same way " <unk> " or " gray " is the country name for a badger . I should call them " <unk> " – both names are used in Westmoreland . " <unk> " , " <unk> " are examples of place names ; also Broxbourne and <unk> [ ... ] " Hey quoth the Tod / it 's a <unk> bright night ! / The wind 's in the west / and the moon shines bright " — Mean to say you never heard that ? " 
 The tale is about undesirable elements of society . Warne objected to Potter 's opening paragraph : " I am quite tired of making goody goody books about nice people . I will make a book about two disagreeable people , called Tommy Brock and Mr. Tod . " He altered the text to read , " I have made many books about well @-@ behaved people . " Potter responded : 
 If it were not impertinent to lecture one 's publisher — you are a great deal too much afraid of the public , for whom I have never cared one <unk> @-@ button . [ ... ] I have always thought the opening paragraph distinctly good , because it gets away from " once upon a time " . 
 She teased him about the name Bull Banks and his sensitivity to less than genteel expressions : " One thinks nothing of bulls and <unk> in the farming world ; but after you objected to cigars it occurred to me to wonder . " There were no objections , and the tale was finished in July . 
 The spring of 1912 was emotionally unsettling for Potter ; her father was ill and severe strikes across the country caused hardships . In April 1912 , she managed to get away from London for Hill Top to execute background drawings for the tale . By July , most of the colour blocks were finished , but Potter was concerned about the anatomy of the fox , and checked photographs and reference books in the Natural History Museum in an attempt to distinguish the true English red fox ( Vulpes vulpes ) from other species . The book was finished by the end of July when she left for holiday at Lake Windemere . Completion of the tale had taken longer than usual because her time had been shared with participation in a campaign opposing hydroplanes on Lake Windemere and the proposed construction of an aeroplane factory near the lake . 
 The Tale of Mr. Tod was published by Frederick Warne & Co. in 1912 , and dedicated to Francis William , the two @-@ year @-@ old son of her cousin Caroline ( Hutton ) Clark , who had married the Laird of Ulva and was living and farming on a small island off the coast of Mull : " For Francis William of Ulva – someday ! " 
 During the course of the tale 's development , Warne proposed launching Mr. Tod as the first in a new series of tales in slightly larger formats with elaborate bindings to accommodate wider spines . Potter objected . She did not want to become involved in a new series ; her eyesight was failing , and she had grown weary of writing . She complained of having difficulty in producing " fresh short stories " , and believed children preferred little change in the books . Nonetheless , Mr. Tod , and the next book , The Tale of Pigling Bland were published in a larger format with elaborate bindings as " Series II , New Style " . Potter disliked the new endpaper depicting Samuel Whiskers sticking up a giant poster while watched by other animal characters , thinking it too like a railway advertisement . Eventually , the larger format and new designation were dropped , and the ordinary binding adopted for reprints . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The tale begins with Tommy Brock , a badger , being entertained by old Mr. Bouncer , the father of Benjamin Bunny . Mr. Bouncer has been left to tend his grandchildren while his son and daughter @-@ in @-@ law Flopsy are away , but , after smoking a pipe of rabbit @-@ tobacco , he falls asleep in Tommy 's company . Tommy puts the bunnies in his sack and slips out . When the parents return , Benjamin sets off in pursuit of the thief . 
 Benjamin finds and brings his cousin Peter Rabbit into the rescue venture , and the two discover Tommy has invaded one of Mr. Tod 's homes . Mr. Tod , a fox , has multiple homes but keeps moving . Often Tommy lodges in his homes . Peeping through the bedroom window , the rabbits see Tommy asleep in Mr. Tod 's bed , and , peeping through the kitchen window , they see the table set for a meal . They realise the bunnies are alive , but shut in the oven . They try to dig a tunnel into the house but hide when Mr. Tod suddenly arrives in a very bad temper , which has caused him to move house . 
 The fox discovers the badger asleep in his bed , and originally plans to hit him , but decides against this due to the Badger 's teeth . He decides to play a trick upon him involving a pail of water balanced on the overhead tester of the bed . Brock however is awake , escapes the trick , and makes tea for himself in the kitchen . Mr. Tod thinks the bucket has killed Tommy and decides to bury him in the tunnel the rabbits have dug , thinking Tommy dug it . When Mr. Tod discovers Tommy in the Kitchen and has tea thrown over him , a violent fight erupts that continues outdoors . The two roll away down the hill still fighting . Benjamin and Peter quickly gather the bunnies , and return home in triumph . 
 = = Illustrations = = 
 The Tale of Mr. Tod is longer than the typical Potter tale with 16 colour illustrations and a series of 42 black and white drawings , one illustration per page . The illustrations depict the wider landscape of Near Sawrey : Bull Banks , Oatmeal Crag , and <unk> Water . The interior of Mr. Tod 's house provided the opportunity to present details of the interiors of village homes . In the frontispiece , Mr. Tod stands on a stone flag floor against a timber wall of <unk> and plank construction ( interlocking thick and thin vertical panels ) covered with a sage @-@ green limewash . A tea caddy , a silver salt , and blue and white willow china decorate his kitchen . The beehive @-@ shaped brick oven was drawn from the one at the Sun Inn in Hawkshead and serves as a place for Brock to hide the bunnies . <unk> frames in the black and white illustrations give the impression of woodcuts . Potter believed a black frame pulled a picture together and sent back the distance . Potter made the kitchen dim to eliminate some detail of the battle between Tod and Brock . 
 Scholar Ruth K. MacDonald argues that the black and white illustrations emphasize the mythic , permanent quality of the tale with heavy black lines that display little of the delicacy characteristic of Potter 's work . She suggests these pictures are more like woodcuts in their heaviness than drawings , and points out they were not " tossed off " to satisfy fans and her publisher , but deliberately planned to give an antique , primitive quality to the story in the manner of Caxton 's woodcuts for his edition of Aesop 's Fables . 
 She notes that the colour illustrations are not vignetted nor surrounded with heavy black lines but rather with a white border that prevents the pastels from fading into the background . The lightness of the pastels and the overall green tones of the colour illustrations contrast with the heavy lines of the black and white pictures and the blocks of print , and this contrast produces a sense of fading because of antiquity yet suggest permanence , " as the greenness of nature is permanent and recurring in the cycle of seasons . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Many of Potter 's tales appealed to girls , but Mr. Tod had a strong following among boys , due perhaps to the lengthy fight at the end of the book accompanied by " dreadful bad language " . Six @-@ year @-@ old Harold <unk> wrote to Potter asking if the fight between Tod and Brock was still raging . Potter replied ; describing the end of the battle and the injuries to the combatants : 
 I am sorry to tell you they are still quarreling . Mr. Tod has been living in the willow till he was flooded out ; at present he is in the stick house with a bad cold in his head . As for the end of the fight – Mr. Tod had nearly half his hair pulled out of his brush [ tail ] and five bad bites , especially one ear , which is <unk> up ( like you sometimes see nasty old Tom Cat 's ears ) . the only misfortune to Tommy Brock – he had his jacket torn and lost one of his boots . So for a long time he went about with one of his feet bundled up in dirty rags , like an old beggar man . Then he found the boot in the quarry . There was a beetle in the boot and several slugs . Tommy Brock ate them . He is a nasty person . He will go on living in Mr. Tod 's comfortable house till springtime – then he will move off into the woods & live out doors – and Mr. Tod will come back very , very cautiously – & there will need to be a big spring cleaning ! " 
 In 1915 , the children of an unknown family living in a Devonshire rectory wrote to express their disappointment in the lack of a sequel to Mr. Tod . Potter enjoyed continuing the lives of her characters through these letters and responded : 
 It is sad to have caused such disappointment ! [ ... ] I think I saw Tommy Brock 's wife last week . I couldn 't think who the person reminded me of , and when I read your letter I remembered directly ! I am not sure how many of a family there are – lots ! and what we call a " long " family , all ages with some long time between . I believe Tommy Brock is very grumpy with the grown @-@ up ones , and makes them clear off into the woods ; and , as you know , he is not often at home himself . Mrs. Badger is rather lighter coloured than he is , rather sandy , with little piggy eyes and a <unk> nose , and a not particularly clean house , I should say – she finishes wearing out Tommy 's celebrated boots . Mr. Tod has been across lately , I smelt him myself ; but he had removed before the hounds came . 
 = = Critical commentary = = 
 The Tale of Mr. Tod was sketched out long before its 1912 publication , and is a forbidding tale with relief only in the landscape illustrations . Graham Greene thought Potter was suffering some sort of emotional disturbance when the tale was composed , but Potter denied the allegation and observed only that she was suffering the after @-@ effects of the ' flu . She deprecated Greene 's " Freudian school of criticism " . 
 There are a few inconsistencies from the naturalist 's view point . Foxes and badgers are not necessarily mutual enemies in nature . Badgers do not normally invade the homes of foxes , and are not typically dirty . Badgers do sometimes eat bunnies , not from a <unk> for bunnies but simply because they are omnivorous . The inconsistencies are few and employed to create individual characters rather than evoke an archetypical fox and badger . 
 The tale does have archetypical sources in the stories of Uncle Remus . There , both rabbits and foxes contend , but unlike the fox in Uncle Remus , the Potter fox is not particularly wily and the rabbits win – not by outsmarting the fox – but only because they enjoy a stroke of luck . The badger is not a typical animal in Uncle Remus but in Potter he is the clever one . The finale reunites the rabbits but the wily animals win nothing . Mr. Tod and the Uncle Remus stories are only similar in depicting the powerless triumphing over the powerful . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 Mr. Tod was adapted to animation and telecast as a segment of the BBC anthology series , The World of Peter Rabbit and Friends . <unk> Landen and Don Henderson voiced Tod and Brock respectively . 
 = Kekal = 
 Kekal ( sometimes stylized as <unk> ) is a heavy metal and electronic music band formed in 1995 in Jakarta , Indonesia . According to AllMusic , Kekal was one of the first heavy metal bands from Indonesia to make international inroads , and according to sociologist of heavy metal , Keith Kahn @-@ Harris , was one of the few extreme metal bands from Southeast Asia to ever make more than a minimal impression on the global scene . Founded by two musicians known simply Yeris and Newbabe , the band underwent some shifts in lineup in its early years , but emerged with a consistent lineup of three key @-@ members , guitarist / vocalist Jeff Arwadi , bassist Azhar Levi Sianturi , and guitarist Leo Setiawan . Frequently labeled as black metal , progressive metal , and avant @-@ garde metal , Kekal plays a very diverse range of music styles within the frame of metal and rock , incorporating many other music genres such as ambient , electronic , jazz fusion , and progressive rock . Over the course of its career , Kekal has transitioned from a heavy metal @-@ based style to a more experimental and electronic sound . 
 Throughout its entire career , the band has released nine full @-@ length studio albums , two EPs , two compilation albums , two demo tapes , a split album with Slechtvalk , and several contributions to various collaborative albums , and in 2004 engaged in a successful European mini @-@ tour . As of 12 August 2009 , all key @-@ members have officially left Kekal , but continue to contribute material . Though the band currently has no active members , former members of the band contributed to an eighth studio album entitled 8 which was officially released in 2010 , and a ninth studio album entitled Autonomy , released in 2012 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years ( formation to 2002 ) = = = 
 The early history of Kekal started out in 1990 , when 16 @-@ year @-@ old musician Jeff Arwadi formed a self @-@ styled " punkish thrash metal " band called Obliteration with some of his high school friends , but Jeff quit this group in 1991 to better learn guitar . Kekal was officially formed on 15 August 1995 , by two friends , simply named under pseudonyms Yeris and Newbabe ( the latter revealed years later as <unk> <unk> ) , as a more straightforward extreme metal band . The name Kekal was coined by Newbabe , and is Indonesian for ' Immortal ' or ' Eternal ' . The band was intended as a one time project , and recruited a vocalist known simply as " Harry " to help record a four @-@ song demo tape . This demo began to circulate and caught the attention of future guitarist Leo , who had gained experience in a Metallica and Megadeth cover band . 
 In June 1996 , Azhar Sianturi joined Kekal and the band recorded its official demo , entitled Contra <unk> <unk> , using the songwriting and production talents of Jeff Arwadi , who was also a member of the group Inner Warfare . According to Jeff , the demo was recorded in his bedroom with only a <unk> X @-@ 28 4 @-@ track tape recorder and $ 2 karaoke microphone . With the help of underground tape trading circles and local fanzines , the demo soon caught the attention of the metal scene outside Indonesia and Southeast Asia , and few record labels began offering deals . Later that year Leo Setiawan joined the band , and in April 1997 Kekal began to record its self @-@ produced debut album , Beyond the Glimpse of Dreams , released in 1998 . The album was licensed to and released by two record labels , allowing for Kekal to be known internationally , especially in the underground metal circles around Europe and North America . Harry left the band after this recording , and the remaining trio released Embrace the Dead the next year . Jeff has expressed disappointment with this album , both in the stylistic direction , which was intentionally designed to appeal to a more mainstream audience , and in the recording sessions , which would inspire the title of the band 's next album , The Painful Experience . The following year the band contributed to a Living Sacrifice tribute album with a cover of that band 's song " Mind Distant " . In October 2001 , the band 's third album , The Painful Experience , was released . Leo Setiawan left the band before the recording sessions and moved to Melbourne , Australia , but he was still listed on the album credits as a guitarist due to his contribution on the album 's songwriting and general concept . In 2002 , the band was reduced to a duo , and collaborated with the Dutch band Slechtvalk to record a split album entitled Chaos & Warfare , and also recorded a cover of " God Rest Ye Merry Gentlemen " for the compilation album Brutal Christmas : The Season in Chaos . 
 = = = International scene ( 2003 – 2006 ) = = = 
 In 2003 , with the absence of Leo as a guitarist , the remaining members Jeff and Azhar Levi recorded a cover song " Dance Macabre " for a well received Cradle of Filth tribute album entitled Covered in Filth , and shortly after they released the highly progressive and experimental 1000 Thoughts of Violence which was also well received , being rated eight out of ten by Rock Hard and was regarded as a highlight of the year 2003 by <unk> A best @-@ of collection of works and re @-@ recordings of Kekal entitled <unk> Us to Immortality was also released that year . Also that year , Kekal received notice by the Antwerp @-@ based radio show " Psych Folk " Radio on Radio Centraal , being referred to in that show 's programs on progressive music in Indonesia . The success of 1000 Thoughts of Violence was followed up by a two @-@ week European mini @-@ tour , arranged and promoted by the band 's record label in Europe at the time , Fear Dark . In March 2004 , the band played a string of shows in the Netherlands , Germany and Sweden , and was featured in the Dutch magazine Aardschok . That year also saw the release of Spirits of the Ancient Days , a collection of early Kekal demo songs . 
 Upon return to Indonesia , Kekal was back in the studio to record a fifth album Acidity which included guest musician Didi <unk> on guitars , as well as playing some local shows with him as an additional live guitarist . Acidity was released in 2005 and was an official reunion album for the band , which marked the return of Leo , and a vocal contribution by founding member Newbabe . Acidity was well received , and Kekal was again noted by " Psych Folk " Radio . In 2006 , the band started recording their sixth album , The Habit of Fire . In 2006 , Jeff leaked two cover songs , " The Prow " , originally by Voivod , and " Juices Like Wine " , originally by Celtic Frost , both of which were recorded in 2005 . 
 = = = Jeff 's move to Canada ( 2006 – 2008 ) = = = 
 In 2006 , right after the recording of The Habit of Fire , founding member Jeff Arwadi moved to Canada while the rest of the members were in Indonesia , leaving the band unable to play shows and do touring . At the same time they left their longtime record label Fear Dark and status of the band was in question . After few months of uncertainty and rumors of break @-@ up went around among their fans , they all decided to remain together and to keep the band only as a studio project . They quickly signed licensing deals with two record labels to release The Habit of Fire in 2007 . The album was received very well and was named CD of the Month by UK 's music technology magazine Sound on Sound , as well as being nominated as The Best <unk> Metal Album in 2007 by Metal Storm . In 2007 , Jeff leaked another cover tune , " Redemption " , that originally was planned as part of a Johnny Cash tribute album by Open Grave Records , a project that was ultimately shelved . Later in 2007 , Jeff announced on the band 's Myspace blog that a new Kekal album was on the way , which he had been working on all by himself . 
 It was revealed later on that the new album was entitled Audible Minority , and it was meant to be released officially on 25 December 2008 as two versions : a free download and a limited edition Digipak with total 11 songs including a cover of the A @-@ ha song " Locust " . Unfortunately the Digipak version was never released , and the album ended up being offered only as a free download instead . 
 = = = Departure of band members ( 2009 ) = = = 
 In March 2009 , Azhar Levi decided to step down from Kekal . Jeff Arwadi said that although this closed a door , Kekal would continue as a musical unit in a " new era " of the band 's history . On 12 August 2009 , Jeff announced that he and Leo had left Kekal , and that the name would continue but without active members . He said that , as well as unspecified personal reasons , he decided to leave the band because , after being closer to nature and in a less densely populated city in Canada , he was unable to continue to make dark and angry metal music which he did in the past with Kekal . Shortly after , Kekal put up an offer of three albums for free download on its website , including its best @-@ selling album to date , 1000 Thoughts of Violence . 
 Many of its fans perceived that Kekal had technically split @-@ up / disbanded at the moment band leader Jeff announced his departure from the band , despite the fact that Kekal as an institution still existed and the institution itself was not affected by any founding member leaving . To end the confusions among the fans , the band issued a statement posted on its official Facebook page : " <unk> IS NOT DEAD ! ! ! ! When Jeff left Kekal it doesn 't mean the band is dead ! " The band 's MySpace and Facebook pages are still active and currently being moderated mainly by volunteers from the band 's Street Team members , as well as Azhar and Jeff themselves . 
 = = = Current activity ( 2010 – present ) = = = 
 On 13 January 2010 , Kekal announced that a new album was in the works , and that former members Jeff , Leo , and Levi were all contributing . Then , on 15 February , Jeff posted a music video on his YouTube channel for an , at that time , untitled new album . The music video was for a song entitled " Tabula Rasa " , which was also released for streaming . On 23 June 2010 , the band announced on its Myspace and Facebook that it would release its eighth album entitled 8 in late 2010 , and that further details would be forthcoming . 
 On 15 August 2010 , a remastered , limited @-@ edition version of the band 's second album , Embrace the Dead , was released as a free @-@ download for up 1000 downloads in celebration of the band 's 15 year anniversary . 
 Kekal 's newest album , 8 , was made available for pre @-@ order on 22 December 2010 by Whirlwind Records , which included an offer of free shipping within Europe up to 24 December . The album was released on 23 January 2011 . 
 On 2 March 2011 , Jeff Arwadi announced on the Kekal Facebook page that he and Leo were recording new music , and said that another album would probably be released sometime in 2012 . On 2 April , Kekal announced that a download @-@ only EP would be released in June or July , and would contain two brand new tracks recorded in 2011 , as well as separate guitar and vocal tracks of " Tabula Rasa " for the purpose of remixing by the general public . On 26 April , Jeff uploaded a music video for the song " Futuride " from the upcoming EP , which was promised to be released in July . The official release date for the album , 10 July 2011 , was announced over Facebook on 23 June 2011 . The title of the EP was Futuride EP , and three tracks from the album were made available for public use under Creative Commons Attribution Non @-@ Commercial Share Alike license . On 24 February 2012 , Kekal announced the title of its ninth studio album , Autonomy , and the album was released on 19 December 2012 , first as a limited , hand @-@ numbered deluxe @-@ edition double @-@ CD with the 2008 album Audible Minority ( which was previously never released on CD ) added as a bonus disc . On 29 June 2013 , Autonomy was released by Indonesian <unk> Yes No Wave Music as a free digital download , but restricted to Indonesian market only . 
 On 19 March 2013 Kekal released a surprise EP , Unsung Division , announced the 10th full @-@ length Kekal album would be released in 2015 , and the possibility of a second EP in late 2013 or 2014 . The Unsung Division EP consisted of songs originally written for the upcoming 2015 album , but removed as the " some compositions turned out to be a bit out @-@ of @-@ place with the rest of the album 's general concept , " according to Arwadi . 
 = = Music = = 
 = = = Style = = = 
 Although mainly known as a progressive metal and avant @-@ garde or experimental metal band , Kekal has stylistic origins in extreme metal , particularly black metal , but even with its debut album the band demonstrated a unique style . Beyond the Glimpse of Dreams featured a varied sound of black and death metal and incorporated a range of vocal styles such as high pitched black metal shrieks , death growls , and female singing . On Embrace the Dead , Kekal used a combination of black metal with death , classic , and doom metal elements and included hints of Gothic and dark wave . The third album , The Painful Experience , saw the band fusing its black metal style with progressive metal and included elements of thrash , classic , and power metal . Mark Allan Powell described that most of the band 's songs were midtempo to fast with a heavy , guitar @-@ driven style , though the band incorporated " certain elements of variety into the sound . " In a 2001 interview , Jeff expressed ambivalence to what style the band was described as , as long as it was " metal " . On its fourth , highly technical album , 1000 Thoughts of Violence , the band plunged into ultra @-@ progressive experiments , The album was noted for switching between raging intensity and more mellow passages , such as the song " Violent Society " , which even included a hip @-@ hop passage . <unk> noted that the band had become more progressive and lost some of its toughness and aggression . " Psych Folk " Radio viewed the album favorably , mentioning that 1000 Thoughts of Violence " is a possibility to invite progressive rock listeners to take the challenge to open up their perspectives . " In March 2004 , Aardschok Magazine described the band 's albums as a mix of black , heavy , and progressive metal , being grounded in the extreme metal scene . 
 On its well received fifth album , Acidity , Kekal used double bass drum blasts and saw the band incorporating styles such as electronic , black metal , progressive metal , progressive rock , classic rock , indie rock , psychedelic rock , trip hop , jazz , ambient , and avant @-@ garde . Jeff Arwadi responded to the " avant @-@ garde " label in an interview with Ultimate <unk> : " For us , avant @-@ garde is not a classification of music . It is a state of being , a state of becoming ... ... once your music can be classified easily , I don 't think the word progressive or avant @-@ garde fits . So that 's why we mention in our bio that ' avant @-@ garde ' is an ideal state for us , and not a classification . " On the next album , The Habit of Fire , the band maintained its use of various music styles such as electronica , ambient , and jazz fusion , but began to shed its black metal roots and introduced atmospheric soundscapes and an industrial vibe . Pop Matters described the album as mixing black metal , noise rock , progressive rock , and jazz fusion . With the 2010 album 8 , the first album by the band without any active members , Metal Hammer Germany noted that the band was now far away from its early black metal days . <unk> described the band as avant @-@ garde tinged post @-@ rock , with the album being predominantly electronic , but stated that " experimental " was the simplest description of the album . The reviewer , Björn Backes , made comparisons to The Prodigy and The Chemical Brothers and noted the use of " weird " arrangements , post @-@ rock mood swings and alternative guitar sound . Sonic Seducer called the album simply avant @-@ garde and described the band as loving triplets , polyrhythms , and complex beats . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Kekal has identified itself with the punk rock and early 1980s metal scenes , and considers itself a " street @-@ progressive " band that is aesthetically more akin to Sonic Youth or The Mars Volta than to technically oriented bands like Dream Theater . The band claims roots in 1980s forms of heavy metal as pioneered by bands like Iron Maiden , Bathory , Trouble , Helloween , Celtic Frost , Sodom , Death , and Massacre . Dimebag Darrell and Quorthon have also been cited as influences . 
 Currently , Kekal has cited an influence from many styles of music and now lists a large host of artists as an inspiration , including A @-@ ha , Amebix , Autechre , Björk , Black Sabbath , <unk> & der Club of Gore , Camel , Celtic Frost , Cocteau Twins , Chick Corea , The Cure , Miles Davis , Depeche Mode , Discharge , Duran Duran , Gazebo , Godflesh , Iron Maiden , Joy Division , Killing Joke , King Crimson , Led Zeppelin , Mantronix , Massive Attack , Curtis Mayfield , Merzbow , Pat Metheny , Wes Montgomery , Gary Moore , Napalm Death , Outkast , Pan Sonic , Paradise Lost , Parliament , Pet Shop Boys , Pink Floyd , The Police , Portishead , Radiohead , Red Snapper , Return to Forever , Rush , Sonic Youth , Squarepusher , Talk Talk , Tangerine Dream , Amon Tobin , Trouble , and Voivod . 
 = = = Songwriting and recording techniques = = = 
 Jeff has stated that starting from the album The Painful Experience they incorporated their own approach to record drum tracks in the studio which they call " hybrid drums " , a mix of real @-@ time performance and software @-@ based matrix programming . He also mentioned the efficiency of using the hybrid drumming compared with getting a drummer : " About the drummer , it is still very hard to find a right drummer because Kekal music is ranging from very extreme @-@ metal with blast beats and fast double @-@ kicks , to powerful rock beats that demand steady tempo , and to some polyrhythmic playing and time @-@ signature shifts in the characteristics of jazz and prog drumming . We would need 2 or 3 kinds of drummer for Kekal . That 's why the best thing for the recording is to make the hybrid drumming . " In other interview , Jeff mentioned the process of recording of The Habit of Fire , starting from collecting samples and creating MIDI information , then manipulating the sounds to create what he called the ' skeleton ' . Then riffs , MIDI @-@ triggered instruments , synthesizers , and melodies would be added and the structure re @-@ arranged once again . Once the song structure was set , the guitars would be re @-@ recorded , then bass and drum tracks would be put on top , then vocals . Jeff also mentioned during the interview about the 2011 Futuride EP , that he has experimented with additive synthesis on the recent songs he has recorded and uses guitars to counterbalance the sounds generated by the additive synthesis . 
 = = Ethics and ideological stance = = 
 = = = Kekal and DIY ethic = = = 
 Kekal claims to have followed a strong DIY ethic throughout the majority of its career . Kekal owns the copyrights of the band 's recording masters and has 100 % artistic control over music , production and artwork . Kekal has recorded and produced most of its albums in its own studio / workstation , manages the band itself , does its own photo sessions , and designs its own album artwork and covers . As Jeff stated , " So far , we 've been known as an independent band who never want to get signed by record label , to maintain our <unk> and control over our artistic freedom , and also to own our recording masters and copyright .. Instead of band signing , we always prefer to license our finished albums to record labels . " 
 = = = Kekal and Christianity = = = 
 Kekal has acknowledged in interviews that the band members , at the time interviewed , subscribed to Christianity , and has been described as one of the first black metal bands to profess Christian beliefs . Known to have fans from different religious backgrounds , and with the majority of their listeners being non @-@ Christians , the band has stated on its Facebook page that as an institution it is not a Christian metal band and does not endorse any particular religion or ideology , and has always maintained that it is about music , life , and universality , and stands against any form of elitism and exclusivism in today 's culture . Although Christianity has comprised a part of the band 's lyrics , the band has said that from The Painful Experience ( 3rd album ) onward its lyrics have not been associated with religion or ideology at all . Mark Allan Powell commented on this in Encyclopedia of Contemporary Christian Music , stating that " on the band 's first two albums the songs testified to their Christian faith in an upfront way " , but that on their third album , the band pulled back from an overt approach that " Jeff says tended to turn people against the band before they gave the music a chance . " According to Powell , " they maintain that three @-@ fourths of their albums are purchased by non @-@ Christians . " In an interview with HM Magazine , Jeff Arwadi clarified his view on Christian metal : " I don 't want to divide our fans and market as religious - secular dichotomy . We always see everything as one . When we started the band , we knew nothing about the Christian metal scene , and we started just like a normal band in our underground scene . We grew up in the normal underground metal scene , and have already got attention from that scene since the very beginning . Kekal never belong to any church or some kind of ministry and never will . We are 100 % just like any band you would call them as secular band . But then we knew we were also accepted within the Christian metal scene as well , that 's cool to know , although I think it still less than 50 % of our general fan base . " 
 Jeff Arwadi in particular has expressed his belief in Christianity that is not a religion , but more about faith , as in his opinion most religions are about laws , organizations , rites , and dogmas . In one interview , Jeff clarified that for him personally , faith is something that drives the human life , and , just like diet and exercise , does not have to be associated with religion whatsoever . When asked to clear up the " confusion " surrounding the band 's stance regarding God , Christianity , and religions in general , Jeff responded that his views about religion are " very different than the view in western countries , " and further said that " in Indonesia , religion is not an issue of faith nor tradition . It 's more the constitutional issue , that means the legal and political ones . I am not anti @-@ religion person , but I do against religion in a political and legal context " and then Jeff added his point on Kekal 's stance as a band : " ... we are non @-@ conformists , musical anarchists . We hate being trendy and we never try to be the same with the rest of the scene . People can love us or hate us , I don 't care . " 
 = = Line @-@ up = = 
 Former members 
 Jeff Arwadi ( Altera Enigma , Armageddon Holocaust , Doctor D , Excision , Inner Warfare ) – guitar , vocals , programming , drum machine , samples & loops ( 1995 – 2009 ) 
 Azhar Levi Sianturi ( <unk> ) – bass , vocals ( 1996 – 2009 ) 
 Leo Setiawan – guitar ( 1996 – 2001 , 2005 – 2009 ) 
 Harry – vocals ( 1995 – 1998 ) 
 Newbabe – bass , vocals ( 1995 – 1996 , 2004 – 2005 ) 
 Yeris – guitar , vocals ( 1995 – 1996 ) 
 Guest musicians 
 Didi <unk> ( Happy Day , In Memoriam ) – session and live guitar , live vocals 
 Kenny Cheong ( Altera Enigma , Soundscape ) – fretless bass 
 Jason <unk> ( <unk> , Altera Enigma , <unk> ) – guitar 
 Doctor D ( Armageddon Holocaust , Doctor D , <unk> ) – vocals , noises and samples , programming 
 <unk> Christina ( Excision ) – vocals , keyboards , programming 
 Hans Kurniawan ( Inner Warfare ) – keyboard 
 <unk> <unk> – keyboards , engineering , mixing 
 Julie – female vocals 
 Hana – female vocals 
 Vera – female vocals 
 Timeline 
 Note : As of August 8 , 2009 , Kekal has no active members , but former members continue to record and contribute content for the band . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Beyond the Glimpse of Dreams – 1998 
 Embrace the Dead – 1999 
 The Painful Experience – 2001 
 1000 Thoughts of Violence – 2003 
 Acidity – 2005 
 The Habit of Fire – 2007 
 Audible Minority – 2008 
 8 – 2010 
 Autonomy – 2012 
 Multilateral - 2015 
 = SS George Washington = 
 SS George Washington was an ocean liner built in 1908 for the Bremen @-@ based North German Lloyd and was named after George Washington , the first President of the United States . The ship was also known as USS George Washington ( ID @-@ 3018 ) and USAT George Washington in service of the United States Navy and United States Army , respectively , during World War I. In the interwar period , she reverted to her original name of SS George Washington . During World War II , the ship was known as both USAT George Washington and , briefly , as USS Catlin ( AP @-@ 19 ) , in a short , second stint in the U.S. Navy . 
 When George Washington was launched in 1908 , she was the largest German @-@ built steamship and the third @-@ largest ship in the world . George Washington was built to emphasize comfort over speed and was sumptuously appointed in her first @-@ class passenger areas . The ship could carry a total of 2 @,@ 900 passengers , and made her maiden voyage in January 1909 to New York . In June 1911 , George Washington was the largest ship to participate in the Coronation Fleet Review by the United Kingdom 's newly crowned king , George V. 
 On 14 April 1912 , George Washington passed a particularly large iceberg south of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland and radioed a warning to all ships in the area , including White Star Line ocean liner Titanic , which sank near the same location . Throughout her German passenger career , contemporary news accounts often reported on notable persons — typically actors , singers , and politicians — who sailed on George Washington . 
 At the outbreak of World War I , George Washington was interned by the then @-@ neutral United States , until that country entered into the conflict in April 1917 . George Washington was seized by the United States and taken over for use as a troop transport by the U.S. Navy . Commissioned as USS George Washington ( ID @-@ 3018 ) , she sailed with her first load of American troops in December 1917 . 
 In total , she carried 48 @,@ 000 passengers to France , and returned 34 @,@ 000 to the United States after the Armistice . George Washington also carried U.S. President Woodrow Wilson to France twice for the Paris Peace Conference . George Washington was decommissioned in 1920 and handed over the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , who reconditioned her for passenger service . SS George Washington sailed in transatlantic passenger service for both the United States Mail Steamship Company ( one voyage ) and United States Lines for ten years , before she was laid up in the Patuxent River in Maryland in 1931 . 
 During World War II , the ship was re @-@ commissioned by the U.S. Navy as USS Catlin ( AP @-@ 19 ) for about six months and was operated by the British under Lend @-@ Lease , but her old coal @-@ fired engines were too slow for effective combat use . After conversion to oil @-@ fired boilers , the ship was chartered to the U.S. Army as USAT George Washington and sailed around the world in 1943 in trooping duties . The ship sailed in regular service to the United Kingdom and the Mediterranean from 1944 to 1947 , and was laid up in Baltimore after ending her Army service . A fire in January 1951 damaged the ship severely , and she was sold for scrapping the following month . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 SS George Washington was an ocean liner built in within two years ( 1907 – 1908 ) by AG Vulcan of Stettin , Germany ( present @-@ day Szczecin , Poland ) , for North German Lloyd ( German : Norddeutscher Lloyd or NDL ) . Intended for Bremen – New York passenger service , the ship was named after George Washington , the first President of the United States as a way to make the ship more appealing to immigrants , who then made up the majority of transatlantic passengers and believed formalities on arrival would be easier on a ship with an American name . George Washington was launched on 10 November 1908 by the United States Ambassador to Germany , David Jayne Hill . At the time of her launch , she was the third @-@ largest ocean liner in the world , behind only Cunard Line ships Lusitania and Mauretania . George Washington also became the largest German @-@ built steamship , surpassing the Hamburg America Line 's Kaiserin Auguste Victoria , and held that distinction until the 1913 launch of Hamburg America 's Vaterland . 
 After George Washington was completed , she was reported in contemporary news accounts as being 27 @,@ 000 gross register tons ( GRT ) , though present @-@ day sources agree on a figure of 25 @,@ 570 GRT . Her displacement was reported as being approximately 37 @,@ 000 long tons ( 38 @,@ 000 t ) , more than twice the <unk> t displacement of the British battleship Dreadnought . She was powered by two quadruple @-@ expansion steam engines that generated 20 @,@ 000 horsepower ( 15 @,@ 000 kW ) and propelled her considerably faster than the 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ) guaranteed by her builders . Because she was designed to emphasize comfort over speed , George Washington 's engines consumed an economical 350 long tons ( 360 t ) of coal daily , or about one @-@ third as much as the Cunard <unk> Lusitania and Mauretania . By using less coal , and , consequently , needing less space to carry it , the liner was able to carry up to 13 @,@ 000 long tons ( 13 @,@ 000 t ) of cargo . The liner also featured the Stone @-@ Lloyd system of hydraulically operated bulkhead doors for her thirteen watertight compartments . 
 George Washington had accommodations for nearly 2 @,@ 900 passengers , with 900 divided between first and second class and the balance as third class or steerage . The ship had only eight decks rather than a more typical nine , which gave her passenger accommodations a spacious feel . The first @-@ class passenger section included 31 cabins with attached baths , and the liner 's imperial suites were designed by German architect Rudolf Alexander Schröder . The second @-@ class , third @-@ class , and steerage compartments were fitted out in a " comfortable manner " suitable for each class . 
 The first class public rooms were " sumptuously appointed " , and included murals by German fresco artist Otto <unk> that commemorated the life and times of George Washington . First @-@ class passengers could visit a separate lounge , a reading room decorated by Bruno Paul , a two @-@ story smoking room , and their own dining room that spanned the width of the ship . The upper and lower floors of the smoking room were joined by a broad staircase which helped , according to a report in The New York Times , make it " one of the most attractive parts " of the first @-@ class areas . The dining saloon seated 350 diners at small tables designed for between two and six diners in " roomy and moveable " red Morocco chairs . The dining room was decorated in white and gold , with a gilded dome rising above , while its walls featured floral designs executed against a blue background . 
 Other first @-@ class passenger amenities aboard George Washington included a gymnasium with machines for " Swedish exercises " , and two electric elevators for those who didn 't want to exercise at all . There was also a darkroom open to amateur photographers ; 20 dog kennels , along with a kennel master ; a 70 @-@ by @-@ 50 @-@ foot ( 21 by 15 m ) solarium decorated with green and gold tapestry , palms , and flowers of all kinds ; and an open air cafe on the awning deck for taking after @-@ dinner coffee . Second @-@ class passengers had a separate dining room , a drawing room , and a smoking room , and third @-@ class passengers had similar amenities . 
 = = North German Lloyd passenger service = = 
 George Washington began her maiden voyage on 12 June 1909 , sailing from Bremen to New York via Southampton and Cherbourg . On board were 1 @,@ 169 passengers which included a German press contingent ; Philipp Heineken , the <unk> of North German Lloyd ; and a chimpanzee named Consul , billed as " his Darwinian Highness " , the " Almost Monkey @-@ Man " , who was coming to America under contract for the William Morris Vaudeville circuit . 
 Upon her arrival in New York on 20 June , George Washington was greeted by the unfurling of the official banner of the League of Peace from the Singer Building , and docked at 18 : 30 at the North German Lloyd piers in Hoboken , New Jersey . Coincidentally , Martha Washington , an ocean liner of the unrelated Austro @-@ American Line , was in port when George Washington docked in New York for the first time . 
 On 22 June , the liner hosted a press luncheon , and , the next afternoon , hosted some 3 @,@ 000 members of the Daughters of the American Revolution who presented a commemorative bronze tablet . Stewart L. Woodford , a former Congressman and ambassador , spoke at the ceremony dedicating the tablet , which was placed at the base of the staircase in the first @-@ class smoking room . Beginning 24 June , the North German Lloyd opened George Washington to the public for five days of viewing of the new ship . 
 Sailing on her first eastbound journey on 1 July , George Washington commenced regular service between Bremen and New York with intermediate stops in Southampton and Cherbourg . North German Lloyd considered the Washington , as her crew affectionately called her , such a success that they soon ordered another liner of similar , but slightly larger , size . 
 On 24 June 1911 , George Washington participated in the Coronation Fleet Review by the United Kingdom 's newly crowned king , George V. Stationed at the head of the second row of merchant ships , George Washington — full dressed for the occasion — was reported by The Times as " by far the largest ship present " . 
 While headed to New York on the morning of 14 April 1912 , crew aboard George Washington observed a large iceberg as the ship passed south of the Grand Banks of Newfoundland . By noon the ship passed within a half mile ( 900 m ) of the iceberg , estimated by the crew at 112 feet ( 34 m ) above the waterline and 410 feet ( 120 m ) long . After recording the ship 's position , George Washington radioed a warning to all ships in the area . The White Star steamship Titanic , some 250 nautical miles ( 460 km ) east of George Washington 's position , acknowledged receipt of the warning , one of several her radio operators received . On 15 April , George Washington received garbled transmissions that informed that Titanic had struck an iceberg less than twelve hours later , and in nearly the same position as the one that George Washington had reported . Edwin Drechsel , in his 2 @-@ volume chronicle of North German Lloyd , draws comparisons between the iceberg photographed by George Washington ( and first published in his book ) , and a better @-@ known photo taken from the Hamburg America Line ship Prinz Adalbert , purportedly of the Titanic iceberg . Drechsel suggests that the iceberg photographed and reported by George Washington may have been one and the same . 
 = = = Notable passengers = = = 
 Throughout her Lloyd transatlantic career George Washington carried some notable and interesting passengers to and from Europe . In August 1909 Sigmund Freud sailed from Bremen bound for New York on his one and only trip to the US . He was accompanied by his colleagues Carl Jung and Sándor <unk> . In February 1910 , banker Edgar Speyer , a Privy Counsellor appointed by Edward VII of the United Kingdom , arrived for a visit to the United States . Prince Tsai Tao , the uncle of the Emperor of China , departed in one of George Washington 's imperial suites after a four @-@ day visit to New York in May ; the Chinese Imperial flag flew from the mainmast in his honor as the ship departed . In October , Henry W. Taft , brother of U.S. President William Howard Taft returned from a visit to Europe . In December , disgraced Arctic explorer Frederick Cook arrived on the liner ; conflicting opinions on the veracity of his claims of reaching the North Pole nearly caused a fight to erupt on board . On the same voyage as Cook , German actor Ernst von <unk> arrived for his first stage performances in New York in over 20 years . 
 Composer Engelbert Humperdinck , after attending the debut of his opera <unk> at the Metropolitan Opera , sailed on George Washington in early January 1911 in order to attend the opera 's Berlin premiere . American sculptor George Grey Barnard returned to New York in April amidst controversy over some of his works . An organization called the National Society for Protection of Morals was protesting the presence of nude figures in sculptures he executed for the Pennsylvania State Capitol in Harrisburg . July saw George Washington transporting a menagerie of sorts . The liner was carrying a shipment from India of 6 white peacocks , 2 lions , 2 elephants , 150 monkeys , and some 2 @,@ 000 canaries destined for the recently organized Saint Louis Zoological Park . In August , two men of note — both headed for Berlin — sailed on George Washington . Nathan Straus , co @-@ owner with his brother Isidor of R.H. Macy & Company , sailed as the U.S. delegate to the third world congress for the protection of infants held in Berlin . Congressman Richard <unk> , charged by President Taft to deliver a statue of Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben to the German government , sailed with the statue , which was a gift from the American people . 
 Financier and philanthropist J. P. Morgan , Jr. returned from a two @-@ month trip to Europe in November 1912 ; his wife followed him home the next month . Also arriving on George Washington 's November crossing was Mary Garden , a Scottish @-@ born soprano , who was returning from a sabbatical in Scotland . The next month , opera singers Frieda Hempel and Leon Rains , both headed for appearances with the Metropolitan Opera , arrived on the same voyage as Mrs. Morgan . Hempel , a German soprano , was with the Berlin Royal Opera , and American tenor Rains was with the Saxon Royal Opera of Dresden . 
 Newlyweds Francis B. Sayre , an assistant district attorney in New York , and Jessie Woodrow Wilson Sayre , the daughter of U.S. President Woodrow Wilson , sailed in November 1913 for a European honeymoon . The couple , wed at the White House , traveled in one of George Washington 's imperial suites . The following January , English playwright W. Somerset Maugham quietly slipped out of New York on George Washington . Maugham had arrived in New York in mid November to see Billie Burke in the New York premiere of his play , The Land of Promise . 
 = = World War I = = 
 George Washington continued operating on the Bremen – New York route until World War I when she sought refuge in New York , a neutral port in 1914 . With the American entry into the war in 1917 , George Washington was taken over 6 April and towed to the New York Navy Yard for conversion into a transport . She commissioned 6 September 1917 , with Captain Edwin T. Pollock in command . 
 George Washington sailed with her first load of troops 4 December 1917 and during the next 2 years made 18 round trip voyages in support of the American Expeditionary Forces . During this period she also made several special voyages . President Woodrow Wilson and the American representatives to the Paris Peace Conference sailed for Europe in George Washington 4 December 1918 . On this crossing she was protected by Pennsylvania , and was escorted into Brest , France , 13 December by ten battleships and twenty @-@ eight destroyers in an impressive demonstration of American naval strength . After carrying 4000 soldiers back home to the U.S. , George Washington carried Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin Roosevelt and the Chinese and Mexican peace commissions to France in January 1919 . On 24 February , she returned President Wilson to the United States . The President again embarked on board George Washington in March 1919 ; arriving France 13 March , and ( see picture [ 1 ] ) returned at the conclusion of the historic conference 8 July 1919 . 
 During the fall of 1919 , George Washington carried another group of distinguished passengers — King Albert and Queen Elizabeth of Belgium and their party . Arriving New York 2 October , the royal couple paid a visit before returning to Brest 12 November . Subsequently , the ship was decommissioned 28 November 1919 after having transported some 48 @,@ 000 passengers to Europe and 34 @,@ 000 back to the United States . The ship was turned over to the United States Shipping Board on 28 January 1920 . 
 = = = The Hatchet newspaper = = = 
 Started in February 1918 ; as a means to relieve the stress the troops , sailors , and officers were under aboard a ship in the danger zone ; it was written by officers who had previous literary experience and produced by men who had printing and publishing experience . It was printed on a small hand press – 5 @,@ 000 copies with the first issue but this was increased to 7 @,@ 000 – and titled The Hatchet ( a reference to the tale about George Washington and the cherry tree ) . News from the ship and news received by radio were in the single @-@ sheet newspaper . The masthead in 1919 listed the ship chaplain as managing editor and three reporters — one each from the Associated Press , International News Service and the United Press as " associate editors " . The newspaper pages , printed on a shipboard press , measured about 9 by 8 inches ( 23 by 20 cm ) . The newspaper 's motto : " We Cannot Tell a Lie " . Its front page claimed it had " The Largest Circulation On The Atlantic Ocean " . 
 = = Interwar passenger service = = 
 After her delivery to the United States Shipping Board ( USSB ) , George Washington was used to transport 250 members of the American Legion to France as guests of the French Government in 1921 . The vessel was then reconditioned by USSB for transatlantic service , and chartered by the U.S. Mail Steamship Company , for whom she made one voyage to Europe in March 1921 . The company was taken over by the government August 1921 and its name changed to the United States Lines . George Washington served the Line on the transatlantic route until 1931 when she was laid up in the Patuxent River , Maryland . 
 = = World War II = = 
 George Washington was reacquired for Navy use from the United States Maritime Commission on 28 January 1941 and commissioned as USS Catlin ( AP @-@ 19 ) on 13 March 1941 . She was named in honor of Brigadier General Albertus W. Catlin , USMC . It was found , however , that the coal @-@ burning engines did not give the required speed for protection against submarines , and she was decommissioned on 26 September 1941 . Because of their great need for ships in 1941 , Great Britain took the ship over under Lend @-@ Lease on 29 September 1941 as George Washington , but they found after one voyage to Newfoundland that her aging boilers could not safely maintain sufficient steam pressure to drive her otherwise <unk> engines . A secondary contributing factor was the difficulty in manning her with sufficient skilled stokers – the role having been supplanted with the steady introduction of oil fired ships in the 1930s . With the ship unfit for combat service the British returned her to the War Shipping Administration ( WSA ) on 17 April 1942 . 
 The ship was next operated under General Agency Agreement by the Waterman Steamship Co . , Mobile , Alabama , and made a voyage to Panama . After her return on 5 September 1942 the WSA assigned George Washington to be converted to an oil @-@ burner at Todd Shipbuilding 's Brooklyn Yard . When she emerged on 17 April 1943 , the transport was chartered by the United States Army and made a voyage to Casablanca and back to New York with troops between April and May 1943 . 
 In July , George Washington sailed from New York to the Panama Canal , thence to Los Angeles and Brisbane , Australia . Returning to Los Angeles , she sailed again in September to Bombay and Cape Town , and arrived at New York to complete her round @-@ the @-@ world voyage in December 1943 . In January 1944 George Washington began regular service to the United Kingdom and the Mediterranean , again carrying troops in support of the Allies in Europe from . She made frequent stops at Le Havre , Southampton , and Liverpool . 
 George Washington was taken out of service and returned to the Maritime Commission 21 April 1947 . She remained tied to a pier at Baltimore , until a fire damaged her 16 January 1951 . She was subsequently sold for scrap to the Boston Metals Corporation of Baltimore on 13 February 1951 . 
 = Christmas Time Is in the Air Again = 
 " Christmas Time is in the Air Again " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her second Christmas album and thirteenth studio album , Merry Christmas II You ( 2010 ) . It was written and produced by Carey in collaboration with Broadway composer Marc Shaiman . Lyrically , it is about finding love during the Christmas season . The track garnered positive reviews from critics , with one describing it as an outstanding performance and the only song on the album that could compare to one of Carey 's previous Christmas singles , " All I Want for Christmas Is You " . It was released as a single in December 2012 . An accompanying lyric video was released , and Carey has performed " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " live on NBC 's Christmas in Rockefeller Centre event and during her December 2014 Beacon Theatre residency called All I Want For Christmas Is You , A Night of Joy & Festivity . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " Christmas Time is in the Air Again " is an original composition written and produced by Carey with Broadway composer Marc Shaiman for Carey 's second Christmas album / thirteenth studio album Merry Christmas II You ( 2010 ) . It was recorded by Brian Garten at multiple recording studios , including Henson Studios , 20th Century Fox Scoring Stage , Guardian Angel Studios , Germano Studios , Capitol Recording Studios , while it was mixed by Phil Tan and assistant Damien Lewis at The Ninja Beat Club . An extensive list of additional and assistant engineers were enlisted in the production of the track : Brett " <unk> " Pierce , Scott <unk> , Kenta Yonesaka , Alex <unk> , Charlie <unk> , Tim Lauber , Tom Steel , Greg <unk> , Denis St. Amand . Aside from being credited as a songwriter and producer , the song was orchestrated and arranged by Shaiman , who also performed the piano . 
 The ballad begins with Carey singing " Oh , Christmas time is in the air again " in her " whisper register " , backed by a string section performed by Mike Valerio on the upright bass and George <unk> playing the guitar . Other instrumentalists who performed on the bell and chime embellished track were Victor <unk> on the drums and Luis Conte on percussion . The orchestra was recorded and pre @-@ mixed by John Richards and the concertmaster was Ralph Morrison ; Shari Sutcliffe was enlisted as the orchestra contractor . Lyrically , the track is about falling in love during the Christmas season . Set in the key of D ♭ major , the song has a " slow " feel and a tempo of 50 beats per minute ; Carey 's voice spans just short of two octaves from F ♯ 3 to E5 . On November 26 , 2012 , Carey announced via her Twitter account that " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " would be released as a single . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The Village Voice writer Rich Juzwiak felt that " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " was the only song on Merry Christmas II You that matched " the magic " of her 1994 single " All I Want for Christmas Is You " , describing it as " exquisite " . He continued to write that it is " a sweeping big @-@ band ballad that you 'd swear was a cover from some Judy Garland movie you didn 't pay that much attention to once . Not even Santa himself has the power to conjure the spontaneous nostalgia found here . " BBC critic Mike Diver was complimentary of the track , writing that , although the effect is " less instant " compared to the first single , " Oh Santa ! " , it fits in well with the rest of the album and is " perfectly formed " . Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone simply described the orchestration of the original compositions " One Child " and " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " as overwhelmingly <unk> . In her 2012 single review of the song , Entertainment Focus writer Pip Ellwood awarded " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " four out of a possible five stars . She praised the composition for its " classy , soulful and sumptuous " feel and labelled it as " yet another festive classic from the Queen of Christmas " . Ellwood concluded her review by writing that the release of the song two years after that of Merry Christmas II You should " get it some more well @-@ deserved attention " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 It was confirmed on November 15 , 2012 , that Carey would be performing at the NBC event Christmas in Rockefeller Centre later that month . The singer performed " All I Want for Christmas Is You " and " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " . Idolator writer Sam Lanksy wrote that she performed with " maestro vocals " , but felt that her vocals on the latter rendition " eclipsed " that of the former . The song was included on the set @-@ list of her Beacon Theatre residency called All I Want For Christmas Is You , A Night of Joy & Festivity in December 2014 . The New York Times critic Jon Caramanica felt as though Carey was " completely <unk> " . Carey released a lyric video for " Christmas Time Is in the Air Again " on December 17 , 2012 . As Carey 's vocals play , the lyrics of the song are intercut with Christmas @-@ themed images . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = 30 Rock = 
 30 Rock is an American satirical television sitcom created by Tina Fey that ran on NBC from October 11 , 2006 , to January 31 , 2013 . It follows the life of Liz Lemon ( Tina Fey ) , who is a writer for a fictional sketch @-@ comedy The Girlie Show . The series is loosely based on Fey 's experiences when she herself was the head writer for Saturday Night Live from 1997 to 2006 . The series ' name refers to 30 Rockefeller Plaza in New York City , the Comcast Building , where the NBC Studios are located and where Saturday Night Live is written , produced , and performed . This series is produced by Broadway Video and Little Stranger , Inc . , in association with NBCUniversal . 
 30 Rock episodes were produced in a single @-@ camera setup ( with the exception of the two live episodes that were taped in the multiple @-@ camera setup ) , and were filmed in New York . The pilot episode premiered on October 11 , 2006 , and seven seasons followed . The series stars Fey with a supporting cast that includes Alec Baldwin , Tracy Morgan , Jane Krakowski , Jack McBrayer , Scott Adsit , Judah Friedlander , Katrina Bowden , Keith Powell , Lonny Ross , John Lutz , Kevin Brown , Grizz Chapman , Maulik Pancholy , and Rachel Dratch . 
 <unk> , 30 Rock uses surreal humor to parody the complex corporate structure of NBC and its then parent company General Electric . Television critic Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club once remarked that it " usually adopts the manic pacing of a live @-@ action cartoon . " The show was influential in its extensive use of smash cuts : sudden , short cuts to unrelated scenes showing something the characters are briefly discussing . 30 Rock also became known for its dedication to making these extremely elaborate , once showing a set that took three days to build for only six seconds of video . 
 30 Rock received overwhelming critical acclaim throughout its entire run , winning several major awards ( including Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Comedy Series in 2007 , 2008 , and 2009 and nominations for every other year it ran ) , and achieving the esteemed top ranking on myriad critics ' year @-@ end best of 2006 @-@ 2013 lists . On July 14 , 2009 , the series was nominated for 22 Primetime Emmy Awards , the most in a single year for a comedy series . Over the course of the series , it was nominated for 103 Primetime Emmy Awards and won 16 , in addition to numerous other nominations and wins from other awards shows . Despite the high praise , the series struggled in the ratings throughout its run , something of which Fey herself has made light . 
 In 2009 , Comedy Central and WGN America bought the syndication rights to the show , which began airing on both networks on September 19 , 2011 ; the series also entered into local broadcast syndication on the same day . Today , 30 Rock is regarded as a landmark series . Its series finale in particular has been named as one of the greatest in television history by several publications . In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America named 30 Rock the 21st best @-@ written television series of all time . 
 = = Development and production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 In 2002 , Fey was the head writer and a performer on the television show Saturday Night Live ( SNL ) . She pitched the show that became 30 Rock to NBC , originally as a sitcom about cable news . NBC Entertainment president Kevin Reilly felt that " Fey was using the news setting as a fig leaf for her own experience and [ he ] encouraged her to write what she knew . " The show was subsequently reworked to revolve around an SNL @-@ style sketch show . After being presented to Reilly once more , the show was set to air during the 2005 – 2006 television season . Just before the deal went through , however , the show was nearly brushed aside by Anthony Lewis and Jack Melcher , two NBC executives who fought the idea , fearing that Fey 's removal from SNL would result in a severe cut to the show 's ratings . Eventually , Lewis gave in just a month before his retirement , and Melcher backed down . In May 2003 , Fey signed a contract with NBC to remain in her SNL head @-@ writer position until at least the 2004 – 2005 television season and to develop a primetime project to be produced by Broadway Video and NBC Universal . Filming was postponed due to Tina Fey 's first pregnancy . 
 During the 2004 – 2005 pilot season , a pilot was announced named Untitled Tina Fey Project . The 30 Rock pilot focused on the boss of a variety show who must manage her relationships with the show 's volatile star and its charismatic executive producer . The storyline evolved into one that dealt with a head writer of a variety show who dealt with both of the stars , as well as the show 's new network executive . 30 Rock was officially given the green light to air May 15 , 2006 , along with a 13 @-@ episode order . 
 The series underwent further changes during the months leading up to and following its debut . A May 2006 press release mentioned that sketches from The Girlie Show would be made available in their entirety on NBC 's broadband website , <unk> The idea was to air the fictitious TGS with Tracy Jordan online . This aspect of the series was abandoned prior to its debut . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Inside scenes for 30 Rock were mostly filmed at Silvercup Studios in Long Island City , Queens , NYC ( Studio 8H in 30 Rock in Manhattan for two live episodes ) . In the episodes " Cleveland " and " Hiatus " , Battery Park City , Manhattan , and Douglaston , Queens , doubled for Cleveland , Ohio and Needmore , Pennsylvania , respectively . In the episode " Gavin Volure " , stock footage of the Arkansas Governor 's Mansion was used for exterior shots of the home of Steve Martin 's character . 
 The title sequence is made up of photos and video of 30 Rockefeller Plaza and features the series regulars . The sequence ends with a time lapse of the building and then a title card reading " 30 Rock " . The sequence has remained mostly the same throughout the series , although changes have been made to the images of most of the actors . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The series features a " jaunty " jazz score . Most of the incidental music melody is played by either clarinet , bass clarinet , saxophone , or strings , often as wildly varying renditions of the usual central theme . The music is composed by Fey 's husband , Jeff Richmond , who is also a producer for 30 Rock . Richmond wrote the theme music , which was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Main Title Theme Music . Seven short , original songs have been featured in episodes , five of which were performed by Jane Krakowski , another performed by Tina Fey and Jason Sudeikis , and another performed by Tracy Morgan . The show has also covered three existing songs , including the song " Midnight Train to Georgia " by Gladys Knight and the Pips . The song had its lyrics altered to accommodate the character Kenneth being " misinformed about the time [ of the 11 : 45 train ] " . The song " Oh My " performed by The Gray Kid is heard throughout the episode " The Source Awards " , which was mixed with a piano arrangement composed by Richmond . " Kidney Now ! " , a rendition of the popular song , " We Are the World " , is performed by various artists in the season @-@ three finale . Other popular songs have been featured ( with blessings by the singers ) , such as " I Will Remember You " or " Bitch " . 
 The 30 Rock Original Television Soundtrack was released by the Relativity Music Group on November 16 , 2010 . 
 = = = Internet content = = = 
 On April 2 , 2008 , NBC announced 30 Rock 360 , an online extension of the 30 Rock series . The extension featured Jack Donaghy 's Online Business Courses ( or Jack U ) . Users were also able to read Jack 's blogs and upload their own business advice in video form . Users were able to submit sketches for TGS with Tracy Jordan and act out skits from TGS . The feature reopened Ask Tina , an interactive question and answer platform in which users could ask Fey questions . Fey answered the questions in video form . Ask Tina was a fixture on NBC.com 's 30 Rock section throughout the first season . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 The plot of 30 Rock revolves around the cast and crew of the fictional sketch comedy series TGS with Tracy Jordan ( originally called The Girlie Show ) , which is filmed in Studio 6H inside 30 Rockefeller Plaza . The series features an ensemble cast . The seven roles that receive star billing during the opening credits are : 
 Tina Fey as Liz Lemon is the protagonist of the series , a " sexually frightened know @-@ it @-@ all " and head writer of TGS with Tracy Jordan . 
 Tracy Morgan as Tracy Jordan is the loose @-@ cannon , crazy , unpredictable , star of TGS . 
 Jane Krakowski as Jenna Maroney , original star of " The Girlie Show " , is co @-@ star of TGS and Liz 's constantly attention @-@ seeking and clueless best friend . 
 Jack McBrayer as Kenneth Parcell is a cheerful , obedient Southern @-@ born NBC page , who " lives for television " , and whose age is never verified , but is hinted to be immortal . 
 Scott Adsit as Pete Hornberger is the " sane " , quick @-@ witted producer of TGS , who often reveals embarrassing details about his family life . 
 Judah Friedlander as Frank Rossitano is a trucker hat @-@ wearing , <unk> , sarcastic writer at TGS . His hat bears a different phrase in every episode . 
 Alec Baldwin as Jack Donaghy is the decisive , controlling , suave , and occasionally senseless network executive who constantly interferes with the goings @-@ on at TGS . 
 Beginning with season two , three characters , who were credited as guest stars during season one , received star billing after the opening credits , in addition to the principal cast : 
 Katrina Bowden as Cerie is Liz 's attractive , laid @-@ back assistant , who usually wears revealing outfits to work , much to the delight of the writers ' room . 
 Keith Powell as James " Toofer " Spurlock is the proud , black , Harvard University @-@ alumnus writer , who often butts heads with Tracy and Frank . 
 Lonny Ross as Josh Girard is a young and immature TGS writer and co @-@ star , known for his impressions . Ross was written out in season four . 
 Beginning with season three , three characters who were credited as guest stars in the first two seasons , received star billing after the opening credits in addition to Bowden , Powell , Ross , and the principal cast . They are credited only in the episodes in which they appear : 
 Kevin Brown as Dot Com is an erudite member of Tracy 's entourage who is also a Wesleyan University @-@ trained stage actor . The character 's real name is Walter Slattery . 
 Grizz Chapman as Grizz is a member of Tracy 's entourage . 
 Maulik Pancholy as Jonathan is Jack 's loyal and overprotective personal assistant , who at times appears to be possibly in love with Jack . Pancholy left the show after season five and returned for season seven . 
 Beginning with season four , one character who was credited as a guest star in the first three seasons , received star billing after the opening credits in addition to Bowden , Powell , Brown , Chapman , and Pancholy . 
 John Lutz as J. D. Lutz is a lazy , overweight TGS writer who is often insulted or made fun of by the rest of the staff . 
 = = = Additional characters = = = 
 Dean Winters as Dennis Duffy is the irresponsible ex @-@ boyfriend of Liz , who had guest appearances throughout the series . 
 James Marsden as Criss <unk> is Liz Lemon 's boyfriend , later husband , who ran a hot dog stand in his first episodes of the series . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Tina Fey worked with Jen McNamara and Adam Bernstein for the casting of the series . Fey 's first act as casting director was to cast herself as the lead character , Liz Lemon , who is said to be much like Fey herself when she first became head writer on SNL . The next actor to be cast was Tracy Morgan as Tracy Jordan , who was then a former castmate of Fey 's in SNL . Morgan was asked by Fey to play the role , and he believed it was " right up [ his ] alley and it was tailor made for [ him ] " . Fey said that the character of Kenneth Parcell was written with Jack McBrayer in mind . McBrayer is an old friend of Fey 's ( they worked together at Second City in Chicago ) , and she " really wanted him for that part and was very happy when no one objected " . 
 Rachel Dratch , Fey 's longtime comedy partner and fellow SNL alumna , was originally cast to portray Jenna . Dratch played the role in the show 's original pilot , but in August 2006 , Jane Krakowski was announced as Dratch 's replacement , with Dratch remaining involved in the show playing various characters . Fey explained the change by noting that Dratch was " better @-@ suited to playing a variety of eccentric side characters " , and that the role of Jenna was more of a straight @-@ ahead acting part . 
 Although Fey went on to say , " Rachel and I were both very excited about this new direction " , Dratch said that she was not happy with the media 's depiction of the change as a demotion ; however , she was also skeptical about the reasons she was given for the change , and was not happy with the reduction in the number of episodes in which she would appear . Following the first season , Dratch only appeared in a handful of episodes . 
 Shortly following the casting of McBrayer and Dratch , Alec Baldwin was cast as Jack Donaghy , the " totally uncensored " Vice President of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming . Fey said that the character of Jack Donaghy was written with Baldwin in mind , and she was " very pleasantly surprised when he agreed to do it " . Judah Friedlander was cast as Frank Rossitano , a staff writer of The Girlie Show . Friedlander had never met Fey before auditioning for a role in 30 Rock . His character was based on at least two writers with whom Fey used to work at SNL , but he has said that he " certainly brought some of [ his ] own things to it , as well " . Finally , Scott Adsit was cast as Pete Hornberger , a longtime friend of Liz 's and producer of The Girlie Show . Adsit , an old friend of Fey 's , also had his character written based on him . 
 Following SNL 's ongoing tradition , 30 Rock had several real @-@ life politician cameos , examples being Al Gore ( twice ) , Nancy Pelosi ( series finale ) and Condoleezza Rice ( as Jack Donaghy 's former love interest ) . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Season one = = = 
 Season one began airing in the United States on October 11 , 2006 , and featured 21 episodes . The season finale aired on April 26 , 2007 . Jack Donaghy , the " Head of East Coast Television and Microwave Oven Programming " at General Electric ( GE ) , is transferred to work at the NBC headquarters , 30 Rockefeller Plaza , and retool the late @-@ night sketch @-@ comedy series The Girlie Show . The show 's cast and crew are outraged by this , especially head writer Liz Lemon and main actress Jenna Maroney . Jack proceeds to wreak havoc on The Girlie Show , forcing Liz to hire off @-@ the @-@ wall movie star Tracy Jordan . He again irritates the cast and crew of The Girlie Show when he changes the name to TGS with Tracy Jordan ( or just TGS ) . 
 As the season progresses , the episodes become less about TGS and more about how the characters deal with juggling their lives and their jobs — specifically the protagonist , Liz Lemon , but other characters are also explored . Episodes also become less self @-@ contained and various story arcs develop in the second half of the season . For example , the first major story arc centers on Liz 's relationship with Dennis Duffy ( Dean Winters ) , " The <unk> King " . Other story arcs include : Jenna promoting her movie The Rural Juror ; Tracy going on the run from the Black Crusaders ; Jack 's engagement , which was eventually called off , to a Christie 's auctioneer named Phoebe ( Emily Mortimer ) ; and another relationship of Liz 's with Floyd ( Jason Sudeikis ) . 
 Guest stars include Nathan Lane , Isabella Rossellini , Will Arnett , Wayne Brady , Elaine Stritch , Whoopi Goldberg , Conan O 'Brien , LL Cool J , and Ghostface Killah . 
 = = = Season two = = = 
 Season two began airing in the United States on October 4 , 2007 , and featured 15 episodes . The second season was originally intended to consist of 22 episodes , but the order was cut to 15 due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike . The season finale aired on May 8 , 2008 . After Liz broke up with Floyd in the summer , she is looking for ways to rebound . When Jerry Seinfeld confronts Jack about a new marketing campaign which featured clips of Seinfeld 's sitcom , Seinfeld , in all NBC shows , he has a chance encounter with Liz that gives her some much @-@ needed advice . During the TGS summer hiatus , Jenna becomes overweight due to performing in the Broadway show Mystic Pizza : The Musical ( based on the real 1988 film Mystic Pizza ) . Tracy has encountered some marital problems with his wife Angie Jordan ( Sherri Shepherd ) and they become separated , but later reunite . 
 During the season , Jack develops a relationship with a Democratic congresswoman named Celeste " C. C. " Cunningham ( Edie Falco ) . They later break up . An arc that was established in the first season , but becomes more apparent in the second , regards Jack running for the GE chairmanship against his nemesis Devon Banks ( Will Arnett ) . The season ends with Liz planning to adopt a child after believing she was pregnant with Dennis ' baby . Kenneth also travels to Beijing to be a page at the 2008 Summer Olympics and Tracy invents a pornographic video game . Jack ends the season working at a new government job in Washington , DC , but plans to get fired by proposing a " gay bomb " . 
 = = = Season three = = = 
 30 Rock returned with a third season as part of NBC 's 2008 fall schedule , airing immediately after The Office . The show experienced a large ratings and popularity spike this season after Tina Fey 's highly praised performance as Sarah Palin on SNL . This is also the season where the show made Primetime Emmy Award history , being nominated for 22 awards . The season consisted of 22 episodes . Oprah Winfrey guest @-@ starred in the second episode , playing herself ( actually a drug @-@ induced hallucination of Liz 's ) , as well as Jennifer Aniston playing Liz 's ex @-@ roommate . Salma Hayek also appeared for a multiple @-@ episode arc , portraying Jack 's new girlfriend , Elisa . Other guest stars this season included John Lithgow , Kerry Butler , Megan Mullally , Peter Dinklage , and Steve Martin . Jon Hamm played Liz 's love interest and neighbor for several episodes . Alan Alda appeared in the season 's final two episodes as Milton Greene , Jack 's biological father . The season finale featured multiple musical guests , including Talib Kweli , Michael McDonald , Norah Jones , Steve Earle , Moby , Clay Aiken , the Beastie Boys , Adam Levine , Mary J. Blige , Elvis Costello , Sheryl Crow , Rhett Miller , Cyndi Lauper , Sara Bareilles , Wyclef Jean , and Rachael Yamagata , performing " Kidney Now ! " , an organ @-@ donation drive spoof of We Are The World and " Just Stand Up ! " . 
 = = = Season four = = = 
 The fourth season of 30 Rock premiered on October 15 , 2009 . Like the previous season , it also consisted of 22 episodes . A recurring story arc early in the season revolved around Jack 's request that Liz cast a new actor for TGS , and Liz 's subsequent search for the perfect comedian , much to the dismay of Jenna and Tracy , who fear losing their spotlight . The latter half of the season focused on complementary story arcs : Jack 's inability to choose between his two girlfriends , Liz 's inability to find a boyfriend to live up to her expectations , and Jenna 's relationship with a Jenna Maroney impersonator . The season has also featured such guest stars as Julianne Moore , Jon Bon Jovi , Cheyenne Jackson , Sherri Shepherd , Will Forte , Elizabeth Banks , Michael Sheen , Matt Damon , and James Franco . 
 = = = Season five = = = 
 30 Rock premiered its fifth season on September 23 , 2010 , in the Thursday 8 : 30 pm time slot . 
 An episode of 30 Rock 's fifth season was filmed and broadcast live , twice , on the evening of October 14 , 2010 . The two separate recordings resulted in a live telecast of the episode to American viewers on both the West and East Coasts , to ensure both would view a live performance . Filmed in front of a live audience , the episode aired at 8 : 30 pm EDT and PDT on NBC . A ratings success , the episode was also met with positive reviews . 
 30 Rock moved to the 10 / 9c from January 20 , 2011 . 
 Season five focuses on Liz Lemon 's continuing relationship with Carol Burnett ( Matt Damon ) , Jack 's start into fatherhood with fiancée Avery ( Elizabeth Banks ) , struggling with the merger of NBCUniversal with Kabletown , Tracy 's foray into getting an EGOT , and Kenneth 's attempt to get back to NBC . Aside from featuring the return of Rachel Dratch in " Live Show " , other guest stars include Matt Damon , Elizabeth Banks , Susan Sarandon ( as Frank 's former <unk> who was in prison due to their relationship while he was a <unk> and present girlfriend ) , Paul Giamatti ( as one of the TGS editors ) , Sherri Shepherd , Queen Latifah , Rob Reiner , John Amos , Jon Hamm ( reprising his role as Drew , Liz Lemon 's former love interest who despite being a doctor , she dumped for being too dumb ) , Julia Louis @-@ Dreyfus ( playing the reimagined version of Liz Lemon and also as herself playing this character in " Live Show " , Bill Hader , Chris Parnell , Kelsey Grammer ( playing himself ) , Buck Henry , David Gregory , John Slattery , Daniel Sunjata , Will Forte , Kelly <unk> Park , Elaine Stritch , Dr. Condoleezza Rice , Alan Alda , Cheyenne Jackson , Robert De Niro ( playing himself ) , Dean Winters , Ken Howard , Vanessa <unk> , Brian Williams ( playing himself ) , Richard Belzer , Ice @-@ T , John Cho , Chloë Grace Moretz ( as Kaylie Hooper - the granddaughter Kabletown CEO Hank Hooper and Jack 's sworn enemy as heir to the Kabletown throne ) , Terrance Mann ( as oceanographer Robert Ballard ) , Cristin <unk> ( as Abby Flynn in " TGS Hates Women " ) , Eion Bailey , Adriane Lenox , Michael Keaton , Margaret Cho ( as Avery 's kidnapper , North Korean dictator Kim Jong @-@ il ) , and Tom Hanks ( as himself in " 100 : Part 1 " and " 100 : Part 2 " ) . 
 = = = Season six = = = 
 On November 15 , 2011 , NBC announced 30 Rock had been renewed for a sixth season , set to air at the beginning of 2012 , due to Tina Fey 's pregnancy . The season began airing January 12 , 2012 , in its new 8 pm timeslot leading into Parks and Recreation , The Office , and Up All Night . 
 Season six finds Liz emotionally maturing while in a new relationship ; Jack continues to attempt to recover his wife from North Korea and find his identity at Kabletown , Kenneth moves up ( and later down ) the corporate ladder , and Jenna reaches a new level of fame due to being a judge on a reality show , and considers settling down with boyfriend Paul . 
 Many LGBT groups called for Tracy Morgan 's resignation or dismissal from the show due to anti @-@ gay comments he made between the end of season five and the filming for season six . Morgan issued an apology and continued with his starring role . 30 Rock had previously received an award from GLAAD , commending the show on its portrayal of LGBT themes and characters . The scandal inspired the second episode of the season , in which Tracy Jordan goes on an offensive rant during a standup set , forcing the show to apologize on his behalf after he mistakenly apologizes to Glad , the plastic bag company , instead of GLAAD . 
 = = = Season seven = = = 
 30 Rock returned for a final , abbreviated season consisting of 13 episodes , which began airing on October 4 , 2012 . Alec Baldwin reportedly approached NBC and offered to cut his pay for 30 Rock to be renewed for a full seventh and eighth seasons , stating on Twitter : " I offered NBC to cut my pay 20 % in order to have a full 7th and 8th seasons of 30 Rock . I realize times have changed . " 
 Season seven continues to develop the relationship between Liz and Criss ( James Marsden ) , as the pair tries for children and considers getting married . Meanwhile , Jack attempts to improve his future prospects at the company , first by trying to " tank " NBC and convince Kabletown CEO Hank Hooper ( Ken Howard ) to sell it , and later by plotting to discredit Hooper 's granddaughter and future CEO , Kaylee Hooper ( Chloë Grace Moretz ) . Ultimately , however , he begins to wonder if he is truly happy . Elsewhere , Tracy has found success with his new movie studio , which produces comedy films mostly starring African American actors , in similar fashion to Tyler Perry ; Jenna prepares to marry her longterm boyfriend Paul ( Will Forte ) , and Kenneth has started a relationship with Hazel ( Kristen Schaal ) , unaware that she is using him to get her moment on TGS . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 30 Rock received massive acclaim from critics but struggled to attract viewers . Robert Abele of LA Weekly declared that the show was a " weirdly appropriate and hilarious symbol of our times " . The Wall Street Journal 's Dorothy Rabinowitz wrote that the " standard caution is relevant — debut episodes tend to be highly polished . All the more reason to enjoy the hilarious scenes and fine ensemble cast here " . Some less favorable reviews were received from Brian Lowry of Variety . Lowry said that " Despite her success with Mean Girls , [ Tina ] Fey mostly hits too @-@ familiar notes in the pilot . Moreover , she 's a limited protagonist , which is problematic . " Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune criticized " 30 Rock for being less than the sum of its parts , and , as an entry in the single @-@ camera comedy sweepstakes , it fails to show either the inspired inventiveness of Arrested Development or provide the surprisingly perceptive character studies of The Office " . Metacritic gave the pilot episode a Metascore — a weighted average based on the impressions of a select thirty @-@ one critical reviews — a 67 out of 100 . 
 At the end of 2006 , LA Weekly listed 30 Rock as one of the best " Series of the Year " . The show also appeared on similar year end " best of " 2006 lists published by the New York Times , The A.V. Club , The Boston Globe , The Chicago Sun @-@ Times , Entertainment Weekly , The Los Angeles Times , The Miami Herald , People Weekly , and TV Guide . The Associated Press wrote that NBC 's " Thursday night comedy block — made up of My Name Is Earl , The Office , Scrubs , and 30 Rock — is consistently the best night of prime time viewing for any network . " In 2007 , it appeared on The Boston Globe 's " best of " list as well as the " best of " lists of The Chicago Sun @-@ Times , The Chicago Tribune , Entertainment Weekly , The Los Angeles Times , Newark Star @-@ Ledger , The New York Times , Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , The San Francisco Chronicle , The San Jose Mercury News , TV Guide and USA Today . 30 Rock was named the best series of 2007 by Entertainment Weekly . 
 At the end of 2009 , Newsweek magazine ranked 30 Rock as the best comedy on TV in the past decade , and at the end of 2010 , Metacritic reported that the show ranked 12th place in their list of collected Television Critic Top Ten Lists . At the end of 2012 , a poll undertaken by 60 Minutes and Vanity Fair named 30 Rock the seventh greatest sitcom of all time . In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America named 30 Rock as one of the best @-@ written television series of all time , ranking it at 21st place . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Capping its critically successful first season , 30 Rock won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series and Elaine Stritch was awarded Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series in September 2007 for her work as a guest actress in the season one finale episode , " Hiatus " . Tina Fey and Alec Baldwin were nominated in the Outstanding Lead Actress and Outstanding Lead Actor in a comedy series categories , respectively . " Jack @-@ Tor " and " Tracy Does Conan " were both nominated for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series . 30 Rock received four Creative Arts Emmy Awards . Alec Baldwin received the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy in 2007 . Baldwin also received the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Comedy Series in 2007 . The show also received various other guild award nominations during its first season and the Peabody Award . 
 In 2008 , Tina Fey and Alec Baldwin both won Screen Actors Guild Awards . The series took home the Writers Guild of America Award for Best Comedy Series in 2008 . It also received the Danny Thomas Producer of the Year Award in Episodic Series – Comedy from the Producers Guild of America in 2008 . 30 Rock received 17 Primetime Emmy Award nominations for its second season , meaning it was the second @-@ most nominated series of the year . These 17 nominations broke the record for the most nominations for a comedy series , meaning that 30 Rock was the most @-@ nominated comedy series for any individual Primetime Emmy Award year . The previous holder of this record was The Larry Sanders Show in 1996 with 16 nominations . 30 Rock also won the Television Critics Association Award for Outstanding Achievement in Comedy . 
 Also in 2008 , 30 Rock completed a sweep of the major awards at the 60th Primetime Emmy Awards . The show won Outstanding Comedy Series , Alec Baldwin was recognized as Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series , and Tina Fey was given the award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series . This marked the eighth time in the history of the Primetime Emmy Awards that a show won best series plus best lead actor and actress . Tina Fey also won the award for Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for the second @-@ season finale episode , " Cooter " . 
 At the 66th Golden Globe Awards , 30 Rock won the award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy , Alec Baldwin won Best Actor in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy , and Tina Fey won Best Actress in a Television Series – Musical or Comedy . 
 At the 67th Annual Peabody Awards , 30 Rock received the Peabody Award for the show 's 2007 episodes . Upon announcing the award , the Peabody Board commended the show for being " not only a great workplace comedy in the tradition of The Mary Tyler Moore Show , complete with fresh , indelible secondary characters , but also a sly , gleeful satire of corporate media , especially the network that airs it " . 
 In 2009 , 30 Rock received a record @-@ breaking 22 Primetime Emmy Award nominations and won five of them , including Outstanding Comedy Series , Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series ( Baldwin ) , and Outstanding Writing for a Comedy Series for " Reunion " . 
 In 2010 , 30 Rock received 15 Primetime Emmy Award nominations , including the series ' fourth consecutive nominations for Outstanding Comedy Series , Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series ( Baldwin ) , and Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series ( Fey ) . 
 In 2011 , 30 Rock received 9 Primetime Emmy Award nominations , including its fifth consecutive nomination for Outstanding Comedy Series . 
 In 2012 , 30 Rock received 13 Primetime Emmy Award nominations , including its sixth consecutive nomination for Outstanding Comedy Series . 
 On July 18 , 2013 , 30 Rock 's seventh and final season received 13 Primetime Emmy Award nominations ( the most of any comedy series and the most of any final season of a comedy series ) , including Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for Fey , Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series for Baldwin , Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series for Krakowski , directing , two nominations for writing , and its seventh consecutive nomination for Outstanding Comedy Series , bringing the series ' total number of nominations to 103 . The series ' casting directors won their third prize for Outstanding Casting for a Comedy Series , while Tina Fey and Tracey Wigfield won for their writing for the series finale , " Last Lunch " . 
 At the 19th Screen Actors Guild Awards , both Fey and Baldwin won for their performances in the Female and Male comedy categories , respectively , while the cast received their final nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series . 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 Below , " Rank " refers to how well 30 Rock rated compared to other television series which aired during primetime hours of the corresponding television season ; for example , in its first year , 101 television series were rated higher . The television season tends to begin in September of any given year and end during May of the following year . " Viewers " refers to the average number of viewers for all original episodes ( broadcast in the series ' " Regular <unk> " ) of 30 Rock aired during the television season . Although the viewer average may be higher for some seasons than others , the rank will not necessarily be higher . This is due to the number of programs aired during primetime . In some seasons , more regular programs may be aired during primetime than in others . 
 The pilot episode generated 8 @.@ 13 million viewers , the series ' highest ratings until that of its third season premiere which garnered 8 @.@ 5 million viewers . In its original timeslot of Wednesday at 8 : 00 pm EST , the show averaged 6 @.@ 23 million viewers . 30 Rock aired on Wednesdays for its first four episodes . The season 's lowest ratings were achieved by " Jack the Writer " and " Hard Ball " which both achieved 4 @.@ 61 million viewers . The season @-@ two premiere , " SeinfeldVision , " was viewed by 7 @.@ 33 million viewers , the highest rating since the pilot . 30 Rock entered a hiatus due to the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike on January 10 , 2008 . The episode that aired on that date was viewed by 5 @.@ 98 million viewers . The second season finale , " Cooter " , which aired on May 8 , 2008 , was viewed by 5 @.@ 6 million viewers . 
 On December 29 , 2006 , Nielsen Media Research ( NMR ) reported the results of having , for the first time , monitored viewers who use a digital video recorder to record shows for later viewing . NMR reported that 30 Rock adds nearly 7 @.@ 5 % to its total audience every week as a result of viewers who use a DVR to record the show and then watch it within a week of its initial airing . A March 2007 report from <unk> Global , based on NMR data about viewership ranked by among adults 25 – 54 , shows that as of the time of the report 30 Rock 's viewers have a median income of $ 65 @,@ 000 , high enough to place the show tied at 11th in affluence with several other shows . This is during a period where for the season 30 Rock is tied at number 85 in the 18 – 49 demographic . During its second season , 30 Rock ranked in fourth place , against all primetime programming , for television series which are watched by viewers with income above $ 100 @,@ 000 . Following Fey 's popular impressions of Alaskan governor Sarah Palin on Saturday Night Live , the third @-@ season premiere was seen by 8 @.@ 5 million viewers , making it the highest @-@ viewed episode in the series . The premiere earned a 4 @.@ 1 preliminary adults 18 – 49 rating , an increase of 21 % from the second @-@ season premiere . 
 = = = = In other countries = = = = 
 30 Rock also airs in other countries ; ratings and rankings for some of these markets include : 
 Australia : Seven Network broadcast the first season Mondays and Wednesdays at 22 : 30 from December 4 , 2007 . The second season began showing on June 9 , 2008 , on Mondays at 23 : 30 , and the third from February 2 , 2009 in the same timeslot . From December 2009 , the third season was rebroadcast at the earlier time of 22 : 30 Mondays and Tuesdays , where it grew significantly in popularity , but the fourth was nonetheless broadcast Mondays at 23 : 30 once more , beginning February 1 , 2010 . 7mate later aired the show in the earlier timeslot of 21 : 30 on Mondays . Season five was broadcast at 22 : 30 , Thursdays from October 21 , 2010 . 
 Canada : The series premiered on the CTV network on October 10 , 2006 , a day before its premiere in the United States . The network aired the first four episodes of the series , but dropped the show effective November 30 , 2006 after a brief run during which it never entered the Bureau of Broadcast Measurement Nielsen top 30 . CTV later re @-@ added the show to its lineup on Sundays at 8 : 30 pm , but moved the show to its secondary A @-@ Channel system for the series ' second season . From the third season onward , it has aired on City . 
 Croatia : Nova TV started airing seasons 1 @-@ 4 on March 29 , 2009 . Doma TV started airing seasons 5 and 6 on April 2 , 2012 . 
 Denmark : Public service channel <unk> and Kanal 5 air 30 Rock . 
 France : Canal + , Direct Star and Comédie + aired 30 Rock . 
 Germany : <unk> , a new digital channel from ZDF , was launched on November 1 , 2009 , with the German @-@ dubbed version of 30 Rock as its flagship program . The series ' free television debut that night on that channel registered a 0 @.@ 0 rating , with fewer than 5000 viewers tuning in . TNT Serie , a German version of the TNT channel , broadcast the series to cable and pay satellite viewers since February 2009 . 
 Greece : 30 Rock originally airs on Universal Channel Greece . The first season of the series finished airing on Alter Channel in July 2010 . 
 Hong Kong : ATV World has aired Seasons 1 – 3 from July 2010 to Oct 2010 ( Mon @-@ Tue , Thu @-@ <unk> 8 : 30 pm ) 
 India : Star World aired the first four seasons , with the 4th airing in 2010 . FX started airing reruns on October 1 , 2010 . It is also available on Comedy Central India . 
 Ireland : Seasons 1 , 2 , 4 have shown on 3e & Season Three began airing on Comedy Central ( UK ) ( also broadcast in Ireland ) on Monday October 5 , 2009 ; and Season Four from April 19 , 2010 . The fifth season began broadcasting from February 10 , 2011 . 
 Israel : It airs on Yes Comedy , currently broadcasting Season 7 . 
 Italy : The first two seasons aired on Lei , Sky 's television channel oriented to female audience . Starting from season 3 , it airs on Sky Uno . On April 11 , 2011 national channel Rai 4 started airing all seasons free to air . 
 Jamaica : Available only via cable or other pay @-@ for television ( satellite or DirecTV ) with new episodes shown on NBC and CityTV . 
 Mexico : Seasons 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and currently 5 are aired on Sony Entertainment Television , a cable network in the Mexican market which shows a number of U.S. prime time programs from NBC , CBS , ABC and the Lifetime network , as well as syndicated U.S. series . 
 Macedonia : Only the first season aired on Sitel TV , Monday to Friday at 21 : 00 but due to low ratings it was transferred to 23 : 30 . 
 Netherlands : 30 Rock airs on Comedy Central Netherlands . 
 New Zealand : seasons 1 – 5 aired free @-@ to @-@ air in C4 's ( now Four ) weeknight comedy line @-@ ups , typically several weeks after the episode 's original U.S. broadcast . 
 Norway : The show is aired on <unk> and <unk> . 
 Portugal : The first two seasons aired on FOX : Next and <unk> . The show is currently being aired on FX . 
 Poland : It airs on channel <unk> and Canal + . 
 Romania : It airs on channel <unk> with Romanian subtitles . 
 Slovenia : Season 1 came to POP TV on April 12 , 2010 ( airing from Monday to Thursday ) . It concluded on May 17 , 2010 . Season 2 began airing on January 4 , 2011 ( Monday to Thursday ) and finished on January 26 . Season 3 started the next day , on January 27 ( same timeslot ) . 
 South Africa : All four seasons have been aired on M @-@ Net and <unk> Series . The final season is currently airing . 
 Spain : Known as " Rockefeller Plaza " , seasons 1 , 2 and 3 have aired on <unk> and other channels . The fourth season hasn 't been aired yet . 
 Trinidad and Tobago : Available only via cable or other pay @-@ for television ( satellite or DirecTV ) with new episodes shown on NBC and CityTV with repeats on <unk> . 
 United Kingdom : The first season premiered on October 11 , 2007 on Five . The premiere was watched by 790 @,@ 000 viewers , which was 6 % of all people watching television in the country at the time it was broadcast . 30 Rock originally aired at 10 : 45 pm , but was moved to 11 : 05 pm , airing back @-@ to @-@ back episodes . Season two was broadcast from February 20 , 2009 at 9 pm on <unk> . For season three , the series moved to Comedy Central and began airing from October 5 , 2009 . Season four followed from April 19 , 2010 , season five from February 10 , 2011 , and season six from March 30 , 2012 . As of May 2015 , season seven has yet to be screened in the UK . 
 = = = Similarities to other media = = = 
 Two shows debuting on 2006 – 07 NBC lineup , 30 Rock and Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , revolved around the off @-@ camera happenings on a Saturday Night Live @-@ analogue sketch comedy series . Similarities between the two led to speculation that only one of them would be picked up . Baldwin said , " I 'd be stunned if NBC picked up both shows . And ours has the tougher task , as a comedy , because if it 's not funny , that 's it . " Kevin Reilly , then president of NBC Entertainment , was supportive of Fey , describing the situation as a " high @-@ class problem " : 
 Evidence of the overlapping subject matter between the shows , as well as the conflict between them , arose when Aaron Sorkin , the creator of Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip , asked Lorne Michaels to allow him to observe Saturday Night Live for a week , a request Michaels denied . Despite this , Sorkin sent Fey flowers after NBC announced it would pick up both series , and wished her luck with 30 Rock . Fey said , " it 's just bad luck for me that in my first attempt at prime time I 'm going up against the most powerful writer on television . I was joking that this would be the best pilot ever aired on Trio . And then Trio got canceled . " Fey wound up " beating " Sorkin when Studio 60 was canceled after one season and 30 Rock was renewed for a second . Though 30 Rock 's first @-@ season ratings proved lackluster and were lower than those of Studio 60 , Studio 60 was more expensive to produce . 
 One early promo for 30 Rock portrayed Alec Baldwin mistakenly thinking he would meet Sorkin , and when asked on her " Ask Tina " space what she thought of the criticism that 30 Rock received , Fey jokingly replied that people who did not like it were probably confusing it with Studio 60 . However , none of 30 Rock 's producers have given Studio 60 any serious criticism , positive or negative . In a November 1 , 2006 interview , Fey said she had seen the first two episodes of Studio 60 . When asked what her impressions were , she jokingly replied , " I can 't do impressions of Bradley Whitford and Matthew Perry . " 
 At least five 30 Rock episodes have briefly parodied Studio 60 : 
 " Jack the Writer " contains a self @-@ referring walk and talk sequence , such sequences being commonly used on Studio 60 and Aaron Sorkin 's previous shows . 
 " Jack @-@ Tor " : Liz tries to quote global education statistics , only to mess up and realize that she does not know what she is talking about . 
 " Jack Meets Dennis " : Liz says the upcoming show will be " worse than that time we did that Gilbert and Sullivan parody " . The second episode of Studio 60 , " The Cold Open " , included a parody of the " Major @-@ General 's Song " on the show @-@ within @-@ the @-@ show . 
 " The Fabian Strategy " : In the ending sequence , Kenneth watches the credits for TGS , which include Ricky and Ronnie as writers , the two ex @-@ head writers on Studio 60 . 
 " Plan B " : Aaron Sorkin appears as himself as Liz is attempting to get a new job at NBC 's The Sing @-@ Off . Sorkin explains to Liz that he , too , is having trouble finding work writing for television , despite having written such works as The West Wing , A Few Good Men , and The Social Network . Liz adds Studio 60 to that list , but Sorkin tells her to " shut up " , 
 Some critics have compared 30 Rock to The Mary Tyler Moore Show , with parallels drawn between the relationship of Liz and Jack and that of Mary Richards and Lou Grant . It has also been compared to That Girl . Like That Girl and Mary Tyler Moore , 30 Rock is a sitcom centering on an unmarried , brunette career woman living in a big city where she works in the television industry . That Girl was parodied in the opening segment of 30 Rock 's pilot . 
 = = Syndication = = 
 It was announced in 2009 that off @-@ network syndication rights for 30 Rock had been acquired by Comedy Central and WGN America for a combined value in the range of $ 800 @,@ 000 an episode . In Canada , CityTV airs it at 7 pm in syndication and Omni 1 airs it at 10 pm in syndication . 
 = = Internet and DVD = = 
 = = = Episode downloads and online streaming = = = 
 Weekly installments of 30 Rock are available to download for a per @-@ episode fee , to U.S. residents only , via Amazon Video , Apple 's iTunes Store , Google Play , and the now @-@ defunct " NBC Direct " service . In addition to paid downloads , all seven seasons can be streamed on Netflix with a paid subscription . Both NBC.com and <unk> stream episodes for free , but only the five most current installments are available for viewing , and Hulu has ceased streaming previous seasons . 
 = = = DVD releases = = = 
 = The Relapse = 
 The Relapse , or , Virtue in Danger is a Restoration comedy from 1696 written by John Vanbrugh . The play is a sequel to Colley Cibber 's Love 's Last Shift , or , The Fool in Fashion . 
 In Cibber 's Love 's Last Shift , a free @-@ living Restoration rake is brought to repentance and reform by the ruses of his wife , while in The Relapse , the rake succumbs again to temptation and has a new love affair . His virtuous wife is also subjected to a determined seduction attempt , and resists with difficulty . 
 Vanbrugh planned The Relapse around particular actors at Drury Lane , writing their stage habits , public reputations , and personal relationships into the text . One such actor was Colley Cibber himself , who played the luxuriant fop Lord Foppington in both Love 's Last Shift and The Relapse . However , Vanbrugh 's artistic plans were threatened by a cutthroat struggle between London 's two theatre companies , each of which was " seducing " actors from the other . The Relapse came close to being not produced at all , but the successful performance that was eventually achieved in November 1696 vindicated Vanbrugh 's intentions , and saved the company from bankruptcy as well . 
 Unlike Love 's Last Shift , which never again performed after the 1690s , The Relapse has retained its audience appeal . In the 18th century , however , its tolerant attitude towards actual and attempted adultery gradually became unacceptable to public opinion , and the original play was for a century replaced on the stage by Sheridan 's <unk> version A Trip to Scarborough ( 1777 ) . On the modern stage , The Relapse has been established as one of the most popular Restoration comedies , valued for Vanbrugh 's light , throwaway wit and the consummate acting part of Lord Foppington , a burlesque character with a dark side . 
 = = The Relapse as sequel = = 
 = = = Sexual ideology = = = 
 Love 's Last Shift can be seen as an early sign of Cibber 's sensitivity to shifts of public opinion , which was to be useful to him in his later career as manager at Drury Lane ( see Colley Cibber ) . In the 1690s , the economic and political power balance of the nation tilted from the aristocracy towards the middle class after the Glorious Revolution of 1688 , and middle @-@ class values of religion , morality , and gender roles became more dominant , not least in attitudes to the stage . Love 's Last Shift is one of the first illustrations of a massive shift in audience taste , away from the analytic bent and sexual frankness of Restoration comedy and towards the conservative certainties and gender role backlash of exemplary or sentimental comedy . The play illustrates Cibber 's opportunism at a moment in time before the change was assured : fearless of self @-@ contradiction , he puts something into his first play to please every section of the audience , combining the old outspokenness with the new preachiness . The way Vanbrugh , in his turn , allows the reformed rake to relapse quite cheerfully , and has the only preaching in the play come from the comically corrupt parson of " <unk> Living " , has made some early 20th @-@ century critics refer to The Relapse as the last of the true Restoration comedies . However , Vanbrugh 's play is also affected by the taste of the 1690s , and compared to a play like the courtier William Wycherley 's The Country Wife of 20 years earlier , with its celebration of predatory aristocratic masculinity , The Relapse contains quite a few moments of morality and uplift . In fact it has a kind of parallel structure to Love 's Last Shift : in the climactic scene of Cibber 's play , Amanda 's virtue reforms her husband , and in the corresponding scene of The Relapse , it reforms her admirer Worthy . Such moments have not done the play any favours with modern critics . 
 = = = Love 's Last Shift plot = = = 
 Love 's Last Shift is the story of a last " shift " or trick that a virtuous wife , Amanda , is driven to reform and retain her rakish husband Loveless . Loveless has been away for ten years , dividing his time between the brothel and the bottle , and no longer recognises his wife when he returns to London . Acting the part of a high @-@ class prostitute , Amanda lures Loveless into her luxurious house and treats him to the night of his dreams , confessing her true identity in the morning . Loveless is so impressed that he immediately reforms . A minor part that was a great hit with the première audience is the fop Sir Novelty Fashion , written by Cibber for himself to play . Sir Novelty flirts with all the women , but is more interested in his own exquisite appearance and witticisms , and Cibber would modestly write in his autobiography 45 years later , " was thought a good portrait of the foppery then in fashion " . Combining daring sex scenes with sentimental reconciliations and Sir Novelty 's buffoonery , Love 's Last Shift offered something for everybody , and was a great box @-@ office hit . 
 = = = The Relapse plot = = = 
 Vanbrugh 's The Relapse is less sentimental and more analytical than Love 's Last Shift , subjecting both the reformed husband and the virtuous wife to fresh temptations , and having them react with more psychological realism . Loveless falls for the vivacious young widow Berinthia , while Amanda barely succeeds in summoning her virtue to reject her admirer Worthy . The three central characters , Amanda , Loveless , and Sir Novelty ( ennobled by Vanbrugh into " Lord Foppington " ) , are the only ones that recur in both plays , the remainder of the Relapse characters being new . 
 In the trickster subplot , young Tom tricks his elder brother Lord Foppington out of his intended bride and her large dowry . This plot takes up nearly half the play and expands the part of Sir Novelty to give more scope for the roaring success of Cibber 's fop acting . Recycling Cibber 's merely fashion @-@ conscious fop , Vanbrugh lets him buy himself a title and equips him with enough aplomb and selfishness to weather all humiliations . Although Lord Foppington may be " very industrious to pass for an ass " , as Amanda remarks , he is at bottom " a man who Nature has made no fool " ( <unk> ) . Literary historians agree in esteeming him " the greatest of all Restoration <unk> " ( <unk> ) , " brutal , evil , and smart " ( Hume ) . 
 = = Background : theatre company split = = 
 In the early 1690s , London had only one officially countenanced theatre company , the " United Company " , badly managed and with its takings bled off by predatory investors ( " adventurers " ) . To counter the draining of the company 's income , the manager Christopher Rich slashed the salaries and traditional perks of his skilled professional actors , antagonising such popular performers as Thomas Betterton , the <unk> Elizabeth Barry , and the comedian Anne Bracegirdle . Colley Cibber wrote in his autobiography that the owners of the United Company , " who had made a monopoly of the stage , and consequently presumed they might impose what conditions they pleased upon their people , did not consider that they were all this while endeavouring to enslave a set of actors whom the public … were inclined to support . " Betterton and his colleagues set forth the bad finances of the United Company and the plight of the actors in a " Petition of the Players " submitted to the Lord Chamberlain . This unusual document is signed by nine men and six women , all established professional actors , and details a disreputable jumble of secret investments and " farmed " shares , making the case that owner chicanery rather than any failure of audience interest was at the root of the company 's financial problems . Barely veiled strike threats in the actors ' petition were met with an answering lock @-@ out threat from Rich in a " Reply of the Patentees " , but the burgeoning conflict was pre @-@ empted by a suspension of all play @-@ acting from December until March 1695 on account of Queen Mary 's illness and death . During this interval , a cooperative actors ' company took shape under the leadership of Betterton and was granted a Royal " licence to act " on 25 March , to the dismay of Rich , who saw the threat too late . 
 The two companies that emerged from this labour / management conflict are usually known respectively as the " Patent Company " ( the no @-@ longer @-@ united United Company ) and " Betterton 's Company " , although Judith Milhous argues that the latter misrepresents the cooperative nature of the actors ' company . In the following period of intense rivalry , the Patent Company was handicapped by a shortage of competent actors . " <unk> " actors ( as the legal term was ) back and forth between the companies was a key tactic in the ensuing struggle for position , and so were appeals to the Lord Chamberlain to issue injunctions against seductions from the other side , which that functionary was quite willing to do . Later Rich also resorted to hiring amateurs , and to tempting Irish actors over from Dublin . But such measures were not yet in place for the staging of The Relapse in 1696 , Rich 's most desperate venture . 
 = = Casting = = 
 Vanbrugh is assumed to have attempted to tailor his play to the talents of particular actors and to what audiences would expect from them , as was normal practice ( Holland ) , but this was exceptionally difficult to accomplish in 1695 – 96 . Love 's Last Shift had been cast from the remnants of the Patent Company — " learners " and " boys and girls " — after the walkout of the stars . Following the surprising success of this young cast , Vanbrugh and Rich had even greater difficulty in retaining the actors needed for The Relapse . However , in spite of the continuous emergency in which the Relapse production was mounted , most of Vanbrugh 's original intentions were eventually carried out . 
 = = = Love 's Last Shift cast = = = 
 To cast Love 's Last Shift in January 1696 , the Patent Company had to make the best use of such actors as remained after the 1694 split ( see cast list right ) . An anonymous contemporary pamphlet describes the " despicable condition " the troupe had been reduced to : 
 The disproportion was so great at parting , that it was almost impossible , in Drury Lane , to muster up a sufficient number to take in all the parts of any play ; and of them so few were tolerable , that a play must of necessity be damned , that had not extraordinary favour from the audience . No fewer than sixteen ( most of the old standing ) went away ; and with them the very beauty and vigour of the stage ; they who were left being for the most part learners , boys and girls , a very unequal match for them that revolted . 
 The only well @-@ regarded performers available were the Verbruggens , John and Susanna , who had been re @-@ seduced by Rich from Betterton 's company . They were of course used in Love 's Last Shift , with John playing Loveless , the male lead , and his wife Susanna the flirtatious heiress Narcissa , a secondary character . The rest of the cast consisted of the new and untried ( for instance Hildebrand Horden , who had just joined Rich 's troupe , playing a rakish young lover ) , the modest and lacklustre ( Jane Rogers , playing Amanda , and Mary Kent , playing Sir Novelty 's mistress <unk> ) , and the widely disliked ( the opportunist Colley Cibber , playing Sir Novelty Fashion ) ; people who had probably never been given the option of joining Betterton . Betterton 's only rival as male lead , George Powell , had most likely been left behind by the rebels with some relief ( Milhous ) ; while Powell was skilled and experienced , he was also notorious for his bad temper and alcoholism . Throughout the " seduction " tug @-@ of @-@ war between Rich and Betterton in 1695 – 96 , Powell remained at Drury Lane , where he was in fact not used for Love 's Last Shift , but would instead spectacularly demonstrate his drinking problem at the première of The Relapse . 
 = = = The Relapse cast = = = 
 Vanbrugh planned The Relapse , too , round these limited casting resources and minor talents , which Peter Holland has argued explains the robust , farcical character of the play ; Vanbrugh 's second comedy , The Provoked Wife ( 1697 ) , written for the better actors of the cooperative company , is a much subtler piece . The Relapse was written in six weeks and offered to the Patent Company in March , but because of the problems with contracting and retaining actors , it did not première until November . It is known from Cibber 's autobiography that Vanbrugh had a decisive say in the ongoing casting changes made during these seven months ; it is not known whether he altered his text to accommodate them . 
 To reinforce the connection with Love 's Last Shift and capitalise on its unexpected success , Vanbrugh designed the central roles of Loveless , Amanda , and Sir Novelty for the same actors : John Verbruggen , Jane Rogers , and Colley Cibber . Keeping Rogers as Amanda was not a problem , since she was not an actress that the companies fought over , but holding on to John Verbruggen and Colley Cibber posed challenges , to which Rich rose with energetic campaigns of bribery and re @-@ seduction . Filling the rest of the large Relapse cast presented a varied palette of problems , which forced some unconventional emergency casting . 
 John Verbruggen was one of the original rebels and had been offered a share in the actors ' company , but became disgruntled when his wife Susanna , a popular comedian , was not . For Rich , it was a stroke of luck to get Susanna and John back into his depleted and unskilled troupe . John 's availability to play Loveless remained precarious , however . In September , when The Relapse had still not been staged after six months of trying ( probably because Rich was still parleying with Cibber about his availability as Lord Foppington ) , John was still complaining about his employment situation , even getting into a physical fight over it at the theatre . This misbehaviour caused the Lord Chamberlain to declare his contract void and at the same time order him to stay with the Patent Company until January 1697 , to give Rich time to find a replacement . The original Loveless was thus finally guaranteed for an autumn season run of The Relapse . Since the loyal Verbruggen couple always moved as a unit , Susanna 's services were also assured . 
 The Verbruggens were essential to the play , not least because Vanbrugh had customised the sprightly temptress Berinthia to Susanna 's talents and reputation for witty , roguish , sexually enterprising characters , most recently Mrs <unk> in Thomas D 'Urfey 's Don Quixote ( a success thanks to " the extraordinary well acting of Mrs Verbruggen " , wrote D 'Urfey ) . Although John was less well known , his acting skills were considerable and would flourish after January 1697 in the cooperative company , where commentators even started to compare him with the great Betterton . Verbruggen was considered a more natural , intuitive or " careless " actor , with " a negligent agreeable wildness in his action and his mien , which became him well . " Anthony Aston vividly described Verbruggen as " a little in @-@ kneed , which gave him a shambling gait , which was a carelessness , and became him . " Modern critics do not find the Loveless part very lively or irresistible , but Vanbrugh was able to count on Verbruggen 's shambling male magnetism and " agreeable wildness " to enrich the character . This would originally have worked even in print , since cast lists were included in the published plays : most 1690s play readers were playgoers also , and aware of the high @-@ profile Verbruggens . Happily married in private life and playing the secret lovers Loveless and Berinthia , the Verbruggens have left traces of their charisma and erotic stage presences in Vanbrugh 's dialogue . The Relapse even alludes to their real @-@ life relationship , in meta @-@ jokes such as Berinthia 's exclamation , " Well , he is a charming man ! I don 't wonder his wife 's so fond of him ! " 
 Hildebrand Horden , who had played a " wild " young lover in Love 's Last Shift , was the only young , handsome , potential romantic lead Rich had . He was presumably cast by Vanbrugh as Tom Fashion , Lord Foppington 's clever younger brother ( Holland ) , and it was a blow to the Patent Company when he was killed in a tavern brawl ( more glamorously referred to as a " duel " in older sources ) in May . At the première in November , Tom Fashion was instead played as a breeches role by Mary Kent , an unusual piece of emergency casting that puts a different face on a uniquely frank homosexual scene where Tom keeps skipping nimbly out of the way of the matchmaker Coupler 's lecherous groping . 
 Colley Cibber was a rather unsuccessful young actor at the time of the split , with a squeaky voice and without any of the physical attractiveness of the soon @-@ to @-@ be @-@ dead Horden . After the success of Love 's Last Shift , his status was transformed , with both companies vying for his services as actor and playwright . He made an off @-@ season transfer to Betterton 's company in the summer of 1696 and wrote part of a play for the rebels before being re @-@ seduced by Rich by means of a fat contract ( Milhous ) . Cibber as Lord Foppington was thus also assured , and finally the première of The Relapse could be scheduled with some confidence . Cibber 's performance in it was received with even greater acclaim than in his own play , Vanbrugh 's Lord Foppington being a larger and , in the estimation of both contemporaries and modern critics , much funnier part than Sir Novelty Fashion . Vanbrugh 's play incorporates some of the ad @-@ libbing and affectations of Cibber 's by all accounts inspired performance in Love 's Last Shift . Cibber has thus imprinted not only his own playwriting but also his acting style and squeaky personality on Vanbrugh 's best @-@ known character . 
 Vanbrugh 's preface to the first edition preserves a single fleeting concrete detail about the première performance : George Powell was drunk . He played Amanda 's worldly and sophisticated admirer Worthy , the " fine gentleman of the play " , and apparently brought an unintended hands @-@ on realism to his supposedly suave seduction attempt : 
 One word more about the bawdy , and I have done . I own the first night this thing was acted , some indecencies had like to have happened , but it was not my fault . The fine gentleman of the play , drinking his mistress 's health in Nantes brandy from six in the morning to the time he <unk> upon the stage in the evening , had toasted himself up to such a pitch of vigour , I confess I once gave Amanda for gone . 
 = = Stage history = = 
 The desperate straits of the United Company , and the success of The Relapse in saving it from collapse , are attested in a private letter from 19 November 1696 : " The other house [ Drury Lane ] has no company at all , and unless a new play comes out on Saturday revives their reputation , they must break . " The new play is assumed to have been The Relapse , and it turned out the success Rich needed . " This play " , notes Colley Cibber in his autobiography , " from its new and easy turn of wit , had great success , and gave me , as a comedian , a second flight of reputation along with it . " Charles <unk> summarises : " This play was received with mighty applause . " 
 The Relapse is singled out for particular censure in the Puritan clergyman Jeremy Collier 's anti @-@ theatre pamphlet Short View of the Immorality and <unk> of the English Stage ( 1698 ) , which attacks its lack of poetic justice and moral sentiment . Worthy and Berinthia , complains Collier , are allowed to enact their wiles against the <unk> ' married virtue without being punished or losing face . The subplot is an even worse offence against religion and morality , as it positively rewards vice , allowing the trickster hero Tom to keep the girl , her dowry , and his own bad character to the end . Vanbrugh failed to take Short View seriously and published a joking reply , but Collier 's censure was to colour the perception of the play for centuries . While it remained a popular stage piece through the 18th century , much praised and enjoyed for its wit , attitudes to its casual sexual morality became increasingly ambivalent as public opinion became ever more restrictive in this area , and more at odds with the permissive ethos of Restoration comedy . From 1777 Vanbrugh 's original was replaced on the stage by Sheridan 's A Trip to Scarborough , a close adaptation but with some " covering " , as the prologue explains , drawn over Vanbrugh 's " too bare " wit : 
 As change thus circulates throughout the nation , 
 Some plays may justly call for alteration ; 
 At least to draw some slender covering o 'er , 
 That graceless wit which was too bare before . 
 Sheridan does not allow Loveless and Berinthia to consummate their relationship , and he withdraws approval from Amanda 's admirer Worthy by renaming him " <unk> " . Some frank quips are silently deleted , and the matchmaker Coupler with the lecherous interest in Tom becomes decorous Mrs Coupler . A small @-@ scale but notable loss is of much of the graphic language of <unk> 's nurse , who is earthy in Vanbrugh 's original , genteel in Sheridan . However , Sheridan had an appreciation of Vanbrugh 's style , and retained most of the original text unaltered . 
 In the 19th century , A Trip to Scarborough remained the standard version , and there were also some ad hoc adaptations that sidelined the <unk> ' drawing @-@ room comedy in favour of the Lord Foppington / <unk> plot with its caricatured clashes between exquisite fop and pitchfork @-@ wielding country bumpkins . The Man of Quality ( 1870 ) was one such robust production , Miss Tomboy ( 1890 ) another . Vanbrugh 's original Relapse was staged once , in 1846 , at the Olympic Theatre in London . 
 During the first half of the 20th century The Relapse was relatively neglected , along with other Restoration drama , and experts are uncertain about exactly when Vanbrugh 's original again resurged to prominence on the stage and thereby marginalised Sheridan 's version . These experts now believe the play may have been first brilliantly rehabilitated by Anthony Quayle 's 1947 production at the Phoenix Theatre , starring Cyril Ritchard as Lord Foppington and brought to Broadway by Ritchard in 1950 . A musical version , Virtue in Danger ( 1963 ) , by Paul Dehn and " John Bernard " , opened to mixed reviews . John Russell Taylor in Plays and Players praised the cast , which included Patricia Routledge as Berinthia and John Moffatt as Lord Foppington , but complained that the production was " full of the simpering , posturing and sniggering which usually stand in for style and sophistication in Restoration revivals . " Following Donald Sinden 's outstanding and award @-@ winning performance at the Aldwych Theatre in the mid @-@ 1970s Vanbrugh 's original play is now again a favourite of the stage . A 2001 revival by Trevor Nunn at the National Theatre was described by Sheridan Morley as " rare , loving and brilliantly cast . " As so often with commentary on The Relapse , Morley focused on the role of Lord Foppington and its different interpretations : " Alex Jennings superbly inherits the role of Lord Foppington which for 20 years or so belonged to Donald Sinden , and for another 20 before that to Cyril Ritchard . " 
 Restoration Comedy , a play by Amy Freed that draws on both The Relapse and its predecessor , Colley Cibber 's Love 's Last Shift , premiered at Seattle Repertory Theatre in 2005 , starring Stephen Caffrey as Loveless , <unk> Kozlowski as Amanda , and Jonathan Freeman as Lord Foppington , and directed by Sharon Ott . 
 = 2008 Bathurst Boys in Red accident = 
 The Boys in Red accident [ a ] was a January 12 , 2008 collision just outside the city of Bathurst , New Brunswick , Canada , between a semi @-@ trailer truck and a van carrying the basketball team from Bathurst High School . The accident killed seven students and the wife of the coach , and injured four other occupants in the van . It was the deadliest transportation accident in New Brunswick since 1989 , when a logging truck tipped onto a <unk> in Cormier Village , killing 13 . 
 The accident was followed by a national day of mourning in Canada , and a ban on all <unk> Ford Club Wagon type vehicles being used for student transport in New Brunswick . Two investigations , one by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) and the other by Transport Canada , found that the cause of the disaster was a combination of poor road conditions , lack of proper snow tires , and possible driver error . Pressure from the public and victims ' families prompted the chief coroner of the province to launch an inquiry , which produced recommendations to improve student transport safety in New Brunswick . The provincial government agreed with the majority of the suggestions and has since enacted many of them . 
 = = Accident = = 
 The accident occurred on New Brunswick Route 8 shortly after midnight on January 12 , 2008 , when the team coach was driving the Bathurst High School basketball team northward back from a game in Moncton against the Moncton High School Purple Knights in an <unk> Ford Club Wagon . Light freezing rain and low visibility created poor , slippery driving conditions . As the van approached the Bathurst city limits , the coach lost control and veered in front of a southbound semi @-@ trailer truck . The truck collided with the side of the van and the two vehicles came to rest on the shoulder of the southbound lane of the highway approximately 40 metres ( 130 ft ) from the point of impact . 
 The police officer who discovered the wreck initially suspected that only the semi had gone off the road . After further investigation , he found the van and called for emergency services , whose arrival was delayed by freezing rain . The rear wall and a large portion of the right @-@ hand side of the van , including three rows of seats , had been torn away , ejecting several occupants . Seven players and the wife of the team coach were pronounced dead at the scene . The coach , his daughter and the two other players survived the accident and were rushed to Chaleur Regional Hospital in Bathurst . Of the injured , one was listed in critical condition , and two in stable . The fourth was released shortly after the accident . The driver of the truck was not injured . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 The accident was met with grief and condolences from New Brunswick and around Canada . 
 John McLaughlin , School District 15 Superintendent , stated that the community of Bathurst was in a state of shock and mourning . McLaughlin also noted that the coach held the appropriate license to drive the vehicle and that there were no laws or regulations in the province which regulated team transportation in the event of poor weather . He also added : 
 That 's really hard because you have to gauge the weather each time you have to make a decision . As for what happened last night , I can 't comment . I don 't have that information . But in general , our people take great care in making decisions based on the information that they have at the time . 
 Premier Shawn Graham said " I just want to extend sympathies to the affected families . This is a tragic situation for the community of Bathurst and our province . " Prime Minister of Canada Stephen Harper said the incident had " shocked the nation " and called for a day of mourning . Valery <unk> , Bishop of Bathurst , read a message on behalf of Pope Benedict XVI stating : " [ The Pope ] expresses sentiments of deep sympathy and spiritual closeness to the members of their families and to all staff and students who have been touched by this tragedy . The Pope assures all concerned of his prayers for those who died and for their families . " 
 On January 16 , all sports @-@ related extracurricular activities in New Brunswick were cancelled . Services were held across the country . Some schools asked students to wear red and black , the colours of Bathurst High School . The funeral for the seven deceased players was held in Bathurst at the K. C. Irving Regional Centre , which was filled with 6 @,@ 000 people . An additional 3 @,@ 500 mourners filled the adjacent rink to watch the service on a widescreen television . Elizabeth Lord 's private funeral followed the next day . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Both the Royal Canadian Mounted Police ( RCMP ) and Transport Canada conducted investigations on the accident . The RCMP released its report on July 29 , 2008 . The report stated that the van would not have passed a safety inspection at the time of the accident because of rust in its body , worn all @-@ season tires , and faulty brakes . None of these factors could be identified as the sole cause of the accident , but the report noted that " together , they certainly contributed " . The report added that speed was not a factor in the crash , as the van was only travelling about 73 kilometres per hour ( 45 mph ) and the truck at approximately 80 kilometres per hour ( 50 mph ) at the time of impact , both of which were well below the posted limit of 100 kilometres per hour ( 62 mph ) . The van had been inspected on October 29 , 2007 , just over two months prior to the collision , and was four months away from its next inspection . The report resulted in public questioning of New Brunswick 's motor vehicle inspection program . 
 Transport Canada released its report on July 30 , 2008 . It blamed weather conditions , but also focused on driver fatigue and driver error . It cited several breaches of provincial law regarding the operation of commercial vehicles . The coach had been on duty for sixteen hours when the collision happened , contravening the law that one cannot drive if they have been working more than fourteen consecutive hours . The report also identified inadequate pre @-@ trip inspections and log book keeping , and the lack of a contingency plan in the event of poor weather . Transport Canada stated that although they put an added emphasis on some factors , their report was consistent with the RCMP 's . They concurred that the vehicle would have failed an inspection in its pre @-@ collision state because of worn tires and brakes . 
 Six of the dead were not wearing seat belts , while a seventh was not properly restrained . Greg <unk> , a collision analyst and principal Transport Canada investigator , later suggested that seat belts most likely would not have saved all the victims ' lives . Randy Arseneau credits the fact that his son , Bradd Arseneau , was not wearing his seatbelt for Bradd 's survival , saying that if Bradd had not been thrown to the floor just before the collision he may also have died . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following the accident New Brunswick immediately halted the use of 15 passenger vans and began a thorough review of transportation policy ; many other provinces later did the same . At the time of the tragedy only Nova Scotia had a ban on 15 passenger vans , following an accident in 1984 . 
 Many at Bathurst High School speculated that its senior varsity basketball team would not be able to continue after the crash . Only five team members remained , including three students who did not go to Moncton because of illness . Despite this , the Bathurst Phantoms ' basketball team defeated the Campobello Vikings 82 – 50 to win the Provincial AA championship a year later . 
 = = = Recommendations = = = 
