 On August 26 , 2008 , a government working group presented New Brunswick Education Minister Kelly Lamrock with eight recommendations for extracurricular transportation . The recommendations included that guidelines for transporting students to school @-@ related extracurricular activities be strengthened , that a school bus be used when transporting ten or more students , that vehicles be equipped with snow tires if travelling between October 15 and April 30 , and that the district superintendent be charged with responsibility for ensuring safe transportation of students to and from extracurricular activities . Lamrock initially suggested that schools voluntarily follow the recommendations , though they were later made into enforceable policy . 
 One major effect of the recommendations is that , as of November 2008 , it is mandatory that all vehicle operators who intend to use their vehicles to transport students between extracurricular activities be covered by a Third Party Liability and Accident Benefit policy . These policies must be in the amount of no less than CAD $ 1 million for vehicles with a capacity of fewer than 10 passengers , and no less than CAD $ 5 million for vehicles with a capacity of 10 or more . This also applies to parents driving others ' children to school related extracurricular activities . 
 The changes were met with critical reception in the province . Many students are now required to pay higher sports fees to cover higher transportation costs . Some schools do not have access to approved vehicles because the Education Act prohibits schools and school districts from owning vehicles . To get around this they use corporate entities to operate vehicles for extracurricular activities . These require money to buy new vehicles and the required insurance , which often requires schools to conduct extra fundraising . 
 = = = Responsibility = = = 
 On November 12 , 2008 , the RCMP ruled out laying criminal charges in relation to the accident . It stated that the finding had been reviewed by a Crown prosecutor and that no wrongdoing was found . The families of two of the deceased expressed disapproval of the decision and indicated that they may bring a lawsuit against several of the involved parties , though others have publicly stated that they accepted the decision . The chief coroner of the province stated that a provincial inquest was possible , though it would take some time to come to any decision on the matter . No decision on whether or not to have an inquest was made for over a month . 
 Two families accused the Department of Public Safety of " dragging its feet " . These families stated that they wanted a " Van Angels " law that would require any driver taking students outside of their community to possess a Class 2 driver 's license . They also wanted a weather law that would prevent students from travelling outside of their communities during severe weather . Ana Acevedo and Isabelle Hains , mothers of two of the deceased , went so far as to launch a website , <unk> , which is dedicated to the memory of their sons and contains a blog related to the accident formerly included a petition to hold an inquest . 
 On December 17 , 2008 , Greg <unk> , the province 's acting chief coroner , called for an inquiry into the accident , stating that " [ t ] he inquest gives us the opportunity to pull all those facts together in a comprehensive manner and look at the issues in their entirety and have the jury make recommendations for prevention . " The decision was met with much approval from the victims ' families . The inquest began on May 4 , 2009 and lasted until May 14 . It included testimony from survivors , experts , and provincial officials . The inquest did not blame anyone directly for the accident , but the jury returned 24 recommendations . Kelly Lamrock stated that the province intended to implement the " vast majority " of these recommendations and that a third of them had already been initiated . 
 = = = Atlantic Wholesalers Limited and Loblaws lawsuit = = = 
 On December 22 , 2009 Atlantic Wholesalers Limited and Loblaws filed a joint claim against the coach and Bathurst Van Inc . In the lawsuit the plaintiffs complained that negligence on behalf of the defendants was responsible for the crash . Atlantic Wholesalers and Loblaws argue that they are owed $ 40 @,@ 667 @.@ 86 in damages , and an additional $ 847 @.@ 50 to cover the clean @-@ up costs . After extensive press coverage and public backlash , Atlantic Wholesalers and Loblaws attempted to defend their action stating that this action was " normal insurance procedures follow an accident of this nature " . Public outrage spread and on January 8 , 2010 , Loblaws dropped the suit for <unk> reasons after enormous public backlash with numerous persons calling for a boycott of the chain . 
 = = Memorial = = 
 A memorial for the victims was unveiled on June 6 , 2008 , at Bathurst High School . An archway with a basketball net was placed in a courtyard behind the school . The memorial was funded by money donations . A temporary memorial at the crash site consisting of two basketball nets and flowers was also erected , and one of the nets featuring pictures of the players remained there as of January 2014 . A permanent " Boys in Red " memorial for the victims of the van crash has been erected on an empty lot on King Avenue in the city 's downtown area near the Bathurst High School . The memorial was erected in a small walking park near the school . It consists of three vertical columns of red quartz . The site has been used for a memorial space in the past as 2 small stones with plaques are placed by the st john st sidewalks of the park with 2 small trees erected as a memorial of 2 Bathurst High students who were among the class of 2001 who died in automobile accidents as well a few months before graduation . 
 = = Note = = 
 ^ [ a ] The accident 's name is derived from the Bathurst High School colors , red and black . 
 = Attack on Yokosuka = 
 The attack on Yokosuka was an air raid conducted by the United States Navy on 18 July 1945 during the last weeks of the Pacific War . The Japanese battleship Nagato was the raid 's main target , though anti @-@ aircraft positions and other warships at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal were also attacked . Other U.S. Navy and British Royal Navy aircraft struck airfields in the Tokyo area . 
 While Nagato was only lightly damaged , the American aircraft sank a destroyer , a submarine and two escort vessels and damaged five small vessels . The Allied pilots also claimed the destruction of several locomotives and 43 Japanese aircraft as well as damage to another 77 aircraft . Japanese anti @-@ aircraft guns shot down twelve American and two British aircraft . 
 = = Background = = 
 During July 1945 the U.S Third Fleet , which was led by Admiral William Halsey , conducted a series of air raids and naval bombardments against targets in Japan . These attacks were made by the Third Fleet 's striking force , Task Force 38 ( TF 38 ) , which was commanded by Vice Admiral John S. McCain and included nine fleet carriers , six light carriers and their escorts . Almost one thousand aircraft were embarked on board these carriers . On 10 July TF 38 's aircraft struck airfields around Tokyo and claimed to have destroyed 340 Japanese aircraft on the ground and two in the air . No Japanese aircraft responded to this attack as they were being held in reserve to mount large @-@ scale suicide attacks on the Allied fleet during the expected invasion of the country later in 1945 . Following this raid , the Third Fleet conducted raids on Hokkaido and northern Honshu on 14 and 15 July which sank large numbers of ships and destroyed 25 aircraft on the ground . The American warships then sailed south and on 16 July were joined by the British Pacific Fleet 's ( BPF 's ) main striking force , which was designated Task Force 37 ( TF 37 ) , and comprised three aircraft carriers and their escorts . 
 By July 1945 the Imperial Japanese Navy 's ( IJN 's ) remaining large warships were unable to put to sea due to shortages of fuel and the dangers of attack from Allied aircraft and submarines . While most of these warships were anchored near the major naval base at Kure and other locations in the Seto Inland Sea , Nagato and several smaller warships were stationed at Yokosuka Naval Arsenal in Tokyo Bay . At this time the battleship was moored alongside a pier facing northwest and covered in camouflage that was intended to make her difficult for aircraft to spot . All of Nagato 's secondary armament and about half her anti @-@ aircraft guns had been removed and emplaced on nearby hills from where they could provide protection to the naval base . Although the battleship 's boilers were not lit , she received steam and power from the submarine chaser Fukugawa Maru No. 7 and an auxiliary boiler located on the pier . The destroyer Ushio was also docked nearby in a position where she was able to protect the battleship with her 25 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns . 
 Nagato 's presence at Yokosuka was revealed to the Allies by photographs taken during the 10 July raid on the Tokyo area . On 16 July Halsey and Vice Admiral Bernard Rawlings , the commander of TF 37 , met to plan raids on the Tokyo area . Halsey was determined to sink the remnants of the IJN , and placed a particularly strong emphasis on attacking Nagato as she had been Admiral Isoroku Yamamoto 's flagship during the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 . Due to the battleship 's position within a well defended harbor , the Third Fleet 's planners assessed that aircraft which attempted the straight and level flight needed to launch torpedoes against her would suffer heavy losses , and so decided to use dive bombing tactics instead . As the landward side of the naval base was mountainous , the approaches which could be used by dive bombers were limited . 
 = = Attack = = 
 On 17 July the American and British fleet attempted to strike the Yokosuka Naval Arsenal and other targets in the Tokyo area . While two waves of aircraft were dispatched , the attack was frustrated by heavy cloud over the region and further attacks were canceled . The aircraft which reached the Tokyo area struck airfields north of the city and caused little damage . While the naval base was not attacked , it was overflown by an American fighter and its defenders were readied to respond to attacks . On the night of 17 – 18 July American and British warships bombarded the city of Hitachi . 
 The next day , the Allied fleet sailed south looking for weather which was better suited to conducting flight operations . Conditions improved during the morning , and at 11 : 30 am the day 's air strikes began to launch . The British aircraft of TF 37 were dispatched against airfields in the Tokyo area . The size of this attack was considerably reduced from what was planned , however , as the fuel system on board HMS Victorious had become contaminated with water and the carrier could only launch six Vought F4U Corsair fighters . TF 38 's main effort was directed against Yokosuka Naval Arsenal , with Nagato being designated the raid 's primary target . A smaller number of American aircraft were also dispatched to raid Japanese air fields . 
 The attack on Yokosuka began at about 3 : 30 pm on 18 July . The first wave of American aircraft attacked the anti @-@ aircraft batteries around the naval base , and succeeded in neutralizing them . Following this , the aircraft of VF @-@ 88 attacked Nagato with bombs . A 500 pound general @-@ purpose bomb struck the battleship 's bridge , killing her commanding officer , Rear Admiral Otsuka Miki as well as the executive officer and at least nine other men . Another 500 pound bomb later struck Nagato and detonated near her officer 's mess , killing about 22 sailors and knocking out four 25 mm guns . The only other direct hit on the ship was made by a 5 @-@ inch ( 130 mm ) shell or rocket which did not explode . In addition , 60 bombs landed in the harbor near Nagato , causing breaches to her double hull which let 2 @,@ 000 tons of water into the ship . By the time the attack concluded at 4 : 10 pm , 35 of the battleship 's 967 officers and men had been killed . The overall damage to the ship was later assessed as being light . 
 American aircraft also attacked several other ships docked at Yokosuka . The unfinished Matsu class destroyer <unk> broke in two and sank after being bombed , and the submarine I @-@ 372 was destroyed by another bomb ; at the time the submarine 's crew was ashore and did not suffer any fatalities . Two escort vessels and a torpedo boat were also sunk . In addition to these losses , five other ships , including the obsolete destroyer Yakaze and training ships Fuji and Kasuga were damaged . Despite their proximity to Nagato , Fukugawa Maru No. 7 and Ushio were not damaged . The British and United States aircraft dispatched against airfields claimed to have destroyed 43 Japanese aircraft and damaged another 77 . The pilots of these aircraft also claimed the destruction of several railway locomotives . Allied losses in the attacks made on 18 July were 12 U.S. Navy aircraft , two Royal Navy aircraft and 18 aircrew . The Allied pilots were disappointed they had not sunk Nagato , despite the battleship being the primary target of the raid . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following its attacks on the Tokyo Bay area on 18 July , the Allied fleet sailed away from Japan to be refueled . Its next attacks were made against the main body of the IJN in Kure and the Inland Sea on 24 , 25 and 28 July . These raids sank three battleships , an aircraft carrier and several other warships but cost the Allies 133 aircraft and 102 aircrew killed . The Third Fleet and elements of the BPF continued strikes against targets in Japan until the end of the war on 15 August 1945 . 
 After the attack on Yokosuka , the Nagato 's crew removed all casualties from the ship and conducted limited repairs . Some of the ship 's ballast tanks were also flooded to give the impression that she had been sunk . During the early hours of 2 August Nagato was ordered to put to sea to intercept an Allied force . However , this sortie was canceled before she had completed preparations to leave port as the report of Allied ships was determined to be false . On 30 August the ship was surrendered to the U.S. Navy . She was one of the target ships for the two atomic bomb tests conducted at Bikini Atoll on 1 and 28 July 1946 during Operation Crossroads , and sank there during the night of 29 – 30 July . 
 = Faramir = 
 In J. R. R. Tolkien 's Middle @-@ earth legendarium , Faramir is a fictional character appearing in The Lord of the Rings . He is introduced as the younger brother of Boromir of the Fellowship of the Ring and second son of Denethor II , the Steward of the realm of Gondor . The relationships between the three men are revealed over the course of the book and are elaborated in the appendices . 
 Faramir first enters the narrative in person in The Two Towers , where , upon meeting Frodo Baggins , he is presented with a temptation to take possession of the One Ring . In The Return of the King , he led the forces of Gondor during the War of the Ring , coming near to death , and eventually succeeded his father as the Steward and won the love of Éowyn of Rohan . 
 In The History of The Lord of the Rings series Christopher Tolkien described that his father had not foreseen the emergence of Faramir during the writing of the book , only inventing him at the actual point of his appearance in The Two Towers . J. R. R. Tolkien noted that the introduction of Faramir had led to postponement of the book 's dénouement and to further development of the background for Gondor and Rohan . Long after completing The Lord of the Rings , Tolkien would write that of all characters Faramir resembles the author most , and that he had deliberately bestowed upon the character several traits of his own . 
 = = Literature = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Early years of Faramir 's life are described in the main narrative of The Lord of the Rings only <unk> , with more detail revealed in the appendices . It is stated that Faramir was born in the year <unk> of the Third Age ; his father , Denethor II , was a man of noble descent and the heir to the Stewardship of Gondor , ascending a year after Faramir 's birth . Denethor had married <unk> , daughter of Prince <unk> of Dol <unk> ; however , she died untimely when Faramir was five , and is said to have remained to him " but a memory of loveliness in far days and of his first grief " . 
 After her death Denethor became sombre , cold , and detached from his family , but the relationship between Faramir and Boromir , who was five years older , only grew closer . The brothers greatly loved and highly esteemed each other , and neither in childhood nor in later years was there any jealousy or rivalry between them , even though Denethor openly favoured his elder son . Tolkien wrote that Faramir was used to giving way and not airing his own opinions . Among other things , Faramir displeased his father in that he welcomed the wizard Gandalf who occasionally visited Minas Tirith , the capital of Gondor . Being eager for knowledge , Faramir learned much from Gandalf about the history of the realm and about the death of Isildur . 
 Gondor had long been threatened by the nearby realm of Mordor , and in 3018 the Dark Lord Sauron began the War of the Ring , attacking the ruined city of Osgiliath that guarded the passage to Minas Tirith . Faramir and Boromir commanded the defence , and were among those few who survived when the eastern half of Osgiliath was captured and the bridges across the River Anduin were destroyed . 
 In The Fellowship of the Ring it is recounted that shortly before the battle Faramir had a prophetic dream , which later often recurred to him and once to Boromir . In this dream a voice spoke about a " Sword that was Broken " that was to be found at <unk> far to the north , about the awakening of " Isildur 's Bane " , approach of " Doom " , and appearance of " the Halfling " . Faramir decided to journey to <unk> and seek advice of Elrond the Half @-@ elven , but Boromir claimed the errand for himself , fearing for his brother , and was approved by Denethor and a council of the elders ; Faramir remained to defend Gondor . 
 = = = The Two Towers = = = 
 Faramir first encountered the hobbits Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee in Ithilien and recognized them to be the <unk> mentioned in his dreams . Faramir questioned Frodo of his quest , and Frodo revealed that he , along with eight other companions including Boromir , had set out from Rivendell . During the interrogation , Faramir asked often about Boromir , since he knew , although Frodo at that point did not , that Boromir was already dead . One night , while on guard , Faramir waded down to the Anduin river after seeing a boat there . It contained the dead body of his brother , who had been killed by Orcs after Frodo left the group . 
 Faramir also asked about the purpose of Frodo 's mission , but Frodo tried to avoid the subject . Faramir determined that Frodo was carrying one of Sauron 's great weapons . In the Rangers ’ secret refuge behind the waterfall , <unk> <unk> , Sam accidentally spoke of Boromir ’ s desire for the One Ring , thus revealing the item Frodo was carrying . Faramir then showed the crucial difference between him and his proud brother : 
 But fear no more ! I would not take this thing , if it lay by the highway . Not were Minas Tirith falling in ruin and I alone could save her , so , using the weapon of the Dark Lord for her good and my glory . No , I do not wish for such triumphs , Frodo son of Drogo . 
 Despite the Hobbits ’ fears , Faramir was wise enough to realize that such a weapon was not to be used and if desired , should be resisted . With this knowledge , he also realized what his brother had to face , and wished that he had gone on the quest himself — knowing that Boromir would not have been able to resist the temptation to seize the Ring for himself . Giving the Hobbits provisions , he sent them on their way to continue their quest , but warned Frodo that their guide , Gollum , was a treacherous creature , and that an unknown terror lived in Cirith Ungol , where Gollum was leading them . 
 = = = The Return of the King = = = 
 The following evening in Cair Andros , Faramir sent his company south to reinforce the garrison at Osgiliath , while he and three of his men rode to Minas Tirith . Along the way , they were pursued by Sauron 's servants , the Nazgûl . Faramir rode back to help the fallen . Immediately , Gandalf rode out to their aid , temporarily banishing the Nazgûl . 
 Faramir arrived at Minas Tirith and reported to Denethor and Gandalf of his encounter with Frodo and Sam . Denethor became angry that Faramir had let Frodo and Sam pass into Mordor with the Ring , instead of bringing the Ring to Minas Tirith to be hidden . 
 Sauron 's second @-@ in @-@ command , the Witch @-@ king of Angmar , led a much larger force from Minas Morgul , and attacked Osgiliath . After Osgiliath was conquered , Faramir decided to stay with the rearguard in order to make sure that the retreat over Pelennor would not turn into a rout . He was gravely wounded by a Southron arrow and the Black Breath of the Nazgûl . Fortunately , all of the mounted soldiers in the city rode to his aid and brought him back to Denethor in Minas Tirith . 
 When Faramir returned unconscious , Denethor believed him to be fatally injured . That blow , coupled with a vision in the <unk> of the forces arrayed against him , drove him insane . He ordered his servants to build a funeral pyre in the House of Stewards for him and his son . Denethor 's temporary servant , the Hobbit Peregrin Took , went to alert Gandalf and Beregond , one of the Tower Guards he had befriended . Gandalf and Beregond stopped the impending sacrifice just in time . Mad with grief , Denethor jumped onto the lit pyre , burning himself alive . 
 Two days later , the battle over , Aragorn came and revived Faramir with <unk> in the Houses of Healing . During his subsequent recuperation there , Faramir met the Lady Éowyn of Rohan ; moved by her sorrow , pride , and beauty , he eventually fell in love with her . At first , Éowyn refused his advances , only desiring to go to war to find honour in death . But soon Éowyn realized that she had come to love him in return . 
 Faramir took up his office as Steward , and began preparing the city for the arrival of Aragorn , who was now King of Gondor . On the day of the King ’ s official coronation , Faramir surrendered his office . Aragorn , however , renewed the office , and announced that as long as his line would last , Faramir and his descendants would be Stewards of Gondor . 
 In addition , Aragorn created Faramir Prince of Ithilien and appointed Beregond Captain of Faramir 's guard , the White Company . Faramir , as Prince of Ithilien , together with the Prince of Dol <unk> became King <unk> 's chief commanders . In a draft letter to a reader of The Lord of the Rings , J. R. R. Tolkien writes that as Prince of Ithilien , Faramir 's duties also included acting as resident march @-@ warden of Gondor 's main eastward outpost , rehabilitating the lost territories , as well as clearing it of outlaws and Orcs and cleansing Minas Morgul ( an old <unk> city , once named Minas <unk> , that Sauron had taken ) of evil remnants . Faramir also fulfilled the traditional role of Steward , acting as the King ’ s chief counsellor and ruling Gondor in his absence . 
 With Éowyn , he settled in <unk> <unk> , where the two had a son named <unk> . After Faramir ’ s death at the age of 120 , his son succeeded him in all of his titles . <unk> , Faramir 's grandson , wrote The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen , which was inserted ( in an abbreviated form ) in the Thain 's Book by the writer <unk> , and appears in The Lord of the Rings as part of Appendix A. 
 = = = Characteristics = = = 
 Faramir 's personality is prominently described in the appendices to The Lord of the Rings : 
 He read the hearts of men as shrewdly as his father , but what he read moved him sooner to pity than to scorn . He was gentle in bearing , and a lover of lore and of music , and therefore by many in those days his courage was judged less than his brother 's . But it was not so , except that he did not seek glory in danger without a purpose . 
 Tolkien recorded that Faramir greatly resembled Boromir in appearance , who in his turn is described as " a tall man with a fair and noble face , dark @-@ haired and grey @-@ eyed , proud and stern of glance " . Members of the line of the Stewards were wont to be of a nobler appearance and bearing than most of the inhabitants of Gondor ; in case of Faramir , it is stated that " by some chance the blood of <unk> [ ran ] nearly true " in him , which was rare . This trait was elaborated by Tolkien through the speech of Pippin : 
 Here was one with an air of high nobility such as Aragorn at times revealed , less high perhaps , yet also less incalculable and remote : one of the Kings of Men born into a later time , but touched with the wisdom and sadness of the Elder Race . [ ... ] He was a captain that men would follow , [ ... ] even under the shadow of the black wings . 
 Faramir ’ s leadership , skill @-@ in @-@ arms , and swift but hardy judgement proved valuable in battle , and earned him Gondor 's respect during the War of the Ring . He defended Gondor from Sauron on many fronts , but did not enjoy fighting for its own sake . Long after completing The Lord of the Rings , Tolkien would write , " As far as any character is ' like me ' , it is Faramir " . Faramir 's relationship to war in Tolkien 's story reflected that of the author himself , who served as an officer in the British Army during the First World War and fought in the Battle of the Somme in the latter half of 1916 . 
 Tolkien bestowed his dream of " darkness <unk> " upon Faramir 's character , who relates it to Éowyn in the chapter " The Steward and the King " in The Return of the King . Of this , Tolkien wrote , " For when Faramir speaks of his private vision of the Great Wave , he speaks for me . That vision and dream has been ever with me — and has been inherited ( as I only discovered recently ) by one of my children , Michael . " 
 = = = Names and titles = = = 
 The meaning of the name Faramir was not explained by Tolkien ; apparently he intended it to come from Sindarin , an Elven language constructed by him and stated to have been used by the Stewards of Gondor for naming . The first part of Faramir could have been derived from Sindarin stems meaning ' suffice ' and ' hunt ' , and the final syllable is likely to have been the same as in his brother 's name . Boromir was described by Tolkien as a name " of mixed form " , and possibly combines Sindarin bor ( on ) - ' steadfast ' with either Sindarin <unk> or Quenya <unk> ' jewel ' . However , it is also stated that the Stewards of Gondor often bore names " remembered in the songs and histories of the First Age " , without paying a special attention to meaning . Thus one Boromir appears in The Silmarillion , and the appendices to The Lord of the Rings introduce Faramir , son of King <unk> of Gondor , although in this case the name was supposedly in Quenya , as the Kings are stated to have borne High @-@ elven names , and similarly did <unk> 's elder son , <unk> . 
 Throughout The Lord of the Rings , Faramir is given several titles and ranks , such as the Captain of Gondor and Captain of the White Tower . ( Boromir is given the latter title at an earlier point in the storyline , and in The Two Towers he is referred to as Captain @-@ General of Gondor and High Warden of the White Tower . ) After his father 's death , Faramir became the Steward of Gondor , but only briefly as he laid down his office at the crowning of Aragorn ; Tolkien stated that it was Denethor who was the last of the Ruling Stewards . Later Aragorn renewed Faramir 's hereditary appointment as Steward to the King , and granted him the titles of the Prince of Ithilien and Lord of <unk> <unk> . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 Faramir 's decision to reject the One Ring shows influences from a kind of courage and behaviour that was known to Tolkien from the medieval poem The Battle of Maldon . By not taking the Ring , Faramir rejects the desire for power and glory and the desire for renown which a defeat of Sauron would bring him . 
 The speed of the relationship of Faramir and Éowyn reflects a culture which Tolkien describes to be " less corrupt " , and nobler in which the " petty fencing and approaches " of courtly love is disregarded . A factor in the development of their love came from Tolkien 's personal belief that feelings grew quickly in periods of great stress and under the expectation of death . Originally , Tolkien employed the use of thou and thee in The Lord of the Rings to show a " deliberate change to a form of affection or endearment " . His son has presented the original drafts for the chapter " The Steward and the King " , in which such usage was employed to emphasize the relationship 's development : 
 The ' sudden change ' to which he referred here ... is possibly to be seen in their first meeting in the garden of the Houses of Healing , where Faramir says ( [ The Return of the King ] p . 238 ) : ' Then , Éowyn of Rohan , I say to you that you are beautiful ' , but at the end of his speech changes to the ' familiar ' form , ' But thou and I have both passed under the wings of the Shadow ' ( whereas Éowyn continues to use ' you ' ) . In the following meetings , in this text , Faramir uses the ' familiar ' forms , but Éowyn does not do so until the last ( ' Dost thou not know ? ' , RK p . 242 ) ; and soon after this point my father went back over what he had written and changed every ' thou ' and ' thee ' to ' you ' . 
 = = Portrayal in adaptations = = 
 = = = Art = = = 
 Faramir appears in several illustrations created by John Howe , Ted Nasmith and Anke <unk> for The Lord of the Rings and related products . One of the scenes from the book that received many depictions is Faramir and Éowyn 's meeting at the top of Minas Tirith . <unk> apparently follows the book in presenting Faramir as dark @-@ haired and beardless , also emphasising his recent recovery in the illustration for the dialogue with Éowyn ; Nasmith depicts Faramir as bearded and brown @-@ haired . 
 = = = Radio = = = 
 In the BBC 's 1981 radio adaptation of The Lord of the Rings , Faramir is voiced by Andrew Seear . The radio drama is known for adhering faithfully to the books , and Peter Jackson gives BBC 's 1981 radio adaptation credit in the production of his film trilogy . The characterisation of Faramir follows that of the original closely ; the character is able to resist the One Ring , in direct contrast to the portrayal in Peter Jackson 's The Lord of the Rings film trilogy . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 In Rankin / Bass ' 1980 adaptation of The Return of the King , a dark @-@ haired man is shown next to Éowyn in greeting Aragorn as he arrives to Minas Tirith . This character could be interpreted as Faramir . 
 In the Lord of the Rings movie trilogy directed by Peter Jackson , Faramir is played by David Wenham . The actor jokes that he got the role because he and Sean Bean , who played Boromir , both had large noses . Faramir and his brother 's appearances were slightly altered from the book : in the films , they have fair hair and are slightly bearded , whereas in the book they were dark @-@ haired and , following a statement in Unfinished Tales , lacked beards . 
 The plot of the second film , The Lord of the Rings : The Two Towers , introduces a significant deviation from the book : Faramir does not at first let Frodo , Sam , and Gollum go , but decides to bring them and the Ring to Gondor . He takes them to Osgiliath and not until the Nazgûl attack the city and Frodo comes under the threat of capture does he release them . This change received some criticism , and the character in the film was jokingly dubbed " <unk> " or " <unk> " , among other names . 
 Jackson 's explanation is that he needed another adventure to delay Frodo and Sam , because the episode at Cirith Ungol was moved to the third movie , and so a new climax was needed . In fact , according to the timeline given by Tolkien , Frodo and Sam had only reached the Black Gate at the time of the fall of Isengard . Jackson also argues that it was necessary for Faramir to be tempted by the Ring because in his films everyone else was tempted , and letting Faramir be immune would be inconsistent in the eyes of a film audience . Co @-@ screenwriter Philippa Boyens and actor David Wenham defended the changes to Faramir 's character in order to increase dramatic tension : Faramir 's " sea @-@ green incorruptible " nature in the book would not have " [ translated ] well filmically " . Wenham ( who had not read the book until after filming had commenced ) also found Tolkien 's original " dramatically dead " . 
 Many readers remain unconvinced by the cast and crew 's justifications , and others note that Faramir was rendered too much like Boromir and thus the contrast between the two was severely weakened . A scene that received additional criticism is the Rangers ' treatment of Gollum , who is beaten up , and Faramir 's implicit compliance . In the book , Faramir called the creature Sméagol instead of Gollum , and told his men to " treat him gently , but watch him " . 
 In the extended edition of The Two Towers , Jackson included an invented flashback scene showing that Denethor had neglected him in favour of Boromir when sending him to Rivendell , so that Faramir wanted to please his father by bringing him the Ring . ( The relationship is similarly strained in the book , but his father 's favouritism does not seem to affect his decisions in Ithilien . ) Reviewers have opined that the extended edition presents Faramir in a more favourable light . 
 = = = Video games = = = 
 Faramir is a bonus playable character in the video game The Return of the King . In a bonus video track within this game , Wenham says that " Faramir and Boromir were brothers , and it isn 't beyond possibility that Faramir would have gone to Rivendell instead . And if that happened , Faramir could have survived and returned to Gondor . " 
 He also appears as a playable hero in E.A. ' s The Battle for Middle @-@ earth , and The Battle for Middle @-@ earth II as well as its expansion pack , The Rise of the Witch @-@ king . Faramir has the unique ability within the game to change between three different classes . At the beginning of battle Faramir is set as an archer but can be changed to use his sword for melee combat and can change to a rider for cavalry assaults . While in archer form he has reasonable attack strength but lacks the speed of Legolas . Faramir has the ability to raise the experience of a select group of archers once he reaches a certain level . 
 Faramir appears as a playable hero in The Lord of the Rings : Conquest . Faramir can be controlled in the Osgiliath level where you need to defend the city against battalions of orcs and afterwards defend the ring bearer Frodo until he reaches the city limits . 
 He also makes a guest hero appearance twice in The Lord of the Rings : The Third Age . As with Conquest Faramir appears to help you during the Osgiliath level and helps the party take on the Orc leader <unk> . 
 Faramir is also featured as a playable character in Lego Lord of the Rings , in which his role is quite similar to that played in the Peter Jackson films . 
 = = Namesakes = = 
 The International Astronomical Union names all <unk> ( small hills ) on Saturn 's moon Titan after characters in Tolkien 's work . In 2012 , they named a hilly area " Faramir Colles " after Faramir . 
 = Victoria Skating Rink = 
 The Victoria Skating Rink was an indoor ice skating rink located in Montreal , Quebec , Canada . Opened in 1862 , it was described at the start of the twentieth century to be " one of the finest covered rinks in the world " . The building was used during winter seasons for pleasure skating , ice hockey and skating sports on a natural ice rink . In summer months , the building was used for various events , including musical performances and horticultural shows . It was the first building in Canada to be electrified . 
 The rink may be most famous for its connection to ice hockey history . It holds the distinction of having hosted the first @-@ ever recorded organized indoor ice hockey match on March 3 , 1875 . The ice surface dimensions set the standard for today 's North American ice hockey rinks . It was also the location of the first Stanley Cup playoff games in 1894 and the location of the founding of the first championship ice hockey league , the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada in 1886 . Frederick Stanley , the donor of the Stanley Cup , witnessed his first ice hockey game there in 1889 . In 1896 , telegraph wires were connected at the Rink to do simultaneous score @-@ by @-@ score description of a Stanley Cup challenge series between Montreal and Winnipeg , Manitoba teams , a first of its kind . 
 The rink was also notable for its role in the development of figure skating in Canada . It held some of the first competitions in the sport in Canada . During its existence , it was the home of two important clubs , the Victoria Skating Club and the Earl Grey Skating Club . It was the home rink of Louis Rubenstein , considered one of the first world champions of the sport , and also an important organizer . 
 The rink was located in central Montreal between Drummond Street and Stanley Street , just north of René Lévesque Boulevard ( formerly Dorchester Boulevard ) . It was located one block to the west of Dominion Square ( today 's Dorchester Square ) , where the Montreal Winter Carnivals of the 19th century were held . <unk> by other facilities , including the Montreal Forum , the rink was sold in 1925 and today the site is occupied by a parking garage . 
 = = Building = = 
 Designed by Lawford & Nelson , Architects , the building was a long ( 252 feet ( 77 m ) x 113 feet ( 34 m ) ) wide , two @-@ story brick edifice with a 52 feet ( 16 m ) -high pitched roof supported from within by curving wooden trusses , which arched over the entire width of the structure . Tall , round @-@ arched windows punctuated its length and illuminated its interior , while evening skating was made possible by 500 gas @-@ jet lighting fixtures set in coloured glass globes . At a later date , the lighting was converted to electric , making the building the first in Canada to be electrified . 
 The ice surface measured 204 feet ( 62 m ) by 80 feet ( 24 m ) , dimensions very similar to today 's National Hockey League ( NHL ) ice rinks . It was surrounded by a 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) -wide platform , or promenade , which was elevated approximately 1 foot ( 30 cm ) above the ice surface and upon which spectators could stand or skaters could rest . Later , a gallery was added with a royal box for visiting dignitaries . The ice itself was a ' natural ' ice surface , frozen by the coldness of the season , not by the later invention of mechanically @-@ frozen ice . 
 At the time of its construction , the Rink 's location at 49 Drummond Street ( now renumbered to 1187 ) , placed it in the centre of the English community in Montreal , in the vicinity of McGill University . The area is referred to today as the " Golden Square Mile , " the area of central Montreal populated then by rich businessmen of British descent who had made the city the budding centre of commerce in Canada . One block east was Dominion Square , where annual outdoor winter sporting events were held and later the Montreal Winter Carnival was held . Across the street to the east , the Windsor Hotel , a long @-@ time centre of social life and meeting place of several sports organizations , was built in 1875 . Nearby is old Windsor Station , which was the eastern terminus of the Canadian Pacific Railway , built in 1889 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Victoria Skating Club was incorporated on June 9 , 1862 , with a sizable capitalization of $ 12 @,@ 000 , for the purpose of buying the land and building the rink . The directors included members of prominent families of the Square Mile : John <unk> , whose family owned the largest <unk> wholesale firm in Canada and James Torrance , whose family owned a prosperous provisions wholesale firm . The Rink , one of the first and largest indoor rinks in North America , was completed and opened on December 24 , 1862 . However , it was not the first indoor rink in Montreal . The first had opened in 1859 , at the north end of St. Urbain Street , for the Montreal Skating Club . It was the first of numerous ice rinks in Canada to be named after Queen Victoria . By about 1880 , membership in the Victoria Skating Club had reached 2 @,@ 000 , mostly drawn from Montreal 's upper classes , who enjoyed considerable leisure time and could afford to participate in such events as the fancy @-@ dress balls , which were a regular feature at the rink . 
 A quote from the 1870s that appeared in the book Montreal Yesterdays captures the essence : 
 “ When many hundred persons are upon the ice , and with every variety of costume , pass through all the graceful figures that skaters delight in , the scene presented to the spectator is dazzling in the extreme . ” 
 The rink became a major attraction for visitors to Montreal . In 1886 , visiting Captain Willard Glazer described the scene : 
 “ One of the principal points of attraction in both winter and summer is the Victoria Skating Rink , in Dominion Square . This extensive building is used during the milder months of the year for horticultural shows , concerts and miscellaneous gatherings . In the winter the doors of this place are thronged with a crowd of sleighs and sleigh drivers , while inside , skaters and spectators form a living , moving panorama , pleasant to look upon . The place is lighted by gas , and men and women , old and young , with a plentiful sprinkling of children , on skates , are practicing all sorts of gyrations . The ladies are prettily and appropriately dressed in skating costumes , and some of them are proficient in the art of skating . The spectators sit or stand on a raised lege around the ice parallelogram , while the skaters dart off , singly or in pairs , executing quadrilles , waltzes , curves , straight lines , letters , labyrinths , and every conceivable figure . Now and then some one comes to grief in the surging , moving throng ; but is quickly on his or her feet again , the ice and water shaken off , and the zigzag resumed . Children skate ; boys and girls ; ladies and gentlemen , and even dignified military officers . Some skate well , some medium , some shockingly ill ; but all skate , or essay to do so . It is the grand <unk> pastime , and though the ice is sloppy , and the air chill and heavy with moisture , everybody has a good time . ” 
 The Rink hosted pleasure skating and masquerade balls during the 1880s Montreal Winter Carnivals , which took place a city block to the east in Dominion Square . 
 = = = Ice hockey = = = 
 The first game 
 On March 3 , 1875 , the Rink hosted what has been recognized as the first indoor organized ice hockey game , between members of the Club , organized by James Creighton , a member of the Victoria Skating Club and a figure skating judge . The match lays claim to this distinction because of several factors which establish its link to modern ice hockey : it featured two teams ( nine players per side ) , goaltenders , a referee , a puck , a pre @-@ determined set of rules , including a pre @-@ determined length of time ( 60 minutes ) with a recorded score . Games prior to this had mostly been outdoors , with sticks and balls , with informal rules and informal team sizes . In order to limit injuries to spectators and damage to glass windows , the game was played with a wooden puck instead of a lacrosse ball , possibly the first time such an object was used . The two teams , members of the Club , included a number of McGill University students . Sticks and skates for this game were imported from Nova Scotia , including Mic @-@ mac sticks and Starr skates . This first game was pre @-@ announced to the general public in the pages of the Montreal Gazette newspaper : 
 Announcement 
 Victoria Rink - A game of Hockey will be played at the Victoria Skating Rink this evening , between two nines chose from among the members . Good fun may be expected , as some of the players are reputed to be exceedingly expert at the game . Some fears have been expressed on the part of intending spectators that accidents were likely to occur through the ball flying about in too lively a manner , to the imminent danger of lookers on , but we understand that the game will be played with a flat circular piece of wood , thus preventing all danger of its leaving the surface of the ice . Subscribers will be admitted on presentation of their tickets . 
 By moving ice hockey game indoors , the smaller dimensions of the rink initiated a major change from the outdoor version of the game , limiting organized contests to a nine @-@ man limit per team . Until that time , outdoor games had no prescribed number of players , the number being more or less the number that could fit on a frozen pond or river and often ranged in the dozens . The nine @-@ man per side rule would last until the 1880s , when it was reduced during the Montreal Winter Carnival Hockey Tournament to seven per side . 
 Role in organized ice hockey 
 From 1875 until 1881 , hockey matches would be held between hockey @-@ playing members of the Skating Club and outside teams , such as McGill University and the Montreal Hockey Club . In 1881 , the Victoria Hockey Club was organized and made the Rink its home . Play at first was by exhibition only as there were no leagues . The Rink was used for exhibition games or as an indoor facility if the outdoor rink was not available during the annual Winter Carnivals . It was for the 1883 Carnival that hockey team sizes were reduced further , to seven per side , which was the common size for the next thirty years . Eventually the tournament play led to plans for a league . The Rink hosted the founding meeting of the Amateur Hockey Association of Canada ( AHAC ) league in December 1886 . The AHAC was the second organized ice hockey league in Canada , and the first championship league . 
 Lord Stanley , later to donate the Stanley Cup trophy , witnessed his first ice hockey game at the Victoria Rink on February 4 , 1889 , seeing the Victorias defeat the Montreal Hockey Club 2 – 1 . According to The Globe , " the vice @-@ regal party was immensely delighted with it . " The Rink would later host the first Stanley Cup playoffs in 1894 . By that time , the building had gained an elevated balcony for additional spectators and a projecting loge , precursor of today 's luxury boxes . In 1896 , the rink was connected by telegraph to distribute the Montreal @-@ Winnipeg Stanley Cup series score immediately . This is considered the first ice hockey broadcast by wire . 
 = = = Ice skating = = = 
 The Rink was built for the Victoria Skating Club and skating was its primary use at first . The Rink was prominent in the development of the sports of figure skating and speed skating . Figure skating , known as " fancy skating " began in the 1860s and the Rink held championships starting in the 1870s . A combination of racing and fancy skating championships was held in February 1888 was announced internationally in the February 1 , 1888 New York Times . The races were " 220 yards , quarter mile , half mile , mile , five miles , 220 yards over six hurdles 27 inches high , and junior championship races . " This was followed a week later by the fancy skating championship of figures . 
 Victoria Rink was the home rink of Louis Rubenstein , Canadian and world figure skating champion . Rubenstein first won the Montreal Championship in 1878 , and won his first Canadian championship at the Victoria Rink in 1883 . At the time , the Victoria Skating Club was considered " the most important one in the Dominion , if not on the continent . " In 1887 , the Club arranged for the formation of the Amateur Skating Association of Canada , the first national governing body of skating in Canada . 
 In 1906 , the Victoria Skating Club sold the rink , dissolving the Club . Ice skating continued under the new ownership , and on December 19 , 1908 , the Earl Grey Skating Club was founded at the Victoria Rink . In a ceremony at the rink , the club 's patron , Governor @-@ General Albert Grey formally initiated the club . Club honorary president Sir H. Montagu Allan and Lady Evelyn Grey were the first to appear on the ice . Mrs. Helen Joseph became the president of the Club . The Earl Grey Club would move to the Montreal Arena by 1911 . 
 = = = Musical performances = = = 
 The Rink hosted many musical performances . In 1878 , a benefit concert was held to aid yellow fever victims in the southern states of the United States , featuring soprano Leonora Braham . In 1890 , an audience of 6 @,@ 000 attended a benefit for Montreal 's Notre @-@ Dame Hospital featuring a performance by soprano Emma Albani , as well as pianist and composer Salomon <unk> , violinist Alfred De Sève , and the Montreal City Band under the direction of Ernest Lavigne . The rink is also known to have held performances of the Montreal Philharmonic Society , which existed from 1875 to 1899 . 
 = = = Other events = = = 
 The Rink was large enough to be used for conferences and exhibitions during the months that no ice was installed . From the 1860s onwards , the Rink hosted the annual Montreal Horticultural Society Exhibition each September . A description of the 1864 exhibition notes that " in addition to prizes for Agriculture , Horticulture , Poultry , Birds , Paint , etc . , $ 200 is offered as prizes for the best band and best solo performer on bugle , fife and drum . " The Presbyterian Church in Canada held their inaugural meeting there on June 15 , 1875 , and other local assemblies , including an assembly of Sunday School students on October 1 , 1887 in honour of Queen Victoria 's Jubilee , attended by approximately 10 @,@ 000 children . The programme included " singing by the children and by the Fisk Jubilee singers , and exhibition by a number of deaf mutes and also by several Indians from Algoma . " 
 In September 1891 , the National Electric Association of the United States held its convention in Montreal , including demonstrations of electrical technology by Thomas Edison and a public lecture by Nikola Tesla . In August 1897 , the British Medical Association held a medical conference with an exhibition of pharmaceutical preparations , surgical and medical appliances , and " everything that interests the physician " at the Rink . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 By 1906 , the building needed repairs and rather than spend money on rebuilding the Rink , the Victoria Skating Club sold the site to J. William Shaw , a piano merchant , who planned to build a concert hall on the site . Shaw planned to rebuild the structure into an auditorium of 2 @,@ 000 to 2 @,@ 500 capacity , suitable for orchestra or opera concerts . Shaw deferred his plans due to the high cost of construction and a low expectation of profits . He continued the use of the building for skating and hockey matches , introducing a summer use for car parking . 
 Smaller hockey leagues continued to use the Rink , such as the Commercial and Steamship League , the Inter @-@ School Hockey League and the Manufacturers ' League . McGill University also occasionally used the rink . The final game of any note reported by the Montreal Gazette was a semi @-@ final of the Canadian National Railway Hockey League ( CNR ) between Car Department and General Office on March 3 , 1925 , exactly fifty years after the first game . The playoff final game of the CNR league was not held at the Victoria ; it was held at the Forum which had opened that season . The CNR game drew 1 @,@ 200 spectators . 
 During the summer months , dog shows , vaudeville performances , the horticultural show and various trade exhibitions continued at the Rink . By the 1920s , the building had deteriorated and the gallery became unsafe to use . Shaw sold the site in 1925 for $ 250 @,@ 000 to the Stanley Realty Corporation to build a parking garage . The Victoria closed and a parking garage was built in its place . 
 = = = Today = = = 
 As shown in the photos , the parking garage is still in use by a local branch of National Car Rental . Today , the highest level of ice hockey is played nearby at Centre Bell , the home arena of the NHL Montreal Canadiens , located two blocks south . Ice skating for pleasure remains a popular pastime and an indoor ice skating rink exists nearby in the concourse of the ' Le 1000 de la <unk> ' office building , open year @-@ round . 
 = = IIHF recognition = = 
 In 2002 , the International Ice Hockey Federation ( IIHF ) announced that it would acknowledge the site of the Rink with " a commemorative plaque or other historical site marker to remind the passers @-@ by of the existence of the Victoria Skating Rink , the birthplace of organized hockey . " The commemoration has been marked in two ways . On May 22 , 2008 , a commemorative plaque was dedicated at Centre Bell , along with a plaque honouring James Creighton . Further , the IIHF created the Victoria Cup , a trophy named for the arena , for which — along with 1 million Swiss francs — one National Hockey League team and the champion of the European Champions Hockey League play off annually . The first Cup match was held in Berne , Switzerland on October 1 , 2008 between the New York Rangers and the Metallurg Magnitogorsk . 
 = United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri = 
 The United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri is a trial level federal district court based in St. Louis , Missouri , with jurisdiction over fifty counties in the eastern half of Missouri . The court is one of ninety @-@ four district @-@ level courts which make up the first tier of the U.S. federal judicial system . Judges of this court preside over civil and criminal trials on federal matters that originate within the borders of its jurisdiction . It is organized into three divisions , with court held in St. Louis , Hannibal , and Cape Girardeau . 
 The court was formed when the District of Missouri was divided into East and West in 1857 , and its boundaries have changed little since that division . In its history it has heard a number of important cases that made it to the United States Supreme Court , covering issues related to freedom of speech , abortion , property rights , and campaign finance . There are currently nine active judges , five judges in senior status , and seven magistrate judges attached to the court . 
 The current United States Attorney is Richard G. Callahan . 
 = = Mandate and jurisdiction = = 
 As a United States district court , the United States District Court for the Eastern District of Missouri conducts civil trials and issues orders . The cases it hears concern either federal question jurisdiction , where a federal law or treaty is applicable , or diversity jurisdiction , where parties are domiciled in different states . The court also holds criminal trials of persons charged with violations of federal law . Appeals from cases brought in the Eastern District of Missouri are heard by the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit ( except for patent claims and claims against the U.S. government under the Tucker Act , which are appealed to the Federal Circuit ) . These cases can then be appealed to the United States Supreme Court . 
 The Court is based in St. Louis but is organized into three divisions : Eastern , Northern , and Southeastern . 
 The court for the Eastern division is held in downtown St. Louis , in the Thomas F. Eagleton United States Courthouse , where the St. Louis Clerk 's Office is located . It covers the counties of Crawford , Dent , Franklin , Gasconade , Jefferson , Lincoln , Maries , Phelps , Saint Charles , Saint Francois , Saint Louis , Warren , Washington , and the independent City of St. Louis . 
 The Northern division is based in Hannibal , Missouri , but its office is unstaffed unless court is being held there . It covers the counties of Adair , Audrain , Chariton , Clark , Knox , Lewis , Linn , Macon , Marion , Monroe , Montgomery , Pike , Ralls , Randolph , Schuyler , Shelby , and Scotland . 
 The Southeastern division is based at Cape Girardeau . Its courthouse is named for Rush Limbaugh , Sr. That division 's jurisdiction covers Bollinger , Butler , Cape Girardeau , Carter , Dunklin , Iron , Madison , Mississippi , New Madrid , <unk> , Perry , Reynolds , Ripley , Sainte Genevieve , Scott , Shannon , Stoddard , and Wayne counties . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 Missouri was admitted as a state on August 10 , 1821 , and the United States Congress established the United States District Court for the District of Missouri on March 16 , 1822 . The District was assigned to the Eighth Circuit on March 3 , 1837 . Congress subdivided it into Eastern and Western Districts on March 3 , 1857 @.@ and has since made only small adjustments to the boundaries of that subdivision . The division was prompted by a substantial increase in the number of admiralty cases arising from traffic on the Mississippi River , which had followed an act of Congress passed in 1845 and upheld by the United States Supreme Court in 1851 , extending federal admiralty jurisdiction to inland waterways . These disputes involved " contracts of affreightment , collisions , mariners ' wages , and other causes of admiralty jurisdiction " , and litigants of matters arising in St. Louis found it inconvenient to travel to Jefferson City for their cases to be tried . 
 When the District of Missouri was subdivided , Robert William Wells , who was the sole judge serving the District of Missouri at the time of the division , was reassigned to the Western District , allowing President Franklin Pierce to appoint Samuel Treat as the first judge for the Eastern District of Missouri . The court was initially authorized to meet in St. Louis , which had previously been one of the two authorized meeting places of the District Court for the District of Missouri . It met for a time at the landmark courthouse shared with Missouri state courts , which was the tallest building in the state during that period . For the first thirty years of its existence , the court was primarily concerned with admiralty and maritime cases , including maritime insurance claims . 
 = = = Civil War and aftermath = = = 
 Within a few years of the court 's establishment , the American Civil War erupted , and Missouri was placed under martial law . Missouri was a border state with sharply divided loyalties among its citizenry , resulting in the imposition of stern controls from the Union government , including the imprisonment of large number of Missouri militiamen . When the District , by the hand of Judge Treat , issued a writ of habeas corpus for the release of one of them , Captain Emmett McDonald , Union commanding general William S. Harney refused , asserting that he had to answer to a " higher law " . A substantial portion of the court 's docket in this period came from tax cases : 
 The court , in this time , also tried numerous criminal cases arising from efforts to evade the tax laws through smuggling and fraud . Following the Civil War , and in response to the economic disruption it had caused , Congress enacted the Bankruptcy Act of 1867 . Between its enactment and its subsequent repeal in 1878 , the Act caused " countless controversies " arising in bankruptcy to be brought before the District Court . Despite the turmoil inflicted by the Civil War , Missouri experienced a population boom , becoming the fifth largest state in the U.S. by 1890 , and having a busy court docket which reflected this population growth . 
 = = = Further division and expansion = = = 
 In 1887 a Congressional Act divided the Eastern District into the Northern and Eastern Divisions of the Eastern District . The courts of the Eastern Division continued to be held at the U.S. Custom House and Post Office in St. Louis , while the courts of the Northern Division were moved to the U.S. Post Office at Hannibal , Missouri , where they met until 1960 . These two courts , along with the four courts of the Western District , made six courts for the state , and at the time no other state had so many separate federal courts . The district has since been further divided into the Eastern , Northern , and Southeast divisions . 
 In 1888 , Audrain County , Missouri was moved from the Eastern to the Western District . In 1897 , it was moved back to the Eastern district . In 1891 , the United States circuit courts were eliminated in favor of the new United States courts of appeals . When the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit heard its first case , on October 12 , 1891 , the presiding judge Henry Clay Caldwell was joined by two district court judges from within the jurisdiction of the Circuit . One of those was Amos Madden Thayer of the Eastern District of Missouri . Thayer would later be appointed to the Eight Circuit in his own right . 
 The court was authorized to meet in Cape Girardeau beginning in 1905 , and from 1910 to 1920 was additionally authorized to meet in Rolla , Missouri . On September 14 , 1922 , an additional temporary judgeship was authorized for each district of Missouri , and on August 19 , 1935 , these temporary judgeships were made permanent . Additional judgeships were added to the Eastern District in 1936 , 1942 , 1970 , 1978 , and 1984 , and two were added in 1990 , bringing the Eastern District to its current total of nine judges . 
 The court continued to meet at the U.S. Custom House and Post Office until 1935 , and then moved to the United States Court House and Custom House in St. Louis . In 2001 it moved to the Thomas F. Eagleton United States Courthouse , the largest courthouse in the United States . The 2000 census reported that the district had a population of nearly 2 @.@ 8 million , ranking 38th in population among the 90 U.S. judicial districts . 
 = = Notable cases = = 
 During the Great Depression , three important United States Supreme Court cases were decided which determined the constitutionality of New Deal measures , one of which originated in the Eastern District of Missouri . The case , originally filed as Norman v. B & O Railroad , reached the Supreme Court along with two cases filed in the United States Court of Claims , under the single heading of the Gold Clause Cases . The Supreme Court upheld the determination of the trial court judge , Charles Breckenridge Faris , who found that Congress had the power to prohibit parties from contracting for payment in gold . 
 In 1976 , the court heard the original proceedings in Planned Parenthood of Central Missouri v. Danforth , a case that challenged several Missouri state regulations regarding abortion . The case was eventually appealed to the United States Supreme Court , which reaffirmed the right to abortion and struck down certain restrictions as unconstitutional . 
 Due to a school desegregation suit in 1972 , the court required St. Louis to accept a busing plan in 1980 . Judge William L. <unk> declared that a mandatory plan would go into effect unless other arrangements were made to adhere to the terms of the suit . In 1983 , an unprecedented voluntary busing plan was put into place , integrating the schools without a mandated plan being required . 
 In Hazelwood v. Kuhlmeier , a case that started in Missouri 's Eastern District went before the United States Supreme Court in 1988 , it was held that public school curricular student newspapers are subject to a lower level of First Amendment protection . Another First Amendment case in public schools came up in 1998 , when E.D. <unk> heard <unk> v. Woodland R @-@ IV School District . Judge Rodney W. Sippel ruled that the school violated a student 's rights by sanctioning him for material he posted on his website . This case has been widely cited in higher courts . 
 In the 2000s , two more notable cases originated in this District and were heard by the United States Supreme Court . Nixon v. Shrink Missouri Government PAC upheld state limits on campaign contributions to state offices , and Sell v. United States imposed stringent limits on the right of a lower court to order the forcible administration of antipsychotic medication to an criminal defendant who had been determined to be incompetent to stand trial for the sole purpose of making him competent and able to be tried . Several notable antitrust cases originated in this district including Brown Shoe Co. v. United States ( preventing a merger between two shoe wholesalers which would have reduced competition in the region ) , and United Shoe Machinery Corp. v. United States ( prohibiting certain long @-@ term leases of manufacturing equipment ) . Another important case brought in the district , Ruckelshaus v. Monsanto Co . , involved the right of companies to maintain trade secrets under Missouri law in the face of federal regulations requiring disclosure of pesticide components . 
 = = Judges = = 
 39 judges have been appointed to the Eastern District of Missouri over the course of its existence . There are currently eight active judges and six judges in senior status . The chief judge is Rodney W. Sippel , who was elevated to that office on January 4 , 2016 . 
 Judges Rodney W. Sippel and Brian C. <unk> are jointly appointed to both the Eastern and Western Districts of Missouri 
 = = = Former judges = = = 
 Jean Constance Hamilton , appointed by George H. W. Bush in 1990 , was the first female judge appointed to the District . The first African American to serve was Clyde S. Cahill Jr . , who was appointed by Jimmy Carter in 1980 . No Hispanic or Asian judges have served on this court . Over the history of the District , five of its judges have been elevated to the Eighth Circuit - Elmer Bragg Adams , John <unk> Collet , Charles Breckenridge Faris , Amos Madden Thayer and William <unk> Webster . No judge from this district has served on the United States Supreme Court . 
 = = Succession of seats = = 
 = Gan Eng Seng = 
 Gan Eng Seng ( simplified Chinese : <unk> ; traditional Chinese : <unk> ; pinyin : <unk> <unk> ; Pe ̍ h @-@ ōe @-@ jī : <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ; 1844 – 1899 ) was a Chinese businessman and philanthropist who was one of the early pioneers of Singapore . He is known for his generosity to many charitable causes in Malaya and Singapore during the British colonial era . Some of his most recognised contributions were the setting up of Gan Eng Seng School , the Thong Chai Medical Institution , Tan Tock Seng Hospital , and the Ee Hoe Hean Club .. 
 = = Life = = 
 Gan was of Hokkien Chinese descent , born and educated in Melaka , and the eldest son of five in his family . His forefathers emigrated from Fujian , China , to Malaya . Owing to poor circumstances , he had an elementary school education in which he learnt to read and write in simple English and keep accounts . After his father 's death , Gan , then 16 years old , was involved in the nutmeg business on a very small scale . 
 Gan was later taken as an apprentice by Guthrie and Company . He was diligent and capable , and his ability won him the recognition and keen interest of Thomas Scott , one of the partners in the company . Scott was one of the early British pioneers responsible for developing Tanjung Pagar and the port of Singapore . Gan was subsequently promoted to the post of Assistant Storekeeper and then Chief Storekeeper of the company . In 1874 , he became the company 's Chief <unk> , a position which he held for the next 25 years . Scott later helped to finance some of Gan 's early business ventures , one of which was to supply labour and transport to the Tanjong Pagar Dock Company which helped Gan make most of his personal fortunes . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Gan married his first wife , Koh Chwee Neo , at the age of 18 , and in 1859 adopted his first son , Gan Tiang Tock , who was an important partner in the building of his fortune . He had a total of five wives , seven sons and two daughters . However , only two of his children were born by his wives ; his other children were adopted , a customary practice which was then considered auspicious . His immediate family members were : 
 = = = Gan Eng Seng School = = = 
 Although Gan had little education , he realised its value as he prospered and became wealthy . His dream to build a school for the poor which taught both English and Chinese ( Hokkien , as Mandarin was not commonly used in Southeast Asia then ) was fulfilled in 1885 , when he built the Anglo @-@ Chinese Free School for boys in some shophouses in Telok Ayer Street ( not related to the Anglo @-@ Chinese School founded a year later by Bishop W.F. Oldham ) . In 1923 , it was renamed to Gan Eng Seng School ( GESS ) in his honour . 
 Gan Eng Seng School is unique among the schools in Singapore being the only one initiated , established and maintained by a local citizen with a gift of freehold property , buildings and adequate funds until his demise . Most other schools of the time were established by missionary or communal organisations . 
 Before it became a government school in 1938 , it had on its Board of Trustees fellow Chinese pioneers such as Tan Keong <unk> , Ho Yang Peng , Wee <unk> Tew , Lee Cheng Yan , S.J. Chan , Wee Swee <unk> , Song Ong Siang , and Lim Boon Keng . Under their management , Gan Eng Seng School was able to serve the local community as a self @-@ funded school for nearly forty years without interference . 
 In later generations , some of Gan 's descendants choose to return to serve the school : 
 Three sons of the founder , Gan Tiang Kwee , Gan Tiang Choon and Gan Tiang Tok , were on the Board of Trustees . 
 Gan Hock Chye , grandson of Gan Eng Seng , was a pupil at the school and later return to serve as the Master of Gan House and committee member of the GESS Old Students ' Association in the 1950s . 
 Gan Kee Soon , one of the great grandsons of Gan Eng Seng , was a mathematics teacher in GESS at its Anson Road site from 1960 to 1969 teaching pre @-@ university classes . 
 As of 2002 , it is located at 1 Henderson Road after it has moved eight times during its 122 @-@ year history ; the most ever known in Singapore schools due to expansion needs . 
 Gan also founded a school for the poor in the village of Sam @-@ toh in Fujian , China , where his forefathers were born , and helped to finance and maintain the <unk> Chinese Free School in Melaka . He also enabled young men of promise to realise their potential by paying for their university education . An example was the case of Wee <unk> Tew , who gave up a clerical post with Macalister & Co. and proceeded to England to further his studies in law and qualify for the Bar in 1911 . 
 = = = Thong Chai Medical Institution = = = 
 The Thong Chai Medical Institution was another major charity which Gan strongly backed and financed . It was established in 1867 and is the oldest charitable institution in Singapore . It began treating the poor of all races and religions in a rented shophouse at 31 Upper Pickering Street . In 1975 , it was relocated to 50 Chin Swee Road and till today , the institution continues to provide free medical consultation and herbal medicines to all . 
 = = Tan Tock Seng Hospital = = 
 Gan was always among the first to respond to pleas for donations , giving thousands of dollars to local hospitals . He also helped to pay for coffins to bury the poor . The 1892 annual report of Tan Tock Seng Hospital mentioned that Gan donated a freehold property at Rochor to the hospital . The hospital is still serving the public and came into the international spotlight when it was designated as the sole treatment centre for the SARS epidemic which struck Singapore in 2003 . 
 = = = Ee Hoe Hean Club = = = 
 In 1895 , Gan was one of the co @-@ founders of the Ee Hoe Hean Club , a social @-@ cum @-@ business club where like @-@ minded Chinese businessmen could mingle and exchange ideas . Its members included notable Chinese pioneers such as Lim Boon Keng , Tan Kah Kee , Lim Nee Soon etc . It was originally located on <unk> Hill but moved to Bukit Pasoh Road in 1925 . The club plays an active role in community services and charity work to this day . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On 9 September 1899 , Gan died at the age of 55 in his house at No. 87 Amoy Street . His total assets were worth an estimated S $ 550 @,@ 000 . He was buried at Leng Kee Sua somewhere on the hill by the side where Leng Kee Road runs today . Due to redevelopment of the area , his body was disinterred and reburied in a family grave at Bukit Brown Cemetery . After the death of his father , Gan Tiang Tok continued the family business for three years , though by the turn of century it was no longer so lucrative . Gan Tiang Tok was dogged by ill health from 1903 until his death in 1927 at the age of 68 . 
 = = Commemoration = = 
 In April 2008 , Gan 's life and generosity to many charitable causes are currently being showcased in a permanent gallery of the Peranakan Museum ( former Tao Nan School building ) at Armenian Street . The gallery titled Public Life : Making a difference ( Level 3 ) honours <unk> ( Straits Chinese ) , who were prominent public figures and philanthropists such as Gan , Singapore pioneer Tan Kim Seng and former Cabinet Minister Lim Kim San . 
 The Peranakan Museum presents a Southeast Asian @-@ wide view of Peranakan culture and houses a comprehensive collection of Peranakan artefacts . The museum is the latest addition to the National Heritage Board 's family of museums and is managed by the Asian <unk> Museum ( ACM ) . The ACM staff consulted academics and collaborated with members of the Peranakan community to bring the museum to life . 
 = St Enghenedl 's Church , Llanynghenedl = 
 St Enghenedl 's Church , Llanynghenedl , is a former parish church in Anglesey , north Wales , dedicated to the son of a 6th @-@ century King of Powys . According to the 19th @-@ century antiquarian Angharad Llwyd , the first church in Llanynghenedl was erected in about 620 . A new church was erected in 1862 , replacing a building that the 19th @-@ century clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones noted as dating in part from the late 13th or early 14th century , based on the decorations on the south doorway . The church later fell into disuse as a result of the growth of the nearby village of Valley and the church there . In 1988 , St Enghenedl 's was dismantled and re @-@ erected as an extension to St Mihangel 's , Llanfihangel yn <unk> , so that St Mihangel 's could serve as the church for RAF Valley . The former churchyard of St Enghenedl 's is still visible but is now overgrown . 
 = = History and location = = 
 The site of the former St Enghenedl 's Church is in the village of Llanynghenedl , in Anglesey , north Wales , in the north @-@ west of the island about 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) east of the port town of Holyhead . Little is known about Enghenedl , the saint to whom the church was dedicated . He was one of the sons of Cynan <unk> , King of Powys in the late 6th century , and a brother of his successor , <unk> ap Cynan or <unk> <unk> . This is the only church recorded as being dedicated to Enghenedl , whose feast day was celebrated on Quinquagesima ( the Sunday before Ash Wednesday ) . The village takes its name from the church ; the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " ‑ <unk> " is a variant of the saint 's name . 
 According to the 19th @-@ century antiquarian Angharad Llwyd , it is said that the first church was built here in about 620 . By the time she was writing , the church was attached to the parish of St <unk> 's Church , <unk> . St Enghenedl 's was rebuilt in 1862 by Henry Kennedy , the architect of the Diocese of Bangor . Another church was subsequently built in the parish , in the village of Valley . As Valley grew , St Enghenedl 's declined in use and it eventually closed . It was dismantled in 1988 and rebuilt as an extension to St Mihangel 's Church , Llanfihangel yn <unk> , so that it could serve as the church for RAF Valley . St Enghenedl 's was re @-@ erected with its west end adjoining the west end of St Mihangel 's , which had also been built by Kennedy in 1862 . The old east window of St Enghenedl 's now faces west , and the bellcote is in the middle of the roof . The churchyard , gravestones , and lychgate of St Enghenedl 's remain in their original location , but the <unk> is now overgrown . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 Writing in 1862 ( but before Kennedy 's rebuilding ) , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones recorded that the church was 40 by 14 feet ( 12 @.@ 2 by 4 @.@ 3 m ) internally , divided by some woodwork into a nave and chancel . Judging by the decoration he considered that the south doorway dated from the late 13th or early 14th century . He also noted that the 12th @-@ century font had an ornamental design similar to other fonts elsewhere in Anglesey . The east window had two lights ( sections of window separated by stone mullions ) , and was similar to that of St <unk> 's Church , <unk> ( another Anglesey church that no longer exists ) . 
 A 1937 survey of Kennedy 's rebuilt church by the Royal Commission on Ancient and Historical Monuments in Wales and Monmouthshire said that it was formed from a continuous nave and chancel , measuring in total 431 ⁄ 2 by 151 ⁄ 2 feet ( 13 @.@ 3 by 4 @.@ 7 m ) . The church , which was at that time in good condition , was entered through a porch on the south side , and there was a vestry on the north side . As well as the font , the church contained some 18th @-@ century memorials . The font is now in the south chapel of St Cybi 's Church , Holyhead . 
 A survey of church plate within the Bangor diocese in 1906 recorded a silver chalice , 7 5 ⁄ 8 inches ( just over 19 cm ) tall , with the Chester date mark for 1724 – 25 . It was inscribed with the names of the vicar ( Thomas Vincent ) and the two churchwardens ( Griffith Edward and Owen Hughes ) , and the year 1724 . It was described as resembling " an inverted bell , standing on a stem " . There was also an accompanying plain paten cover , 3 5 ⁄ 8 inches ( just over 9 cm ) in diameter . Both bore the maker 's mark of William Richardson , the letters " Ri " in a square shield below a crescent . The paten also had the mark of a leopard 's head , indicating that it had been assayed in London . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 Angharad Llwyd described the church in 1833 as " a lofty but small edifice " , adding that several parts " display marks of very great antiquity . " Harry Longueville Jones said that its size made it " one of the least considerable " of the churches in Anglesey . The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in July 1873 . He said that it was a small church with " some small rude windows " . 
 = Kenneth R. Shadrick = 
 Kenneth R. " Kenny " Shadrick ( August 4 , 1931 – July 5 , 1950 ) was a United States Army soldier who was killed at the onset of the Korean War . He was widely but incorrectly reported as the first American soldier killed in action in the war . 
 Shadrick was born in Harlan County , Kentucky , one of 10 children . After dropping out of high school in 1948 , he joined the U.S. Army , and spent a year of service in Japan before being dispatched to South Korea at the onset of the Korean War in 1950 along with his unit , the 34th Infantry Regiment , 24th Infantry Division . During a patrol , Shadrick was killed by the machine gun of a North Korean T @-@ 34 tank , and his body was taken to an outpost where journalist Marguerite Higgins was covering the war . Higgins later reported that he was the first soldier killed in the war , a claim that was repeated in media across the United States . His life was widely profiled , and his funeral drew hundreds of people . 
 His death is now believed to have occurred after the first American combat fatalities in the Battle of Osan . Since the identities of other soldiers killed before Shadrick remain unknown , he is still often incorrectly cited as the first U.S. soldier killed in the war . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Shadrick was born on August 4 , 1931 , in Harlan County , Kentucky . He was the third of 10 children born to Lucille Shadrick and Theodore Shadrick , a coal miner . Growing up during the Great Depression , Kenneth Shadrick moved with his family to Wyoming , West Virginia , then to an outlying town called Skin Fork , 20 miles ( 32 km ) away , as his father was looking for coal mining jobs . Shadrick was described by his family as " an avid reader " throughout his childhood , who had a variety of interests , including Westerns and magazines . He also enjoyed riding his bicycle and , occasionally , hunting . 
 Shadrick enrolled in Pineville High School in 1947 and received top marks in his classes . During his sophomore year in 1948 , he developed an interest in football and made the school 's team , though he was small for his age . The team could not afford uniforms , and Shadrick 's father gave him five dollars to buy one , but it was stolen from his locker in October 1948 . The incident upset Shadrick so much he dropped out of school , reportedly refusing to return from that day forward . One month later , he and a friend enlisted in the U.S. Army . Shadrick 's father would later refer to the stolen school uniform as the reason Shadrick enlisted in the military , and said he felt it indirectly caused his son 's death . 
 On November 10 , 1948 , Shadrick left for basic combat training at Fort Knox , Kentucky . As he was 17 years old , Shadrick had to convince his parents to sign papers allowing him to enlist . Shadrick completed this training in February 1949 , and sailed for Japan to join the 34th Infantry Regiment , 24th Infantry Division , for post – World War II occupation duties . Shadrick spent a year on Kyushu island with the division . According to his family , Shadrick enjoyed his tour in Japan at first , but by June 1950 he was growing tired of the country , and indicated in letters he was feeling depressed . 
 = = Career = = 
 On the night of June 25 , 1950 , 10 divisions of the North Korean army launched a full @-@ scale invasion of South Korea . Advancing with 89 @,@ 000 men in six columns , the North Koreans caught the disorganized , ill @-@ equipped , and unprepared South Korean army by surprise and routed them . North Korean forces destroyed isolated resistance , pushing steadily down the peninsula against the opposing 38 @,@ 000 front @-@ line South Korean men . The majority of the South Korean forces retreated in the face of the invasion , and by June 28 the North Koreans had captured the southern capital , Seoul , and forced the government and its shattered forces to withdraw southward . 
 Meanwhile , the United Nations Security Council voted to send assistance to the collapsing country and U.S. President Harry S. Truman ordered ground troops to the country . U.S. forces in the Far East had been steadily decreasing since the end of World War II , five years earlier , and Shadrick 's division was the closest to the warzone . Under the command of Major General William F. Dean , the division was understrength and most of its equipment was antiquated due to reductions in military spending . In spite of these deficiencies the division was ordered into South Korea , tasked with taking the initial shock of the North Korean advances until the rest of the Eighth United States Army could arrive and establish a defense . 
 Dean 's plan was to airlift one battalion of the 24th Infantry Division into South Korea via C @-@ 54 Skymaster transport aircraft and to block advancing North Korean forces while the remainder of the division was transported on ships . The 21st Infantry Regiment was identified as the most combat @-@ ready of the 24th Infantry Division 's three regiments , and the 21st Infantry 's 1st Battalion was selected because its commander , Lieutenant Colonel Charles B. Smith , was the most experienced , having commanded a battalion at the Battle of Guadalcanal during World War II . On July 5 , Task Force Smith engaged North Korean forces at the Battle of Osan , delaying 5 @,@ 000 North Korean infantry for seven hours before being defeated . The 540 @-@ man force suffered 60 killed , 21 wounded and 82 captured , a very heavy casualty rate . In the chaos of the retreat , most of the bodies were left behind , and the fates of many of the missing were unknown for several weeks . 
 During that time , the 34th Infantry Regiment set up a line between the villages of Pyongtaek and Ansong , 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of Osan , to fight the next delaying action against the advancing North Korean forces . The 34th Infantry Regiment was similarly unprepared for a fight , with few soldiers experienced in combat . At this time , Shadrick was part of an M9A1 Bazooka team with 1st Battalion , 34th Infantry . 
 = = Death = = 
 About 90 minutes after Task Force Smith began its withdrawal from the Battle of Osan , the 34th Infantry sent Shadrick as part of a small scouting force northward to the village of <unk> @-@ ni , 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) south of Osan . The small force , under the command of Lieutenant Charles E. Payne and consisting mostly of bazooka teams and infantry , halted at a graveyard in the village , where they spotted a North Korean T @-@ 34 / 85 tank on a road to the north . Shadrick and the other bazooka operators began firing on the tank from long @-@ range concealed positions at around 16 : 00 . With them was Sergeant Charles R. Turnbull , a US Army combat photographer . Turnbull asked Shadrick to time a bazooka shot so its flash could be caught in Turnbull 's photograph , and Shadrick complied . Shadrick made the shot and paused , then rose from his concealed position to see if he had successfully hit the tank , exposing himself . The T @-@ 34 returned fire with its machine gun , and two bullets struck Shadrick in the chest and arm . Shadrick died moments later . 
 Payne 's patrol retreated without destroying the tank , taking Shadrick 's body with them as the only casualty . The force returned to the 34th Infantry Command post in Pyongtaek to report to Brigadier General George B. Barth and Colonel Harold B. Ayres , who were commanding the troops in the town . Also present was Marguerite Higgins , a war correspondent for the New York Herald Tribune . Higgins subsequently reported Shadrick 's death , referring to him as the first American killed in the Korean War . 
 Shadrick 's family was informed of his death by a neighbor who had heard his name on a radio broadcast , and the news from the military came via telegraph several days later . The family was immediately inundated by reporters and local well @-@ wishers . Shadrick 's body was returned to the United States , and on June 17 , 1951 , a funeral attended by hundreds of local residents was held in Beckley , West Virginia . The service was set to coincide with the anniversary of the start of the war . His flag @-@ draped casket was escorted down the streets of the town on a horse @-@ drawn carriage , and he was buried at the American Legion cemetery in the town . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Higgins ' account of Shadrick 's death was widely republished . Time magazine published a story about Shadrick 's death on July 17 , 1950 , citing Shadrick as the first " reported " death in Korea . Life magazine reported Shadrick for up to a year as the first US soldier to die in the war , and the claim has often been repeated , including as recently as July 4 , 2011 , in the local newspaper in Huntington , West Virginia , The Herald @-@ Dispatch . 
 American Legion Post 133 erected a monument to Shadrick at the Wyoming County courthouse . The monument cites Shadrick 's unit , date of death , and notes him as the " first casualty of the Korean conflict " with an epitaph that reads , " He stands first in the unbroken line of patriots who have dared to die that freedom might live , grow and increase its blessings . Freedom lives and through it he lives – in a way that <unk> the undertakings of most men . " It is one of several memorials to local residents who served in the military . 
 Subsequent publications have shed doubt on the accuracy of the claims of Shadrick 's distinction . Eyewitness accounts at the Battle of Osan point to the first death as a machine gunner in the 21st Infantry Regiment , who had been killed at around 08 : 30 , eight hours before Shadrick 's death . This soldier was killed when a different T @-@ 34 tank was disabled at the battle and one of its crew members attacked nearby troops with a PPSh @-@ 41 " <unk> Gun " . In the confusion of the battle , many of the wounded and dead troops were left behind by retreating American troops , and a large part of the force was also captured ; consequently , the identity of this first combat fatality remains a mystery . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Shadrick 's awards and decorations include : 
 = Tropical Storm Clotilda = 
 Cyclone Clotilda was a destructive tropical cyclone that inundated Réunion in February 1987 . A tropical disturbance first formed between Madagascar and Réunion on February 9 and slowly intensified thereafter . While meandering , the storm fluctuated in intensity before it reached its peak intensity on February 13 , with winds of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) . After passing near Réunion , it began to weaken . On February 16 , however , Clotilda began to regain strength , and reached its secondary peak on February 17 . Two days later , Clotilda became an extratropical cyclone . By February 22 , Clotilda was no long being tracked by meteorologists . While active , it brought torrential rains to the island of Réunion during a span of 72 hours . A total of 1 @,@ 855 mm ( 73 @.@ 0 in ) of rain was recorded in La Plaine @-@ des @-@ Palmistes ; rainfall totals occasionally exceeded the totals measured during Cyclone Hyacinthe , the last major storm to affect Réunion . However , the peak total measured in Hyacinthe was lower than the total measured during Clotilda . Furthermore , about 250 homes were damaged and roughly 120 homes were destroyed . Eighty @-@ nine trees were also brought down during the storm . Throughout the island , damage totaled $ 2 million ( 1987 USD ) and 10 people were killed . In addition to the destruction on Réunion , 5 % of crops on Mauritius were impacted by the storm . During the aftermath of the cyclone , 1 @,@ 000 people on Réunion were evacuated to shelters . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The tropical disturbance that would later become Clotilda was first warned on by Météo @-@ France 's ( MFR ) meteorological office at Réunion at 0600 UTC on February 9 . At this time , it was located about 500 km ( 310 mi ) from Réunion . Initially moving south , the storm maintained its intensity for 24 hours before it was upgraded into a moderate tropical storm , with winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . However , the strengthening trend was short lived , and several hours later , MFR downgraded Clotilda into a tropical depression as it began to meander . At 0600 UTC on February 11 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued its first warning on the system . That day , Clotilda began to re @-@ intensify and MFR upgraded Clotilda into a moderate tropical storm for the second time . At 1200 UTC that day , the JTWC reported that Clotilda developed gale @-@ force winds . Data from both agencies suggest that the storm held on to its intensity for about a day before gradually intensifying while turning east , passing within 80 km ( 50 mi ) Réunion . At 1800 UTC on February 12 , the JTWC reported that Clotilda had reached its peak intensity of 85 km / h ( 55 mph ) while MFR upgraded Clotilda into a severe tropical storm . The following day , MFR noted that Severe Tropical Storm Clotilda had reached its peak 10 @-@ minute sustained wind speed of 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) while undergoing a small clockwise loop , passing about 155 km ( 95 mi ) east of Mauritius . 
 After peaking in intensity , Severe Tropical Storm Clotilda began to weaken ; by February 13 , the JTWC had reassessed the intensity of the system to 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Moreover , MFR reduced to intensity of Clotilda to 155 km / h ( 95 mph ) the next day . Now moving west and away from the island of Reunion , the storm continued to deteriorate , and early on February 15 , the JTWC downgraded the system into a tropical depression while centered 560 km ( 350 mi ) west @-@ southwest of Mauritius . Very early on February 16 , the JTWC dropped advisories on the system even though MFR was still reporting winds of 65 km / h ( 40 mph ) . Thereafter , Clotilda turned west and began to reintensify . Late on February 17 , the cyclone reached its secondary peak of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) while located 1 @,@ 210 km ( 750 mi ) south @-@ southeast of Réunion . Accelerating , the storm transitioned into an extratropical cyclone on February 19 while turning south and later southeast . At 0000 UTC on February 22 , MFR at last stopped monitoring the system . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 Clotilda affected Mauritius on February 13 and 14 , with winds of up to 145 km / h ( 90 mph ) , heavy rain and high seas . This resulted in several homes being flooded and about 5 % of the island 's sugar crop being damaged . 
 Due to the storm 's slow motion , Cyclone Clotilda brought torrential rains to the island of Réunion during a span of three days . 1 @,@ 855 mm ( 75 in ) of rain was recorded in La Plaine @-@ des @-@ Palmistes , compared to the 1 @,@ 716 mm ( 67 @.@ 6 in ) of rain measured at that same location during Cyclone Hyacinthe , the last major storm to affect the region . However , this total was significantly less than the peak total of 6 @,@ 083 mm ( 239 @.@ 5 in ) recorded at Commerson during Hyacinthe . Throughout the island , rainfall totals usually exceeded the totals measured during Hyacinthe . Major flooding was reported , damaging many roads , and 89 trees fell during the storm . A total 250 dwellings were damaged and nearly 120 others were completely destroyed , with several completely destroyed . This left around 4 @,@ 000 people homeless . The north side of the island as well as the capital city of Saint Denis took the brunt of the cyclone ; wind gusts of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) were measured there . In all , damage from the storm totaled $ 2 million ( 1987 USD ) . A total of 40 @,@ 000 people were affected by the storm . Clotilda killed 10 people on the island . 
 Following the storm on Réunion , " tens of millions of francs " were needed to repair damaged roads . Furthermore , 1 @,@ 000 people moved to emergency shelters . On February 18 , 250 @,@ 000 Euros were granted to nation to cope with the aftermath of Clotilda . According to one account , it took five days for most food items to be restored to the island . 
 = Suspensory muscle of duodenum = 
 The suspensory muscle of duodenum is a thin muscle connecting the junction between the duodenum , jejunum , and duodenojejunal flexure to connective tissue surrounding the superior mesenteric artery and coeliac artery . It is also known as the ligament of Treitz . The suspensory muscle most often connects to both the third and fourth parts of the duodenum , as well as the duodenojejunal flexure , although the attachment is quite variable . 
 The suspensory muscle marks the formal division between the first and second parts of the small intestine , the duodenum and the jejunum . This division is used to mark the difference between the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts , which is relevant in clinical medicine as it may determine the source of bleeding in the gastrointestinal tract . 
 The suspensory muscle is derived from mesoderm and plays a role in the embryological rotation of the gut , by offering a point of fixation for the rotating gut . It is also thought to help digestion by widening the angle of the duodenojejunal flexure . Superior mesenteric artery syndrome is a rare abnormality caused by a congenitally @-@ short suspensory muscle . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The duodenum and the jejunum are the first and second parts of the small intestine . The suspensory muscle of the duodenum marks their formal division . The suspensory muscle arises from the right crus of the diaphragm as it passes around the esophagus , continues as connective tissue around the stems of the celiac trunk ( celiac artery ) and superior mesenteric artery , passes behind the pancreas , and enters the upper part of the mesentery , inserting into the junction between the duodenum and jejunum , the duodenojejunal flexure . Here , the muscles are continuous with the muscular layers of the duodenum . 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 Considerable anatomic variation exists , in terms of length and point of attachment . Despite the classical description , the muscle only solely attaches to the duodenojejunal flexure in about 8 % of people ; it is far more common , 40 to 60 % of the time to attach additionally to the third and fourth parts of the duodenum ; and 20 to 30 % of the time it only attaches to the third and fourth parts . Moreover , separate multiple attachments are not that uncommon . 
 According to some authors , who use the original description by Treitz , the muscle may be divided into two sections : a <unk> portion attaching the right crus of diaphragm to the connective tissue surrounding the coeliac artery and superior mesenteric artery ; and a lower muscular portion from the connective tissue attaching to the duodenum . The superior portion is also described as the <unk> . These two parts are now considered anatomically distinct , with the suspensory muscle referring solely to the lower structure attaching at the duodenum . 
 = = Function = = 
 The ligament contains a slender band of skeletal muscle from the diaphragm and a fibromuscular band of smooth muscle from the horizontal and ascending parts of the duodenum . When it contracts , by virtue of connections to the third and fourth parts of the duodenum , the suspensory muscle of the duodenum widens the angle of the duodenojejunal flexure , allowing movement of the intestinal contents . 
 = = = Embryology = = = 
 <unk> , the suspensory muscle of the duodenum is derived from mesoderm . It plays an important role in the embryological rotation of the small intestine as the superior retention band . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 This ligament is an important anatomical landmark of the duodenojejunal flexure , separating the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts . For example , bloody vomit or <unk> , black tarry stools , usually indicate a gastrointestinal bleed from a location in the upper gastrointestinal tract . In contrast , <unk> , bright red blood or clots in the stool , usually indicates gastrointestinal bleeding from the lower part of the gastrointestinal tract . It is an especially important landmark to note when looking at the bowel for the presence of malrotation of the gut , a syndrome often suspected in young children when they have episodes of recurrent vomiting . <unk> a normal location of the ligament of Treitz in radiological images is critical in ruling out malrotation of the gut in a child ; it is abnormally located when malrotation is present . 
 During a Whipple 's procedure , commonly used to treat pancreatic cancer by removing the pancreas , duodenum , and part of the jejunum , the ligament of Treitz is separated from the duodenum and preserved . When the remaining jejunum is <unk> with the pylorus of the stomach , it may be passed through the ligament . 
 Superior mesenteric artery syndrome ( SMA ) is an extremely rare life @-@ threatening condition that can either be congenital and chronic , or induced and acute . SMA Syndrome is characterised by compression of the duodenum between the abdominal aorta and the superior mesenteric artery , and may — when congenital — result from a short suspensory muscle . One surgical treatment is Strong 's operation , which involves cutting the suspensory muscle , though this is not often carried out . 
 = = History = = 
 The suspensory muscle of the duodenum was first named in 1853 by Václav Treitz , as the musculus <unk> <unk> ( in Latin ) , and described as consisting of a lower muscular portion with a broad base , and an upper tendinous portion blending with connective tissue around the origins of the superior mesenteric and coeliac arteries . It is commonly termed the ligament of Treitz by clinicians and as the suspensory muscle of the duodenum by anatomists . It has also been likened to " a polar ice cap ... a structure that many refer to but few have seen . " 
 = = Additional images = = 
 = Oswaldo Payá = 
 Oswaldo Payá <unk> ( 29 February 1952 – 22 July 2012 ) was a Cuban political activist . A Roman Catholic , he founded the Christian Liberation Movement in 1987 to oppose the one @-@ party rule of the Cuban Communist Party . He attracted international attention for organizing a petition drive known as the Varela Project , in which 25 @,@ 000 signatories petitioned the Cuban government to guarantee freedom of speech and freedom of assembly as well as to institute a multi @-@ party democracy . In recognition of his work , he received the European Parliament 's Sakharov Prize and People in Need 's Homo Homini Award . 
 On 22 July 2012 , he died in a car crash under controversial circumstances . The Cuban government stated that the driver had lost control of the vehicle and collided with a tree , while Payá 's children and one of the car 's passengers asserted that the car had been deliberately run off of the road . 
 = = Background = = 
 Oswaldo Payá was born on 29 February 1952 in Cerro , Havana . The fifth of seven children , he was brought up as a Roman Catholic and attended a Marist Brothers school in Havana . Payá was the only student at the school who refused to join the Communist League following the Cuban Revolution . The school was later closed . In 1969 , he was sentenced to three years of hard labor on Isla de Pinos when he refused to transport political prisoners during his mandatory military service . While there , he discovered a locked Catholic church , Nuestra Señora de Dolores , that received permission from the Bishop of Havana to reopen as a mission , giving religious talks and caring for the sick . 
 After his release , Payá enrolled in the University of Havana as a physics major , but was expelled when authorities discovered him to be a practicing Christian ; he then attended night school and switched his major to telecommunications . Payá later became an engineer and worked at a state surgical @-@ equipment company . He was offered an opportunity to leave Cuba in the 1980 Mariel <unk> , but chose to remain in Cuba and work for change . He married Ofelia Acevedo in 1986 in a Catholic wedding . The pair had three children : Oswaldo José , Rosa María , and Reinaldo Isaías . 
 = = Varela Project = = 
 In 1987 , Payá founded the Christian Liberation Movement ( MCL ) , which called for nonviolent civil disobedience against the rule of the Cuban Communist Party . The group advocates for civil liberties and freedom for political prisoners . He also began a magazine for Catholics titled People of God ( Pueblo de Dios ) , calling for Christians to lead the struggle for human rights . However , the magazine was shut down the following year by Cuba 's bishops under government pressure . Payá attempted to run for the National Assembly of People 's Power ( NAPP ) in 1992 , but was not allowed to stand . 
 In the late 1990s , Payá and other MCL activists began collecting signatures for the Varela Project , a petition drive that would become his best @-@ known program . Named in honor of Félix Varela , a Catholic priest who had participated in Cuba 's independence struggle with Spain , the Project took advantage of a clause in the Cuban Constitution requiring a national referendum to be held if 11 @,@ 000 signatures are gathered . 
 In May 2002 , Payá presented NAPP with 11 @,@ 020 signatures calling for a referendum on safeguarding freedom of speech and assembly , allowing private business ownership , and ending to one @-@ party rule . On 3 October 2003 , he delivered an additional 14 @,@ 000 signatures . Former U.S. president Jimmy Carter endorsed the petition when granted a chance to speak on Cuban television , bringing Payá 's efforts to the attention of a wide Cuban audience . Cuban President Fidel Castro described the petition drive as a U.S.-backed conspiracy to overthrow his government . 
 According to the Los Angeles Times , the petition drive was " the biggest nonviolent campaign to change the system the elder Castro established after the 1959 Cuban revolution " , giving Payá an international reputation as a leading dissident . An expert described it as " the only initiative of its time that enlisted citizen participation on a large scale " . Fellow dissident Rene Gomez Manzano , on the other hand , was critical of the Project , stating that appeals to the Communist @-@ Party @-@ controlled NAPP were futile . 
 Later that year , Payá 's efforts were recognized by the European Parliament , which awarded him its Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought , although he was nearly denied an exit visa to attend the awards ceremony . In the months that followed , Payá met with Pope John Paul II , U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell , and Mexican President Vicente Fox to discuss the cause of Cuban democratic reform . The Varela Project progress was blocked when the government launched its own petition drive to declare the socialist state " irrevocable " . During the 2003 crackdown popularly known as the Black Spring , MCL members comprised around 40 of the 75 defendants , though Payá himself was not arrested . 
 = = Later activism = = 
 During Castro 's illness , which culminated in his 2008 resignation , Payá continued to criticize the Cuban government as it transferred power to Castro 's brother Raúl . He called on Raul Castro to allow multiparty elections and free all political prisoners , and delivered a petition asking that the Cuban people be granted freedom of travel . 
 In the years before Payá 's death , his influence was said to be waning , and attention shifted to younger activists such as blogger Yoani Sanchez . In 2010 , WikiLeaks released U.S. State Department cables from Jonathan D. Farrar , head of the U.S. Interests Section in Havana , describing Payá and other older dissidents as " hopelessly out of touch " , writing , " They have little contact with younger Cubans and , to the extent they have a message that is getting out , it does not appeal to that segment of society . " However , many of the younger generation of dissidents cited him as a role model and expressed grief at his death . 
 = = Political views = = 
 Payá refused to accept U.S. aid and also opposed the U.S. Cuban embargo . In a 2000 editorial for the Miami Herald , he stated that " Lifting the embargo won 't solve the problems of the Cuban people . Maintaining it is no solution , either " . He called on the U.S. to immediately lift the embargo on food and medicine . 
 He also maintained his distance from Cuban political groups based in the U.S. In particular , he refused to support their stated goal of land reacquisition upon the return of exiles to Cuba : 
 " It is not a neoliberal programme . For this , we are under attack by the powerful groups in Miami . When people say what is going to happen in Cuba after Fidel , we say – hold on , there are 11 million people in Cuba , not only Fidel Castro . " 
 In 2005 , he also feuded with democracy activist Martha Beatriz Roque , accusing her of collaborating with security forces to provide justification for a further crackdown . Although his political activity was tolerated and on a few occasions he was allowed to travel abroad , Payá reported that both he and his family were subject to routine intimidation : " I have been told that I am going to be killed before the regime is over but I am not going to run away . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Payá died in a car crash on 22 July 2012 at the age of 60 . The incident occurred at 1 : 50 p.m. near Bayamo in eastern Granma province , according to a statement released by the Cuban government 's International Press Center . The chairman of the MCL 's youth league , Harold Cepero , also died in the crash . Swedish politician and chairman of the Young Christian Democrats Aron <unk> and Spanish politician Ángel Carromero Barrios were present , but survived with minor injuries . All four were taken to Professor Carlos Manuel Clinical Surgery Hospital in Bayamo , though Payá was dead on arrival . 
 Payá 's daughter Rosa María stated that her father died after the rental car in which he was traveling was rammed several times by another car . Payá 's son Oswaldo added that his father had received numerous death threats and stated that the accident 's survivors had reported that the car had been deliberately driven off the road . The official statement by the Cuban government said that the driver lost control of the vehicle and collided with a tree . The MCL stated that " the circumstances of these deaths have not been cleared up and are open to hypothesis " and demanded a " transparent " inquiry into the accident . A reporter for Foreign Policy commented that " Ramming vehicles carrying dissidents and foreign supporters , including diplomats , has been a stock @-@ in @-@ trade act of intimidation by Cuban state security for years . It is entirely believable that this was another such incident gone horribly wrong . " On 27 July , the Cuban Interior Ministry forwarded an official report to foreign press , blaming driver error and quoting Carromero as saying that the car had skidded off the road due to poor road conditions and bad weather . Payá 's widow rejected the report , stating that the crash was not an accident and that a government report could not be trusted . 
 At a press conference arranged by Cuban authorities on 30 July , <unk> and Carromero stated that the crash was an accident and no other car was involved . Speaking in 2013 to the Washington Post , Carromero denied this version of events , stating that he had been drugged and threatened by Cuban authorities who had forced him to make a false statement . He stated instead that the car had been rammed by another vehicle with Cuban government license plates , causing the fatal crash . 
 U.S. President Barack Obama released a statement praising Payá as " a tireless champion for greater civic and human rights in Cuba " . U.S. Senator Marco Rubio and Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney called for an independent investigation into the crash , calling on the international community to " demand that the facts concerning Paya 's death be accurately determined and that the surviving witnesses be protected " . The European Union issued a statement recognizing Payá 's dedication " to the cause of democracy and human rights in Cuba " . <unk> Sanchez , president of the Cuban Commission for Human Rights , stated that " This is tragic for the family and the human rights and pro @-@ democracy movement in Cuba ... Payá was considered the most notable political leader of the Cuban opposition . " Ladies in White president Berta Soler described the death as " a terrible blow " . 
 Payá 's funeral was held on 24 July 2012 . Dissident groups reported that dozens of activists were arrested on the way to the funeral , including Félix Navarro Rodríguez and Guillermo <unk> . A scuffle also broke out between activists and state security agents at the funeral itself . Amnesty International and the U.S. criticized the arrests , with the White House describing them as " a stark demonstration of the climate of repression in Cuba . " The dissidents were freed the following day . 
 Oswaldo Payá 's daughter Rosa Maria has continued his activism for democratic reforms in Cuba . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 The Homo Homini Award of People in Need , a Czech NGO , 1999 
 The Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought of the European Parliament , 2002 
 W. Averell Harriman Democracy Award from U.S. National Democratic Institute for International Affairs , 2003 
 Honorary Doctor of Laws degree from Columbia University in New York , 2005 
 Nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by the former Czech President Václav Havel , with fellow Cuban dissidents Raul Rivero and Óscar Elías <unk> 
 Named one of the 15 Champions of World Democracy by the European magazine A Different View , 2008 
 = Thescelosaurus = 
 Thescelosaurus ( / <unk> / <unk> @-@ il @-@ ə @-@ SOR @-@ əs ; ancient Greek <unk> / <unk> meaning " godlike " , " marvelous " , or " wondrous " and σαυρος / sauros " lizard " ) was a genus of small ornithopod dinosaur that appeared at the very end of the Late Cretaceous period in North America . It was a member of the last dinosaurian fauna before the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event around 66 million years ago . The preservation and completeness of many of its specimens indicate that it may have preferred to live near streams . 
 This bipedal ornithopod is known from several partial skeletons and skulls that indicate it grew to between 2 @.@ 5 and 4 @.@ 0 meters ( 8 @.@ 2 to 13 @.@ 1 ft ) in length on average . It had sturdy hind limbs , small wide hands , and a head with an elongate pointed snout . The form of the teeth and jaws suggest a primarily herbivorous animal . This genus of dinosaur is regarded as a specialized basal ornithopod , traditionally described as a hypsilophodont , but more recently recognized as distinct from Hypsilophodon . Several species have been suggested for this genus . Three currently are recognized as valid : the type species T. neglectus , T. garbanii and T. <unk> . 
 The genus attracted media attention in 2000 , when a specimen unearthed in 1993 in South Dakota , United States , was interpreted as including a fossilized heart . There was much discussion over whether the remains were of a heart . Many scientists now doubt the identification of the object and the implications of such an identification . 
 = = Description = = 
 Thescelosaurus was a heavily built bipedal animal , probably herbivorous , but potentially not . There was a prominent ridge along the length of both maxillae ( the tooth @-@ bearing " cheek " bones ) , and a ridge on both dentaries ( tooth @-@ bearing bone of the lower jaw ) . The ridges and position of the teeth , deeply internal to the outside surface of the skull , are interpreted as evidence for muscular cheeks . Aside from the long narrow beak , the skull also had teeth in the premaxilla , or upper beak ( a primitive trait among ornithopods ) . Long rod @-@ like bones called palpebrals were present over the eyes , giving the animal heavy bony eyebrows . Its teeth were of two types : small pointed premaxillary teeth , and leaf @-@ shaped cheek teeth . Six small teeth were present in both premaxillae , with a toothless section at the tip of the beak . 
 <unk> had short , broad , five @-@ fingered hands , four @-@ toed feet with hoof @-@ like toe tips , and a long tail braced by ossified tendons from the middle to the tip , which would have reduced the flexibility of the tail . The rib cage was broad , giving it a wide back , and the limbs were robust . The animals may have been able to move on all fours , given its fairly long arms and wide hands , but this idea has not been widely discussed in the scientific literature , although it does appear in popular works . Charles M. Sternberg reconstructed it with the upper arm oriented almost perpendicular to the body , another idea that has gone by the wayside . As noted by Peter Galton , the upper arm bone of most ornithischians articulated with the shoulder by an articular surface that consisted of the entire end of the bone , instead of a distinct ball and socket as in mammals . The orientation of the shoulder 's articular surface also indicates a vertical and not horizontal upper arm in dinosaurs . 
 Large thin flat mineralized plates have been found next to the ribs ' sides . Their function is unknown ; they may have played a role in respiration . However , muscle scars or other indications of attachment have not been found for the plates , which argues against a respiratory function . Recent histological study of layered plates from a probable subadult indicates that they may have started as cartilage and became bone as the animal aged . Such plates are known from several other ornithopods and their <unk> relatives . 
 The nature of this genus ' integument , be it scales or something else , is currently unknown , although potential evidence exists : Charles Gilmore described patches of carbonized material near the shoulders as possible epidermis , with a " punctured " texture , but no regular pattern , and William J. Morris suggested that armor was present , in the form of small scutes he interpreted as located at least along the midline of the neck of one specimen . <unk> have not been found with other articulated specimens of Thescelosaurus , though , and Morris 's scutes could be crocodilian in origin . 
 Overall , the skeletal anatomy of this genus is well documented , and restorations have been published in several papers , including skeletal restorations and models . The skeleton is known well enough that a detailed reconstruction of the hip and hindlimb muscles has been made . The animal 's size has been estimated in the 2 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 0 m range for length ( 8 @.@ 2 – 13 @.@ 1 ft ) for various specimens , and a weight of 200 – 300 kilograms ( 450 – 660 pounds ) , with the large type specimen of T. garbanii estimated at 4 – 4 @.@ 5 meters ( 13 @.@ 1 – 14 @.@ 8 feet ) long . As discussed more fully under " Discovery , history , and species " , it may have been sexually dimorphic , with one sex larger than the other . Juvenile remains are known from several locations , mostly based on teeth . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Thescelosaurus has generally been allied to Hypsilophodon and other small ornithopods as a <unk> , although recognized as being distinct among them for its robust build , unusual hindlimbs , and , more recently , its unusually long skull . Peter Galton in 1974 presented one twist to the classic arrangement , suggesting that because of its hindlimb structure and heavy build ( not cursorial , or built for running , by his definition ) , it should be included in the Iguanodontidae . This has not been followed , with Morris arguing strongly against Galton 's classification scheme . At any rate , Galton 's Iguanodontidae was polyphyletic and not a natural group , and so would not be recognized under modern cladistic usage . 
 Although Hypsilophodontidae was interpreted as a natural group in the early 1990s , this hypothesis has fallen out of favor and Hypsilophodontidae has been found to be an unnatural family composed of a variety of animals more or less closely related to Iguanodontia ( paraphyly ) , with various small clades of closely related taxa . " Hypsilophodontidae " and " hypsilophodont " are better understood as informal terms for an evolutionary grade , not a true clade . Thescelosaurus has been regarded as both very basal and very derived among the hypsilophodonts . One issue that has potentially interfered with classifying Thescelosaurus is that not all of the remains assigned to T. neglectus necessarily belong to it . Clint Boyd and colleagues found that while the clade Thescelosaurus included the genus Bugenasaura and the species that had been assigned to that genus , there were at least two and possibly three species within Thescelosaurus , and several specimens previously assigned to T. neglectus could not yet be assigned to a species within the genus . It appears to be closely related to Parksosaurus . 
 The dissolution of Hypsilophodontidae has been followed by the recognition of the distinct family <unk> . This area of the dinosaur family tree has historically been complicated by a lack of research , but papers by Clint Boyd and colleagues and Caleb Brown and colleagues have specifically addressed these dinosaurs . Boyd et al . ( 2009 ) and Brown et al . ( 2011 ) found North American " hypsilophodonts " of Cretaceous age to sort into two related clusters , one consisting of Orodromeus , <unk> , and Zephyrosaurus , and the other consisting of Parksosaurus and Thescelosaurus . Brown et al . ( 2013 ) recovered similar results , with the addition of the new genus <unk> to the Orodromeus clade and several long @-@ snouted Asian forms ( previously described under <unk> ) to the Thescelosaurus clade . They also formally defined <unk> ( Thescelosaurus neglectus , Orodromeus <unk> , their most recent common ancestor , and all descendants ) and the smaller clades <unk> and <unk> . The below cladogram is that of Brown et al .. 
 = = Discovery , history , and species = = 
 The type specimen of Thescelosaurus ( USNM 7757 ) was discovered in 1891 by paleontologists John Bell Hatcher and William H. Utterback , from beds of the late Maastrichtian @-@ age Upper Cretaceous Lance Formation of Niobrara County ( at the time part of Converse County ) , Wyoming , USA . The skeleton , however , remained in its shipping crates for years until Charles W. Gilmore of the Smithsonian Institution 's National Museum of Natural History had it prepared and described it in a short paper in 1913 , naming it T. neglectus ( neglectus : " neglected " ) . At the time , he thought it was related to Camptosaurus . He provided a detailed monograph in 1915 , describing the well @-@ preserved skeleton . The type specimen was found largely in natural articulation and was missing only the head and neck , which were lost due to erosion . The name comes from the surprise Gilmore felt at finding such a good specimen that had been unattended to for so long . He considered it to be a light , agile creature , and assigned it to the Hypsilophodontidae , a family of small bipedal dinosaurs . 
 Other remains of similar animals were found throughout the late 19th century and 20th century . Another well @-@ preserved skeleton from the slightly older Horseshoe Canyon Formation , in Alberta , Canada , was named T. warreni by William Parks in 1926 . This skeleton had notable differences from T. neglectus , and so Charles M. Sternberg placed it in a new genus , Parksosaurus , in 1937 . Sternberg also named an additional species , T. edmontonensis , based on another articulated skeleton , this time including a partial skull ( NMC <unk> ) , and drew attention to the genus ' heavy build and thick bones . Due to these differences from the regular light hypsilophodont build , he suggested that the genus warranted its own subfamily , <unk> . T. edmontonensis has , since Peter Galton 's 1974 review , generally been considered a more robust individual ( possibly the opposite sex of the type individual ) of T. neglectus . However , Boyd and colleagues found that they could not assign it to either of their valid species of Thescelosaurus and regarded the specimen as of uncertain placement within the genus . The other point of contention regarding T. edmontonensis is its ankle , which Galton claimed was damaged and misinterpreted , but which was regarded by William J. Morris ( 1976 ) as truly different from T. neglectus . 
 In his paper , Morris described a specimen ( <unk> 7210 ) consisting of a partial skull with heavy ridges on the lower jaw and cheek , four partial vertebrae , and two finger bones as an unidentified species of Thescelosaurus , from the late Maastrichtian @-@ age Hell Creek Formation of Harding County , South Dakota , USA . He drew attention to its premaxillary teeth and deeply inset <unk> which he interpreted as supporting the presence of muscular cheeks . Morris also pointed out the outwardly flaring premaxilla ( which would have given it a wide beak ) and large palpebrals . This skull was recognized as an unnamed hypsilophodont for many years , until Galton made it the type specimen of new genus and species Bugenasaura infernalis ( " large @-@ cheeked lizard belonging to the lower regions " , infernalis being a reference to the Hell Creek Formation ) . Morris also named a new possible species of Thescelosaurus for specimen LACM 33542 : ? T. garbanii ( with a question mark because he was uncertain that it belonged to the genus ) . LACM 33542 comprised a large partial hindlimb ( " a third larger than described specimens of T. neglectus and Parksosaurus or nearly twice as large as Hypsilophodon " ) including a foot , tarsus , shin bones , and partial thigh bone , along with five cervical ( neck ) and eleven dorsal ( back ) vertebrae , from the Hell Creek Formation of Garfield County , Montana , USA . The specimen was discovered by amateur paleontologist Harley <unk> , hence the name . T. garbanii would have been about 4 @.@ 5 meters ( 15 feet ) long , greater than average specimens of T. neglectus . Aside from the size , Morris drew attention to the way the ankle was constructed , which he considered to be unique except in comparison with Thescelosaurus edmontonensis , which he regarded as a separate species . Because Morris believed that the ankles of T. garbanii compared favorably to those of T. edmontonensis , he tentatively assigned it to Thescelosaurus . However , the scientific literature has favored Galton 's view that T. edmontonensis was not different from T. neglectus ( see above ) . In the same paper that he described Bugenasaura , Galton demonstrated that the features Morris had thought connected T. garbanii and T. edmontonensis were the result of damage to the latter 's ankle , so T. garbanii could also be considered distinct from Thescelosaurus . To better accommodate this species , Galton suggested that it belonged to his new genus Bugenasaura as B. garbanii , although he also noted that it could be belong to the similarly sized pachycephalosaurid Stygimoloch , or be part of a third , unknown dinosaur . 
 Clint Boyd and colleagues published a reassessment of Thescelosaurus , Bugenasaura , and Parksosaurus in 2009 , using new cranial material as a starting point . They found that Parksosaurus was indeed distinct from Thescelosaurus , and that the skull of Bugenasaura infernalis was essentially the same as a skull found with a postcranial skeleton that matched Thescelosaurus . Because B infernalis could not be differentiated from Thescelosaurus , they regarded the genus as a synonym of Thescelosaurus , the species as dubious , and <unk> 7210 as an example of T. sp . They found that LACM 33542 , although fragmentary , was a specimen of Thescelosaurus , and agreed with Morris that the ankle structure was distinct , returning it to T. garbanii . Finally , they noted that another specimen , RSM <unk> , differed from T. neglectus in some anatomical details , and may represent a new species . Thus , Thescelosaurus per Boyd et al . ( 2009 ) is represented by at least two , and possibly three valid species : type species T. neglectus , T. garbanii , and a possible unnamed species . In December 2011 , RSM <unk> was assigned to its own species , Thescelosaurus <unk> . It was named by Caleb M. Brown , Clint A. Boyd and Anthony P. Russell and is known only from its holotype , a small , articulated and almost complete skeleton from the Frenchman Formation ( late Maastrichtian stage ) of Saskatchewan . 
 = = Paleobiology = = 
 Thescelosaurus would have browsed in the first meter or so from the ground , feeding selectively , with food held in the mouth by cheeks while chewing . Thescelosaurus was probably slower than other hypsilophodonts , because of its heavier build and leg structure . Compared to them , it had unusual hindlimbs , because the upper leg was longer than the shin , the opposite of Hypsilophodon and running animals in general . One specimen is known to have had a bone pathology , with the long bones of the right foot fused at their tops , hindering swift movement . 
 = = = " Heart of stone " = = = 
 In 2000 , a skeleton of this genus ( specimen NCSM <unk> ) informally known as " <unk> " , now on display at the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences , was described as including the remnants of a four @-@ chambered heart and an aorta . It had been originally unearthed in 1993 in northwestern South Dakota . The authors had found the internal detail through computed tomography ( CT ) imagery . They suggested that the heart had been <unk> ( turned to grave wax ) under airless burial conditions , and then changed to goethite , an iron mineral , by replacement of the original material . The authors interpreted the structure of the heart as indicating an elevated metabolic rate for Thescelosaurus , not reptilian cold @-@ bloodedness . 
 Their conclusions have been disputed ; soon after the initial description , other researchers published a paper where they asserted that the heart is really a concretion . As they noted , the anatomy given for the object is incorrect ( for example , the " aorta " narrows coming into the " heart " and lacks arteries coming from it ) , it partially engulfs one of the ribs and has an internal structure of concentric layers in some places , and another concretion is preserved behind the right leg . The original authors defended their position ; they agreed that it was a type of concretion , but one that had formed around and partially preserved the more muscular portions of the heart and aorta . 
 A study published in 2011 applied multiple lines of inquiry to the question of the object 's identity , including more advanced CT scanning , histology , X @-@ ray diffraction , X @-@ ray <unk> spectroscopy , and scanning electron microscopy . From these methods , the authors found the following : the object 's internal structure does not include chambers but is made up of three unconnected areas of lower density material , and is not comparable to the structure of an ostrich 's heart ; the " walls " are composed of sedimentary minerals not known to be produced in biological systems , such as goethite , feldspar minerals , quartz , and gypsum , as well as some plant fragments ; carbon , nitrogen , and phosphorus , chemical elements important to life , were lacking in their samples ; and cardiac cellular structures were absent . There was one possible patch with animal cellular structures . The authors found their data supported identification as a concretion of sand from the burial environment , not the heart , with the possibility that isolated areas of tissues were preserved . 
 The question of how this find reflects metabolic rate and dinosaur internal anatomy is moot , though , regardless of the object 's identity . Both modern crocodilians and birds , the closest living relatives of dinosaurs , have four @-@ chambered hearts ( albeit modified in crocodilians ) , so dinosaurs probably had them as well ; the structure is not necessarily tied to metabolic rate . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 = = = Temporal and geographic range = = = 
 True Thescelosaurus remains are known definitely only from late Maastrichtian @-@ age rocks , from Alberta ( Scollard Formation ) and Saskatchewan ( Frenchman Formation ) , Canada , and Wyoming ( Lance Formation ) , South Dakota ( Hell Creek Formation ) , Montana ( Hell Creek ) , and Colorado ( Laramie Formation ) , USA . With the exception of birds , it was one of the last genera of dinosaurs , its remains being found as close as 3 meters to the boundary clay containing the iridium layer that closes the Cretaceous . There are reports of teeth from older , Campanian @-@ age rocks , particularly from the Dinosaur Park Formation of Alberta , but these specimens are not from Thescelosaurus and are much more likely those of Orodromeus . More specimens are known than have been officially described for this genus , such as the <unk> specimen , which has been the source of several skeletal casts for museums . 
 When Galton revisited Thescelosaurus and Bugenasaura in 1999 , he described the dentary tooth <unk> <unk> from the Upper Jurassic of Weymouth , England as cf . Bugenasaura . If it is indeed a tooth from a <unk> @-@ like animal , this would significantly extend the stratigraphic range of the group . 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 Conflicting reports have been made as to its preferred habitat ; two papers suggest it preferred channels to floodplains , but another suggests it preferred the opposite . The possible preference for channels is based on the relative abundance of <unk> fossils in sandstones , representing channel environments , in comparison to mudstones , representing floodplain environments . No bonebeds or accumulations of multiple individuals have yet been reported . Dale Russell , in a popular work , noted that Thescelosaurus was the most common small herbivore in the Hell Creek Formation of the Fort Peck area . He described the environment of the time as a flat floodplain , with a relatively dry subtropical climate that supported a variety of plants ranging from angiosperm trees , to bald cypress , to ferns and <unk> . Although most dinosaur skeletons from this area are incomplete , possibly due to the low preservation potential of forests , Thescelosaurus skeletons are much more complete , suggesting that this genus frequented stream channels . Thus when a Thescelosaurus died , it may have been in or near a river , making it easier to bury and preserve for later fossilization . Russell tentatively compared it to the capybaras and tapirs . Other dinosaurs that shared its time and place include the ceratopsids Triceratops and Torosaurus , hadrosaurid Edmontosaurus , ankylosaurid Ankylosaurus , pachycephalosaurian Pachycephalosaurus , and the theropods Ornithomimus , Troodon , and Tyrannosaurus . Thescelosaurus was also abundant in the Lance Formation . Toe bones from this genus are the most common finds after fossils of Triceratops and Edmontosaurus , and it may have been the most common dinosaur there in life , if the Lance Formation had a preservational bias against small animals . 
 = The Pit and the Pendulum ( 1961 film ) = 
 The Pit and the Pendulum is a 1961 horror film directed by Roger Corman , starring Vincent Price , Barbara Steele , John Kerr , and Luana Anders . The screenplay by Richard Matheson was based on Edgar Allan Poe 's short story of the same name . Set in sixteenth @-@ century Spain , the story is about a young Englishman who visits a forbidding castle to investigate his sister 's mysterious death . After a series of horrific revelations , apparently ghostly appearances and violent deaths , the young man becomes strapped to the titular torture device by his lunatic brother @-@ in @-@ law during the film 's climactic sequence . 
 The film was the second title in the popular series of Poe @-@ based movies released by American International Pictures , the first having been Corman 's House of Usher released the previous year . Like House , the film features widescreen cinematography by Floyd Crosby , sets designed by art director Daniel Haller , and a film score composed by Les Baxter . A critical and box @-@ office hit , Pit 's commercial success convinced AIP and Corman to continue adapting Poe stories for another six films , five of them starring Price . The series ended in 1965 with the release of The Tomb of Ligeia . 
 Film critic Tim Lucas and writer Ernesto Gastaldi have both noted the film 's strong influence on numerous subsequent Italian thrillers , from Mario Bava 's The Whip and the Body ( 1963 ) to Dario Argento 's Deep Red ( 1975 ) . Stephen King has described one of Pit 's major shock sequences as being among the most important moments in the post @-@ 1960 horror film . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 In sixteenth century Spain , Englishman Francis Barnard ( John Kerr ) visits the castle of his brother @-@ in @-@ law Nicholas Medina ( Vincent Price ) to investigate the mysterious death of his sister Elizabeth ( Barbara Steele ) . Nicholas and his younger sister Catherine ( Luana Anders ) offer a vague explanation that Elizabeth died from a rare blood disorder six months earlier ; Nicholas is evasive when Francis asks for specific details about the disease . Francis vows that he will not leave until he discovers the true circumstances surrounding his sister 's death . 
 During dinner with the family physician , Dr. Leon ( Antony Carbone ) , Francis again asks about his sister 's death . Dr. Leon tells him that his sister died of massive heart failure , literally " dying of fright " . Francis demands to be shown where Elizabeth died . Nicholas takes him to the castle 's torture chamber . Nicholas reveals that Elizabeth , under the influence of the castle 's " heavy atmosphere " , became obsessed with the chamber 's torture devices . After becoming progressively unbalanced , one day she locked herself into an iron maiden , and died after whispering the name " Sebastian " . Francis refuses to believe Nicholas 's story . 
 Francis tells Catherine that Nicholas appears to feel " definite guilt " regarding Elizabeth 's death . In response , Catherine talks about Nicholas 's traumatic childhood . Their father was Sebastian Medina , a notorious agent of the Spanish Inquisition . When Nicholas was a small child , he was exploring the forbidden torture chamber when his father ( also played by Price ) entered the room with his mother Isabella and Sebastian 's brother , Bartolome . Hiding in a corner , Nicholas watched in horror as his father repeatedly hit Bartolome with a red @-@ hot poker , screaming " <unk> ! " at him . After murdering Bartolome , Sebastian began torturing his wife slowly to death in front of Nicholas . 
 Catherine and Francis are later informed by Dr. Leon that Isabella in fact was not tortured to death , rather she was entombed behind a brick wall while still alive . Dr. Leon explains , " The very thought of premature interment is enough to send your brother into convulsions of horror . " Nicholas fears that Elizabeth may have been interred prematurely . The doctor tells Nicholas that " if Elizabeth Medina walks these corridors , it is her spirit and not her living self . " 
 Nicholas believes his late wife 's vengeful ghost is haunting the castle . Elizabeth 's room is the source of a loud commotion , and it is found ransacked and her portrait slashed to ribbons . Her beloved harpsichord plays in the middle of the night . One of Elizabeth 's rings is found on the keyboard . Francis accuses Nicholas of planting the evidence of Elizabeth 's " haunting " as an elaborate hoax . Nicholas insists that his wife 's tomb be opened . They discover Elizabeth 's <unk> corpse frozen in a position that suggests she died screaming after failing to claw her way out of her sarcophagus . Nicholas faints . 
 That night , Nicholas – now on the verge of insanity – hears Elizabeth calling him . He follows her ghostly voice down to her tomb . Elizabeth rises from her coffin and pursues Nicholas into the torture chamber , where he falls down a flight of stairs . As Elizabeth gloats over her husband 's unconscious body , she is met by her lover and accomplice , Dr. Leon . They had plotted to drive Nicholas mad so that she could inherit his fortune and the castle . 
 Leon confirms that Nicholas " is gone " , his mind destroyed by terror . Elizabeth taunts her insensate husband . Nicholas opens his eyes and begins laughing hysterically while his wife and the doctor recoil in horror . Believing himself to be Sebastian , he replays the events of his mother and uncle 's murders . He overpowers Dr. Leon , believing him to be Bartolome , and Leon falls to his death in the pit while trying to escape . Nicholas seizes Elizabeth , and repeats his father 's promise to Isabella to torture her horribly . 
 Francis , having heard Elizabeth 's screams , enters the dungeon . Nicholas confuses Francis for Bartolome , and knocks him unconscious . He straps him to a stone slab located directly beneath a huge razor @-@ sharp pendulum . The pendulum is attached to a clockwork apparatus that causes it to descend fractions of an inch after each swing , ever closer to Francis 's torso . Catherine arrives just in time with Maximillian , one of the servants . After a brief struggle with Maximillian , Nicholas falls to his death in the pit . Francis is removed from the torture device . As they leave the basement , Catherine vows to seal up the chamber forever . They slam and lock the door shut , unaware that Elizabeth is still alive , gagged and trapped in the iron maiden . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 20th Century Fox had announced plans to film the story in the late ' 50s , along with versions of Tell Tale Heart and Murders in the Rue Morgue , but the films were never made . 
 When Roger Corman 's House of Usher was released in June 1960 , its box office success took AIP 's James H. Nicholson and Samuel Z. Arkoff by surprise . Corman admitted , " We anticipated that the movie would do well ... but not half as well as it did . " According to Richard Matheson , " When the first film was a hit , they still didn 't consider doing a Poe series . They just wanted another movie with a Poe title fixed to it . " 
 Corman felt Poe 's two strongest stories after Usher were Masque of the Red Death , and Pit and the Pendulum . He considered making the former but was worried about similarities between the story and The Seventh Seal ( 1957 ) , so he decided on adapting the latter . However Samuel Z. Arkoff said it was his and James H. Nicholson 's decision to make Pit as the second Poe film " because it was a lot more graphic and in the second place , Masque of the Red Death would have needed a dancing troupe that would have been quite expensive . In all those early Poe pictures we had relatively few actors , so when we did finally make Masque of the Red Death we went to the UK where it would be less expensive to do it . " 
 = = = Screenplay = = = 
 Matheson 's script freely devised an elaborate narrative that barely resembled Poe , with only the finale having any similarity at all to the original short story on which the film was based . Corman noted , " The method we adopted on The Pit and the Pendulum was to use the Poe short story as the climax for a third act to the motion picture ... because a two @-@ page short story is not about to give you a ninety @-@ minute motion picture . We then constructed the first two acts in what we hoped was a manner faithful to Poe , as his climax would run only a short time on the screen . " 
 Matheson says he used the outline for a novel he was starting to work on called House of the Dead as the basis of the screenplay . He also used elements from other Poe stories , such as the unfaithful wife from The Cask of <unk> and the fact that a favourite book of Roderick Usher from The House of Usher was The Inquisition <unk> . 
 Matheson 's screenplay included a flashback to a time immediately preceding Elizabeth 's illness , featuring Nicholas and Elizabeth horseback @-@ riding and eating a picnic lunch . Corman deleted the sequence prior to filming because he felt it violated one of his major theories regarding the Poe series : 
 I had a lot of theories I was working with when I did the Poe films ... One of my theories was that these stories were created out of the unconscious mind of Poe , and the unconscious mind never really sees reality , so until The Tomb of <unk> we never showed the real world . In Pit , John Kerr arrived in a carriage against an ocean background , which I felt was more representative of the unconscious . That horseback interlude was thrown out because I didn 't want to have a scene with people out in broad daylight . 
 The screenplay was modified from its original draft form during the film 's shooting . Price himself suggested numerous dialogue changes for his character . In the script , when Francis Barnard is first introduced to Nicholas , the young man asks about loud , strange noises he had heard a few moments earlier . Don Medina responds : " Uh ... an apparatus , Mr. Barnard . ( turning ) What brings you to us ? " Price penciled in the suggestions " that must be kept in constant repair " and " that cannot be stopped " . Later in the screenplay , when Nicholas recalls his father 's chamber of torture , Price devised alternate explanations for Sebastian Medina 's violence . During Nicholas ' death scene , after falling to the bottom of the pit the character originally had dialogue at the point of dying , asking in a voice of horror , " Elizabeth . What have I done to you ? ( beat ) What have I done to you ? " The camera was to then cut directly to Elizabeth 's face trapped in the iron maiden . Corman decided to jettison the lines , believing that the film should remain purely visual at that point and dialogue would ruin the power of the scene . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The Pit and the Pendulum was announced in August 1960 , and filming began the first week of January 1961 . 
 According to Lucy Chase Williams ' book , The Complete Films of Vincent Price , the shooting schedule was fifteen days , and the film 's budget was almost $ 1 million . Corman himself has said that the film 's actual production cost was approximately $ 300 @,@ 000 . 
 Corman has noted that making the film was a pleasurable experience : " I enjoyed The Pit and the Pendulum because I actually got the chance to experiment a bit with the movement of the camera . There was a lot of moving camera work and interesting cutting in the climax of the film . " 
 Filming went smoothly , and Corman attributed the ease of the production 's shoot to the short but comprehensive pre @-@ production planning he did with the major technicians : 
 We achieved what we did on a low budget because we carefully planned the whole production in advance of starting the cameras . Thus , when we moved into the studio for fifteen days of scheduled shooting , we didn 't have to start making decisions . Because of our pre @-@ production conferences with director of photography Floyd Crosby and art director Daniel Haller , everyone knew exactly what to do , barring any last minute inspirations on the set . 
 To create the flashbacks revealing Nicholas ' traumatic experiences , Corman and Crosby attempted to shoot them in a manner that would convey to the audience the character 's horror in dredging up nightmares trapped in his subconscious . Corman insisted on these images having a dream @-@ like quality , " twisted and distorted because they were being experienced by someone on the rim of madness " . Corman decided to film the flashbacks in monochrome , since he had read that some psychiatrists believe most people dream in " black @-@ and white " imagery . Crosby used wide @-@ angle lenses , violent camera movement , and tilted camera angles to represent the character 's feeling of hysteria . The sequences were then printed on blue @-@ tinted stock which was subsequently toned red during development , effectively producing a two @-@ tone image . The highlights were blue , with the shadows rendered as red ... producing a deep , bloody quality . The image was then run through an optical printer where the edges were vignetted and a twisted linear distortion was introduced . 
 = = = Art direction = = = 
 The film 's brief exterior prologue showing Kerr 's arrival to the castle was filmed on the Palos Verdes coast . The rest of the production was shot in four interior sound stages at the California Studios in Hollywood . To provide great freedom for the planned camera movements , a castle set with many levels and ample space was designed by Daniel Haller . 
 Because of the film 's low budget , none of the sets could be constructed " from scratch . " After Haller made sketches and floor plans for the sets , he searched the backlots and property lofts of the major studios in search of available set units that could be inexpensively rented and then put together to form the sets he had conceived . At Universal Studios , he located numerous discarded pieces from old productions , including massive archways , fireplaces , windows and doorways , and several torture machine props . At other studios , he found gigantic stairways and stone wall units . Haller selected and rented numerous pieces from these various depositories and had them delivered to California Studios , where the sets for the film were constructed , following his floor plans as closely as possible . To further set the atmosphere , about 20 gallons of <unk> was sprayed throughout the castle 's sets . 
 The film 's pressbook noted that the pendulum was eighteen @-@ feet long and weighed over a ton and was constructed with a realistic rubber cutting blade . The pendulum was rigged from the top of the sound stage thirty @-@ five feet in the air . In an interview , Haller provided details regarding the creation of the pendulum : 
 I found that such a pendulum actually was used during the Spanish and German inquisitions . At first we tried to use a rubberized blade , and that 's why it got stuck on Kerr 's chest . We then switched to a sharp <unk> blade covered with steel paint . The problem was to get it in exactly the right position so it would slash John 's shirt without actually cutting him . To guard against this , we put a steel band around his waist where the pendulum crosses . He was a good sport about it ... but noticed him perspiring a good bit and no wonder . That pendulum was carving out a 50 foot arc just above his body . 
 To visually enhance the size of this set , the camera was equipped with a 40 mm Panavision wide @-@ angle lens and mounted at the opposite end of the stage , giving Crosby the ability to frame the scenes in his camera with extra space at the bottom and at either side . These areas were filled in later by printing @-@ in process extensions of the set , doubling its size onscreen . 
 = = = Cast = = = 
 Vincent Price as Nicholas / Sebastian Medina . This was Price 's third film for American International Pictures and his second for director Corman . In response to the profitability of House of Usher , Price " upped his asking price for Pit to $ 125 @,@ 000 , plus a percentage of the profits . " Most critics seemed to enjoy Price 's somewhat hammy performance as the tormented , guilt @-@ ridden victim of his " late " wife 's evil machinations . Darrell Moore wrote , " Vincent Price returns to his usual overacting , ego @-@ tripping self in The Pit and the Pendulum . His wonderfully maniacal performance is the high point of the film . " And Nathaniel Thompson noted that " Vincent Price has a field day alternating from gibbering terror to teeth @-@ gnashing insanity ( sometimes in the same scene ) ... " Some , however , thought his acting overly theatrical and damaging to the film 's mood . Writer Ken Hanke felt the film had " ... a few unintended laughs thanks to Vinnie 's campiness . " 
 John Kerr as Francis Barnard . The Tony Award @-@ winning actor ( for Tea and Sympathy ( 1955 ) ) had been a once @-@ promising leading man in the 1950s , featured in major roles in the theatrical film versions of Tea and Sympathy ( 1956 ) and Rodgers and Hammerstein 's South Pacific ( 1958 ) . His role as the nominal hero in Pit would prove to be the last notable film appearance of his career . Years later , Kerr expressed surprise that Pit seemed to be his best remembered role , " If you had told me years ago that Pit and the Pendulum would be The One out of all the stuff I 've done , if you had told me that this would be the cult @-@ type movie that people would be collecting memorabilia on , I would have said , ' You 're out of your gourd . ' Just ... no way . <unk> way ! " 
 Barbara Steele as Elizabeth . This was Steele 's first film since her break @-@ through horror performance in Mario Bava 's Black Sunday ( 1960 ) . The actress recalled that she was " in awe " of Price during the production and described the filming of their final scene together as surprisingly physical : " Our major confrontation where he strangles me was done in one take … He really went at me and I had the bruises on my throat to prove it . Afterward , he was so concerned he had hurt me — a perfect gentleman — a truly kind figure in spite of his image . " While watching the daily rushes of the movie , Corman became convinced that Steele 's " thick working class English accent " was not blending well with the other cast members , so after the filming was completed he had all of her dialogue dubbed by a different actress . 
 Luana Anders as Catherine Medina . Anders ' role as Price 's ( much younger ) sister was one of several appearances she made in AIP productions . Most of these films were directed by Corman . The actress had first met Corman several years previously while both were attending acting classes taught by Jeff Corey in Los Angeles . After Pit , Anders would make two further films with Corman as a director , The Young Racers ( 1963 ) and The Trip ( 1967 ) . 
 Antony Carbone as Doctor Leon . Like Anders , Carbone was a brief member of Corman 's early @-@ 1960s " stock company " of actors , appearing in four of the director 's films during that time . Carbone 's only starring role in his career had been in Corman 's Creature from the Haunted Sea ( 1960 ) , which co @-@ starred writer Robert Towne . Pit was Carbone 's final appearance in a Corman @-@ directed movie . 
 Other cast : Patrick Westwood as Maximillian ( the servant ) , Lynette Bernay as Maria ( the maid ) , Larry Turner as Nicholas as child , Mary Menzies as Isabella , Charles Victor as Bartolome . 
 Prior to the start of filming , Corman had set aside one day of rehearsals with his cast . " Previously , I had painstakingly rehearsed the actors so there was complete understanding as to what each was to accomplish in each scene . This is most important ; there is nothing worse than to be on the set and ready to roll , only to find that director and actor have different views as to how the scene is to be done . Thanks to pre @-@ production planning and rehearsals , there was no time wasted on the set in haggling and making decisions . " 
 = = Response = = 
 = = = Box Office = = = 
 The Pit and the Pendulum was a bigger financial hit than House of Usher , accruing over US $ 2 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in distributors ' domestic ( U.S. and Canada ) rentals versus the first film 's US $ 1 @,@ 450 @,@ 000 . This made it the most successful film to date in AIP 's history . 
 The movie would remain the most financially successful of all the AIP Poe films . " It 's also the one I liked the best because it was the scariest , " said Arkoff . " We had a wonderful piece of artwork for the poster ... as well as some great sets by Danny Haller . " 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 According to writer Ed Naha , the film also received a better critical response than Usher . The majority of the film 's reviews were positive . 
 Howard Thompson of The New York Times wrote , " <unk> at least — there is a striking fusion of rich colors , plush décor and eerie music — this is probably Hollywood 's most effective Poe @-@ style horror flavoring to date … Richard Matheson 's ironic plot is compact and as logical as the choice of the small cast … Roger Corman has evoked a genuinely chilling mood of horror . " Variety noted , " The last portion of the film builds with genuine excitement to a reverse @-@ twist ending that might have pleased Poe himself ... a physically stylish , imaginatively photographed horror film … " The Los Angeles Examiner said it was " … one of the best " scare " movies to come along in a long time … skillfully directed by Corman … with Vincent Price turning in the acting job of his career … . " Brendan Gill of The New Yorker felt it was " a thoroughly creepy sequence of horrors ... " Time called the film " a literary hair @-@ raiser that is cleverly , if self @-@ consciously , Edgar Allan poetic . " The Hollywood Reporter described it as " ... a class suspense / horror film of the calibre of the excellent ones done by Hammer ... It is carefully made and has full production values ... Vincent Price gives a characteristically rococo performance ... " 
 But Charles Stinson of the Los Angeles Times was notably unimpressed by the film : " The uncredited [ sic ] scenario violates Poe 's gothic style with passages of flat , modernized dialogue … But the <unk> of the script pale beside the acting … Price mugs , rolls his eyes continuously , and delivers his lines in such an unctuous tone that he comes near to burlesquing the role . His mad scenes are just ludicrous . The audience almost died laughing . " Price was so infuriated by Stinson 's negative review that he wrote a letter to the critic , saying , " I find I must break a 25 @-@ year determination never to answer a critic . Since your review of The Pit and the Pendulum was obviously not meant to be instructive , and therefore constructive , but only to hurt and humiliate , I 'm sure you would enjoy the satisfaction of knowing that it did . My only consolation … is that it is the second @-@ greatest box @-@ office attraction in the country . " Price apparently never sent the letter , placing it instead into his " Letting Off Steam File " . 
 The film 's critical reputation has continued to grow over the years , and it is now generally held to be one of the best entries in Corman 's Poe series . Time Out has opined , " Corman at his intoxicating best , drawing a seductive mesh of sexual motifs from Poe 's story through a fine Richard Matheson script . " In The Penguin Encyclopedia of Horror and the Supernatural , Timothy Sullivan wrote : " The Pit and the Pendulum is even better than its predecessor … The plot is heady stuff , and Roger Corman drives it forward — with wonderful matte shots of the castle perched on the seaside cliff , odd camera angles , the thickest cobwebs in horror @-@ movie history , a spider in the face , and an iron maiden — all before our hero is strapped under the pendulum ... in a sequence that still stands one 's hair on end . " Phil Hardy 's The Aurum Film Encyclopedia : Horror observed : " If Price 's performance is noticeably more extravagant than in the earlier film , this is offset ( or matched ) by the markedly greater fluidity of camera movement . House of Usher seemed unsure of how to cope with the rush of action as Madeline returned from the grave ; The Pit and the Pendulum has no such hesitations . From the great sequence in which Steele lures Price down into the crypt to the finale … its action is terrific . " Tim Lucas , in reviewing the film 's DVD release in 2001 , wrote , " Benefitting from the box @-@ office success of House of Usher , Pit is a more elaborate production and features some of the definitive moments of the AIP Corman / Poe series . " And Glenn Erickson , reviewing the DVD on his " DVD Savant " website , noted , " Roger Corman 's second Edgar Allan Poe adaptation is a big improvement on his first , House of Usher … Remembered as a first @-@ rate chiller by every kid who saw it , Pit and the Pendulum upped the ante for frantic action and potential <unk> … " 
 Recent critical opinion of the film is not all positive . Of the 17 reviews included in a Rotten Tomatoes survey of critics regarding the title , 17 % reflect negative reactions . <unk> opines that the film " ... is quite a disappointment ... In the end , it feels like one of [ Corman 's ] rush jobs , which of course , it was . " 
 The film was selected for screening as part of the Cannes Classics section at the 2016 Cannes Film Festival . 
 = = Influence = = 
 The critical and popular success of The Pit and the Pendulum persuaded AIP 's Arkoff and Nicholson to produce more Edgar Allan Poe @-@ based horror films on a regular basis . The films that followed , all directed by Corman , were The Premature Burial ( 1962 ) , Tales of Terror ( 1962 ) , The Raven ( 1963 ) , The Haunted Palace ( 1963 , actually based on the novella The Case of Charles Dexter Ward by H. P. Lovecraft ) , The Masque of the Red Death ( 1964 ) , and The Tomb of Ligeia ( 1965 ) . 
 Tim Lucas has argued that the film had a large impact on many Italian horror films that followed . Lucas noted , " It takes Corman 's Freudian theories even further with a nightmarish <unk> sequence that plants the seeds of Nicholas 's breakdown , and would prove particularly influential on the future course of Italian horror — an influence that can be seen even in productions of the 1970s ( Deep Red ) and 1980s ( A Blade in the Dark ) . " Writer K. <unk> has noted an " obvious influence " on Antonio <unk> 's Castle of Blood ( 1964 ) and its remake , Web of the Spider ( 1970 ) . 
 Screenwriter Ernesto Gastaldi acknowledged that Ugo Guerra and Elio <unk> , the producers of Mario Bava 's The Whip and the Body ( 1963 ) , had " shown me an Italian print of The Pit and the Pendulum before I started writing it : ' Give us something like this ' , they said . " When asked if another of his films , The Long Hair of Death ( 1964 ) , was inspired by Corman 's film , Gastaldi replied , " Yes , of course ! The Pit and the Pendulum had a big influence on Italian horror films . Everybody borrowed from it . " 
 Stephen King felt that one of the film 's most powerful shocks — the discovery of Elizabeth 's hideously decayed corpse — had a major impact on the genre and served as one of the most significant horror sequences of the decade . King wrote , " Following the Hammer films , this becomes , I think , the most important moment in the post @-@ 1960 horror film , signaling a return to an all @-@ out effort to terrify the audience ... and a willingness to use any means at hand to do it . " 
 = = <unk> television version = = 
 In 1968 , when the film was sold to ABC @-@ TV for television airings , the network noted that the film was too short to fill the desired two @-@ hour time slot . They requested that AIP extend the film 's runtime . Approximately five minutes of additional footage were subsequently shot by Corman 's production assistant Tamara <unk> . 
 Of the original cast members , only Luana Anders was available at the time , and the new sequence featured her character , Catherine Medina , confined to a lunatic asylum . After much screaming and hair pulling , Catherine reveals the details of her horrific story to her fellow inmates , at which point the film itself follows as a flashback . 
 = Tallahassee ( The Office ) = 
 " Tallahassee " is the fifteenth episode of the eighth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 167th episode overall . The episode aired on NBC in the United States on February 16 , 2012 . " Tallahassee " was written by co @-@ executive producer Daniel Chun and directed by series cinematographer Matt Sohn . The episode guest stars David Koechner and Wally Amos . 
 The series — presented as if it were a real documentary — depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania , branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Dwight returns to Tallahassee to meet with the president of Sabre 's special projects , Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) . Meanwhile , in Scranton , Andy fills in for reception and thoroughly enjoys himself . 
 " Tallahassee " saw the reappearance of Catherine Tate as Nellie Bertram . Tate had previously appeared in the seventh season finale , " Search Committee " . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics , with many reviewers noting that the " special projects " storyline helped to give the series a focus . The cold opening , in particular , received significant attention from critics , with many calling it the best of the show 's eighth season . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Tallahassee " drew 4 @.@ 38 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 6 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic , marking a 12 % drop in ratings from the previous episode , " Special Project " , and becoming the lowest @-@ rated episode of the series to air , beating the previous record holder , " Hot Girl . " Despite this , it was the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Dwight ( Rainn Wilson ) , Jim ( John Krasinski ) , Stanley ( Leslie David Baker ) , Cathy ( Lindsey Broad ) , Ryan ( B.J. Novak ) and Erin ( Ellie Kemper ) travel to Tallahassee as part of a team picked for Sabre 's new project . On the day of orientation , Dwight wakes everyone up at 5 o 'clock . Jim , used to waking up at four AM to take care of his children , uses the extra time to stage a murder scene in his room , in order to prank Dwight . 
 At the orientation meeting , Dwight and Jim find that Todd Packer ( David Koechner ) is still working at the company after the two of them attempted to get him fired . The president of Sabre 's special projects , Nellie Bertram ( Catherine Tate ) begins to talk about the project , which encompasses creating a store to rival Apple 's chain of stores , and Dwight and Packer start to compete to see who will become her vice president . However , Dwight begins having stomach pains , which Ryan suspects to be appendicitis . Dwight collapses during a presentation , the paramedics confirm appendicitis , and Dwight is rushed into surgery . However , three hours later , after getting his appendix removed , he returns in order to impress his new boss . After nearly butchering a slide @-@ show presentation , he finally impresses Bertram by telling the audience that the only element of marketing that matters is " desire . " Bertram subsequently invites Packer and Dwight to have breakfast with her the following day . 
 Meanwhile , Jim discovers another side of Stanley , who demonstrates uncharacteristic energy and zeal for life . Stanley explains this is because he is on vacation . 
 Meanwhile in Scranton , the office is left without a receptionist . Not wanting to get roped into being receptionist again , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) defies Andy 's ( Ed Helms ) orders to answer the phone . With the rest of the staff similarly declining to answer the phone , Andy is left with no choice but to take on the receptionist 's role himself , and performs the job with unexpected gusto . He orders new magazines for the waiting area , cooks mini @-@ pizzas as reception snacks , color @-@ coordinates the desk , and brings in a mail cart to deliver mail . Pam and Darryl ( Craig Robinson ) attempt to talk him out of his newfound enjoyment , believing it to be linked to his lingering feelings for Erin , to no success . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Tallahassee " was written by co @-@ executive producer Daniel Chun , his sixth writing credit for the series after joining the writing staff in the fifth season . It was directed by series cinematographer Matt Sohn , his fourth directing credit for the series . " Tallahassee " marked the return appearance of Catherine Tate , who previously appeared in the seventh season finale , " Search Committee " as a candidate to replace Michael as office manager . Tate was initially the top choice to join the cast as the manager , but due to a commitment to the West End production of the Shakespeare play , Much Ado About Nothing she was unable to join the series at the start of the season . Her character , Nellie is introduced as the head of a special project for Sabre . She appeared in a six episode arc , during which , her character also got romantically involved with Robert . The episode also marked the return appearance of David Koechner , who portrays Todd Packer in the series . He recently made a deal with NBC to do more episodes for the series and also possibly join the cast of series developer Greg Daniels 's next series , Friday Night Dinner , an adaption of the British series of the same name . 
 The episode also marks the ninth appearance of Lindsey Broad , who portrays Cathy , Pam 's replacement during her maternity leave . She appeared in a recurring role for the season , after she initially appeared in " Pam 's Replacement " . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Sabre 's Pyramid tablet makes a reappearance , after making its debut in the episode " The Incentive " . The device serves as a parody of several tablet computers , specifically the Apple iPad . B. J. Novak described the device as " really the worst piece of technology that you 've ever seen . " " Florida Stanley " tells Jim to play Kenny Loggins on his iPod in the car , but Jim confuses his request for Loggins and Messina . After Andy buys the office new magazines , Creed is shown zealously reading Dwell . Dwight compares his team to the " enemies of Seabiscuit . " At the very end of the episode Wally " Famous " Amos makes an appearance and attempts to talk about success before he is cut off by Nellie , who demands that he serve his famous cookies . The brief exterior shot of the hospital where Dwight had his appendix removed , is the same building that was used in the opening credits of General Hospital beginning in 1975 . The Los Angeles County USC Medical Center , was also in a number of other movies and television shows over the years . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Tallahassee " originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 16 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 38 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 3 rating / 6 % share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 3 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 % of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . This marked a twelve percent drop in the ratings from the previous episode , " Special Project . " In addition , the episode was , at the time , the lowest @-@ rated episode of the series to air , beating the first season finale , " Hot Girl " , which gathered 4 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode finished third in its time slot , being beaten by Grey 's Anatomy which received a 3 @.@ 2 rating / 8 % share and the CBS drama Person of Interest which received a 2 @.@ 8 rating / 7 % share in the 18 – 49 demographic . The episode beat The CW drama series The Secret Circle . Despite this , " Tallahassee " was the highest @-@ rated NBC television episode of the night . After DVR usage was taken into account , the episode increased its viewership by 61 @.@ 1 % , being viewed by a total of 7 @.@ 053 million viewers . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Tallahassee " received largely positive reviews from critics , with many noting that the Florida story @-@ line gave the series a focus . TV Equals noted that the episode was " one of the best episodes of The Office this the season and [ possibly ] one of the better episodes from the last couple of seasons . " Brian Marder from Hollywood.com wrote a largely positive review , noting that " Overall , tonight represented a significant step back in the right direction -- and hope that maybe the series still has hope . [ ... ] More promisingly , the humor was top @-@ notch , funnily similar to the effortless comedy of early seasons and refreshingly dissimilar to the forced , uncharacteristic stuff that has pervaded season 8 . " Bret Davinger from the California Literary Review noted that " A couple of weeks ago , I complained about The Office spending too much time away from the office . How was I to know that taking a trip to Tallahassee would produce probably the best episode of the season and maybe one of the best episodes of the past couple of seasons ? " Davinger went on to note that the change in scenery from the office set to Tallahassee was working for the series . In addition , he noted that episode did not feature any hints of Erin 's desire to stay in Florida or Cathy 's attempt to seduce Jim , a move he hoped would be permanent . Jeffrey Hyatt from Screencrave awarded the episode an 8 out of 10 and wrote that " between ' Special Project ' and ' Tallahassee ' it ’ s fair to say that The Office is on a nice little run . Everything good and funny about last week ’ s episode spilled over to ' Tallahassee ' . " TV Fanatic reviewer Dan Forcella awarded the episode four out of five stars . Despite praising the episode for coming " together as one of the best Office episodes of the season , " he criticized Dwight 's main plot , calling it " not funny . " The <unk> Lens reviewer Matt Dougherty called the episode " solid " and noted " While ' Tallahassee ' was not quite as good as last week , it still is a step in the right direction for this struggling show . " He ultimately awarded the episode a 7 out of 10 . Many reviews praised the episode 's cold opening , with many critics calling it one of the funniest openings of the eighth season . What Culture ! reviewer Jeffrey Kratzer , despite awarding the episode three out of five stars , wrote , “ ' Tallahassee ' was so enjoyable ( for the most part ) that [ the ] next few episodes look to be the excitement and focused momentum we ’ ve been waiting for all season . " Conversely , The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt gave the episode a C- rating and criticized the episode 's lack of complexity . He wrote that , " I would argue , though , that [ undeveloped characters are ] part of the show ’ s problem right now " and noted that Tate 's performance was expanded " little [ ... ] beyond her initial appearance last season . " In a review for the subsequent episode , " After Hours " , however , McNutt acknowledged that , " If I ’ m being honest with [ sic ] , last week ’ s probably should have been above a ' C- , ' but I went with my gut and have to stand by that decision . " 
 = The Conquest of Belgrade = 
 The Conquest of Belgrade is an oil painting by the romanticist Katarina Ivanović , one of Serbia 's first significant female painters . Painted in 1844 – 45 , it depicts the capture of Belgrade by Serbian revolutionaries in late 1806 , during the First Serbian Uprising . 
 Ivanović was inspired to create the painting upon reading a book titled History of the Serb People while studying at the Munich Academy . The painting was poorly received by Belgrade 's art critics . The art historian Lilien Filipovitch @-@ Robinson suggests this was due to its poor compositional and spatial conception . By the 1870s , Ivanović 's works had largely been forgotten in Serbia . The Conquest of Belgrade was one of four paintings offered by Ivanović to the Gallery of Historical Portraits in 1874 . The Gallery went on to form the nucleus of what was to become the National Museum of Serbia . The painting is currently in the possession of the National Museum . 
 = = Background = = 
 According to David A. Norris , a scholar specializing in Serbian cultural history , conditions in 19th @-@ century Serbia were unsuitable for the development of visual art . Materials were difficult to come by , studio and exhibition spaces were virtually non @-@ existent , and there were no art patrons willing to financially support painters and purchase their finished works . In the first half of the 19th century , Serbian visual artists dedicated themselves almost exclusively to decorating the walls of churches and producing icons and other religious objects . There were some painters of Serb heritage living outside Serbia , such as Uroš Knežević and Jovan Popović , who resided in the Austrian Empire . 
 Another one of these artists was the romanticist Katarina Ivanović , who was born in Székesfehérvár in either 1811 or 1817 , and was the first significant Serbian female painter . She left Székesfehérvár around 1835 and went to Budapest to study painting under the master Jozsef Pesky . She remained in Budapest for much of 1835 . Later that year she found a patron , a baroness by the name of <unk> . In late 1835 , the baroness funded Ivanović 's move to Vienna . Precisely what her training entailed is unknown , but since women were not admitted into the Academy of Fine Arts at the time , it is likely that Ivanović was classified as a " special student " and tutored privately . Some scholars have suggested that she studied under Ferdinand Georg <unk> , though this cannot be established with any degree of certainty since most documents pertaining to her time in Vienna were destroyed in subsequent wars . 
 = = Description and history = = 
 An oil on canvas , The Conquest of Belgrade measures 157 by 188 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 61 @.@ 8 by 74 @.@ 2 in ) . It depicts the city 's capture by Serbian revolutionaries in late 1806 , during the First Serbian Uprising . This proved to be one of the defining battles of the insurrection . 
 Ivanović had left Vienna in 1840 and gone to study at the Munich Academy , possibly owing to <unk> 's further generosity . Subsequent statements suggest that Ivanović was inspired to paint The Conquest of Belgrade around this time . Writing in 1873 , she recalled how the painting came about : 
 While studying at the Munich Academy , I started to read History of the Serb People . I wanted to paint the brave battle of Mirko on my canvas . With seven of his comrades he succeeded in entering the city at night while the Muslims were celebrating <unk> ( Eid al @-@ Fitr ) and didn 't even think about any danger . Mirko and his comrades killed the guards at the town gate . Their rifle shots were the signal for the others . 
 Ivanović soon travelled to Belgrade , visited the <unk> , conversed with some of the participants in Belgrade 's capture , and examined period clothing and weaponry used in the battle . She created the composition in 1844 – 45 ; it was painted in Belgrade . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Conquest of Belgrade is the only known historical composition from the time period that art historian Ljubica D. Popovich describes as the second phase of Ivanović 's career , which lasted from 1842 to 1847 . The painting was not well received by Belgrade critics . " It was compositionally and spatially poorly conceived , " writes Popovich , " but <unk> quite exciting , in cinnabar , <unk> and ocher tones " . Art historian Žarko <unk> states that the painting is typical of this phase in Ivanović 's career , which saw a substantial decline in the quality of her scene paintings . Dissatisfaction with the way her works were received in the Serbian capital prompted Ivanović to leave Serbia . 
 Lilien Filipovitch @-@ Robinson , another historian , compares the work 's Romantic presentation to Théodore Géricault 's depiction of contemporary shipwreck survivors in The Raft of the Medusa ( 1818 – 19 ) inasmuch as neither is a reliable documentary piece . This , she asserts , is typical of contemporary Serbian painters who did not have a long Romantic tradition and therefore borrowed elements from other artists , especially those from France . Filipovitch @-@ Robinson further describes the painting as " highly theatrical , emotional and stridently Romantic " . " In its complexity , deliberate confusion , slashing diagonals , tenebrism and intense colouration , " she writes , " it most resembles the paintings of her French Romantic predecessors Géricault and Antoine @-@ Jean Gros , as well as the more contemporary Eugène Delacroix . " 
 Ivanović painted very little in her final years , and is said to have been largely forgotten in Serbia by the 1870s . In June 1876 , she became an honorary member of the Serbian Learned Society , which was later to become the Serbian Royal Academy and eventually the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts . She died in Székesfehérvár in September 1882 . 
 = = Provenance = = 
 In 1874 , Ivanović offered four of her paintings to the Gallery of Historical Portraits , the nucleus of what was later to become the National Museum of Serbia . One of these paintings was The Conquest of Belgrade . The work remains in the possession of the National Museum , and is classified under inventory number 413 . 
 = = = Endnotes = = = 
 = My Only Wish ( This Year ) = 
 " My Only Wish ( This Year ) " is a teen pop Christmas song performed by American recording artist Britney Spears . It was written by Brian Kierulf , Josh Schwartz and Spears . It was released originally in the Christmas compilation album Platinum Christmas . In it Spears asks Santa Claus to find her a lover during the holidays . The track received mixed reviews from music critics , however close to decade after release , reviewers felt the song could be considered a holiday classic . " My Only Wish ( This Year ) " has charted in various countries , mainly on Billboard 's Holiday Songs in 2011 and 2012 . The song also received success in South Korea , selling over 600 @,@ 000 units . On October 22 , 2013 , an audio @-@ only video of the song was uploaded on Britney Spears ' Vevo account . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 On October 13 , 2000 , American publishing and media company Forbes reported that Spears had plans to record a song called " My Only Wish ( This Year ) " for a Christmas album titled Platinum Christmas . The song was included in the album , which was released on November 14 , 2000 . " My Only Wish ( This Year ) " was written by Brian Kierulf , Josh Schwartz and Spears and produced by Kierulf . It is a teen pop song in the key of C major over a vocal range spanning from G4 to A5 . It runs in a fast shuffle rhythm , a rhythm pattern used mainly in jazz @-@ influenced music . In the song , Spears laments her loneliness during the holidays and asks Santa Claus to bring her a lover , in lines such as " He 's all I want , just for me / Underneath my Christmas tree " . Since its release , the song has been included in more than eight Christmas music compilations , including Now That 's What I Call Christmas ! ( 2001 ) , Super Christmas Hits ( 2006 ) and Christmas Top 100 ( 2009 ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Michael Roberts of the Dallas Observer described the song as " an unobjectionable but generic retro bounce @-@ fest " . Lori Reese of Entertainment Weekly called it " festive " . In her review of Now That 's What I Call Christmas ! , Melissa Ruggieri of the Richmond Times @-@ Dispatch commented , " Thankfully , only a small portion of disc two is devoted to tween magnets including Britney Spears ( ' My Only Wish [ This Year ] ' ) and ' N Sync ( ' You Don 't Have to Be Alone [ On Christmas ] ' ) " . Gabrielle Rice of Yahoo ! called it one of Spears 's best and most remembered songs , saying , however , that it only " made the Top 10 list because the lyrics [ and ] fast shuffle rhythm ... are just plain cute " . A reviewer for Yahoo ! Shopping thought that Spears " turns in the most sexually charged performance of a seasonal song since Eartha Kitt 's ' Santa Baby ' " . In his review of classic Christmas songs , Sydney Morning Herald writer Richard Jinman said that this track and Mariah Carey 's 1994 single " All I Want for Christmas Is You " were " ho @-@ ho @-@ horrible singles " , and Adam Graham of The Detroit News also commented that the " sleigh bells and holiday cheer abound on this bouncy teen @-@ pop ditty ... follows in the tradition " of Carey 's single . 
 Sam Lansky of PopCrush included the song on his list of Top 10 Original Christmas Pop Songs , writing , " another millennial teen pop jam , Britney Spears ' ' My Only Wish ( This Year ) ' follows the time @-@ honored tradition of asking Santa Claus for love " , and finding it " a sweet throwback to the simpler days of [ Britney ] " . Allmusic editor Stephen Thomas Erlewine considered the song a " pop holiday classic . " Steve Leggett noted the song as " a nice and bright backdrop for that Christmas party or dinner " . MTV blogger Tamar Anitai praised it as " the absolute holy grail of 1990s pop Christmas songs " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " My Only Wish ( This Year ) " appeared in the Danish Singles Chart on December 26 , 2008 , as a result of digital downloads , debuting and peaking at number 34 before dropping off the chart in the following week . In the following year it came back at number 37 . It charted in Slovakia , on December 28 , 2009 , at number 54 . It made its first appearance on Billboard Holiday / Seasonal Digital Songs on November 27 , 2010 , peaking at number 49 as a result of digital downloads . On December 3 , 2010 , Nielsen SoundScan reported that there had so far been 162 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads of the song in the United States . On December 8 , 2011 , " My Only Wish ( This Year ) " debuted at number 170 on South Korea 's International Download Gaon Chart , following digital sales of 3 @,@ 671 copies . On December 17 , 2011 it sold other 13 @,@ 670 <unk> December 24 , 2011 , it peaked at number 1 , selling a total of 690 @,@ 545 digital units . On the International Comprehensive Tracks component chart , it peaked at number 34 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Brian Kierulf , Josh Schwartz , Britney Spears 
 Production – Brian Kierulf 
 Backing vocals , lead vocals – Britney Spears 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque = 
 Philippe François Marie Leclerc de Hauteclocque ( French pronunciation : ​ [ filip <unk> də <unk> ] ; 22 November 1902 – 28 November 1947 ) was a French general during the Second World War . He became Marshal of France posthumously in 1952 , and is known in France simply as le maréchal Leclerc or just Leclerc . 
 The son of an aristocratic family , de Hauteclocque graduated from the École spéciale militaire de Saint @-@ Cyr , the French military academy , in 1924 . After service with the French Occupation of the Ruhr and in Morocco , he returned to Saint @-@ Cyr as an instructor . He was awarded the croix de guerre des théâtres d 'opérations extérieures for leading goumiers in an attack on caves and ravines on Bou <unk> on 11 August 1933 . During the Second World War he fought in the Battle of France . He then became one of the first to make his way to Britain to fight with the Free French under General Charles de Gaulle , adopting the nom de guerre of Leclerc so that his wife and children would not be put at risk if his name appeared in the papers . He was sent to French Equatorial Africa , where he rallied local leaders to the Free French cause , and led a force against Gabon , whose leaders supported Vichy France . From Chad he led raids into Italian @-@ controlled Libya . After his forces captured Kufra , he had his men swear an oath known today as the Serment de Koufra , in which they pledged to fight on until their flag flew over the Strasbourg Cathedral . 
 The forces under his command , known as L Force , campaigned in Libya in 1943 , covered the Eighth Army 's inland flank during its advance into Tunisia , and participated in the attack on the Mareth Line . L Force was then transformed into the 2e Division Blindée , although it was often referred to as La Division Leclerc . It fought under Leclerc 's command in the Battle of Normandy , and participated in the liberation of Paris and Strasbourg . After the end of World War II in Europe in May 1945 , he was given command of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps ( Corps expéditionnaire français en Extrême @-@ Orient , CEFEO ) . He represented France at the surrender of the Japanese Empire in Tokyo Bay on 2 September 1945 . He quickly perceived the necessity for a political solution to the nascent conflict in Indochina , but once again was ahead of his countrymen , and was recalled to France in 1946 . He was killed in an air crash in Algeria in 1947 . 
 = = Ancestry and family = = 
 Philippe François Marie de Hauteclocque was born on 22 November 1902 at <unk> @-@ Saint @-@ Léonard in the department of Somme . He was the fifth of six children of Adrien de Hauteclocque , comte de Hauteclocque ( 1864 – 1945 ) , and Marie @-@ Thérèse van der <unk> de <unk> ( 1870 – 1956 ) . Philippe was named in honour of an ancestor killed by Croats in 1635 . 
 De Hauteclocque came from an old line of country nobility . His direct ancestors had served in the Fifth Crusade against Egypt , and again in the Eighth Crusade of Saint Louis against Tunisia in 1270 . They had also fought at the Battle of Saint @-@ Omer in 1340 and the Battle of Fontenoy in 1745 . The family managed to survive the French Revolution . Three members of the family served in Napoleon 's Grande Armée and a fourth , who suffered from weak health , served in the supply train . The third son , Constantin , who had served in Napoleon 's Russian Campaign , was created a chevalier by King Louis XVIII , and a Papal count by Pope Pius IX in 1857 . Constantin had two sons . The older , Alfred Francois Marie ( 1822 – 1902 ) , died childless . The younger , Gustave Francois Marie Joseph ( 1829 – 1914 ) , became a noted Egyptologist . 
 Gustave , in turn , had three sons . The first , Henry ( 1862 – 1914 ) , and third , <unk> ( 1866 – 1914 ) , became officers in the French Army , serving during the colonial campaigns , including fighting <unk> in the Sudan . Both were killed in the early fighting of the First World War . The second son was Adrien , who enlisted in August 1914 as a trooper in the 11e Régiment de Chasseurs à Cheval , the regiment in which his son Guy was a cornet . Adrien was later commissioned , and was twice awarded the Croix de Guerre for gallantry . He survived the war , and inherited the family title and estate in <unk> @-@ Saint @-@ Léonard . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Philippe de Hauteclocque was homeschooled until he was 13 , when he was sent to L <unk> de la Providence , a Jesuit school in Amiens . In 1920 , at the age of 17 , he went to Lycée <unk> Sainte @-@ Geneviève , known as Ginette , a preparatory school in Versailles . He then entered the École spéciale militaire de Saint @-@ Cyr , the French military academy . Each class has a name ; his was Metz et Strasbourg after towns in Alsace and Lorraine returned to France by the Treaty of Versailles . He graduated on 1 October 1924 , and was commissioned as a sous lieutenant in the French Army . Having chosen the cavalry branch , he then had to attend the Cavalry School in Saumur , from which he graduated first in his class on 8 August 1925 . 
 De Hauteclocque 's older brother Guy had married Madeleine de Gargan , the daughter of the Baron de Gargan . Philippe became a frequent visitor to the Gargan household , and became enchanted by Madeleine 's youngest sister Thérèse . The two courted while he was at Saint @-@ Cyr . In the tradition of old noble families , Count Adrien asked Baron de Gargan for permission for Philippe to marry Thérèse . The wedding ceremony took place in the Church of St Joan of Arc in Rouen on 10 August 1925 . For a wedding present , Adrien gave them a chateau in Tailly . They had six children : Henri ( 1926 – 1952 ) , who was later killed in the First Indochina War ; Hubert ( 1927 – ) , who served as mayor of Tailly from 2001 to 2008 ; Charles ( 1929 – ) ; Jeanne ( 1931 – ) ; Michel ( 1933 – 2014 ) ; and <unk> ( 1936 – ) . Philippe and Thérèse hired an Austrian governess , and spoke German in front of their children to improve their command of the language . 
 Having graduated from Saumur , de Hauteclocque joined his regiment , the 5e Régiment de Cuirassiers , which was then on occupation duty in Trier as part of the French occupation of the Ruhr . Garrison duty was not to his liking , so he volunteered for service with the <unk> Régiment de Spahis Marocains , based at Taza in Morocco . He was promoted to lieutenant in October 1926 . In 1927 , he was posted as an instructor at the École militaire de Dar El Beida at Meknes , the military academy of French Morocco . Here , he met Paul de Langlade , a First World War veteran eight years his senior , who would later volunteer to serve under his command . In 1929 , he was attached to the <unk> <unk> Mixte Marocains , a Moroccan <unk> unit at M <unk> in the Atlas Mountains . He saw action in the fighting against the Ait Hammou guerrillas . In one action , two horses were shot out from under him . Afterwards , he was posted to the 1er Régiment de Chasseurs d 'Afrique , the senior cavalry regiment of the Armée d 'Afrique , based at Rabat . 
 In February 1931 , de Hauteclocque went back to Saint @-@ Cyr as an instructor , but wanted to return to active service . During the summer break in 1933 , he flew south to Africa , where he reported to Général de brigade Henri Giraud on 11 July . Giraud sent him into the field as a liaison officer with a <unk> . He was awarded the croix de guerre des théâtres d 'opérations extérieures for leading goumiers in an attack on caves and ravines on Bou <unk> on 11 August . The Commander in Chief in Morocco , Général de division Antoine Huré , felt that de Hauteclocque should not have been there , and held the award up for three years . Others felt differently , and de Hauteclocque was given early admission to the course for promotion to capitaine . He placed fourth in the class , and was promoted on 25 December 1934 . Promotion was slow in the inter @-@ war French Army , especially in the cavalry , and he was only the second in his Saint @-@ Cyr class to reach that rank . Most had to wait until 1936 . He was also made a Chevalier de la Légion d 'Honneur . 
 Although they were devout Catholics , de Hauteclocque and Thérèse subscribed to Action Française , the journal of a far @-@ right political organisation of the same name , despite a papal interdict against it , and continued to do so even after Thérèse was refused absolution . In contrast , his cousin Xavier de Hauteclocque was an award @-@ winning journalist who covered the rise of the Nazi Party in Germany , visited the concentration camp at Dachau , and wrote about the Night of Long Knives . Xavier died in April 1935 , convinced that he had been poisoned by the Nazis . After the Second World War , de Hauteclocque destroyed his copies of Action Française . 
 De Hauteclocque broke his leg in two places in a fall from his horse in 1936 . He told his company that it was his own fault for riding on the shoulder of the road . Thereafter he frequently walked with a cane . After another mishap involving losing his way during a tactical exercise and getting stuck in a field cordoned off with barbed wire , he told them that when you have done something really stupid , it is best to admit it . 
 In November 1938 , de Hauteclocque entered the École supérieure de guerre , the French Army 's staff college , as part of its 60th class . On graduating in July 1939 , he was ordered to report to the 4e Division d 'Infanterie ( 4e DI ) as its chief of staff . 
 = = Fall of France = = 
 On 10 May 1940 , Germany invaded Luxembourg , the Netherlands , and Belgium . The 4e DI was ordered to hold the line of the Sambre river . De Hauteclocque was placed in charge of three infantry battalions . To his dismay , orders came to pull back to the Canal de l 'Escaut . From there the 4e DI retreated northward , becoming encircled in the Lille pocket on 28 May . De Hauteclocque received permission to escape through German lines . He attempted to make his way back to the French lines by pretending to be a civilian refugee , but was apprehended by a German patrol and taken prisoner when they discovered an old military pay receipt . He was taken back to a German command post , where he secretly destroyed the receipt . He convinced a German colonel that he had been wounded in Morocco , suffered from malaria , and had six children , all of which was true , and he was thus exempted from military service , which was false . The Germans let him go . He then made his way to the Crozat Canal , swam across , and encountered a French patrol . 
 De Hauteclocque reported to the headquarters of Général d 'armée Aubert Frère , the commander of the Seventh Army , who gave him permission to visit his home at Tailly , which was still behind French lines . When he got there , however , he found that Thérèse had fled to Sainte @-@ Foy @-@ la @-@ Grande in the southwest of France , where she had relatives . On returning to the Seventh Army , he was ordered to join the <unk> groupement <unk> , a scratch force of armoured and mechanised units that included Brigadier General Stanisław Maczek 's Polish 10th Armoured Cavalry Brigade . The groupement launched a series of counter @-@ attacks . Lacking a radio , de Hauteclocque gave directions to the Char B1 tanks with his cane . On 15 June , he was wounded in the head during a German air attack , and was taken to a hospital in a convent in <unk> . There he was again taken prisoner when the area was overrun by the Germans . 
 This time , de Hauteclocque escaped by jumping out a window . After the armistice was signed on 22 June , French soldiers who had not been captured were simply allowed to go home , and the Germans were friendly towards de Hauteclocque , especially when they discovered that he spoke fluent German . He made his way to rejoin his family by car and bicycle . So that he could cross from the zone <unk> into the zone libre where Thérèse and the children were , his sister Yvonne obtained an identity card for him in the name of " Leclerc " . It was his first use of this name . He also told Yvonne that he intended to join Général de brigade Charles de Gaulle in Britain . He was reunited with his family in Saint @-@ Germain @-@ les @-@ <unk> on 30 June but stayed with them for only four days before setting out for Spain . He managed to obtain a visa on the second attempt , being refused the first time for carrying too much money with him . Once in Spain he took a train to Madrid , and then to Lisbon , where he went to the British embassy , which arranged his passage to Britain on a merchant ship , the SS Hillary . 
 = = Africa = = 
 De Hauteclocque arrived in London on 25 July 1940 , and met with de Gaulle , who announced that he was promoting him to Chef d <unk> ( major ) . He also encountered his cousin Pierre de Hauteclocque , Xavier 's brother , who was serving with the <unk> Demi @-@ Brigade de Légion Étrangère . This was the largest unit that had joined the Free French Forces . After participating in the Battles of Narvik , it had found itself in Britain when France surrendered . Formed after the war began , it contained many men who had fought for the Republican cause in the Spanish Civil War , and many refugees from Nazi and Fascist countries . De Hauteclocque then offered his own services to the unit , but its commander , Colonel Raoul <unk> @-@ <unk> , rejected his offer on the grounds that he was high @-@ born , over @-@ qualified and a cavalryman . 
 Instead , in August 1940 , de Gaulle ordered de Hauteclocque to French Equatorial Africa , where the local leaders had declared themselves for Free France , as the governor of French Cameroon . At this time he adopted Leclerc as his nom de guerre , so that Thérèse and their children would not be put at risk if his name appeared in the papers . He quickly secured the Free French grip on Cameroon . He then led a force consisting of the <unk> <unk> and Senegalese Tirailleurs against Gabon , whose local leader supported Vichy France . The Battle of Gabon lasted from 12 October to 12 November 1940 , and ended with 20 dead and Gabon in Free French hands . Vichy prisoners were held as hostages in case Vichy France tried to retaliate against the families of Free Frenchmen . When Louis @-@ Michel @-@ François Tardy , the Bishop of Libreville , refused to conduct a mass to celebrate the victory , Leclerc had him arrested . Capitaine de corvette Georges Thierry d 'Argenlieu conducted the service in his capacity as a Carmelite priest . 
 With Gabon in hand , de Gaulle sent Leclerc to Chad , the only Free French territory that shared a border with territory controlled by Axis Powers , along its Sahara Desert border with Italian @-@ controlled Libya . Leclerc 's attention was drawn to two Italian outposts in the desert , Murzuk in southwestern Libya and Kufra in the southeast . Both were over 1 @,@ 000 miles ( 1 @,@ 600 km ) from his base at Fort Lamy in Chad . He started with a small raid on Murzuk by eleven men of the Régiment de Tirailleurs <unk> du Tchad ( <unk> ) and two troops of the British Long Range Desert Group ( LRDG ) on 11 January 1941 . In February , he led a much larger operation that captured Kufra . After the battle , he had his men swear an oath known today as the Serment de Koufra ( " Oath of Kufra " ) : 
 You shall not lay down arms , until the day when our colours , our beautiful colours , flutter over the Strasbourg Cathedral . 
 Leclerc learnt a great deal about how to handle and supply a force advancing across the desert , and was rewarded with the British Distinguished Service Order . He began planning a far more ambitious advance into Libya . This was delayed by a year due to Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel 's defeat of the British Eighth Army in the Battle of Gazala , and the subsequent German and Italian advance into Egypt . Leclerc was promoted to Général de brigade in August 1941 , and pinned two metal stars captured from the Italians on his kepi . 
 De Gaulle ordered the plan for an advance into Libya to be put in motion in the wake of the Eighth Army 's victory in the Second Battle of El Alamein . Leclerc set out from Fort Lamy on 16 December 1942 with 500 European and 2 @,@ 700 African troops in 350 vehicles . He captured <unk> on 12 January 1943 , and <unk> on 22 January . He reached Tripoli on 26 January , where he was greeted by the Eighth Army 's commander , General Bernard Montgomery . Leclerc 's command , now reinforced by the Greek Sacred Squadron , and known as L Force , covered the Eighth Army 's inland flank during its advance into Tunisia . L Force beat off a German counterattack on 10 March , and participated in the attack on the Mareth Line . 
 = = Western Europe = = 
 After the fighting in North Africa ended , Leclerc 's L Force , now about 4 @,@ 000 strong , became the 2e Division Française Libre ( 2e DFL ) . In June 1943 , de Gaulle informed him the 2e DFL would be re @-@ equipped by the Americans as an armoured division , the 2e Division Blindée ( 2e DB ) . It was often called La Division Leclerc . Although organised along American lines , its units had French titles . The non @-@ white units were transferred out . The remainder of 2e DFL became the Regiment de Marche du Tchad ( RMT ) , 2e DB 's motorised infantry regiment . Free French armoured units serving with the Eighth Army became the 501e Régiment de <unk> de combat 501e RCC . The artillery and the other two armoured regiments of 2e DB , the 12e Régiment de Cuirassiers ( 12e RC ) and the 12e Régiment de Chasseurs d 'Afrique ( 12e RCA ) , were drawn from the Vichy Armée d 'Afrique . Perhaps the most unusual unit in the division was the Régiment <unk> de Fusiliers @-@ <unk> ( <unk> ) , sailors who served as a tank destroyer regiment . Leclerc had to weld the various units , some of whom had recently been fighting against the Allies , into a team . This was no easy task . When two men from the 501e RCC upset a former Vichy officer by singing a disrespectful song about Général d 'armée Henri Giraud , resulting in a fight , he told the officer concerned that respect had to be earned . 
 In April 1944 , 2e DB was shipped to Britain to participate in Operation Overlord , the Allied invasion of northern France . Leclerc and his staff travelled by air in a converted B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber . The division moved to training areas in Yorkshire , where Leclerc established his headquarters on the estate of Henry Frederick Hotham , 7th Baron Hotham , at Dalton Hall , Beverley . Training was conducted in concert with Maczek 's 1st Polish Armoured Division . 
 On 1 August 1944 , 2e DB landed at Utah Beach in Normandy as part of Major General Wade Haislip 's United States XV Corps of Lieutenant General George S. Patton , Jr . ' s United States Third Army . Both of these American generals spoke French fluently . Later that month , 2e DB participated in the Battle of the Falaise Pocket , which inflicted a major defeat on the German Army . Like most new division commanders , Leclerc also made errors , in his case by allowing 2e DB to use roads that had been earmarked for American units , thereby causing traffic jams and holding up the American advance . 
 The next assignment for 2e DB , and the one that it had been brought from Africa for , was the liberation of Paris . Allied troops initially avoided the historic city , moving around it to minimise the danger of destruction if the Germans sought to defend it . When Parisians rose against the Germans , de Gaulle and Leclerc persuaded General Dwight D. Eisenhower to help . Leclerc 's men had to fight their way into Paris , and when they got there they found German infantry and tanks still holding parts of the city . The German commander , General der Infanterie Dietrich von Choltitz , was inclined to surrender , and did so to Leclerc and Henri <unk> @-@ Tanguy of the French Forces of the Interior at the Gare Montparnasse on 25 August 1944 . Leclerc arranged for Ensign Philippe de Gaulle , who was serving in the <unk> , to be in attendance , but the elder de Gaulle was annoyed that Leclerc had allowed the communist <unk> to co @-@ sign the surrender . The next day de Gaulle held a triumphal parade , accompanied by senior military figures including Leclerc , Alphonse Juin , Pierre Koenig and Georges Thierry d 'Argenlieu . 
 Montgomery 's troops liberated Tailly , allowing Leclerc to return home to see Thérèse and the children again on 6 September 1944 . His oldest sons , Henri and Hubert , now 18 and 17 years old respectively , lied about their ages to volunteer for service with 2e DB . Henri went on to serve with the RMT , while Hubert became a Sherman tank gunner with the 12e RCA . Other relatives also served with the division , including two nephews . The fighting in Paris cost 2e DB 97 killed and 238 wounded ; nearly twice that number were lost in the fighting in surrounding areas . These were replaced by men and women who , like Leclerc 's sons , offered themselves at a recruitment office the 2e DB established near the Bois de Boulogne . 
 After Paris , 2e DB returned to XV Corps at Leclerc 's request . He won a notable victory on 12 – 16 September 1944 against the Panzer IVs and Panther tanks of the German 112th Panzer Brigade by using manoeuvre and air power to compensate for the numerical and technical inferiority of his tanks . American historian Hugh M. Cole wrote that " this fight , characterised warmly by the XV Corps commander as a ' brilliant example ' of perfect air @-@ ground co @-@ ordination , not only was an outstanding feat of arms but also dealt a crippling blow to Hitler 's plans for an armoured thrust into the Third Army flank . " 
 Patton personally pinned a Silver Star on Leclerc , and brought with him another six Silver Stars and 25 Bronze Star Medals for other members of the 2e DB . Patton then gave Leclerc his next objective : the town of Baccarat and the bridge there over the Meurthe River . The bridge was captured before the Germans could destroy it . Haislip 's XV Corps was transferred to the Seventh United States Army on 29 September , and Leclerc feared that 2e DB would be transferred to Général d 'armée Jean de Lattre de Tassigny 's French First Army . Leclerc regarded the First Army as being full of traitors who had supported Vichy France . Moreover , de Lattre had sacked Général de division Edgard de <unk> for Gaullist sentiments , and de Lattre had good reason to fear that he might meet a similar fate . 
 On 22 November , Haislip gave Leclerc permission to advance on Strasbourg . Leclerc surprised the Germans by advancing over country roads and tracks to bypass their defences . Strasbourg was reached on 25 November , and that afternoon the Tricolour flew over the Strasbourg Cathedral . The German offensive in the Ardennes in December and in Alsace in January led Eisenhower to consider abandoning Strasbourg , but strong opposition to the idea from the French caused him to back down . As a result , the 2e DB was transferred to de Lattre 's command to assist in the reduction of the Colmar Pocket . 
 Leclerc objected to the use of his troops in the attack on Royan in April 1945 . As a result , only part of 2e DB was employed . The division rejoined Seventh Army , crossing the Rhine on 25 April , and joining the pursuit into Bavaria . Leclerc visited Dachau concentration camp after its liberation by the Americans . In an incident that took place 8 May 1945 at Bad <unk> in Bavaria , he was presented with a defiant group of captured Frenchmen of the SS Charlemagne Division . He asked them why they wore a German uniform , to which one of them replied by asking why Leclerc wore an American one . Leclerc told his men to get rid of them . That was taken as a death sentence . The group of French Waffen @-@ SS men was summarily executed by the RMT without any form of military tribunal procedure , and their bodies left where they fell until an American burial team collected them . For his services leading the 2e DB , Leclerc was awarded the Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour . 
 = = South East Asia = = 
 At the end of the Second World War in Europe in May 1945 , Leclerc received command of the French Far East Expeditionary Corps ( Corps expéditionnaire français en Extrême @-@ Orient , CEFEO ) . He represented France at the surrender of the Japanese Empire in Tokyo Bay on 2 September 1945 . On 28 November 1945 , he legally changed his name to Jacques @-@ Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque , incorporating his Free French pseudonym . 
 Although he had never before served in the Far East , as CEFEO commander , Leclerc was charged with recovering French Indochina . This territory , comprising the present day states of Vietnam , Cambodia and Laos , had been conquered by the French during the late 19th and early 20th centuries . The Vichy regime had allowed the Japanese to use Indochina as a base from which to attack the Allies in Malaya , Burma and China . On 9 March 1945 , the Japanese had deposed the French colonial government , taken direct control of Indochina , defeated the French army in several engagements , and imprisoned surviving French soldiers . 
 With the end of the war , Indochina was divided in two , with the area north of the 16th parallel occupied by 150 @,@ 000 Nationalist Chinese troops , while the part to the south was occupied by 20 @,@ 000 British and Indian troops of Major General Douglas Gracey 's 20th Infantry Division . Meanwhile , the Vietnamese nationalist leader Ho Chi Minh had declared Vietnamese independence . Leclerc arrived in Saigon with a first contingent of French soldiers on 5 October 1945 . He was dependent on the British for equipment and shipping . He did not get along well with D 'Argenlieu , whom de Gaulle had appointed French High Commissioner for Indochina . 
 Leclerc heeded the advice he was given by United States General of the Army Douglas MacArthur to bring as many soldiers as possible . He broke the Vietminh blockade around Saigon , then drive through the Mekong delta and up into the highlands . This was possible because Ho feared Chinese domination far more than French colonialism , which he perceived to be in decline . Ho 's first priority was getting rid of the Chinese , and for this he needed French help . Leclerc quickly perceived the necessity for a political solution to the conflict . 
 The French government negotiator Jean Sainteny flew to Saigon to consult Leclerc , who was acting as high commissioner in the absence of d 'Argenlieu . Leclerc approved Sainteny 's proposal to negotiate with Ho because he preferred a diplomatic solution to a larger conflict , but he still dispatched a flotilla with shiploads of French soldiers to northern Vietnam ready to attack if the talks failed . At that time , Ho felt that negotiations with the French constituted his best option because the Soviet Union had not yet endorsed the Vietminh or the Vietnamese nationalist party ( VNQDD ) , and the French Communist Party chose to support French rule in Vietnam . 
 On 6 March 1946 , a tentative agreement was reached at the last minute ( with Leclerc 's fleet already in the Gulf of Tonkin ) between Sainteny and Ho . The agreement stated that France would recognise Vietnam as a free state within the French Union , a new name for the French empire broadly similar to the British Commonwealth , and that Ho would allow France to base 25 @,@ 000 soldiers in Vietnam for five years . The Ho @-@ Sainteny agreement was never confirmed because it disappointed people on both sides . Ho 's immense prestige largely silenced Vietnamese dissent , but the agreement caused a serious split within the French side . French businessmen , planters , and officials in Saigon were " indignant at the prospect of losing their colonial privileges . " 
 D 'Argenlieu bluntly denounced Leclerc . " I am amazed – yes , that is the word , amazed " , he said , " that France 's fine expeditionary corps in Indochina is commanded by officers who would rather negotiate than fight " . D 'Argenlieu stated that a higher level meeting in Paris would be required . He then unilaterally declared a French @-@ owned Autonomous Republic of Cochinchina without asking either Paris or the Vietnamese . In 1946 , Leclerc was replaced as commander of the French forces by Jean @-@ Étienne <unk> . At the time many French and American politicians were willing to believe that Ho was part of a Soviet plan to dominate the world , but Leclerc warned that " anti @-@ communism will be a useless tool unless the problem of nationalism is resolved . " His advice was simple : " Negotiate at all costs ! " 
 Leclerc was appointed Inspector of Land Forces in North Africa . On 28 November 1947 , his aircraft Tailly II , carrying Leclerc and his staff , crashed near Colomb @-@ Béchar in French Algeria , killing everyone on board . His body was returned to France , where it was taken to Paris along the route that 2e DB had followed in August 1944 . A funeral service was held at Notre Dame de Paris , and he was interred in a crypt at Les Invalides . 
 = = Posthumous honours = = 
 Leclerc was posthumously created a Marshal of France on 23 August 1952 , the anniversary of the day that 2e DB had entered Paris . Today his marshal 's baton is displayed in the Leclerc room of the Musée de l 'Armée at Invalides , as is his battered <unk> with the Italian stars that he wore at Kufra . 
 The Leclerc main battle tank built by GIAT Industries ( Groupement <unk> des <unk> Terrestres ) of France is named after him . There is a monument to Leclerc in the Petit @-@ <unk> quarter of the 14th arrondissement in Paris , between Avenue de la Porte d 'Orléans and Rue de la Légion Étrangère , and near the Square du Serment @-@ de @-@ Koufra . Two streets in Paris are named for him : Avenue du Général Leclerc in the 14th arrondissement and Rue du Maréchal Leclerc in the 12th arrondissement , between the Bois de Vincennes and the Marne River . 
 = = Promotions = = 
 Sous @-@ lieutenant ( 9 September 1924 ) 
 Lieutenant ( 26 October 1926 ) 
 Capitaine ( 25 December 1934 ) 
 Chef d <unk> ( 31 July 1940 ) 
 Colonel ( 27 August 1940 ) 
 Général de brigade ( temporary ) ( 10 August 1941 ) 
 Général de brigade ( substantive ) ( 14 April 1942 ) 
 Général de division ( 25 May 1943 ) 
 Général de corps d 'armée ( 25 May 1945 ) 
 Général d 'armée ( 14 July 1946 ) 
 Maréchal de France ( 23 August 1952 ) ( posthumous ) 
 = = Decorations = = 
 Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour 
 Companion of the Order of Liberation 
 Médaille Militaire 
 Croix de Guerre 1939 – 1945 with eight palms 
 Croix de guerre des théâtres d 'opérations extérieures with two palms 
 Resistance Medal with rosette 
 Escapees ' Medal 
 Colonial Medal with bars " Maroc " , " Fezzan " , " Koufra " , " <unk> " , " <unk> " , " Extrême @-@ Orient " 
 Insignia for the Military Wounded 
 Commemorative medal for voluntary service in Free France 
 Commemorative war medal 1939 – 1945 
 Companion of the Order of the Bath ( UK ) 
 Distinguished Service Order ( UK ) 
 Silver Star ( USA ) 
 Bronze Star Medal ( USA ) 
 Commander of the Legion of Merit ( USA ) 
 Presidential Unit Citation ( USA ) 
 Grand Officer of the Order of the Crown with palm ( Belgium ) 
 Croix de guerre ( Belgium ) 
 Croix de guerre ( Luxembourg ) 
 Grand Cross Order of the Oak Crown ( Luxembourg ) 
 Commander 's Cross of Virtuti Militari ( Poland ) 
 Czechoslovak War Cross 1939 – 1945 ( Czechoslovakia ) 
 Military Order of the White Lion ( Czechoslovakia ) 
 War Cross ( 1st Class ) ( Greece ) 
 Grand @-@ officer of the Order of Glory ( Tunisia ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Ouissam Alaouite ( Morocco ) 
 Grand Cross of the Royal Order of Cambodia ( Cambodia ) 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Million Elephants and the White Parasol ( Laos ) 
 = Black Widows of Liverpool = 
 Catherine Flannagan ( 1829 – 3 March 1884 ) and Margaret Higgins ( 1843 – 3 March 1884 ) were Irish sisters who were convicted of poisoning and murdering one person in Liverpool , Lancashire , England and suspected of more deaths . The women collected a burial society payout , a type of life insurance , on each death , and it was eventually found that they had been committing murders using arsenic to obtain the insurance money . Though Catherine Flannagan evaded police for a time , both sisters were eventually caught and convicted of one of the murders ; they were both hanged on the same day at Kirkdale Prison . Modern investigation of the crime has raised the possibility that Flannagan and Higgins were known or believed by investigators to be only part of a larger conspiracy of murder @-@ for @-@ profit — a network of " black widows " — but no convictions were ever obtained for any of the alleged conspiracy members other than the two sisters . 
 = = Deaths = = 
 In the early 1880s , unmarried sisters Catherine and Margaret Flannagan ran a rooming house at 5 <unk> Street , Liverpool . The household in the final months of 1880 consisted of the two sisters , Catherine 's son John , and two lodger families – hod carrier Thomas Higgins and his daughter Mary , and Patrick Jennings and his daughter Margaret . John Flannagan , 22 and previously healthy , died suddenly in December 1880 . His death did not raise any particular comment ; Catherine collected £ 71 ( worth roughly £ <unk> in 2012 pounds ) from the burial society with which he had been registered and he was interred shortly thereafter . 
 By 1882 , a romance had sprung up between Margaret and lodger Thomas Higgins . The pair married in October of that year . Thomas 's daughter Mary , 8 , died within months of the wedding after a short illness . Once again , the burial society payout was collected upon death , this time by Margaret Higgins . 
 In January 1883 , Margaret Jennings , 19 , died . Her burial payout was collected by Catherine . 
 In the face of neighbourhood gossip about the death rate in the home , Catherine , Margaret , and Thomas moved their household to 105 Latimer Street and then again to 27 Ascot street . In September 1883 , Thomas Higgins , then 45 , became yet another member of the household to fall mysteriously ill . His stomach pains were severe enough that Doctor Whitford was called ; the doctor attributed Higgins 's illness to dysentery related to drinking cheap whiskey and prescribed opium and castor oil . Higgins died after two days of illness . Days later , the same doctor was contacted and asked to provide a death certificate . He did so , attributing the death to dysentery . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 Though Thomas Higgins 's death by apparent dysentery raised no questions for the attending doctor , Higgins 's brother Patrick was surprised to hear that his brother , who had been strong and in good general health , could have succumbed so easily to illness . When he also discovered that his brother has been insured with five different burial societies , which left his widow with a profit of around £ 100 , he pursued the matter with the authorities . A postmortem examination was ordered on Higgins 's body . To the surprise of mourners , the coroner arrived at the home to perform the examination during the wake being held there for Higgins . Catherine Flannagan , upon hearing that a full autopsy was to be performed , fled the home . 
 When a full autopsy of Higgins 's body was carried out , evidence of arsenic poisoning was found : Higgins 's organs showed traces of arsenic , in quantities indicating the poisoning had taken place over several days . Evidence from the home , including " a bottle containing a mystery white substance and a market pocket worn by [ Margaret ] " was examined by poison expert Dr Campbell Brown , who verified the presence of arsenic – dust in Margaret 's pocket , and an arsenic solution ( containing unusual adulterants ) in the bottle . 
 Margaret Higgins was arrested immediately ; Catherine , after moving from one boarding house to another to avoid police for nearly a week , was taken into custody in Wavertree . On 16 October 1883 , the sisters were formally charged with the murder of Thomas Higgins . 
 Orders for the bodies of the previously @-@ deceased members of the household to be exhumed were issued when it became clear that arsenic was the mechanism of Thomas Higgins 's death . The bodies of John Flannagan , Mary Higgins , and Margaret Jennings all showed evidence of minimal deterioration – a quality associated with arsenic poisoning – and traces of arsenic were found in the remains of all three . 
 Investigators initially assumed that the arsenic used to poison the victims had come from rat poison , but when common adulterants used in rat poison failed to show up in autopsies , they were forced to come up with a new theory . It was unlikely that the illiterate sisters would have been able to acquire arsenic through the usual method of visiting a chemist , a route more open to doctors than spinsters . Eventually it was discovered that common flypaper at the time contained arsenic , and that by soaking the flypaper in water , a solution substantially identical – including the same adulterants – to that found in a bottle at the Higgins residence could be obtained . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 At the time of her arrest , Catherine claimed to her solicitor that the murders the sisters committed were not isolated , and provided a list of six or seven other deaths that she claimed to be murders related to burial society fraud , as well as a list of five other women who had either perpetrated those murders or provided insurance to those who did . 
 = = = Alleged conspiracy = = = 
 Catherine Flannagan 's list of alleged conspirators to the arsenic deaths contained three poisoners other than herself , one accomplice , and three agents of the insuring groups who had provided payouts upon the deaths . Margaret Evans , Bridget Begley , and Margaret Higgins were named as the poisoners ; Margaret Potter , a Mrs Fallon , and a Bridget Stanton were the insurers ; and Catherine Ryan was alleged to have obtained the arsenic needed by one of the poisoners . According to Flannagan , Margaret Evans had been the instigator of the crime ring , beginning with the murder of a mentally @-@ handicapped teenager in which Ryan obtained the poison and Evans administered it . Though Evans did not personally receive an insurance payout from this death , there were implications that she had dealings with the boy 's father and may have profited from those . The women Flannagan alleged to have been involved in the conspiracy all appear often in accounts of suspicious deaths in this period ; Mrs Stanton , for example , was linked to the insurance policies of three of the deaths , and groups of two or more of the involved women were seen visiting those who died shortly before their deaths . In one case , when an insurance company supervisor requested to meet Thomas Higgins in the course of issuing the insurance on him , he was greeted at the Higgins home by a woman who was neither Flannagan nor Higgins , who presented to him a " Thomas " who he later realised , upon seeing the deceased Thomas Higgins , was not Thomas Higgins at all . 
 Flannagan 's testimony was sometimes contradictory to both herself and to what seemed to be obvious facts of the conspiracy , however ; in one case , despite Mrs Stanton 's close links to the insurance payouts of murder victims and Flannagan 's identification of her as part of the conspiracy , Flannagan " exonerated " Stanton after police arrested the woman . Ultimately it was decided by the Prosecuting Solicitor for Liverpool that while the additional deaths were , indeed , likely to be murder , it would be difficult to prove that anyone other than Higgins or Flannagan had committed them , especially considering that the primary evidence against the other women was being provided by Flannagan , who had every reason to attempt to minimise her own responsibility in such crimes . As a result , only Flannagan and Higgins were tried for the crime of murdering Thomas Higgins , despite continuing suspicion by all investigating parties that there had been more deaths than just the four household ones , and more murderers than just the two sisters . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 At the trial in 1884 , prosecutors implicated the sisters in the three other deaths in their household , as well as that of Thomas Higgins , with which they were officially charged . Catherine Flannagan 's offer to provide evidence against other conspirators for the prosecution in exchange for leniency was refused . The sisters were found guilty and sentenced to be hanged . The sentence was carried out on 3 March 1884 at Kirkdale Prison , with the sisters attended to by a Roman Catholic priest . The deaths were witnessed by a reported one thousand people . 
 = = In media = = 
 Contemporary accounts of the Flannagan sisters referred to them as " disciple [ s ] of Lucrezia Borgia " or as " the Borgias of the Slums " , in reference to their use of poison and the tales of how Borgia had been known to do the same . Modern accounts of the Flannagan sisters , such as those by Angela Brabin and the television series Deadly Women , have focused more on the cooperative aspect of the crimes rather than the poison aspect , and tend to refer to them as " black widows " or " The Black Widows of Liverpool " , particularly in reference to the allegation that the Flannagan sisters were part of a larger murder ring . Wax effigies of Flannagan and Higgins were placed in Madame Tussaud 's Chamber of Horrors after their executions . 
 = Panellus stipticus = 
 Panellus stipticus , commonly known as the bitter oyster , the astringent panus , the luminescent <unk> , or the <unk> fungus , is a species of fungus in the family Mycenaceae , and the type species of the genus Panellus . A common and widely distributed species , it is found in Asia , Australia , Europe , and North America , where it grows in groups or dense overlapping clusters on the logs , stumps , and trunks of deciduous trees , especially beech , oak , and birch . During the development of the fruit bodies , the mushrooms start out as tiny white knobs , which , over a period of one to three months , develop into fan- or kidney @-@ shaped caps that measure up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) broad . The caps are orange @-@ yellow to brownish , and attached to the decaying wood by short stubby stalks that are connected off @-@ center or on the side of the caps . The fungus was given its current scientific name in 1879 , but has been known by many names since French mycologist Jean Bulliard first described it as Agaricus stypticus in 1783 . Molecular phylogenetic analysis revealed P. stipticus to have a close genetic relationship with members of the genus Mycena . 
 Panellus stipticus is one of several dozen species of fungi that are bioluminescent . Strains from eastern North America are typically bioluminescent , but those from the Pacific coast regions of North America and from other continents are not . The luminescence is localized to the edges of the gills and the junction of the gills with the stem and cap . Bioluminescence is also observable with mycelia grown in laboratory culture , and the growth conditions for optimal light production have been studied in detail . Several chemicals have been isolated and characterized that are believed to be responsible for light production . Genetic analysis has shown that luminescence is controlled by a single dominant allele . The luminescent glow of this and other fungi inspired the term foxfire , coined by early settlers in eastern and southern North America . Modern research has probed the potential of P. stipticus as a tool in bioremediation , because of its ability to detoxify various environmental pollutants . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The species was first named Agaricus stypticus by the French botanist Jean Bulliard in 1783 , and later sanctioned by Elias Magnus Fries under this name in 1821 . Fries later changed the genus as well as the spelling of the epithet and called it Panus stipticus . The species has had an extensive taxonomic history and been shuffled to a number of genera by various authors , resulting in several synonyms : Agaricus flabelliformis ( Johann Friedrich Gmelin , 1792 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Otto Kuntze , 1898 ) , <unk> <unk> ( Karl Friedrich Wilhelm Wallroth , 1833 ) , <unk> stipticus ( Samuel Frederick Gray , 1821 ) , Pleurotus stipticus ( Paul Kummer ) , Lentinus stipticus ( Joseph Schröter , 1885 ) , and Merulius stipticus ( Jean @-@ Baptiste Lamarck ) . It was Finnish mycologist Petter Karsten who in 1879 assigned its current name . Panellus stypticus is still used in the literature as a variant spelling . 
 Panellus stipticus is the type species of the genus Panellus , and , in Rolf Singer 's authoritative 1986 classification of the Agaricales , it is also the type species of subgenus Panellus , an infrageneric ( below the taxonomic level of genus ) grouping of Panellus species characterized by the absence of cystidia on the sides of the gills . More recently , phylogenetic analyses of the sequences of their ribosomal large subunit genes have concluded that Panellus stipticus is closely related to the <unk> mushroom Dictyopanus pusillus . The molecular analysis supports a previous assessment by mycologists Harold <unk> and Orson K. Miller , who in 1975 suggested merging Dictyopanus into Panellus based on similarities in spore shape , stem structure , and the ability of dried fruit bodies to revive when moistened . Formerly grouped in the Tricholomataceae family , a wastebasket taxon of gilled mushrooms with white spores , P. stipticus is now classified in the Mycenaceae , after a large @-@ scale phylogenetic analysis revealed " a previously unsuspected relationship between Mycena and Panellus ( including Dictyopanus ) " . 
 The fungus is commonly known as the bitter oyster , the luminescent <unk> , the astringent panus , or the styptic fungus . The specific epithet stipticus refers to its purported value in stopping bleeding . Etymologically , it is a Greek equivalent to the Latin word <unk> , deriving from <unk> ( <unk> ) , itself from the verb <unk> ( <unk> ) , " to contract " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fungus normally exists unseen , in the form of a mass of threadlike vegetative cells called a mycelium , inhabiting rotting wood ; only when suitable environmental conditions of temperature , moisture , and nutrient availability are achieved does the fungus produce the reproductive structures known as fruit bodies , or mushrooms . The cap of the fruit body is <unk> or clamshell @-@ shaped , convex to roughly flat , with dimensions of 1 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 3 in ) by 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 to 1 @.@ 0 in ) . The edges of the caps are scalloped with small rounded teeth , and curved slightly inward . The cap surface is dry , with a pattern of block @-@ like areas similar to cracked dried mud ; the surface is also covered with small fine hairs that give it a somewhat woolly consistency . It may have several concentric ridges or zones . Fresh fruit bodies range in color from yellowish @-@ orange to buff to cinnamon ; when dried they may be various shades of tan , brown or clay . The faded colors of dried fruit bodies tend to revive when moistened . On the underside of the cap , the gills are narrow and spaced closely together , often forked , buff @-@ colored , and with numerous interconnecting cross @-@ veins . Holding the cap in position is a stem that is 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 2 to 0 @.@ 5 in ) long by 0 @.@ 3 to 0 @.@ 8 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 3 in ) thick , and has an off @-@ center attachment to the cap , either at or near the cap side . The dull @-@ white stem is covered with minute silk @-@ like fibers , and is narrower at the base where it attaches to the substrate . Fruit bodies do not have any distinctive odor . The flesh is thin and tough , and dark yellow @-@ brown to cream @-@ colored . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 Various microscopic characteristics may be used to help identify the fungus from other morphologically similar species . A spore print of P. stipticus , made by depositing a large number of spores in a small area , reveals their color to be white . Viewed with a microscope , the spores are smooth @-@ walled , elliptical to nearly allantoid ( sausage @-@ shaped ) , with dimensions of 3 – 6 by 2 – 3 µm . Spores are amyloid , meaning that they will absorb iodine and become bluish @-@ black when stained with Melzer 's reagent , but this staining reaction has been described as " relatively weak " . 
 The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are 15 – 20 by 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 5 µm , club @-@ shaped , and clamped at the base . The spores are attached to the end of the basidia by four projections called sterigmata that are 1 – 3 @.@ 5 µm long . Cystidia are hyphal cells in the hymenium that do not produce basidiospores ; they also make up the surfaces of the fruit body ( the <unk> or " cuticles " ) . They are usually structurally distinct from the basidia , and their features may be used as microscopic characters to help distinguish and differentiate similar fungi . The cheilocystidia are found on the gill edge ; in P. stipticus they are narrowly club @-@ shaped , cylindrical , spindle @-@ shaped to bifurcate at the apex . They are also thin @-@ walled , hyaline ( translucent ) , abundant and crowded , and measure 17 – 45 by 3 @.@ 5 – 6 µm . The pleurocystidia , located on the gill face , are 17 – 40 by 3 – 4 @.@ 5 µm , spindle- or club @-@ shaped , sometimes bifurcate at the apex , thin @-@ walled , and hyaline . They are scattered or in dense clusters , mostly embedded in hymenium , occasionally protruding up to half the width of the hymenium . 
 The flesh of the cap consists of a number of microscopically distinct layers of tissue . The cuticle of the cap ( known as the pileipellis ) is between 8 – 10 µm thick , and is made of a loose textura <unk> , a type of tissue in which the hyphae are irregularly interwoven with distinct spaces between them . The cuticle hyphae are thick @-@ walled to thin @-@ walled , with scattered inconspicuous cystidia measuring 40 – 55 by 3 @.@ 5 – 5 @.@ 5 µm . These cystidia located in the cap ( pileocystidia ) are cylindrical , thin @-@ walled , yellow in Melzer 's reagent , hyaline in KOH , sometimes with amorphous dingy brown material coating the walls . Beneath the cuticle layer is a zone 54 – 65 µm thick , made of very loosely entwined , thin @-@ walled hyphae , 2 – 3 µm in thickness , with clamps at the septa . Below this is a zone 208 – 221 µm in thickness , in which the densely compacted hyphae , 3 – 8 µm in diameter , have swollen , gelatinized walls , and often more or less a vertical orientation . This in turn is followed by a layer 520 µm in thickness , formed of loosely interwoven hyphae , 2 – 8 µm in width , some of which have thin walls with clamps at the septa , whilst others have somewhat thickened gelatinized walls . The flesh of the cap has a layer of upright hyphae bending into a lower layer of interwoven hyphae with diameters of 2 @.@ 5 – 8 µm . The flesh of the gills is similar to that of the lower cap . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Species of <unk> having a similar shape can be distinguished by their brown spore print , compared with the white spore print of P. stipticus . <unk> commune has a densely hairy white to grayish cap and longitudinally split gill @-@ folds on the underside . The ruddy panus mushroom ( Panus rudis ) is larger , has a reddish @-@ brown cap that fades to pinkish @-@ tan , and shows lilac tinges when young , fresh , and moist . Some Paxillus species may have a similar appearance , but they have yellow @-@ brown spore prints . 
 = = = Uses = = = 
 Panellus stipticus is considered too small and bitter to be edible . Its taste has been described as acidic , acrid , or astringent . One 1992 study reported that the taste of the fruit bodies varies across the geographic range of the species . Those from eastern North America have a mildly acrid taste that takes time to develop , and cause uncomfortable drying in the mouth . In contrast , specimens from Japan , New Zealand , and Russia produce no sensation in the mouth , but cause significant constriction and a nauseating taste in the throat . The fruit bodies are reputed to have been used in traditional Chinese medicine as a styptic to staunch bleeding , and also as a " violent <unk> " . 
 = = Fruit body development = = 
 Fruit bodies first appear as tiny white knobs less than a cubic millimeter in size . In a day or two the knobs grow into a horizontal pyramidal mass , increasing in height as the hyphae lengthen . This is soon followed by the formation of a minute cap , and lengthening of the stem . The stem is about 1 mm long when the cap first begins to form . The hyphae that comprise the stem gradually cease to grow at their ends , and then start to branch , with many of the branches growing in a horizontal direction . This growth , indicated by the flattening and broadening out of the top of the stem , gives rise to the cap . The horizontally aligned hyphae grow vertical branches which remain more or less parallel , ultimately forming the dorsal tissue of the cap . Other similar downward @-@ growing branches form the fertile hymenium , which can be seen when the cap is about 2 mm in diameter . 
 The young cap is spherical and its growth is at first <unk> , its margin being curved inwards and pressed against the stem . In this way , the hymenium begins its development within a special enclosed chamber . As the hymenial surface increases and keeps pace with the growth of the dorsal tissue of the cap , the latter expands and exposes the gills . The gills are formed by the continual downward growth of some of the hyphae . The gills are exposed before the cap is completely developed , and before the spores are mature . Spores can be produced by fruit bodies as small as 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) broad , and liberation of the spores continues until the fruit body is fully grown — a period of one month to three months , depending on the conditions of temperature and moisture . The mature spores are disseminated by the wind . When the fruit body is nearing maturity , some of the terminal portions of the hyphae of the dorsal surface of the cap separate , and as a consequence , the upper surface of the fruit body becomes granular in appearance . 
 The fruit body projects out horizontally from the growing surface . If the position of a log is altered after young fruit bodies with the beginnings of gills have appeared , the stems of these attempt to readjust themselves in order to place the cap in a horizontal position . The cap are sometimes zonate ( marked with concentric lines that form alternating pale and darker zones ) ; this depends on changes in the humidity of the environment , as variations in the amount of moisture will cause alternating periods of acceleration or slowing of growth . 
 A yellowish @-@ brown pigment is diffused through the cytosol of the hyphae and is much deeper in color just below the cuticle of the cap . In very young fruit bodies , stems and caps are very pale buff , but soon the color of the cap deepens and becomes cinnamon . The intensity of the color appears to be dependent on light , for when fruit bodies are grown in diffuse light ( temperature and humidity being constant ) they are a uniform pale buff color , but in bright light they are cinnamon or tan . 
 = = Distribution , habitat , and ecology = = 
 Panellus stipticus is common in northern temperate regions of Europe , and has also been collected in Australia , New Zealand , Anatolia , Japan , and China . In North America , it is more common in the east than the west ; the mushroom 's northern range extends to Alaska , and it has been collected as far south as Costa Rica . 
 Panellus stipticus is a saprobic species , and causes a white rot . This is a form of wood decay in which the wood assumes a bleached appearance and where lignin as well as cellulose and hemicellulose is broken down by enzymes secreted by the fungus . Fruit bodies are usually found in tightly overlapping clusters on the sides of hardwood trees , on logs , stumps , and fallen branches . Although most commonly found on dead wood , it can also grow opportunistically in the wounds of living trees . In North America , its preferred hosts are oak , birch , maple , hickory , pecan , and American hornbeam , while in Europe , it is commonly found growing on oak , birch , alder , beech , hazel , chestnut , and ash . It has also been found growing on <unk> in North Africa . Although the fungus favors hardwoods , it has been reported to grow on loblolly pine and eastern white pine . Fruiting occurs September through November in Europe , the Canary Islands , and North America , although it may also sometimes be found in the spring . The fruit bodies are long @-@ lasting and may be found year @-@ round . It is an " early @-@ stage " succession fungus , not typically recorded from plantations over 20 years old . 
 The fruit bodies are frequently attacked by slugs , which may be important agents in the dispersal of its spores . White @-@ tailed deer are also known to consume the fungus . 
 = = Mating studies = = 
 Panellus stipticus uses a heterothallic , <unk> mating system : each <unk> develops into a self @-@ sterile mycelium which , when grown alone , remains homokaryotic ( i.e. , with all cells genetically identical ) indefinitely . Researchers have paired collections of P. stipticus from Japan and Eastern North America , and later , collections from New Zealand and Russia . Although the separated allopatric populations differ in bioluminescence and taste , the results revealed a universal <unk> group over these geographical regions . In a 2001 study , Jin and colleagues also paired geographically representative collections of the fungus , but observed a reduced ability to cross between Northern Hemisphere and Oceanian collections , as well as between and within Oceanian collections . 
 = = Bioluminescence = = 
 Bioluminescence refers to the ability of certain living things in the environment to produce light by the action of enzymes . Bioluminescent fungi are widespread , and over 70 species are known . Although the intensity of their luminescence is generally low compared to many other bioluminescent organisms , fungi glow continuously for days , so their total emission is comparable with that of most brightly luminescent organisms , such as fireflies . Luminous fungi are found growing on decaying wood , leading to the popular name of " foxfire " or " glow wood " when their glow is visible at night . The responsible oxidative enzymes — known generically as luciferases — produce light by oxidizing a pigment called a luciferin . In some areas , P. stypticus is bioluminescent , and the fruit bodies of these strains will glow in the dark when fresh or sometimes when revived in water after drying . 
 An early record of luminescence noted in P. stypticus was made by the American naturalist Thomas G. Gentry in 1885 . Job Bicknell Ellis , reporting on the phenomenon for the Journal of Mycology , wrote : 
 By careful examination , the luminosity was found to proceed from the gills and not the stipe , nor from any fragment of rotten wood attached to the specimen . This <unk> was not observed in all specimens brought in for examination , and seemed to depend on some peculiar condition of the air , having been noticed only in specimens gathered in damp weather or just before a storm . 
 Canadian mycologist Buller in 1924 described the gills of P. stipticus in North America as luminescent , and noted that the fungus glows most strongly at the time of spore maturation . Bioluminescence has not been observed in European specimens , in Pacific North American collections , nor in strains collected from New Zealand , Russia , and Japan . Although a number of reports have confirmed that eastern North American strains are luminescent , non @-@ luminescent North American strains are also known . In general , the intensity of fungal bioluminescence decreases after exposure to certain contaminants ; this sensitivity is being investigated as a means to develop bioluminescence @-@ based biosensors to test the toxicity of polluted soils . Most known luminescent fungi are in the genus Mycena or closely allied genera ; this grouping of fungi — known as the " mycenoid lineage " — includes P. stipticus and three other Panellus species . 
 = = = Mycelia = = = 
 The mycelia of this species , grown in laboratory culture , have also been shown to be bioluminescent . Early studies demonstrated that short @-@ wave ultraviolet light ( at a wavelength of 280 nm ) reversibly inhibited the luminescence of P. stypticus mycelia , while longer wavelength ( 366 nm ) ultraviolet was stimulatory . Further , the fungus exhibited a pronounced diurnal periodicity , and maximum luminescence was noted between 6 and 9 pm , regardless as to whether the mycelial cultures were incubated in continuous light , continuous darkness , or a normal day @-@ night cycle . The mycelia of P. stipticus grown submerged in liquid were non @-@ luminescent , but became luminescent while growing on solid substrata . Dark @-@ grown colonies were luminescent in the center , and light @-@ grown colonies were brightest at the periphery . Other experiments have shown that growth temperature and pH have a significant effect on the level of bioluminescence , optimized at 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) and pH 3 – 3 @.@ 5 . However , light had a significant effect on mycelial growth but not on bioluminescence , and the optimal light conditions for maximum bioluminescence were total darkness . 
 = = = Fruit bodies = = = 
 Bioluminescent tissue in the mature fruit body is restricted to the edge of the gills ( as well as the cross @-@ veins that connect them ) , the junction of the gills with the stem , and the inrolled cap edge . Distribution of bioluminescence along the gill edge corresponds to the position of the cheilocystidia . Less than 10 % of the light emitted from both the young and mature fruit bodies is from other tissues , including the fertile hymenial area and the stem . Fruit body luminescence is highly variable between fruit bodies found on different logs in different environments . 
 = = = Genetics = = = 
 Using techniques of genetic complementation , Macrae paired <unk> <unk> with luminescent ones , and concluded that luminosity in P. stipticus is an inherited character , and governed by a single pair of alleles in which luminosity was dominant over <unk> . Luminosity factors were independent of <unk> factors . In 1992 , Lingle and colleagues agreed with Macrae about luminosity and stated that at least three different gene mutations could lead to the loss of luminescence . They also reported that the maximum bioluminescence was found at 525 nm , and shifted to 528 nm in deeply pigmented fruit bodies . 
 After intercontinental compatibility tests , Petersen and <unk> suggested that bioluminescence and compatibility were independent since bioluminescence seemed to be geographically restricted . This suggested that the ability or potential to interbreed must have been preserved since separation of P. stypticus into geographically isolated areas . 
 = = = Function = = = 
 Several authors have suggested that the purpose of fungal bioluminescence is to attract arthropods to the fruit body to help disseminate spores . However , there has been no direct observation of this phenomenon . In many species , the mycelium is luminescent , but the fruit body is not , which argues against this hypothesis . Mycelial <unk> may also function to attract animals that can potentially carry fungal spores in well @-@ hydrated areas , as light emission from the mycelium is higher when it is hydrated . This would presumably increase the chance that spores would be deposited in an environment that is already optimal for growth . Basidiomycete mushrooms are known to be dependent on an adequate moisture supply for proper development . In species with a luminous mycelium , the mycelium would therefore have a dual function in performing the fungal translocation that permits transport of substances from the further environment back to the fruiting body , and in attracting disseminating vectors towards environments favorable for development of the species . 
 = = = Chemical basis = = = 
 In general , bioluminescence is caused by the action of luciferases , enzymes that produce light by the oxidation of a luciferin ( a pigment ) . Several studies have evaluated the biochemical basis of light production in Panellus stipticus , and concluded that there is no specific fungal luciferase . The fungus was shown in 1988 to contain the sesquiterpene panal , which has a cadinene keto @-@ aldehyde chemical structure . Later , two additional precursors were isolated , PS @-@ A ( 1 @-@ O @-@ <unk> ) and PS @-@ B ( 1 @-@ O @-@ <unk> ) . If these compounds are treated with salt of ammonia or primary amines in the presence of iron ( II ) , hydrogen peroxide , and a cationic surfactant , light is emitted by a chemiluminescence reaction , suggesting that panal and its derivatives are fungal luciferins , and that the chemiluminescence reaction is the cause of in vivo bioluminescence . In the fungus , the level of activity of the enzyme superoxide dismutase ( SOD ) appears to play a critical role in the amount of light emission . SOD quenches the effect of the superoxide ( O2 − ) anion required in the reaction , and thus SOD activity has to be inhibited for the reaction to occur . 
 = = Bioremediation = = 
 As a white @-@ rot fungus , Panellus stipticus contains enzymes that are able to break down lignin , a complex aromatic polymer in wood that is highly resistant to degradation by conventional enzyme systems . The major enzyme that initiates the cleavage of hydrocarbon rings is laccase , which catalyzes the addition of a hydroxyl group to phenolic compounds ( polyphenols ) . The ring can then be opened between the two adjacent carbon atoms that bear the hydroxyl groups . White @-@ rot fungi are being investigated scientifically for their potential use in the bioremediation of land contaminated by organic pollutants , and to convert industrial wastes rich in toxic polyphenols . Panellus stipticus has been shown to reduce the phenolic concentration of waste water produced by olive @-@ processing plants — an environmental concern in many Mediterranean countries . In this study , a liquid culture of P. stipticus mycelia reduced the initial concentration of phenolic compounds by 42 % after a 31 @-@ day incubation period . In a separate study , a P. stipticus culture was able to effectively degrade the environmental pollutant 2 @,@ 7 @-@ <unk> @-@ p @-@ dioxin , a polychlorinated dioxin . 
 = Walk Away ( Christina Aguilera song ) = 
 " Walk Away " is a song by American recording artist Christina Aguilera , taken from her fourth studio album , Stripped ( 2002 ) . The song was written by Aguilera , Scott Storch and Matt Morris . Its production was handled by Storch , while Aguilera and E. <unk> served as vocal producers . The track is a piano @-@ driven ballad which talks about an abusive relationship , where Aguilera uses a " clever " metaphor . 
 Upon its release , " Walk Away " received mainly positive reviews from music critics , who praised its melody and deemed it as one of the stand @-@ out tracks from Stripped . On March 14 , 2008 , the song peaked at number 35 on the Danish Tracklisten chart , becoming the only non @-@ single entry from Stripped on the chart . Aguilera performed the track on two of her major concert tours : Justified & Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) and The Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Following the release of the self @-@ titled debut album in 1999 , Aguilera had achieved major success with four worldwide number @-@ one hits . Despite the international success , the singer was dissatisfied with the music and image that her manager , Steve Kurtz , had created for her , having been marketed as a bubblegum pop singer because of the genre 's upward financial trend . She mentioned plans for her next album to have more musical and lyrical depth . Aguilera decided not to continue the contact with Kurtz . By late 2000 , after terminating Kurtz 's services , Irving Azoff was hired as her new manager . Aguilera decided to take a more prominent role in the musical direction of her next record . She also used her new alter ego , " Xtina " , and changed her appearance . 
 Speaking about the conception of the album , Aguilera told MTV News that " it is a new beginning , a re @-@ introduction of myself as a new artist in a way , because for the first time people are really seeing and getting to know who I really am " . She also revealed , " Coming off of the height of being a part of such a big pop @-@ craze phenomenon , that imagery of that cookie @-@ cutter sweetheart , without it being me , I just had to take it all down and get it away from me . And that is why I actually named the album Stripped , because it is about being emotionally stripped down and pretty bare to open my soul and heart " . " Walk Away " was written by Aguilera , Scott Storch and Matt Morris , with production handled by Storch . 
 = = Composition and critical reception = = 
 " Walk Away " is a piano @-@ driven waltz ballad . Written in the key of G major , it is a downtempo song , with a moderate slow and bluesy tempo of 52 beats per minute . It is followed by a chord progression of Em – C7 in the verses . Aguilera 's vocal range on the song span nearly two octaves , from the low @-@ note of C3 to the high @-@ note of G5 . In the track , Aguilera uses a " sultry lower range " . Lyrically , " Walk Away " is about an abusive relationship , where she uses a " clever " metaphor . At the song 's beginning , the lyrics " What do you do , when you know something 's bad for you , and you still can 't let go ? " are spoken by Aguilera . In the first verse , she sings , " Your love was like candy / Artificially sweet , I was deceived by your wrapping " . The track was described as a non @-@ sense song by Amanda Murray for Sputnikmusic . 
 Upon its release , " Walk Away " received mainly positive reviews from contemporary music critics . Slant Magazine editor Sal Cinquemani chose " Walk Away " as one of the stand @-@ out ballads from Stripped . <unk> Dunn from Rolling Stone called it a " torchy can 't @-@ let @-@ go number " . Doug Elfman for Las Vegas Review @-@ Journal labelled it " gorgeous " , while Amanda Murray from Sputnikmusic wrote that the song " sounds sexy " , although it is " one of the only songs on the album that makes no effort to , certainly not lyrically " . In 2010 , Nick Levine from Digital Spy listed " Walk Away " as one of Aguilera 's ten best songs . He calls Aguilera 's vocals " emotive " and the song 's theme " heartfelt " , commenting that the song would have been a single . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Aguilera first performed " Walk Away " on the Justified & Stripped Tour , a concert tour which was held in summer 2003 to support Justin Timberlake 's album Justified ( 2002 ) and Aguilera 's Stripped . In late 2003 , Aguilera continued to perform the track on the former 's extension , Stripped Live ... on Tour , which happened without Timberlake 's acts . The performance in London is included on the singer 's first full @-@ length DVD Stripped Live in the U.K. ( 2004 ) . Aguilera also performed " Walk Away " on the Late Show with David Letterman on January 16 , 2004 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 On March 14 , 2008 , " Walk Away " debuted and peaked at number 35 on the Danish Tracklisten chart , becoming the only non @-@ single song from Stripped to chart on the Tracklisten . 
 = The Love Club ( song ) = 
 " The Love Club " is a song by New Zealand singer Lorde , taken from her debut extended play The Love Club EP ( 2013 ) . It was written by Lorde and Joel Little , while production was handled by Little . " The Love Club " addresses the befriending of " a bad crowd . " 
 Upon the release of the EP , the song was well received by music critics and peaked at number 17 on the New Zealand Singles Chart . Due to the chart performance in New Zealand , " The Love Club " was certified gold by Recorded Music NZ for exceeding sales of 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 = = Background and promotion = = 
 In 2012 , The Love Club EP was made freely available on SoundCloud . Later in March 2013 , the EP was released for digital sales on iTunes Stores through Universal Music Group . The EP featured songs solely written by Lorde ( credited under her birth @-@ name Ella Yelich @-@ O 'Connor ) and Joel Little and produced by Little , including " The Love Club " . To promote the EP , Lorde held a concert at Le Poisson Rouge in New York and performed the song among other tracks from The Love Club EP on 6 August 2013 , becoming her first US show . On 9 August 2013 , Lorde performed " The Love Club " and " Royals " on KCRW radio station . 
 " The Love Club " is a electropop song . It addresses the befriending of " a bad crowd . " Lorde explained the song 's lyrical meaning to New York magazine , " ' The Love Club ' is about an experience I had about a year ago where I met all these new friends and I fell in with them . It happened overnight and I couldn 't think of anything but our friends and our situation . Then I started to maybe realise that group wasn 't so good for me , and that my old friends and my family are the people I should be with . It 's about being drawn into this crazy world , and you ’ re all in love " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Upon its release , " The Love Club " received mainly positive reviews from music critics . Writing for The New Zealand Herald , Chris Schulz wrote that the song was " the start of something very special indeed . " James Christopher Monger from AllMusic and The Nelson Mail writer Nick Ward picked it as one of the EP 's standout tracks , alongside " Royals " . Todd <unk> from The Huffington Post labelled the song " a perfect pop song " . Nick Manson from mX labelled " The Love Club " a " light @-@ hearted " track . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In New Zealand , the song peaked at number three on the New Zealand Artists Singles Chart on 25 March 2013 , and at number seventeen on the New Zealand Singles Chart on 10 June 2013 . It was eventually certified Gold by Recorded Music NZ for sales of 7 @,@ 500 copies there . 
 In the United States , " The Love Club " peaked at number 18 on the Hot Rock Songs chart , published by Billboard magazine . The song was listed at number 60 on the 2013 year @-@ end Hot Rock Songs chart . Moreover , it charted at number 20 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles . " The Love Club " was included in the album Songs for the Philippines , a charity album to support the people in the Philippines who suffered from Typhoon Haiyan ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = Duesenberg Model A = 
 The Duesenberg Model A was the first automobile in series production to have hydraulic brakes and the first automobile in series production in the United States with a straight @-@ eight engine . Officially known as the Duesenberg Straight Eight , the Model A was first shown in late 1920 in New York City . Production was delayed by substantial changes to the design of the car , including a change in the engine <unk> from horizontal overhead valves to an overhead camshaft ; also during this time , the company had moved its headquarters and factory from New Jersey to Indiana . The Model A was manufactured in Indianapolis , Indiana , from 1921 to 1925 by the Duesenberg Automobiles and Motors Company and from 1925 to 1926 at the same factory by the restructured Duesenberg Motor Company . The successors to the company began referring to the car as the Model A when the Model J was introduced . 
 = = Background = = 
 Fred and August Duesenberg built aircraft and marine engines during World War I and used this expertise to design and build racing engines and to design a car . The Duesenberg Automobiles and Motors Company was incorporated in Delaware and founded to manufacture and market the production car while Duesenberg Brothers , a separate organization , built racing cars and engines . 
 = = Introduction and delay = = 
 The Duesenberg Straight Eight was introduced in late 1920 at the Commodore Hotel in New York City , but production of the Straight Eight did not begin until late 1921 . The main reason for the delay was Fred Duesenberg 's decision to redesign several aspects of the car , including the <unk> . The headquarters and manufacturing facilities of the Duesenberg Automobiles and Motors Company were relocated from Newark , New Jersey , to Indianapolis , Indiana during this time . The move was completed in May 1921 , but the redesign was not . 
 = = Design and engineering = = 
 = = = Drivetrain = = = 
 The Straight Eight was the first car in series production in the United States with a straight @-@ eight engine . The engine had a cast iron block , a detachable cast iron cylinder head , and an aluminum lower crankcase and oil pan . The crankshaft ran in three main bearings . While the prototype Straight Eight shown at the model 's introduction had horizontal valves of the type used in earlier Duesenberg @-@ designed marine and racing engines , the model that entered production had a shaft @-@ driven single overhead camshaft which used rockers to operate two valves per cylinder in a hemispheric combustion chamber . 
 The engine used a single updraft carburetor ; early versions used a Stromberg unit , which was replaced by a <unk> unit . The carburetor was on the right side of the engine , the mixture went into a passage through the engine block to the intake manifold on the left side of the engine . Ignition was by Delco coil and breaker points , with the distributor at the end of the generator / starter unit . 
 With a 2 @.@ 875 in ( 73 @.@ 0 mm ) bore and a 5 in ( 127 @.@ 0 mm ) stroke , the engine had a displacement of 260 cu in ( 4 @.@ 3 L ) . The standard compression ratio of five to one yielded 88 hp ( 66 kW ) at 3600 rpm and 170 lb · ft ( 230 N · m ) of torque at 1500 rpm . 
 A single dry @-@ plate clutch and an unsynchronized three @-@ speed gearbox were bolted to the engine . The gearbox was operated directly with a central shift lever . The drive shaft was enclosed in a torque tube and drove the live rear axle through a spiral bevel drive . 
 = = = Chassis = = = 
